GAUGE UNIFICATION OF FUNDAMENTAL
FORCES
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1979
by
ABDUS SALAM
Imperial College of Science and Technology, London, England
and International Centre for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy




Introduction: In June 1938, Sir George Thomson, then Professor of Physics
at Imperial College, London, delivered his 1937 Nobel Lecture. Speaking
of Alfred Nobel, he said: “The idealism which permeated his character led
him to . . . (being) as much concerned with helping science as a whole, as
individual scientists. . . . The Swedish people under the leadership of the
Royal Family and through the medium of the Royal Academy of Sciences
have made Nobel Prizes one of the chief causes of the growth of the
prestige of science in the eyes of the world . . . As a recipient of Nobel’s
generosity, I owe sincerest thanks to them as well as to him.”
   I am sure I am echoing my colleagues’ feelings as well as my own, in
reinforcing what Sir George Thomson said - in respect of Nobel’s generos-
ity and its influence on the growth of the prestige of science. Nowhere is
this more true than in the developing world. And it is in this context that I
have been encouraged by the Permanent Secretary of the Academy -
Professor Carl Gustaf Bernhard - to say a few words before I turn to the
scientific part of my lecture.
   Scientific thought and its creation is the common and shared heritage of
mankind. In this respect, the history of science, like the history of all
civilization, has gone through cycles. Perhaps I can illustrate this with an
actual example.
   Seven hundred and sixty years ago, a young Scotsman left his native
glens to travel south to Toledo in Spain. His name was Michael, his goal to
live and work at the Arab Universities of Toledo and Cordova, where the
greatest of Jewish scholars, Moses bin Maimoun, had taught a generation
before.
   Michael reached Toledo in 1217 AD. Once in Toledo, Michael formed
the ambitious project of introducing Aristotle to Latin Europe, translating
not from the original Greek, which he did not know, but from the Arabic
translation then taught in Spain. From Toledo, Michael travelled to Sicily,
to the Court of Emperor Frederick II.
   Visiting the medical school at Salerno, chartered by Frederick in 1231,
Michael met the Danish physician, Henrik Harpestraeng - later to be-
come Court Physician of King Erik Plovpenning. Henrik had come to
Salerno to compose his treatise on blood-letting and surgery. Henrik’s


514                              Physics 1979


sources were the medical canons of the great clinicians of Islam, Al-Razi
and Avicenna, which only Michael the Scot could translate for him.
  Toledo’s and Salerno’s schools, representing as they did the finest syn-
thesis of Arabic, Greek, Latin and Hebrew scholarship, were some of the
most memorable of international assays in scientific collaboration. To
Toledo and Salerno came scholars not only from the rich countries of the
East and the South, like Syria, Egypt, Iran and Afghanistan, but also from
developing lands of the West and the North like Scotland and Scandinavia.
Then, as now, there were obstacles to this international scientific con-
course, with an economic and intellectual disparity between different parts
of the world. Men like Michael the Scot or Henrik Harpestraeng were
 singularities. They did not represent any flourishing schools of research in
 their own countries. With all the best will in the world their teachers at
Toledo and Salerno doubted the wisdom and value of training them for
 advanced scientific research. At least one of his masters counselled young
 Michael the Scot to go back to clipping sheep and to the weaving of
 woollen cloth.
    In respect of this cycle of scientific disparity, perhaps I can be more
 quantitative. George Sarton, in his monumental five-volume History of
 Science chose to divide his story of achievement in sciences into ages, each
 age lasting half a century. With each half century he associated one central
 figure. Thus 450 BC - 400 BC Sarton calls the Age of Plato; this is fol-
 lowed by half centuries of Aristotle, of Euclid, of Archimedes and so on.
 From 600 AD to 650 AD is the Chinese half century of Hsiian Tsang, from
 650 to 700 AD that of I-Ching, and then from 750 AD to 1100 AD - 350
 years continuously - it is the unbroken succession of the Ages of Jabir,
 Khwarizmi, Razi, Masudi, Wafa, Biruni and Avicenna, and then Omar
 Khayam - Arabs, Turks, Afghans and Persians - men belonging to the
 culture of Islam. After 1100 appear the first Western names; Gerard of
 Cremona, Roger Bacon - but the honours are still shared with the names
 of Ibn-Rushd (Averroes), Moses Bin Maimoun, Tusi and Ibn-Nafi-the
 man who anticipated Harvey’s theory of circulation of blood. No Sarton
 has yet chronicled the history of scientific creativity among the pre-Spanish
 Mayas and Aztecs, with their invention of the zero, of the calendars of the
‘moon and Venus and of their diverse pharmacological discoveries, includ-
 ing quinine, but the outline of the story is the same - one of undoubted
 superiority to the Western contemporary correlates.
    After 1350, however, the developing world loses out except for the
 occasional flash of scientific work, like that of Ulugh Beg - the grandson of
Timurlane, in Samarkand in 1400 AD; or of Maharaja Jai Singh of Jaipur
 in 1720 - who corrected the serious errors of the then Western tables of
eclipses of the sun and the moon by as much as six minutes of arc. As it
was, Jai Singh’s techniques were surpassed soon after with the develop-
ment of the telescope in Europe. As a contemporary Indian chronicler
wrote: “With him on the funeral pyre, expired also all science in the East.”
And this brings us to this century when the cycle begun by Michael the Scot


                                      A. Salam                                 515


turns full circle, and it is we in the developing world who turn to the
Westwards for science. As Al-Kindi wrote 1100 years ago: “It is fitting then
for us not to be ashamed to acknowledge and to assimilate it from what-
ever source it comes to us. For him who scales the truth there is nothing of
higher value than truth itself; it never cheapens nor abases him.”
Ladies and Gentlemen,
   It is in the spirit of Al-Kindi that I start my lecture with a sincere
expression of gratitude to the modern equivalents of the Universities of
Toledo and Cordova, which I have been privileged to be associated with -
Cambridge, Imperial College, and the Centre at Trieste.




     I. FUNDAMENTAL PARTICLES, FUNDAMENTAL FORCES
                AND GAUGE UNIFICATION
The Nobel lectures this year are concerned with a set of ideas relevant to the
gauge unification of the electromagnetic force with the weak nuclear force.
These lectures coincide nearly with the 100 th death-anniversary of Maxwell,
with whom the first unification of forces (electric with the magnetic) matured
and with whom gauge theories originated. They also nearly coincide with the
100th anniversary of the birth of Einstein - the man who gave us the vision of an
ultimate unification of all forces.
   The ideas of today started more than twenty years ago, as gleams in several
theoretical eyes. They were brought to predictive maturity over a decade back.
And they started to receive experimental confirmation some six years ago.
   In some senses then, our story has a fairly long background in the past. In
this lecture I wish to examine some of the theoretical gleams of today and ask
the question if these may be the ideas to watch for maturity twenty years from
now.
   From time immemorial, man has desired to comprehend the complexity of
nature in terms of as few elementary concepts as possible. Among his quests - in
Feynman’s words - has been the one for “wheels within wheels” - the task of
natural philosophy being to discover the innermost wheels if any such exist.
A second quest has concerned itself with the fundamental forces which make
the wheels go round and enmesh with one another. The greatness of gauge
ideas - of gauge field theories - is that they reduce these two quests to just one;
elementary particles (described by relativistic quantum fields) are representa-
tions of certain charge operators, corresponding to gravitational mass, spin,
flavour, colour, electric charge and the like, while the fundamental forces are
the forces of attraction or repulsion between these same charges. A third quest
seeks for a unification between the charges (and thus of the forces) by
searching for a single entity, of which the various charges are components in
the sense that they can be transformed one into the other.
   But are all fundamental forces gauge forces? Can they be understood as
such, in terms of charges - and their corresponding currents - only? And if they
are, how many charges? What unified entity are the charges components of?


516                                 Physics 1979


What is the nature of charge? Just as Einstein comprehended the nature of
gravitational charge in terms of space-time curvature, can we comprehend the
nature of the other charges - the nature of the entire unified set, as a set, in terms
of something equally profound? This briefly is the dream, much reinforced by
the verification of gauge theory predictions. But before I examine the new
theoretical ideas on offer for the future in this particular context, I would like
your indulgence to range over a one-man, purely subjective, perspective in
respect of the developments of the last twenty years themselves. The point I
wish to emphasize during this part of my talk was well made by G. P. Thomson
in his 1937 Nobel Lecture. G. P. said ". . . The goddess of learning is fabled to
have sprung full grown from the brain of Zeus, but it is seldom that a
scientific conception is born in its final form, or owns a single parent. More
often it is the product of a series of minds, each in turn modifying the ideas
of those that came before, and providing material for those that come after.”

II. THE EMERGENCE OF SPONTANEOUSLY BROKEN SU(2)xU(1)
                        GAUGE THEORY
I started physics research thirty years ago as an experimental physicist in the
Cavendish, experimenting with tritium-deuterium scattering. Soon I knew the
craft of experimental physics was beyond me - it was the sublime quality of
patience - patience in accumulating data, patience with recalcitrant equip-
ment - which I sadly lacked. Reluctantly I turned my papers in, and started
instead on quantum field theory with Nicholas Kemmer in the exciting
department of P. A. M. Dirac.
   The year 1949 was the culminating year of the Tomonaga-Schwinger-
Feynman-Dyson reformulation of renormalized Maxwell-Dirac gauge theory,
and its triumphant experimental vindication. A field theory must be
renormalizable and be capable of being made free of infinities - first discussed
by Waller - if perturbative calculations with it are to make any sense.
More - a renormalizable theory, with no dimensional parameter in its inter-
action term, connotes somehow that the fields represent “structureless”
elementary entities. With Paul Matthews, we started on an exploration of
renormalizability of meson theories. Finding that renormalizability held only
for spin-zero mesons and that these were the only mesons that empirically
existed then, (pseudoscalar pions, invented by Kemmer, following Yukawa)
one felt thrillingly euphoric that with the triplet of pions (considered as the
carriers of the strong nuclear force between the proton-neutron doublet) one
might resolve the dilemma of the origin of this particular force which is
responsible for fusion and fission. By the same token, the so-called weak
nuclear force - the force responsible for β-radioactivity (and described then
by Fermi’s non-renormalizable theory) had to be mediated by some unknown
spin-zero mesons if it was to be renormalizable, If massive charged spin-one
mesons were to mediate this interaction, the theory would be non-
renormalizable, according to the ideas then.
   Now this agreeably renormalizable spin-zero theory for the pion was a
field theory, but not a gauge field theory. There was no conserved charge


                                      A. Salam                                 517


which determined the pionic interaction. As is well known, shortly after the

theory was elaborated, it was found wanting. The          resonance ∆ effectively

killed it off as a fundamental theory; we were dealing with a complex dynamical
system, not “structureless” in the held-theoretic sense.
   For me, personally, the trek to gauge theories as candidates for fundamental
physical theories started in earnest in September 1956 - the year I heard at the
Seattle Conference Professor Yang expound his and Professor Lee’s ideas[1] on
the possibility of the hitherto sacred principle of left-right symmetry, being
violated in the realm of the weak nuclear force. Lee and Yang had been led to
consider abandoning left-right symmetry for weak nuclear interactions as a
possible resolution of the                p uzzle. I remember travelling back to
London on an American Air Force (MATS) transport flight. Although I had
been granted, for that night, the status of a Brigadier or a Field Marshal - I
don’t quite remember which-the plane was very uncomfortable; full of crying
service-men’s children - that is, the children were crying, not the servicemen.
I could not sleep. I kept reflecting on why Nature should violate left-right
symmetry in weak interactions. Now the hallmark of most weak interactions
was the involvement in radioactivity phenomena of Pauli’s neutrino. While
crossing over the Atlantic, came back to me a deeply perceptive question
about the neutrino which Professor Rudolf Peierls had asked when he was
examining me for a Ph. D. a few years before. Peierls’ question was: “The
photon mass is zero because of Maxwell’s principle of a gauge symmetry for
electromagnetism; tell me, why is the neutrino mass zero?” I had then felt
somewhat uncomfortable at Peierls. asking for a Ph. D. viva, a question of which
he himselfsaid he did not know the answer. But during that comfortless night the
answer came. The analogue for the neutrino, of the gauge symmetry for the
photon existed; it had to do with the masslessness of the neutrino, with
symmetry under the      transformation [2] ( la ter christened “chiral symmetry”) .
The existence of this symmetry for the massless neutrino must imply a
combination (1            or (l-γ 5 ) for the neutrino interactions. Nature had
the choice of an aesthetically satisfying but a left-right symmetry violating
theory, with a neutrino which travels exactly with the velocity of light; or
alternatively a theory where left-right symmetry is preserved, but the neutrino
has a tiny mass - some ten thousand times smaller than the mass of the electron.
   It appeared at that time clear to me what choice Nature must have made.
Surely, left-right symmetry must be sacrificed in all neutrino interactions. I got
off the plane the next morning, naturally very elated. I rushed to the Cavendish,
worked out the Michel parameter and a few other consequences of γ5 symmetry,
rushed out again, got into a train to Birmingham where Peierls lived. To
Peierls I presented my idea; he had asked the original question; could he approve
of the answer? Peierls’ reply was kind but firm. He said “I do not believe
left-right symmetry is violated in weak nuclear forces at all. I would not touch
such ideas with a pair of tongs.” Thus rebuffed in Birmingham, like
Zuleika Dobson, I wondered where I could go next and the obvious place was
CERN in Geneva, with Pauli - the father of the neutrino - nearby in Zurich.


 518                                 Physics 1979


 At that time CERN lived in a wooden hut just outside Geneva airport. Besides
 my friends, Prentki and d’Espagnat, the hut contained a gas ring on which was
 cooked the staple diet of CERN - Entrecôte à la creme. The hut also contained
 Professor Villars of MIT, who was visiting Pauli the same day in Zurich. I
 gave him my paper. He returned the next day with a message from the Oracle;
 “Give my regards to my friend Salam and tell him to think ofsomething better”.
 This was discouraging, but I was compensated by Pauli’s excessive kindness a
 few months later, when Mrs. Wu’s [3], Lederman’s [4] and Telegdi’s[5] experi-
 ments were announced showing that left-right symmetry was indeed violated
 and ideas similar to mine about chiral symmetry were expressed independently
 by Landau[6] and Lee and Yang[7]. I received Pauli’s first somewhat
 apologetic letter on 24 January 1957. Thinking that Pauli’s spirit should by
 now be suitably crushed, I sent him two short notes [8] I h a d written in the
 meantime. These contained suggestions to extend chiral symmetry to electrons
 and muons, assuming that their masses were a consequence of what has
 come to be known as dynamical spontaneous symmetry breaking. With
 chiral symmetry for electrons, muons and neutrinos, the only mesons that
 could mediate weak decays of the muons would have to carry spin one.
 Reviving thus the notion of charged intermediate spin-one bosons, one could
 then postulate for these a type of gauge invariance which I called the “neutrino
 gauge”. Pauli’s reaction was swift and terrible. He wrote on 30th January
 1957, then on 18 February and later on 11, 12 and 13 March: “I am reading
 (along the shores of Lake Zurich) in bright sunshine quietly your paper...”
 “I am very much startled on the title of your paper ‘Universal Fermi interaction’
      ...For quite a while I have for myself the rule if a theoretician says universal
 it just means pure nonsense. This holds particularly in connection with the
 Fermi interaction, but otherwise too, and now you too, Brutus, my son, come
 with this word. ...” Earlier, on 30 January, he had written “There is a
 similarity between this type of gauge invariance and that which was published
 by Yang and Mills . . . In the latter, of course, no     was used in the exponent.”
 and he gave me the full reference of Yang and Mills’ paper; (Phys. Rev. 96,
 191 (1954)). I quote from his letter: “However, there are dark points in your
 paper regarding the vector field B,. If the rest mass is infinite (or very large),
how can this be compatible with the gauge transformation
 and he concludes his letter with the remark: “Every reader will realize that
 you deliberately conceal here something and will ask you the same questions”.
 Although he signed himself “With friendly regards”, Pauli had forgotten his
 earlier penitence. He was clearly and rightly on the warpath.
   Now the fact that I was using gauge ideas similar to the Yang - Mills
(non-Abelian SU(2)-invariant) gauge theory was no news to me. This was
because the Yang - Mills theory [9] (which married gauge ideas of Maxwell
with the internal symmetry SU(2) of which the proton-neutron system con-
stituted a doublet had been independently invented by a Ph. D. pupil of mine,
Ronald Shaw,[10] at Cambridge at the same time as Yang and Mills had
written. Shaw’s work is relatively unknown; it remains buried in his Cambridge
thesis. I must admit I was taken aback by Pauli’s fierce prejudice against


                                                 A. Salam                                 519


universalism - against what we would today call unification of basic forces -
but I did not take this too seriously. I felt this was a legacy of the exasperation
which Pauli had always felt at Einstein’s somewhat formalistic attempts at
unifying gravity with electromagnetism - forces which in Pauli’s phrase “cannot
be joined - for God hath rent them asunder”. But Pauli was absolutely right
in accusing me of darkness about the problem of the masses of the Yang - Mills
fields; one could not obtain a mass without wantonly destroying the gauge
symmetry one had started with. And this was particularly serious in this context,
because Yang and Mills had conjectured the desirable renormalizability of
their theory with a proof which relied heavily and exceptionally on the mass-
lessness of their spin-one intermediate mesons. The problem was to be solved
only seven years later with the understanding of what is now known as the
Higgs mechanism, but I will come back to this later.
   Be that as it may, the point I wish to make from this exchange with
Pauli is that already in early 1957, just after the first set of parity experiments,
many ideas coming to fruition now, had started to become clear. These are:
1. First was the idea of chiral symmetry leading to a V-A theory. In those
    early days my humble suggestion [2], [8] of this was limited to neutrinos,
    electrons and muons only, while shortly after, that year, Sudarshan and
    Marshak,[11] F eynman and Gell-Mann,[12] and Sakurai[13] had the
    courage to postulate      symmetry for baryons as well as leptons, making
    this into a universal principle of physics.’

   Concomitant with the (V-A) theory was the result that if weak interactions are mediated
by intermediate mesons, these must curry spin one.
2. Second, was the idea of spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry to generate
    electron and muon masses: though the price which those latter-day Shylocks,
    Nambu and Jona-Lasinio[14] and Goldstone[15] exacted for this (i.e. the
    appearance of massless scalars), was not yet appreciated.
3. And finally, though the use of a Yang-Mills-Shaw (non-Abelian) gauge
    theory for describing spin-one intermediate charged mesons was suggested
    already in 1957, the giving of masses to the intermediate bosons through
    spontaneous symmetry breaking, in a manner to preserve the renormaliz-
    ability of the theory, was to be accomplished only during a long period of
    theoretical development between 1963 and 1971.

Once the Yang-Mills-Shaw ideas were accepted as relevant to the charged
weak currents - to which the charged intermediate mesons were coupled in this
theory - during 1957 and 1958 was raised the question of what was the third
component of the SU(2) triplet, of which the charged weak currents were the
two members. There were the two alternatives: the electroweak unification
suggestion, where the electromagnetic current was assumed to be this third
component; and the rival suggestion that the third component was a neutral
current unconnected with electroweak unification. With hindsight, I shall
1
    Today we believe protons and neutrons are composites of quarks, so that   symmetry is now
postulated for the elementary entities of today - the quarks.


520                                Physics 1979


call these the Klein [16] (1938) and the Kemmer[17] (1937) alternatives. The
Klein suggestion, made in the context of a Kaluza-Klein five-dimensional
space-time, is a real tour-de-force; it combined two hypothetical spin-one
charged mesons with the photon in one multiplet, deducing from the compacti-
lication of the fifth dimension, a theory which looks like Yang-Mills-Shaw’s.
Klein intended his charged mesons for strong interactions, but if we read charged
weak mesons for Klein’s strong ones, one obtains the theory independently
suggested by Schwinger[18] (1957), though Schwinger, unlike Klein, did not
build in any non-Abelian gauge aspects. With just these non-Abelian Yang-
Mills gauge aspects very much to the fore, the idea of uniting weak interactions
with electromagnetism was developed by Glashow[19] and Ward and myself[20]
in late 1958. The rival Kemmer suggestion of a global SU(2)-invariant triplet
of weak charged and neutral currents was independently suggested by Blud-
rnan[21] (1958) in a gauge context and this is how matters stood till 1960.
   To give you the flavour of, for example, the year 1960, there is a paper
written that year of Ward and myself [ 2 2 ] with the statement: “Our basic
postulate is that it should be possible to generate strong, weak and electro-
magnetic interaction terms with all their correct symmetry properties (as well
as with clues regarding their relative strengths) by making local gauge trans-
formations on the kinetic energy terms in the free Lagrangian for all particles.
This is the statement of an ideal which, in this paper at least, is only very
partially realized”. I am not laying a claim that we were the only ones who
were saying this, but I just wish to convey to you the temper of the physics
of twenty years ago - qualitatively no different today from then. But what a
quantitative difference the next twenty years made, first with new and far-
reaching developments in theory-and then, thanks to CERN, Fermilab, Brook-
haven, Argonne, Serpukhov and SLAG in testing it!
   So far as theory itself is concerned, it was the next seven years between
1961-67 which were the crucial years of quantitative comprehension of the
phenomenon of spontaneous symmetry breaking and the emergence of the
SU(2) X U( 1) theory in a form capable of being tested. The story is well known
and Steve Weinberg has already spoken about it. So I will give the barest
outline. First there was the realization that the two alternatives mentioned
above a pure electromagnetic current versus a pure neutral current-Klein-
Schwinger versus Kemmer-Bludman - were not alternatives; they were com-
plementary. As was noted by Glashow [23] and independently by Ward and
m y s e l f[24] , both t ypes of currents and the corresponding gauge particles
(W’, Z0 and         were needed in order to build a theory that could simultaneously
accommodate parity violation for weak and parity conservation for the electro-
magnetic phenomena. Second, there was the influential paper of Goldstone [25]
in 1961 which, utilizing a non-gauge self-interaction between scalar particles,
showed that the price of spontaneous breaking of a continuous internal
symmetry was the appearance of zero ‘mass scalars-a result foreshadowed
earlier by Nambu. In giving a proof of this theorem [26] with Goldstone I
collaborated with Steve Weinberg, who spent a year at Imperial College in
London.


                                               A. Salam                                        521


I would like to pay here a most sincerely felt tribute to him and to Sheldon
Glashow for their warm and personal friendship.
   I shall not dwell on the now well-known contributions of Anderson [27] ,
Higgs[28], B rout & Englert[29], Guralnik, H agen and Kibble[30] starting from
1963, which showed the way how spontaneous symmetry breaking using
spin-zero fields could generate vector-meson masses, defeating Goldstone at the
same time. This is the so-called Higgs mechanism.
   The final steps towards the electroweak theory were taken by Weinberg[31]
and myself [32] (with Kibble at Imperial College tutoring me about the
Higgs phenomena). We were able to complete the present formulation of
the spontaneously broken SU(2)xU(1) theory so far as leptonic weak inter-
                                                     2
actions were concerned - with one parameter sin θ describing all weak and
electromagnetic phenomena and with one isodoublet Higgs multi let. An
account of this development was given during the contribution [32] to the
Nobel Symposium (organized by Nils Svartholm and chaired by Lamek Hulthén
held at Gothenburg after some postponements, in early 1968). As is well known,
we did not then, and still do not, have a prediction for the scalar Higgs mass.
   Both Weinberg and I suspected that this theory was likely to be renormaliz-
able.’ Regarding spontaneously broken Yang-Mills-Shaw theories in general
this had earlier been suggested by Englert, Brout and Thiry[29]. But this
subject was not pursued seriously except at Veltman’s school at Utrecht, where
the proof of renormalizability was given by ‘t Hooft[33] in 1971. This was
elaborated further by that remarkable physicist the late Benjamin Lee [34],
working with Zinn Justin, and by ‘t Hooft and Veltman [35]. This followed on
the earlier basic advances in Yang-Mills calculational technology by Feyn-
man[36], DeWitt[37], Faddeev and Popov[38], Mandelstam[39], Fradkin and
Tyutin[40] Boulware[41] Taylor[42], Slavnov[43], Strathdee[44] and Salam.
In Coleman’s eloquent phrase “’ t Hooft’s work turned the Weinberg-Salam
frog into an enchanted prince”. Just before had come the GIM (Glashow,
Iliopoulos and Maiani) mechanism[45], emphasising that the existence of the
fourth charmed quark (postulated earlier by several authors) was essential to
the natural resolution of the dilemma posed by the absence of strangeness-
-violating currents. This tied in naturally with the understandin of the
Steinberger-Schwinger-Rosenberg-Bell-Jackiw-Adler anomaly [46] and
its removal for SU (2) X U ( 1) by the parallelism of four quarks and four leptons,
pointed out by Bouchiat, Iliopoulos and Meyer and independently by Gross
and Jackiw.[47]




2
    When I was discussing the final version of the SU(2) X U(1) theory and its possible renormaliz-
ability in Autumn 1967 during a post-doctoral course of lectures at Imperial College, Nino
Zichichi from CERN happened to be present. I was delighted because Zichichi had been badgering
me since 19.58 with persistent questioning of what theoretical avail his precise measurements
on (g-2) for the muon as well as those of the muon lifetime were, when not only the magnitude of
the electromagnetic corrections to weak decays was uncertain, but also conversely the effect of
non-renormalizable weak interactions on “renormalized” electromagnetism was so unclear.


    If one has kept a count, I have so far mentioned around fifty theoreticians.
As a failed experimenter, I have always felt envious of the ambience of large
experimental teams and it gives me the greatest pleasure to acknowledge the
direct or the indirect contributions of the “series of minds” to the spontaneously
broken SU (2) X U ( 1) gauge theory. My profoundest personal appreciation goes
 to my collaborators at Imperial College, Cambridge, and the Trieste Centre,
John Ward, Paul Matthews, Jogesh Pati, John Strathdee, Tom Kibble and to
Nicholas Kemmer.
    In retrospect, what strikes me most about the early part of this story is
how uninformed all of us were, not only of each other’s work, but also of work
done earlier. For example, only in 1972 did I learn of Kemmer’s paper written
at Imperial College in 1937.
    Kemmer’s argument essentially was that Fermi’s weak theory was not
globally SU(2) invariant and should be made so - though not for its own sake
but as a prototype for strong interactions. Then this year I learnt that earlier,
in 1936, Kemmer’s Ph. D. supervisor, Gregor Wentzel [48], had introduced
 (the yet undiscovered) analogues of lepto-quarks, whose mediation could give
rise to neutral currents after a Fierz reshuffle. And only this summer, Cecilia
Jarlskog at Bergen rescued Oscar Klein’s paper from the anonymity of the
 Proceedings of the International Institute of Intellectual Cooperation of Paris,
 and we learnt of his anticipation of a theory similar to Yang-Mills-Shaw’s
 long before these authors. As I indicated before, the interesting point is that
Klein was using his triplet, of two charged mesons plus the photon, not to
describe weak interaction but for strong nuclear force unification with the
electromagnetic-something our generation started on only in 1972-and not
yet experimentally verified. Even in this recitation I am sure I have inadvertantly
left off some names of those who have in some way contributed to SU (2) x U ( 1).
Perhaps the moral is that not unless there is the prospect of quantitative
verification, does a qualitative idea make its impress in physics.
   And this brings me to experiment, and the year of the Gargamelle[49]. I still
remember Paul Matthews and I getting off the train at Aix-en-Provence for
the 1973 European Conference and foolishly deciding to walk with our rather
heavy luggage to the student hostel where we were billeted. A car drove from
behind us, stopped, and the driver leaned out. This was Musset whom I did
not know well personally then. He peered out of the window and said: “Are
you Salam?” I said “Yes”. He said: “Get into the car. I have news for you.
We have found neutral currents.” I will not say whether I was more relieved
for being given a lift because of our heavy luggage or for the discovery of
neutral currents. At the Aix-en-Provence meeting that great and modest man,
Lagarrigue, was also present and the atmosphere was that of a carnival - at
least this is how it appeared to me. Steve Weinberg gave the rapporteur’s talk
with T. D. Lee as the chairman. T. D. was kind enough to ask me to comment
after Weinberg finished. That summer Jogesh Pati and I had predicted proton
decay within the context of what is now called grand unification and in the
flush of this excitement I am afraid I ignored weak neutral currents as a subject
which had already come to a successful conclusion, and concentrated on


                                       A. Salam                                 523


speaking of the possible decays of the proton. I understand now that proton
decay experiments are being planned in the United States by the Brookhaven,
Irvine and Michigan and the Wisconsin-Harvard groups and also by a
European collaboration to be mounted in the Mont Blanc Tunnel Garage
No. 17. The later quantitative work on neutral currents at CERN, Fermilab.,
Brookhaven, Argonne and Serpukhov is, of course, history, but a special tribute
is warranted to the beautiful SLAC-Yale-CERN experiment [50] of 1978 which
exhibited the effective Z0-photon interference in accordance with the predictions
of the theory. This was foreshadowed by Barkov et al’s experiments [51] at
Novosibirsk in the USSR in their exploration of parity violation in the atomic
potential for bismuth. There is the apocryphal story about Einstein, who was
asked what he would have thought if experiment had not confirmed the light
deflection predicted by him. Einstein is supposed to have said, “Madam, I
would have thought the Lord has missed a most marvellous opportunity.”
I believe, however, that the following quote from Einstein’s Herbert Spencer
lecture of 1933 expresses his, my colleagues’ and my own views more accurately.
“Pure logical thinking cannot yield us any knowledge of the empirical world;
all knowledge of reality starts from experience and ends in it.” This is exactly
how I feel about the Gargamelle-SLAC experience.


III. THE PRESENT AND ITS PROBLEMS
Thus far we have reviewed the last twenty years and the emergence of
SU (2) X U (1) with the twin developments of a gauge theory of basic interactions,
linked with internal symmetries, and of the spontaneous breaking of these
symmetries. I shall first summarize the situation as we believe it to exist now and
the immediate problems. Then we turn to the future.
 1. To the level ofenergies explored, we believe that the following sets ofparticles
    are “structureless” (in a field-theoretic sense) and, at least to the level of
    energies explored hitherto, constitute the elementary entities of which all
   other objects are made.

                               SU c( 3) triplets

Family I          quarks                           leptons       SU(2) doublets


Family II         quarks


Family III        quarks

Together with their antiparticles each family consists of 15 or 16 two-component
fermions ( 15 or 16 depending on whether the neutrino is massless or not).
The third family is still conjectural, since the top quark            has not yet
been discovered. Does this family really follow the pattern of the other two?
Are there more families? Does the fact that the families are replicas of each
other imply that Nature has discovered a dynamical stability about a system


    524                                                Physics 1979


    of 15 (or 16) objects, and that by this token there is a more basic layer of
    structure underneath?[52]
    2. Note that quarks come in three colours; Red (R), Yellow (Y) and Blue (B).
        Parallel with the electroweak SU( 2) X U(l), a gauge field’ theory (SU, (3)) of
        strong (quark) interactions (quantum chromodynamics, QCD)[53] has
        emerged which gauges the three colours. The indirect discovery of the
        (eight) gauge bosons associated with QCD (gluons), has already been
        surmised by the groups at DESY.[54]
    3. All known baryons and mesons are singlets of colour SU c(3). This has led
        to a hypothesis that colour is always confined. One of the major unsolved
        problems of field theory is to determine if QCD-treated non-pertur-
        batively-is capable of confining quarks and gluons.
    4. In respect of the electroweak SU(2) XU( 1), all known experiments on weak
        and electromagnetic phenomena below 100 GeV carried out to date agree
        with the theory which contains one theoretically undetermined parameter
        sin’8 = 0.230+0.009.[55] Th e predicted values of the associated gauge boson
        (W’ and Z”) masses are:               7 7 - 8 4 G e V , mZ  89-95 GeV, for
        0.25    sin%    0.21.
    5. Perhaps the most remarkable measurement in electroweak physics is that of

          the parameter          =    Currently this has been determined from the
                                cost9
       ratio of neutral to charged current cross-sections. The predicted value = 1
       for weak iso-doublet Higgs is to be compared with the experimental 4
       p = 1.00+0.02.
    6. Why does Nature favour the simplest suggestion in SU(2)xU(l) theory
       of the Higgs scalars being iso-doublet? 5 Is there just one physical Higgs?




    3
        “To my mind the most striking feature of theoretical physics in the last thirty-six years is the
    fact that not a single new theoretical idea of a fundamental nature has been successful. The
    notions of relativistic quantum theory have in every instance proved stronger than the
    revolutionary ideas of a great number of talented physicists. We live in a dilapidated house
    and we seem to be unable to move out. The difference between this house and a prison is
,   hardly noticeable” - Res Jost ( 1963) i n P r a i s e o f Q u a n t u m F i e l d T h e o r y ( S i e n a E u r o p e a n
    Conference).
    ‘The one-loop radiative corrections to  suggest that the maximum mass of leptons contributing
    top is less than 100 GeV.[56]
    5
        To reduce the arbitrariness of the Higgs couplings and to motivate their iso-doublet character,
    one suggestion is to use supersymmetry. Supersymmetry is a Fermi-Bose symmetry, so that iso-
    doublet leptons like (v e , e) or (vµ , µ) in a super-symmetric theory must be accompanied in the
    same multiplet by iso-doublet Higgs.
         Alternatively, one may identify the Higgs as composite fields associated with bound states of a
    yet new level of elementary particles and new (so-called techni-colour) forces (Dimopoulos &
    Susskind[57],     Weinberg[58] and ‘t Hooft) of which, at present low energies, we have no cognisance
    and which may manifest themselves in the 1-100 TeV range. Unfortunately, both these ideas at
    first sight appear to introduce complexities, though in the context of a wider theory, which spans
    energy scales up to much higher masses, a satisfactory theory of the Higgs phenomena, incorporating
    these, may well emerge.


                                       A. Salam                                  525


   Of what mass? At present the Higgs interactions with leptons, quarks as
   well as their self-interactions are non-gauge interactions. For a three-family
   (6-quark) model, 21 out of the 26 parameters needed, are attributable to the
   Higgs interactions. Is there a basic principle, as compelling and as
   economical as the gauge principle, which embraces the Higgs sector?
   Alternatively, could the Higgs phenomenon itself be a manifestation of a
                                                      5
   dynamical breakdown of the gauge symmetry.
7. Finally there is the problem of the families; is there a distinct SU(2) for
   the first, another for the second as well as a third SU(2), with spontaneous
   symmetry breaking such that the SU(2) apprehended by present experiment
   is a diagonal sum of these “family” SU(2)‘s? To state this in another way,
   how far in energy does the e-µ universality (for example) extend? Are there
   more[59] Z 0, t h an just one, effectively differentially coupled to the e and the
   µ systems? (If there are, this will constitute mini-modifications of the theory,
   but not a drastic revolution of its basic ideas.)
      In the next section 1 turn to a direct extrapolation of the ideas which
   went into the electroweak unification, so as to include strong interactions as
   well. Later I shall consider the more drastic alternatives which may be
   needed for the unification of all forces (including gravity)-ideas which have
   the promise of providing a deeper understanding of the charge concept.
   Regretfully, by the same token, 1 must also become more technical and
   obscure for the non-specialist. I apologize for this. The non-specialist may
   sample the flavour of the arguments in the next section (Sec. IV), ignoring
   the Appendices and then go on to Sec. V which is perhaps less technical.


IV. DIRECT EXTRAPOLATION FROM THE ELECTROWEAK
TO THE ELECTRONUCLEAR

4.1 The three ideas
The three main ideas which have gone into the electronuclear - also called
grand - unification of the electroweak with the strong nuclear force (and
which date back to the period 1972-1974), are the following:
1. First: the psychological break (for us) of grouping quarks and leptons in the
   same multiplet of a unifying group G, suggested by Pati and myself in
   1972[60].      The group G must contain SU(2)xU(l)xSUc(3); must be
   simple, if all quantum numbers (flavour, colour, lepton, quark and family
   numbers) are to be automatically quantized and the resulting gauge theory
   asymptotically free.
2. Second: an extension, proposed by Georgi and Glashow (1974)[61] which
   places not only (left-handed) quarks and leptons but also their antiparticles
   in the same multiplet of the unifying group.
      Appendix I displays some examples of the unifying groups presently
   considered.
      Now a gauge theory based on a “simple” (or with discrete symmetries, a
   “semi-simple”) group G contains one basic gauge constant. This constant


526


   would manifest itself physically above the “grand unification mass” M,
   exceeding all particle masses in the theory - these themselves being
   generated (if possible) hierarchially through a suitable spontaneous
   symmetry-breaking mechanism.
3. The third crucial development was by Georgi, Quinn and Weinberg
    (1974) [62wh o sh owed how, using renormalization group ideas, one could
   relate the observed low-energy couplings           and           100 GeV) to the
   magnitude of the grand unifying mass M and the observed value of
                    is the ratio of the U( 1) to the SU(2) couplings).
4. If one extrapolates with Jowett6, that nothing essentially new can possibly
   be discovered - i.e. one assumes that there are no new features, no new
   forces, or no new “types” of particles to be discovered, till we go beyond the
   grand unifying energy M - then the Georgi, Quinn, Weinberg method leads
   to a startling result: this featureless “plateau” with no “new physics”
   heights to be scaled stretches to fantastically high energies. More precisely,
   if          is as large as 0.23, then the grand unifying mass M cannot be
   smaller than 1.3x10 13 GeV.[63] (Compare with Planck mass mp ≈ 1.2x10 19
   GeV related to Newton’s constant where gravity must come in.) 7 The result
   follows from the formula[63],[64]
                                                    M
                                                                                                                                (I)
if it is assumed that sin%(M)-the magnitude of           for energies of the order
of the unifying mass M-equals 3/8 (see Appendix II).
   This startling result will be examined more closely in Appendix II. I show
there that it is very much a consequence of the assumption that the SU (2) X U( 1)
symmetry survives intact from the low regime energies µ right up to the grand
unifying mass M. I will also show that there already is some experimental
indication that this assumption is too strong, and that there may be likely peaks
of new physics at energies of 10 TeV upwards (Appendix II).




“The universal urge to extrapolate from what we know to-day and to believe that nothing new
can possibly be discovered, is well expressed in the following:


   “I come first, My name is Jowett
   I am the Master of this College,
   Everything that is, I know it
   If I don’t, it isn’t knowledge”


                                    -The Balliol Masque.
‘ O n a c c o u n t o f t h e r e l a t i v e p r o x i m i t y o f M ≈ 1 01 3 G e V t o mp ( a n d t h e h o p e o f e v e n t u a l
unification with gravity), Planck mass m p is now the accepted “natural” mass scale in Particle
Physics. With this large mass as the input, the great unsolved problem of Grand Unification is the
“ n a t u r a l ” e m e r g e n c e o f m a s s h i e r a r c h i e s ( mp , am,., a ’ m , . . . ) o r mp             where
are constants.


                                                A. Salam                                             527


4.2 Tests of electronuclear grand unification
The most characteristic prediction f r o m t h e e x i s t e n c e o f t h e E L E C -
TRONUCLEAR force is proton decay, first discussed in the context of grand
unification at the Aix-en-Provence Conference (1973)[65]. For “semi-simple”
unifying groups with multiplets containing quarks and leptons only, (but no
antiquarks nor antileptons) the lepto-quark composites have masses (deter-
mined by renormalization group arguments), of the order of ≈ 1 05- 106
GeV[66]. F or such theories the characteristic proton decays (proceeding
through exchanges of three lepto-quarks) conserve quark number+lepton
number, i.e. P =                              10”” ears. On the contrary, for the
“simple ” unifying family groups like              or SO(          (with multiplets
containing antiquarks and antileptons) proton decay proceeds through an
exchange of one lepto-quark into an antilepton (plus pions etc.)
   An intriguing possibility in this context is that investigated recently for the
maximal unifying group SU(16)--the largest group to contain a 16-fold
fermionic (q,               This can permit four types of decay modes:
as well as                    (e.g.                 and          (e.g.
                    the relative magnitudes of these alternative decays being
model-dependent on how precisely SU( 16) breaks down to SU( 3) X SU( 2) X
U( 1). Quite clearly, it is the central fact of the existence of the proton decay
for which the present generation of experiments must be designed, rather than
for any specific type of decay modes.
   Finally, grand unifying theories predict mass relations like:[68]




for 6 (or at most 8) flavours below the unification mass. The important remark
for proton decay and for mass relations of the above type as well as for an
understanding of baryon excess [69] in the Universe8, is that for the present
these are essentially characteristic of the fact of grand unification - rather than of specific
models.
  “Yet each man kills the thing he loves” sang Oscar Wilde in his famous
Ballad of Reading Gaol. Like generations of physicists before us, some
in our generation also (through a direct extrapolation of the electroweak
gauge methodology to the electronuclear) - and with faith in the assumption of


8
    The calculation of baryon excess in the Universe - arising from a combination of CP and
baryon number violations - has recently been claimed to provide teleological arguments for
grand unification. For example, Sanopoulos [70] has suggested that the “existence of human
beings to measure the ratio      (where n B is the numbers of baryons and       the numbers of
photons in the Universe) necessarily imposes severe bounds on this quantity: i.e. 10 -11 ≈ ( me / mp ) 1/2
            1 0- 4           Of importance in deriving these constraints are the upper (and
lower) bound on the numbers of flavours (≈ 6) deduced (1) from mass relations above, (2) from
cosmological arguments which seek to limit the numbers of massless neutrinos, (3) from asymptotic
freedom and (4) from numerous (one-loop) radiative calculations. It is clear that lack of
accelerators as we move up in energy scale will force particle physics to reliance on teleology and
cosmology (which in Landau’s famous phrase is “often wrong, but never in doubt”).


no “new physics”, which leads to a grand unifying mass ~ 10 13 GeV--are
beginning to believe that the end of the problems of elementarity as well as of
fundamental forces is nigh. They may be right, but before we are carried
away by this prospect, it is worth stressing that even for the simplest grand
unifying model (Georgi and Glashow’s SU(5) with just two Higgs (a 5 and
a 24)), the number of presently ad hoc parameters needed by the model is
still unwholesomely large - 22, to compare with 26 of the six-quark model
based on the humble SU(2)xU(1)XSU c(3). We cannot feel proud.


V. ELEMENTARITY: UNIFICATION WITH GRAVITY AND
NATURE OF CHARGE
In some of the remaining parts of this lecture I shall be questioning two of the
notions which have gone into the direct extrapolation of Sec. IV - first, do
quarks and leptons represent the correct elementary” fields, which should
appear in the matter Lagrangian, and which are structureless for re-
normalizaibility; second, could some of the presently considered gauge fields
themselves be composite? This part of the lecture relies heavily on an address
I was privileged to give at the European Physical Society meeting in Geneva
in July this year.[64]

5.1 The quest for elementarity, prequarks (preons and pre-peons)
If quarks and leptons are elementary, we are dealing with 3 X 15 = 45 elementary
entities. The “natural” group of which these constitute the fundamental
representation is SU(45) with 2024 elementary gauge bosons. It is possible to
reduce the size of this group to SU(11) for example (see Appendix I), with only
120 gauge bosons, but then the number of elementary fermions increases to
561, (of which presumably 3x15 = 45 objects are of low and the rest of
Planckian mass). Is there any basic reason for one’s instinctive revulsion when
faced with these vast numbers of elementary fields.
   The numbers by themselves would perhaps not matter so much. After all,
Einstein in his description of gravity, [71] chose to work with 10 fields
rather than with just one (scalar field) as Nordstrom [72] had done before him.
Einstein was not perturbed by the multiplicity he chose to introduce, since he
relied on the sheet-anchor of a fundamental principle - (the equivalence
principle)-which permitted him to relate the 10 fields for gravity gµv with the
10 components of the physically relevant quantity, the tensor T µv of energy
and momentum. Einstein knew that nature was not economical of structures: only of
principles of fundamental applicability. The question we must ask ourselves
is this: have we yet discovered such principles in our quest for elementarity,
to justify having fields with such large numbers of components as elementary.

9
    I would like to quote Feynman in a recent interview to the “Omni” magazine: “As long as it
looks like the way things are built with wheels within wheels, then you are looking for the
innermost wheel - but it might not be that way. in which case you are looking for whatever the
hell it is you find!“. In the same interview he remarks “a few years ago I was very sceptical about
the gauge theories... I was expecting mist. and now it looks like ridges and valleys after all.”


                                              A. Salam                                           529


  Recall that quarks carry at least three charges (colour, flavour and a family
number). Should one not, by now, entertain the notions of quarks (and
possibly of leptons) as being composites of some more basic entities”’ (PRE-
Q U A R K S o r P R E E N S ) , which each carry but one basic charge [52]. These
ideas have been expressed before but they have become more compulsive now?
with the growing multiplicity of quarks and leptons. Recall that it was similar
ideas which led from the eight-fold of baryons to a triplet of (Sakatons and)
quarks in the first place.
  The preon notion is not new. In 1975, among others, Pati, Salam and
Strathdee[52] introduced 4 chromons (the fourth colour corresponding to the
lepton number) and 4 flavons,the basic group being SU(8) - of which the
family group SU F(4)xSU c( 4 ) was but a subgroup. As an extension of these
ideas, we now believe these preons carry magnetic charges and are bound
together by very strong short-range forces, with quarks and leptons as their
magnetically neutral composites [ 7 3 ] The important remark in this context is
that in a theory containing both electric and magnetic generalized charges, the
analogues of the well-known Dirac quantization condition [74] gives relations

like          for the strength of the two types of charges. Clearly, magnetic
            2
monopoles” of strength ±g and mass                        GeV, are likely to bind
much more tightly than electric charges, yielding composites whose non-
elementary nature will reveal itself only for very high energies. This appears
to be the situation at least for leptons if they are composites.
   In another form the preon idea has been revived this year by Curtwright and
Freund[52], wh o motivated by ideas of extended supergravity (to be discussed
in the next subsection). reintroduce an SU(8) of 3 chromons (R, Y, B), 2 flavons
and 3 familons (horrible names). The family group SU(5) could be a subgroup
of this SU(8). In the Curtwright-Freund scheme, the 3 X15 = 45 fermions of
SU(5)[61] can be found among the 8+28+56 of SU(8) (or alternatively the
3X 16 = 48 of SO( 10) among the vectorial 56 fermions of SU(8)). (The next
succession after the preon level may be the pre-preon level. It was suggested
at the Geneva Conference [64 ] that with certain developments in field theory
of composite fields it could be that just two-preons may suffice. But at this
stage this is pure speculation.)
   Before I conclude this section, I would like to make a prediction regarding
the course of physics in the next decade, extrapolating from our past experience
of the decades gone by:

10
     One must emphasise however that zero mass neutrinos are the hardest objects to conceive of as
compositcs.
11
     According to 't Hooft’s theorem. a monopoly corrosponding to the SU L (2) gauge symmetry is

expected to possess a mass with the lower limit          ,           if such monopolcs arc confined,
                                                  a
their indirect effects must manifest themselves, if they exist. (Note that       is very much a lower
                                                                             a
limit. For a grand unified theory like SU(5) for which the monopole mass is          times the heavy
lepto-quark mass.) The monopole force may be the techni-colour force of Footnote 5.


530                                                  Physics 1979




5.2 Post-Planck physics, supergravity and Einstein’s dreams
I now turn to the problem of a deeper comprehension of the charge concept
(the basis of gauging) - which, in my humble view, is the real quest of particle
physics. Einstein, in the last thirty-live years of his life lived with two dreams:
one was to unite gravity with matter (the photon) - he wished to see the “base
wood” (as he put it) which makes up the stress tensor T µv on the right-hand

side of his equation                              R = -Tµv transmuted through this union, into

the “marble” of gravity on the left-hand side. The second (and the comple-
mentary) dream was to use this unification to comprehend the nature of
electric charge in terms of space-time geometry in the same manner as he had
successfully comprehended the nature of gravitational charge in terms of space-
time curvature.
   In case some one imagines 12 that such deeper comprehension is irrelevant
to quantitative physics, let me adduce the tests of Einstein’s theory versus the
proposed modifications to it (Brans-Dicke [77] for example). Recently (1976),
the strong equivalence principle (i.e. the proposition that gravitational forces
contribute equally to the inertial and the gravitational masses) was tested’s to
one part in 1012 (i.e. to the same accuracy as achieved in particle physics for
(g-2),) through lunar-laser ranging measurements [78]. Th ese measurements
determined departures from Kepler equilibrium distances, of the moon, the
earth and the sun to better than ±30 cms. and triumphantly vindicated Einstein.
   There have been four major developments in realizing Einstein’s dreams:
1. The Kaluza-Klein[79] miracle: An Einstein Lagrangian (scalar curvature)
    in live-dimensional space-time (where the fifth dimension is compactified in




12
     The following quotation from Einstein is relevant here. “We now realize, with special clarity,
how much in error are those theorists who believe theory comes inductively from experience.
Even the great Newton could not free himself from this error (Hypotheses “on lingo).” This
quote is complementary to the quotation from Einstein at the end of Sec. II.
13
     The weak    equivalence   principle   (the    proposition   that   all   but   the   gravitational   force   contribute
equally to the inertial and the gravitational masses) was verified by Eötvös to 1 : 10 8 a n d b y
Dicke and Braginsky and Panov to 1 : 10 12 .


                                                   A. Salam                                                531


   the sense of all fields being explicitly independent of the fifth co-ordinate)
   precisely reproduces the Einstein-Maxwell theory in four dimensions, the gµ5
   (µ = 0, 1, 2, 3) components of the metric in five dimensions being identified
   with the Maxwell field Aµ. From this point of view, Maxwell’s field is
   associated with the extra components of curvature implied by the
   (conceptual) existence of the fifth dimension.
2. The second development is the recent realization by Cremmer, Scherk,
   Englert, Brout, Minkowski and others that the compactification of the
   extra dimensions[80] -- (their curling up to sizes perhaps smaller than Planck
   length     10-33 cms. and the very high curvature associated with them) -
   might arise through a spontaneous symmetry breaking (in the first 10 -43
   seconds) which reduced the higher dimensional space-time effectively to
   the four-dimensional that we apprehend directly.
3. So far we have considered Einstein’s second dream, i.e. the unification of
   of electromagnetism (and presumably of other gauge forces) with gravity,
   giving a space-time significance to gauge charges as corresponding to
   extended curvature in extra bosonic dimensions. A full realization of the
   first dream (unification of spinor matter with gravity and with other gauge
   fields) had to await the development of supergravity[81], [82] -and an
   extension to extra fermionic dimensions. of superspace [83] (with extended
   torsion being brought into play in addition to curvature). I discuss this
   development later.
4. And finally there was the alternative suggestion by Wheeler [84] and
   Schemberg that electric charge may be associated with space-time
   topology - with worm-holes, with space-time Gruyère-cheesiness. This idea
   has recently been developed by Hawking14 and his collaborators [85].

5.3 Extended supergravity, SU(8) p reons and composite gauge fields
Thus far I have reviewed the developments in respect of Einstein’s dreams as
reported at the Stockholm Conference held in 1978 in this hall and organized
by the Swedish Academy of Sciences.
   A remarkable new development was reported during 1979 by Julia and
Cremmer[87] which started with an attempt to use the ideas of Kaluza and
Klein to formulate extended supergravity theory in a higher (compactified)
spacetime-more precisely in eleven dimensions. This development links up,
as we shall see, with preons and composite Fermi fields - and even more
important - possibly with the notion of composite gauge fields.
   Recall that simple supergravity[8l] is the gauge theory of super-
s y m m e t r y [ 8 8 ] th e gauge particles being the (helicity ±2) gravitons and



“ T h e E i n s t e i n L a n g r a n g i a n allows large fluctuations of metric and topology on Planck-length
scale. Hawking has surmised that the dominant contributions to the path integral of quantum
gravity come from metrics which carry one unit of topology per Planck volume. On account of the
intimate connection (de Rham, Atiyah-Singer) [86] of curvature with the measures of space-time
topology (Euler number, Pontryagin number) the extended Kaluza-Klein and Wheeler-Hawking
points of view may find consonance after all.


532                                     Physics 1979


(helicity        gravitinos15. Extended super gravity gauges super-symmetry combined

with SO(N) internal symmetry. For N = 8, the (tribal) supergravity multiplet
consists of the following SO(8) families:[81], [87]




As is well known, SO(8) is too small to contain SU(2)xU(1)xSU c(3). Thus
this tribe has no place for W± (though Z0 and       are contained) and no places
for µ or τ or the t quark.
   This was the situation last year. This year, Cremmer and Julia [87] attempted
to write down the N = 8 supergravity Langrangian explicitly, using an extension
of the Kaluza-Klein ansatz which states that extended supergravity (with SO(8)
internal symmetry) has the same Lagrangian in four space-time dimensions as
simple supergravity in (compactified) eleven dimensions. This formal - and rather
formidable ansatz - when carried through yielded a most agreeable bonus.
The supergravity Lagrangian possesses an unsuspected SU(8) “local” internal symmetry
although one started with an internal SO(8) only.
   The tantalizing questions which now arise are the following.
 1. Could this internal SU(8) be the symmetry group of the 8 preons (3
    chromons, 2 flavons, 3 familons) introduced earlier?
2. When SU(8) is gauged, there should be 63 spin-one fields. The supergravity
    tribe contains only 28 spin-one fundamental objects which are not
    minimally coupled. Are the 63 fields of SU(8) to be identified with composite
    gauge fields made up of the 70 spin-zero objects of the form               V; Do
    these composites propagate, in analogy with the well-known recent result in
            theories[89], where a composite gauge field of this form propagates
    as a consequence of quantum effects (quantum completion)?

The entire development I have described - the unsuspected extension of
SO(8) to SU(8) when extra compactified space-time dimensions are used - and
the possible existence and quantum propagation of composite gauge fields - is
of such crucial importance for the future prospects of gauge theories that one
begins to wonder how much of the extrapolation which took SU(2) X U( 1) X


15
     Supersymmetry algebra extends Poincaré group algebra by adjoining to it supersymmetric
charges     which transform bosons to fermions,            =         The currents which
correspond to these charges      and    are      and            are essentially the currents
which in gauged supersymmetry (i.e. supergravity) couple to the gravitino and the graviton,
respectively.


S Uc(3) into the electronuclear grand unified theories is likely to remain
unaffected by these new ideas now unfolding.
    But where in all this is the possibility to appeal directly to experiment?
For grand unified theories, it was the proton decay. What is the analogue for
                                      3
supergravity? Perhaps the spin          massive gravitino, picking its mass from
                                      2
a super-Higgs effect[90] provides the answer. Fayet[91] has shown that for a
spontaneously broken globally supersymmetric weak theory the introduction
of a local gravitational interaction leads to a super-Higgs effect. Assuming
that supersymmetry breakdown is at mass scale m w, the gravitino acquires a
mass and an effective interaction. but of conventional weak rather than of the
gravitational strength-an enhancement by a factor of 10 34. One may thus
search for the gravitino among the neutral decay modes of                 predicted
rate being 10 -3 - 10 -5 times smaller than the observed rate for              This
will surely tax all the ingenuity of the great men (and women) at SLAC and
DESY. Another effect suggested by Scherk[92] is antigravity - a cancellation
of the attractive gravitational force with the force produced by spin-one gravi-
photons which exist in all extended supergravity theories, Scherk shows that
the Compton wave length of the gravi-photon is either smaller than 5 cms. or
comprised between 10 and 850 metres in order that there is no conflict with
what is presently known about the strength of the gravitational force.
    Let me summarize: it is conceivable of course. that there is indeed a grand
 plateau - extending even to Planck energies. If so, the only eventual laboratory
 for particle physics will be the Early Universe, where we shall have to seek for
 the answers to the questions on the nature of charge. There may, however, be
 indications of a next level of structure around 10 TeV; there are also beautiful
 ideas (like, for example, of electric and magnetic monopole duality) which may
 manifest at energies of the order of            10        Whether even this level
 of structure will give us the final clues to the nature of charge, one cannot
 predict. All I can say is that I am for ever and continually being amazed at the
 depth revealed at each successive level we explore. I would like to conclude, as I
 did at the 1978 Stockholm Conference, with a prediction which J. R.
 Oppenheimer made more than twenty-five years ago and which has been
 fulfilled to-day in a manner he did not live to see. More than anything else,
 it expresses the faith for the future with which this greatest ofdecades in particle
 physics ends: “Physics will change even more... If it is radical and unfamiliar
    ...we think that the future will be only more radical and not less, only more
 strange and not more familiar, and that it will have its own new insights for
 the inquiring human spirit.”

                                                              J. R. Oppenheimer
                                                        Reith Lectures BBC 1953


534                                          Physics 1979


APPENDIX I. EXAMPLES OF GRAND UNIFYING GROUPS




APPENDIX II
The following assumptions went into the derivation of the formula (I) in the text.
    a)         2) X       1) survives intact as the electroweak symmetry group from
energies ≈ µ right up to M. This intact survival implies that one eschews, for
example, all suggestions that i) low-energy SUL( 2) may be the diagonal sum of
                                 where I, II, III refer to the (three?) known families;
ii) or that the          1) is a sum of pieces, where UR ( 1) may have differentially
descended from a (V+A)-symmetric SU R (2) contained in G, or iii) that U( 1)
contains a piece from a four-colour symmetry SUc(4) (with lepton number as
the fourth colour) and with SUc(4) b reaking at an intermediate mass scale to
S Uc ( 3 ) x U c ( l ) .
    b) The second assumption which goes into the derivation of the formula
above is that there are no unexpected heavy fundamental fermions, which might

make                 differ from              value for the low mass fermions presently

known to exist.+




* Grouping quarks (q) and leptons            together,       implies treating lepton number as the fourth
colour, i.e. SU c (3) extends to SU c (4) (Pati and Salam)           Tribal group, by definition, contains
all known families in its basic representation. Favoured representations of Tribal SU(11)
(Georgi)[94] and Tribal SO(22) (Gell-Man[95] et al.) contain 561 and 2048 fermions!

+ If one does not know G, one way to infer the parameter sin%(M) is from the formula:




H e r e N q and   are the numbers of the fundamental quark and lepton SU(2) doublets (assuming
these are the only multiplets that exist). If we make the further assumption that N q , =       (from the

requirement of anomaly cancellation between quarks and leptons) we obtain sin%(M) =                  This

assumption however is not compulsive; for example anomalies cancel also if (heavy) mirror

fermions exist[98]. This is the case for [SU(6)]4 for which              =


                                           A. Salam                                       535


  c) If these assumptions arc relaxed, for example, for the three family group

G =                             where                 =      we find the grand unifying

mass M tumbles down to 106 GeV.
    d) The introduction of intermediate mass scales (for example, those
connoting the breakdown of family universality, or of left-right symmetry, or
of a breakdown of 4-colour SUc (4) d own to SUc(3) x Uc(1)) will as a rule push
the magnitude of the grand unifying mass M upwards [96]. I n order to secure a
proton decay life, consonant with present empirical lower limits (~10 30
years)[97] this is desirable anyway.                 for M ~ 1013 GeV is unacceptably
low ~ 6x10 years unless there arc 15 Higgs.) There is, from this point of
               23



view, an indication of there being in Particle Physics one or several intermediate
mass scales which can be shown to start from around 10 4 GeV upwards. This
is the end result which I wished this Appendix to lead up to.




REFERENCES
  1. Lee, T. D. and Yang, C. N., Phys. Rev. 104, 254 (1956).
 2. Abdus Salam, Nuovo Cimento 5, 299 (1957).
 3. Wu, C. S., et al., Phys. Rev. 105, 1413 (1957).
 4. Car-win, R., Lederman, L. and Weinrich, M., Phys. Rev. 105, 1415 (1957).
 5. Friedman, J. I. and Telegdi, V. L., Phys. Rev. 105, 1681 (1957).
 6. Landau, L., Nucl. Phys. 3, 127 (1957).
 7. Lee, T. D. and Yang, C. N., Phys. Rev. 105, 1671 (1957).
 8. Abdus Salam, Imperial College, London, preprint (1957). For reference, see Footnote 7,
     p. 89, of Theory of Weak Interactions in Particle Physics, by Marshak, R. E., Riazuddin and
     Ryan, C. P., (Wiley-Interscience, New York 1969), and W. Pauli’s letters
     (CERN Archives).
 9. Yang, C. N. and Mills, R. L., Phys. Rev. 96, 191 (1954).
10. Shaw, R., “The problem of particle types and other contributions to the theory of
     elementary particles”, Cambridge Ph. D. Thesis (1955), unpublished.
11. Marshak, R. E. and Sudarshan, E. C. G., Proc. Padua-Venice Conference on Mesons and
     Recently Discovered Particles (1957), and Phys. Rev. 109, 1860 (1958). The idea of a
     universal Fermi interaction for (P,N),        and         doublets goes back to Tiomno, J.
     and Wheeler, J. A., Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 144 (1949); 21, I53 (1949) and by Yang, C. N.
     and Tiomno, J., Phys. Rev. 75, 495 (1950). Tiomno, J., considered       transformations of
     Fermi fields linked with mass reversal in 11 Nuovo Cimento 1, 226 (1956).
12. Feynman, R. P. and Gell-Mann, M., Phys. Rev. 109, 193 (1958).
13. Sakurai, J. J., Nuovo Cimento 7, 1306 (1958).
14. Nambu, Y. and Jona-Lasinio, G., Phys. Rev. 122, 345 (1961).
15. Nambu, Y., Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 380 (1960); Goldstone, J., Nuovo Cimento 19, 154
     (1961).
16. Klein, O., “On the theory of charged fields”, Proceedings of the Conference organized
     by International Institute of Intellectual Cooperation, Paris (1939).
17. Kemmer, N., Phys. Rev. 52, 906 (1937).
18. Schwinger, J., Ann. Phys. (N. Y.)2, 407 (1957).
19. Glashow, S. L., Nucl. Phys. 10, 107 (1959).
20. Abdus Salam and Ward, J. C., Nuovo Cimento II, 568 (1959).
21. Bludman, S., Nuovo Cimento 9, 433 (1958).


 536                                       Physics 1979


22.  Abdus Salam and Ward, J. C., Nuovo Cimento 19, 165 (1961).
23.  Glashow, S. L., Nucl. Phys. 22, 579 (1961).
24.  Abdus Salam and Ward, J. C., Phys. Letters 13, 168 (1964).
25.  Goldstone, J., see Ref. 15.
26.  Goldstone, J.. Abdus Salam and Weinberg, S., Phys. Rev. 127, 965 (1962).
27.  Anderson, P. W., Phys. Rev. 130, 439 (1963).
28.  Higgs, P. W., Phys. Letters 12, 132 (1964); Phys. Rev. Letters 23, 508 (1964); Phys. Rev.
      245, 1156 (1966).
 29. Englert, F. and Brout, R., Phys. Rev. Letters 23, 321 (1964);
      Englert, F., Brout, R. and Thiry, M. F., Nuovo Cimento 48, 244 (1966).
 30. Guralnik, G. S., Hagen, C. R. and Kibble, T. W. B., Phys. Rev. Letters 13, 585 (1964);
      Kibble, T. W. B., Phys. Rev. 155, 1554 (1967).
 31. Weinberg, S., Phys. Rev. Letters 27, 1264 (1967).
 32. Abdus Salam, Proceedings of the 8th Nobel Symposium, Ed. Svartholm, N., (Almqvist
      and Wiksell, Stockholm 1968).
 33. ‘t Hooft, G., Nucl. Phys. B33, 173 (1971); ibid. B35, 167 (1971).
 34. Lee, B. W., Phys. Rev. D5, 823 (1972); Lee, B. W. and Zinn-Justin, J., Phys. Rev. D5, 3137
      (1972);ibid. D7, 1049 (1973).
 35. ‘t Hooft, G. and Veltman, M., Nucl. Phys. B44, 189 (1972); ibid. B50, 318 (1972). An
      important development in this context was the invention of the dimensional regulariza-
      tion technique by Bollini, C. and Giambiagi, J., Nuovo CimentoEl2, 20 (1972);
      Ashmore, J., Nuovo Cimento Letters 4, 289 (1972) and by ‘t Hooft, G. and Veltman, M.
 36. Feynman, R. P., Acta Phys. Polonica 24, 297 (1963).
 37. Dewitt, B. S., Phys. Rev. 162, 1195 and 1239 (1967).
 38. Faddeev, L. D. and Popov, V. N., Phys. Letters 258, 29 (1967).
39. Mandelstam, S., Phys. Rev. 175, 1588 and 1604 (1968).
40. Fradkin, E. S. and Tyutin, I. V., Phys. Rev. D2, 2841 (1970).
 41. Boulware, D. G., Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)56, 140 (1970).
42. Taylor, J. C., Nucl. Phys. B33, 436 (1971).
 43. Slavnov, A., Theor. Math. Phys. 10, 99 (1972).
44. Abdus Salam and Strathdee, J., Phys. Rev. D2, 2869 (1970).
45. Glashow, S., Iliopoulos, J. and Maiani, L., Phys. Rev. D2, 1285 (1970).
46. For a review, see Jackiw, R., in Lectures on Current Algebra and its Applications,     by Treiman,
      S. B., Jackiw, R. and Gross, D. J., (Princeton Univ. Press, 1972).
47. Bouchiat, C., Iliopoulos, J. and Meyer, Ph., Phys. Letters 38B, 519 (1972); Gross, D. J.
      and Jackiw, R., Phys. Rev. D6, 477 (1972).
48. Wentzel, G., Helv. Phys. Acta 10, 108 (1937).
49. Hasert, F. J., et al., Phys. Letters 46B, 138 (1973).
50. Taylor, R. E., Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on High Energy Physics,
      Tokyo, Physical Society of Japan, 1979, p. 422.
51. Barkov, L. M., Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on High Energy
      Physics, Tokyo, Physical Society of Japan, 1979, p. 425.
 52. Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, ICTP, Trieste, IC/75/106, Palermo Conference, June 1975;
      Pati, J, C., Abdus Salam and Strathdee, J., Phys. Letters 598, 265 (1975); Harari, H.,
      Phys. Letters 86B, 83 (1979); Schupe, M., ibid. 86B, 87 (1979); Curtwright, T. L. and
      Freund, P. G.O., Enrico Fermi Inst. preprint EFI 79/25, University of Chicago, April
       1979.
53. Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, see the review by Bjorken, J. D., Proceedings of the 16th
      International Conference on High Energy Physics, Chicago-Batavia, 1972, Vol. 2, p. 304;
     Fritsch, H. and Gell-Mann, M., ibid. p. 135; Fritzsch, H., Gell-Mann, M. and Leutwyler,
      H., Phys. Letters 478, 365 (1973);
      Weinberg, S., Phys. Rev. Letters 31, 494 (1973); Phys. Rev. D8, 4482 (1973); Gross, D. J.
     and Wilczek, F., Phys. Rev. D8, 3633 (1973); For a review see Marciano, W. and Pagels,
      H., Phys. Rep. 36C, 137 (1978).
54. Tasso Collaboration, Brandelik et al., Phys. Letters 868, 243 (1979); Mark-J. Collabora-
     tion, Barber et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 43, 830 (1979); See also reports of the Jade, Mark-J,


                                           A. Salam                                       537

     Pluto and Tasso Collaborations to the International Symposium on Lepton and Photon
     Interactions at High Energies, Fermilab, August 1979.
55. Winter, K., Proceedings of the International Symposium on Lepton and Photon Interac-
    tions at High Energies, Fermilab, August 1979.
56. Ellis, J., Proceedings of the "Neutrino-79" International Conference on Neutrinos, Weak
     Interactions and Cosmology, Bergen, June 1979.
57. Dimopoulos, S. and Susskind, L., Nucl. Phys B155, 237 (1979).
58. Weinberg, S., Phys. Rev. D19, 1277 (1979).
59. Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, Phys. Rev. D10, 275 (1974);
     Mohapatra, R. N. and Pati. J. C., Phys. Rev. D11, 566,2558 (1975);
     Elias, V., Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, Phys. Letters 73B, 450 (1978);
     Pati, J. C. and Rajpoot, S., Phys. Letters 798, 65 (1978).
60. See Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, Ref. 53 above and Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, Phys.
      Rev. D8, 1240 (1973).
61. Georgi, H. and Glashow, S. L., Phys. Rev. Letters 32, 438 (1974).
62. Georgi, H., Quinn, H. R. and Weinberg, S., Phys. Rev. Letters 33, 451 (1974).
63. Marciano, W. J., Phys. Rev. 020, 274 (1979).
64. See Abdus Salam, Proceedings of the European Physical Society Conference, Geneva,
     August 1979, ICTP, Trieste, preprint IC/79/142, with references to H. Harari’s work.
65. Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, Phys, Rev. Letters 31, 661 (1973).
66. Elias, V., Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, Phys. Rev. Letters 40, 920 (1978);
     Rajpoot, S. and Elias, V., ICTP, Trieste, preprint IC/78/159.
67. Fritzsch, H. and Minkowski, P., Ann. Phys. (N. Y.) 93, 193 (1975); Nucl. Phys. B103, 61
     (1976);
     Georgi, H., Particles and Fields (APS/OPF Williamsburg), Ed. Carlson, C. E., AIP, New
     York, 1975, p. 575;
     Georgi, H. and Nanopoulos, D. V., Phys. Letters 82B, 392 (1979).
68. Buras, A., Ellis, J., Gaillard, M. K. and Nanopoulos, D. V., Nucl. Phys. Bl35, 66 (1978).
69. Yoshimura, M., Phys. Rev. Letters 41, 381 (1978);
     Dimopoulos, S. and Susskind, L., Phys. Rev. D18, 4500 (1978);
     Toussaint, B., Treiman, S. B., Wilczek, F. and Zee, A., Phys. Rev. D19, 1036 (1979);
     Ellis J., Gaillard, M. K. and Nanopoulos, D. V., Phys. Letters 8OB, 360 (1979);
     Erratum 82B, 464 (1979);
     Weinberg, S., Phys. Rev. Letters 42, 850 (1979); Nanopoulos, D. V. and Weinberg, S.,
     Harvard University preprint HUTP-79/A023.
70. Nanopoulos, D. V., CERN preprint TH2737, September 1979.
71. Einstein, A., Annalen der Phys. 49, 769 (1916). For an English translation, see The
    Principle of Relativity (Methuen, 1923, reprinted by Dover Publications), p. 35.
72. Nordstrom, G., Phys. Z. 13, 1126 (1912); Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 40, 856 (1913); ibid. 42,
     533 (1913);ibid. 43, 1101 (1914); Phys. Z. 15, 375 (1914); Ann. Acad. Sci. Fenn.57 (1914,
     1915);
     See also Einstein, A., Ann. Phys. Leipzig38, 355, 433 (1912).
73. Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, in preparation.
74. Dirac, P. A. M., Proc. Roy. Soc. (London)A133, 60 (1931).
75. ‘t Hooft, G., Nucl. Phys. 879, 276 (1974).
76. Polyakov, A. M., JETP Letters 20, 194 (1974).
77. Brans, C. H. and Dicke, R. H., Phys. Rev. 124, 925 (1961).
78. Williams, J. G., et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 36, 551 (1976);
    Shapiro, I. I., et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 36, 555 (1976);
     For a discussion, see Abdus Salam, in Physics and Contemporary      Need.s Ed. Riazuddin
     (Plenum Publishing Corp., 1977), p. 301.
79. Kaluza, Th., Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. p. 966 (1921);
     Klein, O.. Z. Phys. 37, 895 (1926).
80. Cremmer, E. and Scherk, J., Nucl. Phys. 8103, 399 (1976); ibid. B108, 409 (1976); ibid.
    B118, 61 (1976);
     Minkowski, P., Univ. of Berne preprint, October 1977.


538                                      Physics 1979

81. Freedman, D. Z.. van Nieuwenhuizen, P. and Ferrara, S., Phys. Rev, D13, 3214 (1976);
     Deser, S. and Zumino, B., Phys. Letters 62B, 335 (1976);
     For a review and comprehensive list of references, see D. Z. Freedman’s presentation to
    the 19th International Conference on High Energy Physics, Tokyo, Physical Society of
    Japan, 1979.
82. Amowitt, R., Nath, P. and Zumino, B., Phys. Letters 56B, 81 (1975); Zumino, B., in
    Proceedings of the Conference on Gauge Theories and Modern Field Theory, North-
    eastern University, September 1975, Eds. Arnowitt, R. and Nath, P., (MIT Press);
    Wess, J. and Zumino, B., Phys. Letters 66B, 361 (1977);
    Akulov, V. P., Volkov, D. V. and Soroka, V. A., JETP Letters22, 187 (1975);
    Brink, L., Gell-Mann, M., Ramond, P. and Schwarz, J. H., Phys. Letters 748, 336 (1978);
    Taylor, J. G., King’s College, London, preprint, 1977 (unpublished);
    Siegel, W., Harvard University preprint HUTP-77/A068, 1977 (unpublished);
    Ogievetsky, V. and Sokatchev, E., Phys. Letters 79B, 222 (1978);
    Chamseddine, A. H. and West, P. C., Nucl. Phys. B129, 39 (1977);
    MacDowell, S. W. and Mansouri, F., Phys. Rev. Letters 38, 739 (1977).
83. Abdus Salam and Strathdee, J., Nucl. Phys. B79, 477 (1974).
84. Fuller, R. W. and Wheeler, J. A., Phys. Rev. 128, 919 (1962);
    Wheeler, J, A., in Relativity Groups and Topology, Proceedings of the Les Houches Summer
    School, 1963, Eds. Dewitt, B. S. and Dewitt, C. M., (Gordon and Breach, New York
     1964).
85. Hawking, S. W., in General Relativity: An Einstein Centenary Survey (Cambridge University
    Press, 1979);
     See also “Euclidean quantum gravity”, DAMTP, Univ. of Cambridge preprint, 1979;
    Gibbons, G. W., Hawking, S. W. and Perry, M. J., Nucl. Phys. B138, 141 (1978);
    Hawking, S. W., Phys. Rev. D18, 1747 (1978).
86. Atiyah, M. F. and Singer, 1. M., Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 69, 422 (1963).
87. Cremmer, E., Julia, B. and Scherk, J., Phys. Letters 768, 409 (1978); Cremmer, E. and
    Julia, B., Phys. Letters 80B, 48 (1978); Ecole Normale Superieure preprint, LPTENS 79/
    6, March 1979;
    See also Julia, B., in Proceedings of the Second Marcel Grossmann Meeting, Trieste, July
     1979 (in preparation).
88. Gol’fand, Yu. A. and Likhtman, E. P., JETP Letters 13, 323 (1971);
     Volkov, D. V. and Akulov, V. P., JETP Letters 16, 438 (1972);
     Wess, J. and Zumino, B., Nucl. Phys. 870, 39 (1974);
     Abdus Salam and Strathdee, J., Nucl. Phys. 879, 477 (1974); ibid. B80, 499 (1974); Phys.
     Letters 51B, 353 (1974);
     For a review, see Abdus Salam and Strathdee, J., Fortschr. Phys. 26, 57 (1978).
89. D’Adda, A., Lüscher, M. and Di Vecchia, P., Nucl. Phys. 8146, 63 (1978).
90. Cremmer, E., et al., Nucl. Phys. B147, 105 (1979);
     See also Ferrara, S., in Proceedings of the Second Marcel Grossmann Meeting, Trieste,
    July 1979 (in preparation), and references therein.
91. Fayet, P., Phys. Letters 7OB, 461 (1977); ibid. 84B, 421 (1979).
92. Scherk, J., Ecole Normale Superieure preprint, LPTENS 79/17, September 1979.
93. Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, Phys. Rev. D10, 275 (1974).
94. Georgi, H., Harvard University Report No. HUTP-29/AO13 (1979).
95. Gell-Mann, M., (unpublished).
96. See Ref. 64 above and also Shafi, Q. and Wetterich, C., Phys. Letters 85B, 52 (1979).
97. Learned, J., Reines, F. and Soni, A., Phys. Letters 43, 907 (1979).
98. Pati, J. C., Abdus Salam and Strathdee, J., Nuovo Cimento 26A, 72 (1975);
     Pati, J. C. and Abdus Salam, Phys. Rev. D11, 1137, 1149 (1975);
     Pati, J. C., invited talk, Proceedings Second Orbis Scientiae, Coral Gables, Florida, 1975,
     Eds. Perlmutter, A. and Widmayer, S., p. 253.
