THE ORIGIN, DEVELOPMENT
AND FUTURE OF SPINTRONICS

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2007
by

Albert Fert
Unité Mixte de Physique CNRS/Thales, 91767, Palaiseau, and Université
Paris-Sud, 91405, Orsay, France.




OVERVIEW
Electrons have a charge and a spin, but until recently, charges and spins have
been considered separately. In conventional electronics, the charges are mani-
pulated by electric fields but the spins are ignored. Other classical technolo-
gies, magnetic recording for example, are using the spin but only through
its macroscopic manifestation, the magnetization of a ferromagnet. This
picture started to change in 1988 when the discovery1-2 of the Giant Magneto-
Resistance (GMR) of the magnetic multilayers opened the way to an efficient
control of the motion of the electrons by acting on their spin through the ori-
entation of a magnetization. This rapidly triggered the developments of a new
field of research and technology, today called spintronics and, like the GMR,
exploiting the influence of the spin on the mobility of the electrons in ferro-
magnetic materials. Actually, the influence of the spin on the mobility of the
electrons in ferromagnetic metals, first suggested by Mott3, had been experi-
mentally demonstrated and theoretically described in my Ph.D. thesis more
than ten years before the discovery of 1988. The GMR was the first step on the
road of the exploitation of this influence to control an electrical current. Its
application to the read head of hard discs greatly contributed to the fast rise
in the density of stored information and led to the extension of the hard disk
technology to consumer’s electronics. Then, the development of spintronics
revealed many other phenomena related to the control and manipulation
of spin currents. Today this field of research is extending considerably, with
very promising new axes like the phenomena of spin transfer, spintronics with
semiconductors, molecular spintronics or single-electron spintronics.


FROM SPIN DEPENDENT CONDUCTION IN FERROMAGNETS
TO GIANT MAGNETORESISTANCE
GMR and spintronics take their roots in previous researches on the influence
of the spin on the electrical conduction in ferromagnetic metals3-5. The spin

                                                                             59


     n (E)
                  (a)    EF
                                                             0.3
                                                (b)
                                  E




     n (E)
                                                                              20
                       (c)
     I

     I
              
Figure 1. Basics of spintronics. (a) Schematic band structure of a ferromagnetic metal
showing the energy band spin-splitting . (b) Resistivities of the spin up and spin down con-
duction channels for nickel doped with 1% of several types of impurity (measurements at
4.2 K)4. The ratio A between the resistivities R0m and R0k of the spin m and spink channels
can be as large as 20 (Co impurities) or, as well, smaller than one (Cr or V impurities). (c)
Schematic for spin dependent conduction through independent spin m and spink chan-
nels in the limit of negligible spin mixing (Rkm = 0 in the formalism of Ref.[4]).


dependence of the conduction can be understood from the typical band
structure of a ferromagnetic metal shown in Fig.1a. The splitting between
the energies of the “majority spin” and “minority spin” directions (spin up
and spin down in the usual notation) makes that the electrons at the Fermi
level, which carry the electrical current, are in different states for opposite
spin directions and exhibit different conduction properties. This spin depen-
dent conduction was proposed by Mott3 in 1936 to explain some features of
the resistivity of ferromagnetic metals at the Curie temperature. However, in
1966, when I started my Ph.D. thesis, the subject was still almost completely
unexplored. My supervisor, Ian Campbell, proposed that I investigate it with
experiments on Ni- and Fe-based alloys and I had the privilege to be at the
beginning of the study of this topic. I could confirm that the mobility of the
electrons was spin dependent and, in particular, I showed that the resistivities
of the two channels can be very different in metals doped with impurities
presenting a strongly spin dependent scattering cross-section4. In Fig.1b, I
show the example of the spin up (majority spin) and spin down (minority
spin) resistivities of nickel doped with 1% of different types of impurities. It
can be seen that the ratio A of the spin down resistivity to the spin up one
can be as large as 20 for Co impurities or, as well, smaller than one for Cr or
V impurities, consistently with the theoretical models developed by Jacques
Friedel for the electronic structures of these impurities. The two current con-
duction was rapidly confirmed in other groups and, for example, extended
to Co-based alloys by Loegel and Gautier5 in Strasbourg.


60


                  $                      %
(a)                     
       $       $
                   >1 %  %
                             <1
                        
spin



spin
          AB >> A + B                     Type # 1


(b)           $>1 % > 1

                                         spin



                                         spin

             AB  A + B                   Type # 2
Figure 2. Experiments on ternary alloys based on the same concept as that of GMR4. (a)
Schematic for the spin dependent conduction in alloys doped with impurities of opposite
scattering spin asymmetries (AA = RAm/RAk > 1, AB = RBm/RBk < 1, which leads to RAB >> RA + RB)
and experimental results for Ni(Co1-xRhx) alloys. (b) Same for alloys doped with impurities
of similar scattering spin asymmetries (AA = RAm/RAk > 1, AB = RBm/RBk > 1, whitch leads to
RAB y RA + RB) and experimental results for Ni(Au1-xCox) alloys. In GMR the impurities A and
B are replaced by multilayers, the situation of a (b) corresponding to the antiparallel (paral-
lel) magnetic configurations of adjacent magnetic layers.


   In my thesis, I also worked out the so-called two current model4 for the
conduction in ferromagnetic metals. This model is based on a picture of spin
up and spin down currents coupled by spin mixing, i.e. by momentum ex-
change. Spin mixing comes from spin-flip scattering, mainly from electron-
magnon scattering which increases with temperature and equalizes partly
the spin up and spin down currents above room temperature in most fer-
romagnetic metals. The two-current model is the basis of spintronics today,
but, surprisingly, the interpretation of the spintronics phenomena is gener-
ally based on a simplified version of the model neglecting spin mixing and
assuming that the conduction is by two independent channels in parallel, as
illustrated by Fig. 1c. It should be certainly useful to revisit the interpretation
of many recent experiments by taking into account the spin mixing contribu-
tions (note that the mechanism of spin mixing should not be confused with
the relaxation of spin accumulation by other types of spin-flips6).

                                                                                            61


   As a matter of fact, some experiments of my thesis with metals doped with
two types of impurities4 were already anticipating the GMR. This is illustrated
by Fig. 2. Suppose, for example, that nickel is doped with impurities of Co
which scatter strongly the electrons of the spin down channel and with impu-
rities of rhodium which scatter strongly the spin up electrons. In the ternary
alloy Ni(Co + Rh), that I call of type #1, the electrons of both channels are
strongly scattered either by Co or by Rh, so that the resistivity is strongly en-
hanced. In contrast, there is no such enhancement in alloys of type #2 doped
with impurities (Co and Au for example) scattering strongly the electrons in
the same channel and leaving the second channel open. The idea of GMR is
the replacement of the impurities A and B of the ternary alloy by layers A and
B in a multilayer, the antiparallel magnetic configuration of the layers A and
B corresponding to the situation of an alloy of type #1, while the configura-
tion with a parallel configuration corresponds to type #2. This brings the pos-
sibility of switching between high and low resistivity states by simply changing
the relative orientation of the magnetizations of layers A and B from anti-
parallel to parallel. However, the transport equations tell us that the relative
orientation of layers A and B can be felt by the electrons only if their distance
is smaller than the electron mean free path, that is, practically, if they are
spaced by only a few nm. Unfortunately, in the seventies, it was not techni-
cally possible to make multilayers with layers as thin as a few nm. I put some
of my ideas in the fridge and, in my team at the Laboratoire de Physique des
Solides of the Université Paris-Sud, from the beginning of the seventies to
1985, I worked on other topics like the extraordinary Hall effect, the spin
Hall effect, the magnetism of spin glasses and amorphous materials.
   In the mid-eighties, with the development of techniques like the Molecular
Beam Epitaxy (MBE), it became possible to fabricate multilayers composed
of very thin individuals layers and I could consider trying to extend my ex-
periments on ternary alloys to multilayers. In addition, in 1986, I saw the
beautiful Brillouin scattering experiments of Peter Grünberg and coworkers7
revealing the existence of antiferromagnetic interlayer exchange couplings
in Fe/Cr multilayers. Fe/Cr appeared as a magnetic multilayered system in
which it was possible to switch the relative orientation of the magnetization in
adjacent magnetic layers from antiparallel to parallel by applying a magnetic
field. In collaboration with the group of Alain Friederich at the Thomson-
CSF company, I started the fabrication and investigation of Fe/Cr multi-
layers. The MBE expert at Thomson-CSF was Patrick Etienne, and my three
Ph.D. students, Frédéric Nguyen Van Dau first and then Agnès Barthélémy
and Frédéric Petroff, were also involved in the project. This led us in 1988
to the discovery1 of very large magnetoresistance effects that we called GMR
(Fig. 3a). Effects of the same type in Fe/Cr/Fe trilayers were obtained practi-
cally at the same time by Peter Grünberg at Jülich2 (Fig. 3b). The
interpreta-tion of the GMR is similar to that described above for the ternary
alloys and is illustrated by Fig. 3c. The first classical model of the GMR was
published in 1989 by Camley and Barnas8 and I collaborated with Levy and
Zhang for the first quantum model9 in 1991.

62


                      (a)



                                                                              80%
                                                                               80%




      (b)
                                                          (c)




Figure 3. First observations of giant magnetoresistance. (a) Fe/Cr(001) multilayers1 (with
the current definition of the magnetoresistance ratio, MR = 100(RAP-RP)/Rp, MR = 80% for
the (Fe 3nm/Cr 0.9nm) multilayer). (b) Fe/Cr/Fe trilayers2. (c) Schematic of the mecha-
nism of the GMR. In the parallel magnetic configuration (bottom), the electrons of one
of the spin directions can go easily through all the magnetic layers and the short-circuit
through this channel lead to a small resistance. In the antiparallel configuration (top), the
electrons of each channel are slowed down every second magnetic layer and the resistance
is high (figure from Ref.[18]).


   I am often asked if I was expecting such large MR effects. My answer is
yes and no: on one hand, a very large magnetoresistance could be expected
from an extrapolation of my preceding results on ternary alloys, on the other
hand one could fear that the unavoidable structural defects of the multi-
layers, interface roughness for example, might introduce spin-independent
scatterings cancelling the spin-dependent scattering inside the magnetic
layers. The good luck was finally that the scattering by the roughness of the
interfaces is also spin dependent and adds its contribution to the “bulk” one
(the “bulk” and interface contributions can be separately derived from CPP-
GMR experiments).

                                                                                          63


THE GOLDEN AGE OF GMR
Rapidly, our papers reporting the discovery of GMR attracted attention for
their fundamental interest as well as for the many possibilities of applica-
tions, and the research on magnetic multilayers and GMR became a very hot
topic. In my team, reinforced by the recruitment of Agnés Barthélémy and
Frédéric Petroff, as well as in the small but rapidly increasing community
working in the field, we had the exalting impression of exploring a wide
virgin country with so many amazing surprises in store. On the experimental
side, two important results were published in 1990. Parkin et al.10 demon-
strated the existence of GMR in multilayers made by the simpler and faster
technique of sputtering (Fe/Cr, Co/Ru and Co/Cr), and found the oscilla-
tory behaviour of the GMR due to the oscillations of the interlayer exchange
as a function of the thickness of the nonmagnetic layers. Also in 1990 Shinjo
and Yamamoto11, as well as Dupas et al.12, demonstrated that GMR effects can
be found in multilayers without antiferromagnetic interlayer coupling but
composed of magnetic layers of different coercivities. Another important re-


                                                                                                          (b)
                        CPP- GMR
MR ratio (%)




                                                6 nm


               (a)

                      Cu thickness (Å)

                                                                 60 nm
                                                        10


                                                         8                         CIP- GMR              (d)
                                         MR ratio (%)




                                                         6


                                                         4                                     400 nm

                                                         2
               (c)
                                                         0
                                                             0           100     200     300       400     500
                                                                               Co thickness (nm)

Figure 4. (a) Variation of the GMR ratio of Co/Cu multilayers in the conventional Current
In Plane (CIP) geometry as a function of the thickness of the Cu layers13. The scaling
length of the variation is the mean free path (short). (b) Structure of multilayered na-
nowires used for CPP-GMR measurements 21. (c) CPP-GMR curves for (Permalloy 12 nm/
Copper 4 nm) multilayered nanowires (solid lines) and (Cobalt 10 nm/Copper 5nm)
multilayered nanowires (dotted lines)21. (d) ) Variation of the CPP-GMR ratio of Co/Cu
multilayered nanowires as a function of the thickness of the Co layers21. The scaling length
of the variation is the spin diffusion length (long).


64


sult, in 1991, was the observation of large and oscillatory GMR effects in Co/
Cu, which became the archetypical GMR system (Fig. 4a). The first obser-
vations13 were obtained in my group by my Ph. D. student Dante Mosca with
multilayers prepared by sputtering at Michigan State University and at about
the same time in the group of Stuart Parkin at IBM14. Also in 1991, Dieny et
al.15 reported the first observation of GMR in spin-valves, i.e. trilayered struc-
tures based on a concept of my co-laureate Peter Grünberg16 in which the
magnetization of one of the two magnetic layers is pinned by coupling with
an antiferromagnetic layer while the magnetization of the second one is free.
The magnetization of the free layer can be reversed by very small magnetic
fields, so that the concept is now used in most applications.




Figure 5. GMR head for hard-disc. Figure from Chappert et al.18.



   Other developments of the research on magnetic multilayers and GMR at
the beginning of the seventies are described in the Nobel lecture of my co-
laureate Peter Grünberg, with, in particular, a presentation of the various de-
vices bases on the GMR of spin valve structures17-18. In the read heads (Fig.5)
of the Hard Disc Drives (HDDs), the GMR sensors based on spin-valves have
replaced the AMR (Anisotropic Magnetoresistance) sensors in 1997. The
GMR, by providing a sensitive and scalable read technique, has led to an in-
crease of the areal recording density by more than two orders of magnitude
(from y 1 to y 600 Gbit/in2 in 2007). This increase opened the way both to
unprecedented drive capacities (up to 1 terabyte) for video recording or
backup and to smaller HDD sizes (down to .85-inch disk diameter) for mo-
bile appliances like ultra-light laptops or portable multimedia players. GMR
sensors are also used in many other types of application, mainly in automo-
tive industry and bio-medical technology19.


CPP-GMR AND SPIN ACCUMULATION PHYSICS
During the first years of the research on GMR, the experiments were per-
formed only with currents flowing along the layer planes, in the geometry
we call CIP (Current In Plane). It is only in 1993 that experiments of CPP-


                                                                               65


GMR begun to be performed, that is experiments of GMR with the Current
Perpendicular to the layer Planes. This was done first by sandwiching a
magnetic multilayer between superconducting electrodes by Bass, Pratt and
Shroeder at Michigan State University20, and, a couple of years after, in a col-
laboration of my group with Luc Piraux at the University of Louvain, by elec-
trodepositing the multilayer into the pores of a polycarbonate membrane21
(Fig. 4b-d). In the CPP-geometry, the GMR is not only definitely higher than
in CIP (the CPP-GMR will be probably used in a future generation of read
heads for hard discs), but also subsists in multilayers with relatively thick lay-
ers, up to the micron range21, as it can be seen in Fig. 4c-d. In a theoretical
paper with Thierry Valet22, I showed that, owing to spin accumulation effects
occurring in the CPP-geometry, the length scale of the spin transport be-
comes the long spin diffusion length in place of the short mean free path for
the CIP-geometry. Actually, the CPP-GMR has revealed the spin accumulation
effects which govern the propagation of a spin-polarized current through a
succession of magnetic and nonmagnetic materials and play an important
role in all the current developments of spintronics. The diffusion current in-
duced by the accumulation of spins at the magnetic/nonmagnetic interface
is the mechanism driving a spin-polarized current at a long distance from
the interface, well beyond the ballistic range (i.e. well beyond the mean free
path) up to the distance of the spin diffusion length (SDL). In carbon mol-
ecules for example, the spin diffusion length exceeds the micron range and,
as we will see in the Section on molecular spintronics, strongly spin-polarized
currents can be transported throughout long carbon nanotubes.
   The physics of the spin-accumulation occurring when an electron flux
crosses the interface between a ferromagnetic and a nonmagnetic material is
explained in Fig. 6. Far from the interface on the magnetic side, the current
is larger in one of the spin channels (spin up on the figure), while, far from
the interface on the other side, it is equally distributed in the two channels.
With the current direction and the spin polarization of the figure, there is
accumulation of spin up electrons (and depletion of spin down for charge
neutrality) around the interface, or, in other word, a splitting between the
Fermi energies (chemical potentials) of the spin up and spin down electrons.
This accumulation diffuses from the interface in both directions to the dis-
tance of the SDL. Spin-flips are also generated by this out of equilibrium
distribution and a steady splitting is reached when the number of spin-flips
is just what is needed to adjust the incoming and outgoing fluxes of spin up
and spin down electrons. To sum up, there is a broad zone of spin accumula-
tion which extends on both sides to the distance of the SDL and in which the
current is progressively depolarized by the spin-flips generated by the spin
accumulation.
   Figure 6 is drawn for the case of spin injection, i.e. for electrons going
from the magnetic to the nonmagnetic conductor. For electrons going in the
opposite direction (spin extraction), the situation is similar except that a spin
accumulation in the opposite direction progressively polarizes the current in


66


Figure 6. Schematic representation of the spin accumulation at an interface between a fer-
romagnetic metal and a non magnetic layer. (a) Spin-up and spin-down currents far from
an interface between ferromagnetic and nonmagnetic conductors (outside the spin-accu-
mulation zone). (b) Splitting of the chemical potentials EFk and EFm at the interface. The
arrows symbolize the spin flips induced by the spin-split out of equilibrium distribution.
These spin-flips control the progressive depolarization of the electron current between
the left and the right. With an opposite direction of the current, there is an inversion of
the spin accumulation and opposite spin flips, which polarizes the current when it goes
through the spin-accumulation zone. (c) Variation of the current spin polarization when
there is an approximate balance between the spin flips on both sides (metal/metal) and
when the spin flips on the left side are predominant (metal/semiconductor without spin-
dependent interface resistance, for example). Figures from Ref.[18].




                                                                                        67


the nonmagnetic conductor. In both the injection and extraction cases, the
spin-polarization subsists or starts in the nonmagnetic conductor at a long
distance from the interface. This physics can be described by new types of
transport equation22 in which the electrical potential is replaced by a spin
and position dependent electro-chemical potential. These equations can be
applied not only to the simple case of a single interface but to multi-interface
systems with overlap of the spin accumulations at successive interfaces. They
can also be extended to take into account band bending and high current
density effects23-24.
   The physics of spin accumulation plays an important role in many fields
of spintronics, for example in one of the most active field of research today,
spintronics with semiconductors. In the case of spin injection from a mag-
netic metal into a nonmagnetic semiconductor (or spin extraction for the
opposite current direction), the much larger DOS in the metal makes that
similar spin accumulation splittings on the two sides of the interface, as in
Fig. 6, lead to a much larger spin accumulation density and to a much larger
number of spin flips on the metallic side. The depolarization is therefore
faster on the metallic side and the current is almost completely depolarized
when it enters the semiconductor, as shown in Fig. 6c. This problem has been
first raised by Schmidt and coworkers25. I came back to the theory with my co-
worker Henri Jaffrès to show that the problem can be solved by introducing a
spin dependent interface resistance, typically a tunnel junction, to introduce
a discontinuity of the spin accumulation at the interface, increase the pro-
portion of spin on the semiconductor side and shift the depolarization from
the metallic to the semiconductor side (the same conclusions appear also in
a paper of Rashba)26-27. Spin injection through a tunnel barrier has now been
achieved successfully in several experiments but the tunnel resistances are
generally too large for an efficient transformation of the spin information
into an electrical signal24.


MAGNETIC TUNNEL JUNCTIONS AND TUNNELLING MAGNETO-
RESISTANCE (TMR)
An important stage in the development of spintronics has been the re-
search on the Tunnelling Magnetoresistance (TMR) of the Magnetic
Tunnel Junctions(MTJ). The MTJ are tunnel junctions with ferromagnetic
electrodes and their resistance is different for the parallel and antiparallel
magnetic configurations of their electrodes. Some early observations of TMR
effects, small and at low temperature, had been already reported by Jullière28
in 1975, but they were not easily reproducible and actually could not be re-
ally reproduced during 20 years. It is only in 1995 that large (y 20%) and
reproducible effects were obtained by Moodera’s and Miyasaki’s groups on
MTJ with a tunnel barrier of amorphous alumina29-30. From a technological
point of view, the interest of the MTJ with respect to the metallic spin valves
comes from the vertical direction of the current and from the resulting pos-
sibility of a reduction of the lateral size to a submicronic scale by lithographic

68


                                                  (a)




                                        (b)




Figure 7. (a) Principle of the magnetic random access memory MRAM in the basic “cross
point” architecture. The binary information “0” and “1” is recorded on the two opposite
orientations of the magnetization of the free layer of magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ),
which are connected to the crossing points of two perpendicular arrays of parallel con-
ducting lines. For writing, current pulses are sent through one line of each array, and
only at the crossing point of these lines the resulting magnetic field is high enough to
orient the magnetization of the free layer. For reading, one measures the resistance be-
tween the two lines connecting the addressed cell. Schematic from Ref.[18]. (b) High
magnetoresistance, TMR=(Rmax-Rmin)/Rmin, measured by Lee et al.34 for the magnetic
stack: (Co25Fe75)80B20(4nm)/MgO(2.1nm)/(Co25Fe75)80B20(4.3nm) annealed at 475°C
after growth, measured at room temperature (black circles) and low temperature (open
circles).


techniques. The MTJ are at the basis of a new concept of magnetic memory
called MRAM (Magnetic Random Access Memory) and shematically rep-
resented in Fig. 7a. The MRAMs are expected to combine the short access
time of the semiconductor-based RAMs and the non-volatile character of the
magnetic memories. In the first MRAMs, put onto the market in 2006, the
memory cells are MTJs with an alumina barrier. The magnetic fields generat-
ed by “word” and “bit” lines are used to switch their magnetic configuration,
see Fig. 7a. The next generation of MRAM, based on MgO tunnel junctions
and switching by spin transfer, is expected to have a much stronger impact
on the technology of computers.


                                                                                     69


   The research on the TMR has been very active since 1995 and the most
important step was the recent transition from MTJ with amorphous tunnel
barrier (alumina) to single crystal MTJ and especially MTJ with MgO barrier.
In the CNRS/Thales laboratory we founded in 1995, the research on TMR
was one of our main projects and, in collaboration with a Spanish group,
we obtained one of the very first TMA results31 on MTJ with epitaxial MgO.
However our TMR was only slightly larger than that found with alumina bar-
riers and similar electrodes. The important breakthrough came in 2004 at
Tsukuba32 and IBM33 where it was found that very large TMR ratios, up to
200% at room temperature, could be obtained from MgO MTJ of very high
structural quality. TMR ratios of about 600% have been now reached34 (Fig.
7b). In such MTJ, the single crystal barrier filters the symmetry of the wave
functions of the tunnelling electrons35-37, so that the TMR depends on the
spin polarization of the electrodes for the selected symmetry.
   The high spin polarization obtained by selecting the symmetry of the tun-
nelling waves with a single crystal barrier is a very good illustration of what is
under the word “spin polarization” in a spintronic experiment. In the example
of Fig. 8, taken from an article by Zhang and Butler37, one sees the density of
states of evanescent waves functions of different symmetries, $1, $5, etc, in a
MgO(001) barrier between Co electrodes. The key point is that, at least for
interfaces of high quality, an evanescent wave function of a given symmetry is
connected to the Bloch functions of the same symmetry at the Fermi level of
the electrodes. For Co electrodes, the $1 symmetry is well represented at the
Fermi level in the majority spin direction sub-band and not in the minority
one. Consequently, a good connection of the slowly decaying channel $1 with
both electrodes can be obtained only in their parallel magnetic configura-
tion, which explains the very high TMR. Other types of barrier can select
other symmetries than the symmetry $1 selected by MgO(001). For example,
a SrTiO3 barrier predominantly selects evanescent wave functions of $5 sym-
metry, which are connected to minority spin states of cobalt38. This explains
the negative effective spin-polarization of cobalt we had observed in SrTiO3-
based MTJ39. This finally shows that there no intrinsic spin polarization of a
magnetic conductor. The effective polarization of a given magnetic conduc-
tor in a MTJ depends on the symmetry selected by the barrier and, depend-
ing on the barrier, can be positive or negative, large or small. In the same way
the spin polarization of metallic conduction depends strongly on the spin
dependence of the scattering by impurities, as illustrated by Fig. 1b.
   There are other promising directions to obtain large TMR and experi-
ments in several of them are now led by Agnès Barthélémy (much more than
by myself) in the CNRS/Thales laboratory. First, we tested ferromagnetic
materials which were predicted to be half-metallic, i.e. metallic for one of
the spin direction and insulating for the other one, in other words 100%
spin-polarized. Very high spin polarization (95%) and record TMR (1800%)
have been obtained by our Ph.D. student Martin Bowen with La2/3Sr1/3MnO3
electrodes40 but the Curie temperature of this manganite (around 350K) is


70


P




AP




Figure 8. Physics of TMR illustrated by the decay of evanescent electronic waves of differ-
ent symmetries in a MgO(001) layer between cobalt electrodes calculated by Zhang and
Butler37. The $1 symmetry of the slowly decaying tunnelling channel is well represented
at the Fermi level of the spin conduction band of cobalt for the majority spin direction
and not for the minority spin one, so that a good connection by tunnelling between the
electrodes exists only for the parallel magnetic configuration when a $1 channel can be
connected to both electrodes (above). In the antiparallel configuration (below), both the
spin up and spin down $1 channels are poorly connected on one of the sides. This explains
the very high TMR of this type of junction.




too low for applications. It now turns out from recent results in Japan41 that
ferromagnets of the family of the Heusler alloys also present very large TMR
ratios with still 90% at room temperature41. Another interesting concept that
we are exploring is spin filtering by tunnelling through a ferromagnetic insu-
lator layer42-43. This can be described as the tunnelling of electrons through
a barrier of spin dependent height if the bottom of the conduction band is
spin-split, which gives rise to a spin-dependence of the transmission probabil-
ity (spin filtering). Very high spin filtering coefficients have been found at
low temperature with Eus barriers42 at the MIT and at Eindhoven. Promising
results with insulating ferromagnets of much higher Curie temperature have
been recently obtained, see, for example Ref. [43]. Some of the magnetic
barriers we have recently tested in MTJ are also ferroelectric, so that the MTJ
present the interesting property of four states of resistance corresponding
to the P and AP magnetic configurations and to the two orientations of the
ferroelectric polarization44, as shown in Fig. 9.


                                                                                        71


                                                                                   Au
                                                                            LBMO
               10mV 3K                      1                        LSMO
         180
                                                                     1
         160
                                                    After +2V
                                        3
R (k)




         140                                                         2
                                                                2
                                                    After -2V
         120
                                                                     3
                                                                4
         100

                -4       -2         0           2          4         4
                               H (kOe)
Figure 9. Four state resistance of a tunnel junction composed of a biferroic tunnel barrier
(La0.1Bi0.9MnO3) between a ferromagnetic electrode of La2/3Sr1/3 MnO3 and a nomagnetic
electrode of gold. The sates 1-4 correspond to the magnetic (white arrows) and electric
(black arrows) polarizations represented on the right of the figure. From Gajek et al.44.


MAGNETIC SWITCHING AND MICROWAVE GENERATION BY SPIN
TRANSFER
The study of the spin transfer phenomena is one of the most promising new
directions in spintronics today and also an important research topic in our
CNRS/Thales laboratory. In spin transfer experiments, one manipulates the
magnetic moment of a ferromagnetic body without applying any magnetic
field but only by transfer of spin angular momentum from a spin-polarized
current. The concept, which has been introduced by John Slonczewski45
and appears also in papers of Berger46, is illustrated in Fig. 10. As described
in the caption of the figure, the transfer of a transverse spin current to the
“free” magnetic layer F2 can be described by a torque acting on its magnetic
moment. This torque can induce an irreversible switching of this magnetic
moment or, in a second regime, generally in the presence of an applied field,
it generates precessions of the moment in the microwave frequency range.
   The first evidence that spin transfer can work was indicated by experi-
ments of spin injection through point contacts by Tsoi et al.47 but a clear un-
derstanding came later from measurements48-49 performed on pillar-shaped
metallic trilayers (Fig. 11a). In Fig.11b-c, I present examples of our experi-
mental results in the low field regime of irreversible switching, for a metallic
pillar and for a tunnel junctions with electrodes of the dilute ferromagnetic
semiconductor Ga1-xMnxAs. For metallic pillars or tunnel junctions with elec-
trodes made of a ferromagnetic transition metal like Co or Fe, the current
density needed for switching is around 106-107 Amp/cm2, which is still slightly
too high for applications, and an important challenge is the reduction of this
current density. The switching time has been measured in other groups and

72


Figure 10. Illustration of the spin transfer concept introduced by John Slonczewski45 in
1996. A spin-polarized current is prepared by a first magnetic layer F with an obliquely ori-
ented spin-polarization with respect to the magnetization axis of a second layer F2. When
this current goes through F2, the exchange interaction aligns its spin-polarization along
the magnetization axis. As the exchange interaction is spin conserving, the transverse spin-
polarization lost by the current has been transferred to the total spin of F2, which can also
be described by a spin-transfer torque acting on F2.This can lead to a magnetic switching of
the F2 layer or, depending on the experimental conditions, to magnetic oscillations in the
microwave frequency range. Figure from Ref.[18].




can be as short as 100 ps, which is very attractive for the switching of MRAM.
For the tunnel junction of Fig. 11c, the switching current is only about 105
Amp./cm2 and smaller than that of the metallic pillar by two orders of mag-
nitude. This is because a smaller number of individual spins is required to
switch the smaller total spin momentum of a dilute magnetic material.
   In the presence of a large enough magnetic field, the regime of irrevers-
ible switching of the magnetization of the “free” magnetic layer in a trilayer
is replaced by a regime of steady precessions of this free layer magnetization
sustained by the spin transfer torque52. As the angle between the magnetiza-
tions of the two magnetic layers varies periodically during the precession,
the resistance of the trilayer oscillates as a function of time, which generates
voltage oscillations in the microwave frequency range. In other conditions,
the spin transfer torque can also be used to generate an oscillatory motion of
a magnetic vortex.
   The spin transfer phenomena raise a series of various theoretical problems.
The determination of the spin transfer torque is related to the solution of

                                                                                          73


      (a)                                                                    14,6
                                                                                                                                     (b)
Free Co layer




                                                                  dV/dI()
Cu spacer                                                                    14,5
Fixed Co layer



                                                                             14,4
                                                                                                     -2                    0
                                                                                                                  I (mA)

                  550000   (c)                                                                                                       (d)



                                                                                Power (pW/GHz)
                                                                                                 3
 Resistance (




                  500000
                                                                                                 2

                  450000
                                                                                                 1

                  400000
                                                                                                 0
                       -1.0x10 5 -5.0x10 4   0.0   5.0x104   1.0x105                                        3,5                4,0
                             Current density (A .cm-2)                                                    Frequency (GHz)

Figure 11. Experiments of magnetic switching and microwave generation induced by spin
transfer from an electrical DC current in trilayered magnetic pillars. (a) Schematic of a tri-
layered magnetic pillar. (b) Switching by spin transfer between the parallel and antiparallel
magnetic configurations of a Co/Cu/Co metallic pillar49. The switching between parallel
and antiparallel orientations of the magnetizations of the two magnetic layers of the trilayer
is detected by irreversible jumps of the resistance at a critical value of the current. The criti-
cal current density is of the order of 107 A/cm2. (c) Switching by spin transfer of a pillar-
shaped tunnel junction composed of electrodes of the dilute ferromagnetic semiconductor
GaMnAs separated by a tunnel barrier of InGaAs50. The critical current is about hundred
times smaller than in the Py/Cu/Py pillar. Similar results have been obtained by Hayakawa
et al.51.(d) Typical microwave power spectrum of a Co/Cu/Py pillar (Py =permalloy)57.




spin transport equations53-56, while the description of the switching or preces-
sion of the magnetization raises problems of non-linear dynamics53. All these
problems are interacting and, for example, some of our recent results show
that it is possible to obtain very different dynamics (with, for applications, the
interest of oscillations without applied field) by introducing strongly differ-
ent spin relaxation times in the two magnetic layers of a trilayer to distort the
angular dependence of the torque57.
   The spin transfer phenomena will have certainly important applications.
Switching by spin transfer will be used in the next generation of MRAM and
will bring great advantages in terms of precise addressing and low energy
consumption. The generation of oscillations in the microwave frequency
range will lead to the design of Spin Transfer Oscillators (STOs). One of the
main interests of the STOs is their agility, that is the possibility of changing
rapidly their frequency by tuning a DC current. They can also have a high

74


quality factor. Their disadvantage is the very small microwave power of an
individual STO, metallic pillar or tunnel junction. The solution is certainly
the synchronization of a large number of STOs. The possibility of synchro-
nization has been already demonstrated for two nano-contacts inducing spin
transfer excitations in the same magnetic layer58-59. In our laboratory we are
exploring theoretically and experimentally a concept of self-synchronization
of a collection of electrically connected STOs by the RF current components
they induce60.


SPINTRONICS WITH SEMICONDUCTORS AND MOLECULAR
SPINTRONICS
Spintronics with semiconductors61-62 is very attractive as it can combine the
potential of semiconductors (control of current by gate, coupling with optics,
etc) with the potential of the magnetic materials (control of current by spin
manipulation, non-volatility, etc.). It should be possible, for example, to gath-
er storage, detection, logic and communication capabilities on a single chip
that could replace several components. New concepts of components have
also been proposed, for example the concept of Spin Field Effect Transistors
(Spin FETs) based on spin transport in semiconductor lateral channels be-
tween spin-polarized sources and drains with control of the spin transmission
by a field effect gate63. Some nonmagnetic semiconductors have a definite
advantage on metals in terms of spin-coherence time and propagation of
spin polarization on long distances61-62. However, as it will be discussed below,
the long standing problem of the Spin FET it still far from being solved.
   Spintronics with semiconductors is currently developed along several
roads.
   i) The first road is by working on hybrid structures associating ferromag-
netic metals with nonmagnetic semiconductors. As this has been mentioned
in the Section on spin accumulation, Schmidt et al.25 have raised the problem
of “conductivity mismatch” to inject a spin-polarized current from a magnetic
metal into a semiconductor. Solutions have been proposed by the theory26-27
and one knows today that the injection/extraction of a spin-polarized cur-
rent into/from a semiconductor can be achieved with a spin-dependent
interface resistance, typically a tunnel junction. Spin injection/extraction
through a tunnel contact has been now demonstrated in spin LEDs and
magneto-optical experiments61-62,64.
   ii) Another road for spintronics with semiconductors is based on the fabri-
cation of ferromagnetic semiconductors. The ferromagnetic semiconductor
Ga1-xMnxAs (x y a few %) has been discovered65 by the group of Ohno in
Sendai in 1996, and, since this time, has revealed very interesting proper-
ties, namely the possibility of controlling the ferromagnetic properties with
a gate voltage, and also large TMR and TAMR (Tunnelling Anisotropic
Magnetoresistance) effects. However its Curie temperature has reached only
170 K, well below room temperature, which rules out most practical applica-


                                                                              75


tions. Several room temperature ferromagnetic semiconductors have been
announced but the situation is not clear on this front yet.
   iii) The research is now very active on a third road exploiting spin-polar-
ized currents induced by spin-orbit effects, namely the Spin Hall66-68, Rashba
or Dresselhaus effects. In the Spin Hall Effect (SHE), for example, spin-orbit
interactions deflect the currents of the spin up and spin down channels in
opposite transverse directions, thus inducing a transverse spin current, even
in a nonmagnetic conductor. This could be used to create spin currents in
structures composed of only nonmagnetic conductors. Actually the SHE can
be also found in nonmagnetic metals69-70 and the research is also very active
in this field. May I mention that, already in the seventies, I had found very
large SHE induced by resonant scattering on spin-orbit-split levels of non-
magnetic impurities in copper71.
   Several groups have tried to probe the potential of spintronics with semi-
conductors by validating experimentally the concept of Spin FET63 described
above. Both ferromagnetic metals and ferromagnetic semiconductors have
been used for the source and the drain, but the results have been relatively
poor. In a recent review article, Jonker and Flatté61 note that a contrast
larger than about 1% (i. e. [RAP-RP]/RP > 1%) has never been observed be-
tween the resistances of the parallel and antiparallel magnetic orientations
of the source and the drain, at least for lateral structures. We have recently
proposed24 this can be understood in the models27 I had developed with
Henri Jaffrès to describe the spin transport between spin-polarized sources
and drains. In both the diffusive and ballistic regimes, a strong contrast be-
tween the conductances of the two configurations can be obtained only if
the resistances of the interfaces between the semiconductor and the source
or drain are not only spin dependent but also chosen in a relatively narrow
window. The resistances must be larger than a first threshold value for spin
injection/extraction from/into a metallic source/drain, and smaller than a
second threshold value to keep the carrier dwell time shorter than the spin
lifetime. For vertical structures with a short distance between source and
drain, the above conditions can be satisfied more easily and relatively large
magnetoresistance can be observed, as illustrated by the results I present in
Fig. 12. However the results displayed in Fig. 12c show that the magnetore-
sistance drops rapidly when the interface resistance exceeds some threshold
value. This can be explained by the increase of the dwell time above the spin
lifetime. Alternatively, the magnetoresistance also drops to zero when an
increase of temperature shortens the spin lifetime and increases the ratio
of the dwell time to the spin lifetime. For most experiments on lateral struc-
tures, it turns out that a part of the difficulties comes from too large interface
resistances giving rise to too short dwell times. Min et al.73 have arrived at
similar conclusions for the particular case of silicon-based structures and
propose interesting solutions to lower the interface resistances by tuning the
work function of the source and the drain.




76


(a)                                                 40
                                                          (b)
     Ga 1-xMnxAs (30 nm)                            30




                                         TMR (%)
          GaAs (10Å)                                20
         AlAs (15-19Å)
                                                    10

                                                     0
        GaAs (5-10nm)                               -300        -200   -100    0      100 200       300
                                                                       Magnetic Field (Oe)

                                                     50

                                                     40
                                                                                                (c)
        AlAs (15-19Å)
         GaAs (10Å)                      MR ( % )    30
       Ga 1-xMnxAs (300
              nm)                                    20
                                                                 1.45nm                       1.95nm
                                                     10                    1.7nm
                                                         0
                                                         1E-3            0.01                 0.1
                                                                        AR AP ( .cm 2 ) ~ tN

Figure 12. Spintronics with semiconductors illustrated by experimental results24,72 on
the structure represented on the right and composed of a GaAs layer separated from the
GaMnAs source and drain by tunnel barriers of AlAs. (a) MR curve at 4.2 K showing a
resistance difference of 40 % between the parallel and antiparallel magnetic configura-
tions of the source and the drain. (b) MR ratio as a function of the resistance of the tunnel
barriers.


   A recently emerging direction is spintronics with molecules. Very large
GMR- or TMR-like effects are predicted by the theory, especially for carbon-
based molecules in which a very long spin lifetime is expected from the small
spin-orbit coupling. Promising experimental results have been published
during the last years on spin transport in carbon nanotubes74-75. In particu-
lar, my recent work75 in collaboration with a group in Cambridge on carbon
nanotubes between ferromagnetic source and drain made of the metallic
manganite L1/3Sr1/3MnO3 has shown that the relative difference between the
resistances of the parallel and antiparallel configurations can exceed 60-70%,
well above what can be obtained with semiconductor channels. This can be
explained not only by the long spin lifetimes of the electrons in carbon nano-
tubes but also by their short dwell time related to their high Fermi velocity (a
definite advantage on semiconductors). The research is currently very active
in this field and, in particular, graphene-based devices are promising.




                                                                                                    77


 La 2/3 Sr 1/3 MnO 3                   La 2/3 Sr 1/3 MnO 3
 (LSMO)                                           (LSMO)




                          CNT

  (a)

                    (b)           MR=60%                (c)
                 MR=72%




                                 P                       P




Figure 13. Spintronics with molecules illustrated by, (a): Artistic view of spin transport
through a carbon nanotube between magnetic electrodes (courtesy of T. Kontos). (b)
and (c): Magnetoresistance experimental results75 at 4.2 K on carbon nanotubes between
electrodes made of the ferromagnetic metallic oxide La2/3Sr1/3MnO3. A contrast of 72%
and 60% is obtained between the resistances for the parallel (high field) and antiparallel
(peaks) magnetic configurations of the source and drain.


CONCLUSION
In less than twenty years, we have seen spintronics increasing considerably
the capacity of our hard discs, extending the hard disc technology to mobile
appliances like cameras or portable multimedia players, entering the auto-
motive industry and the bio-medical technology and, with TMR and spin
transfer, getting ready to enter the RAM of our computers or the microwave
emitters of our cell phones. The researches of today on the spin transfer phe-
nomena, on multiferroic materials, on spintronics with semiconductors and
molecular spintronics, open fascinating new fields and are also very promis-
ing of multiple applications. Another perspective, out of the scope of this
lecture, should be the exploitation of the truly quantum mechanical nature
of spin and the long spin coherence time in confined geometry for quantum
computing in an even more revolutionary application. Spintronics should
take an important place in the science and technology of our century.

78


REFERENCES
[1] M.N. Baibich, J.M. Broto, A. Fert, F. Nguyen Van Dau, F. Petroff, P. Etienne, G.
     Creuzet, A. Friederich, and J. Chazelas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2472 (1988).
[2] G. Binash, P. Grünberg, F. Saurenbach, and W. Zinn, Phys. Rev. B 39, 4828 (1989).
[3] F. Mott, Proc. Roy. Soc. A153, 699 (1936).
[4] A. Fert and I. A. Campbell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 21, 1190 (1968); A. Fert and I. A. Campbell,
     J. Physique 32, C1-46 (1971); A. Fert and I. A. Campbell, J. Phys. F 6, 849 (1976).
[5] B. Loegel and F. Gautier, J. Phys. Chem. Sol. 32, 2723 (1971).
[6] The contribution of spin-flips to spin mixing (i.e. to momentum exchange between
     the two channels, mainly through magnon scattering4) should not be confused with
     the contribution of spin-flips to the relaxation of spin accumulation effects (mainly
     through spin-lattice relaxation by spin-orbit interactions).
[7] P. Grünberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Young, M. B. Brodsky, H. Sowers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57,
     2442 (1986).
[8] R. E. Camley, J. Barnas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 664 (1989).
[9] P. M. Levy, S. Zhang, A. Fert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1643 (1990).
[10] S. S. P. Parkin, N. More, K.P. Roche, Phys. Rev.Lett. 64, 2304 (1990).
[11] T. Shinjo and H. Yamamoto, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 59, 3061 (1990).
[12] C. Dupas, P. Beauvillain, C. Chappert, C. Chappert, J.P. Renard, F. Trigui, P. Veillet, E.
     Velu, D. Renard, J. Appl. Phys. 67, 5680 (1990).
[13] D. H. Mosca, F. Petroff, A. Fert, P. A. Schroeder, W. P. Pratt, R. Loloee, J. Magn. Magn.
     Mater. 94, L1 (1991).
[14] S. S. P. Parkin, R. Bhadra, K. P. Roche, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2152 (1991).
[15] B. Dieny, V. S. Speriosu, S. S. P. Parkin, B. A. Gurney, D. R. Wilhoit, D. Mauri, Phys.
     Rev. B 43, 1297 (1991).
[16] P. Grünberg, Magnetic field sensor with ferromagnetic thin layers having magneti-
     cally antiparallel polarized components, US patent 4,949,039 (1990).
[17] S. S. P. Parkin, in Spin Dependent Transport in Magnetic nanostructures (Edited by
     S. Maekawa and T. Shinjo, Taylor and Francis 2002), p. 237.
[18] C. Chappert, A. Fert, F. Nguyen Van Dau, Nature Materials, vol. 6, 813 (2007).
[19] P. P. Freitas, H. Ferreira, D. Graham, L. Clarke, M. Amaral, V. Martins, L. Fonseca,
     J. S. Cabral, Europhysiscs News 34/6, 225 (2003).
[20] W. P. Pratt et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 3060 (1991); J. Bass and W. P. Pratt, J. Magn.
     Magn. Mater. 200, 274 (1999).
[21] L. Piraux, J-M. George, C. Leroy, R. Legras, A. Fert, Appl. Phys. Lett. 65, 2484 (1994);
     A. Fert and L. Piraux, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 200, 338 (1999).
[22] T. Valet and A. Fert, Phys. Rev. B 48, 7099 (1993).
[23] Z. G. Yu and M. E. Flatté, Phys. Rev. B 66, 201202 (2002).
[24] A. Fert, J. M. George, H. Jaffrès and R. Mattana, IEEE Transactions on Electron
     Devices 54, 921 (2007).
[25] G. Schmidt et al., Phys. Rev. B 62, 4790 (2000).
[26] E. I. Rashba, Phys. Rev. B 62, 16267 (2000).
[27] A. Fert and H. Jaffrès, Phys. Rev. B 64, 184420 (2001).
[28] Jullière, Phys. Lett. 54A, 225 (1975).
[29] J. S. Moodera, L. R. Kinder, T. M. Wong, R. Meservey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3273 (1995).
[30] T. Miyazaki and N. Tezuka, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 139 (1995) 231.
[31] M. Bowen, V. Cros, F. Petroff, A. Fert, A. Cebollada, F. Briones, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79,
     1655 (2001).
[32] Yuasa et al., Nature Mater. 3, 868 (2004).
[33] S. S. P. Parkin et al., Nature Materials 3, 862 (2004).
[34] Y. M. Lee, J. Hayakawa, S. Ikeda, F. Matsukura, H. Ohno, Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 212507
     (2007).
[35] J. Mathon and A. Umerski ; Phys. Rev. B 60, 1117 (1999).
[36] Ph. Mavropoulos, N. Papanikolaou and Ph. Dederichs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 1088 (2000).
[37] X. G. Zhang and W. H. Butler, Phys. Rev. B 70, 173407 (2004).


                                                                                           79


[38] S. Velev et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005); M. Bowen et al., Phys. Rev. B 73, 140408 (2006).
[39] J. M. De Teresa, A. Barthélémy, A. Fert, J. P. Contour, F. Montaigne, A. Vaures; Science
      286, 507 (1999).
[40] M. Bowen, M. Bibes, A. Barthélémy, J. P. Contour, A. Anane, Y. Lemaitre, A. Fert ;
      Appl. Phys. Letters 82, 233, (2003).
[41] T. Ishikawa et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 192505 (2006).
[42] P. Leclair, J. K. Ha, J. M.Swagten, J. T. Kohlhepp, C. H. Van de Vin and W. J. M. de Jonge;
      Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 625 (2002).
[43] A. V. Ramos et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 122107 (2007).
[44] M. Gajek, M. Bibes, S. Fusil, K. Bouzehouane, J. Fontcuberta, A. Barthélémy, A. Fert,
      Nature Materials 6, 296 (2007).
[45] J. C. Slonczewski, J. Magn. Mat. 159, L1 (1996).
[46] L. Berger, Phys. Rev. B 54, 9353 (1996).
[47] M. Tsoi, A. G. M. Jansen, J. Bass, W. C. Chiang, V. Tsoi, M. Seck, P. Wyder, Phys. Rev.
      Lett. 80, 4281 (1998).
[48] Katine et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3149 (2000).
[49] J. Grollier, V. Cros, A. Hanzic, J. M. George, H. Jaffres, A. Fert, G. Faini, J. Ben Youssef,
      H. Le Gall., Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 3663 (2001). J. Grollier, Ph. D. thesis (Université
      Paris-Sud, 2003).
 [50] M. Elsen, O. Boulle, J. M.George, H. Jaffrès, V. Cros, A. Fert, A. Lemaître, R. Giraud,
      G. Faini, Phys.Rev. B 73, 035303 (2006).
[51] J. Hayakawa et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2 44, L1267 (2005).
[52] W. H. Rippart et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 027201 (2004).
[53] M. D. Stiles and J. Miltat in Spin Dynamics in Confined Magnetic Structures, III, edited by
      B. Hillebrands and A. Thiaville (Springer, Berlin, 2006).
[54] J. C. Slonczewski, J. Magn. Magn. Mat.,247, 324 (2002).
[55] A. A. Kovalev, A. Brattas, G. E. W. Bauer, Phys. Rev. B 66, 224424 (2002).
[56] J. Barnas, A. Fert, M. Gmitra, I. Weymann, V. K. Dugaev, Phys. Rev. B 72, 024426
      (2005).
[57] O. Boulle, V. Cros, J. Grollier, L. G. Pereira, C. Deranlot, F. Petroff, G. Faini, J. Barnas,
      A. Fert, Nature Physics, 3, 492 (2007), O. Boulle, Ph. D. Thesis (2006, Université
      Paris-Sud).
[58] S. Kaka et al., Nature 437, 389 (2005).
[59] F. B. Mancoff et al., Nature 437, 393 (2005).
[60] J. Grollier, V; Cros, A. Fert, Phys. Rev. B 73, 060409 [R], 2006.
[61] B. T. Jonker and M. E. Flatté, in Nanomagnetism (edited by D.L. Mills and J.A.C.
      Bland, Elsevier, 2006), p. 227.
[62] D. D. Awschalom and M. E. Flatté, Nature Physics 3, 153 (2007).
[63] S. Datta and B. Das, Appl. Phys. Lett. 56, 665 (1990).
[64] Stephens et al., PRL 93, 097602 (2004).
[65] H. Ohno et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 363 (1996).
[66] Y. Kato, R. C. Myers, A. C. Gossard, D. D. Awschalom, Science 306, 1910 (2004).
[67] S. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 393 (2000).
[68] M. Koenig, S. Wiedmann, C. Bruene, A. Roth, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, X. L.
      Qi and S-C. Zhang, Science, 318, 766 (2007).
[69] L. Vila, T. Kjimura, Y. Otani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 226604 (2007).
[70] T. Seki et al., Nature Materials 7, 125 (2008).
[71] A. Fert, A. Friederich, A. Hamzic, J. of Magn. Magn. Mat. 24, 231 (1981).
[72] R. Mattana, J. M. George, H. Jaffrès, F. Nguyen Van Dau, A. Fert, B. Lépine, A.
      Guivarch, G. Jézéquel, Phys. Rev. Letters 90, 166601, (2003).
[73] B. C. Min, K. Motohashi, C. Lodder, R. Jansen, Nature Mat. 5, 817 (2006).
[74] A. Cottet, T. Kontos, S. Sahoo, H. T. Man, W. Belzig, C. Bruder, C. Schönenberger,
      Semicond. Sci.Technol. 21, 578 (2006).
[75] L. E. Hueso, J. M. Pruneda, V. Ferrari, G. Burnell, J. P. Valdes-Herrera, B. D. Simmons,
      P. B. Littlewood, E. Artacho, A. Fert, N. D. Mathur, Nature 445, 410 (2007).
Portrait photo of Albert Fert by photographer Ulla Montan.


80
