                        A L B E R T A. M I C H E L S O N

              Recent advances in spectroscopy
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12,1907



The fame of Newton rests chiefly on his epoch-making discovery of the
laws of gravitational astronomy - by means of which the position of the
moons, the planets, and the comets, and other members of our solar system
can be calculated and verified with the utmost precision - and in many cases
such calculation and verification may be extended to systems of suns and
planets outside our own.
    But in no less degree are we indebted to this monumental genius for that
equally important branch of Astrophysics - in which the spectroscope plays
so fundamental a role - by means of which we are enabled to discover the
physical and chemical constitution of the heavenly bodies, as well as their
positions and motions. As the number and intricacy of the wonderful systems
of stellar worlds which the telescope can reveal increase with its power, so
 also do the evidences of the innermost molecular structure of matter increase
 with the power of the spectroscope. If Newton’s fundamental experiment
 of separating the colors of sunlight had been made under conditions so
 slightly different from those in his actual experiment that in the present stage
 of experimental science, they would at once suggest themselves to the veriest
 tyro - the science of spectroscopy would have been founded.
    So simple a matter as the narrowing of the aperture through which the
 sunlight streamed before it fell upon the prism which separates it into its
 constituent colors - would have sufficed to show that the spectrum was
 crossed by dark lines, named after their discoverer, the Fraunhofer lines of
 the Solar Spectrum. These may be readily enough observed, with no other
 appliances than a slit in a shutter which is observed through an ordinary
 prism of glass. Fraunhofer increased the power of the combination enor-
 mously by observing with a telescope - and this simple combination,
 omitting minor details, constitutes that wonder of modern science, the
  Spectroscope. As the power of a telescope is measured by the closeness of
 the double stars which it can "resolve", so that of the Spectroscope may
 be estimated by the closeness of the spectral lines which it can separate.
 In order to form an idea of the advance in the power of spectroscopes


                          ADVANCES IN SPECTROSCOPY                             167
let us for a moment consider the map of the Solar Spectrum (Figure 1).
    The portion which is visible to the unaided eye extends from the Fraun-
hofer line A to H; but by photography it may be traced far into the ultra-
violet region and by bolometric measurements it is found to extend enor-
mously farther in the region beyond the red. In the yellow we observe a
dark line marked D, which coincides in position with the bright light emit-
 ted by sodium - as when salt is placed in an alcohol flame. It may be readily
 shown by a prism of very moderate power that this line is double, and as
 the power of the instrument increases the distance apart or separation of this
 doublet furnishes a very convenient measure of its separating or resolving
 power. Of course this separation may be effected by simple magnification,
 but this would in itself be of no service, as the "lines" themselves would be
 broadened by the magnification in the same proportion. It can be shown
 that the effective resolving power depends on the material of the prism which
 must be as highly dispersive as possible and on the size, or number, of the
 prisms employed - and by increasing these it has been found possible to
 "resolve" double lines thirty or forty times as near together as are the sodium
 lines. It will be convenient to take the measure of the resolving power when
just sufficient to separate the sodium lines as 1,000. Then the limit of resolving
 power of prism spectroscopes may be said not much to exceed 40,000.*
    This value of resolving power is found in practice to obtain under average
 conditions. Theoretically there is no limit save that imposed by the optical
 conditions to be fulfilled - and especially by the difficulty in obtaining large
 masses of the refracting material of sufficient homogeneity and high disper-
 sive power. It is very likely that this limit has not yet been reached.
    Meanwhile another device for analysing light into its component parts
 has been found by Fraunhofer (1821) which at present has practically super-
 seded the prism - namely, the diffraction grating. Fraunhofer’s original grat-
 ing consisted of a number of fine equidistant wires, but he afterwards made
 them by ruling fine lines on a glass plate covered with gold leaf and removing
  the alternate strips. They are now made by ruling upon a glass or a metal
 surface fine equidistant lines with a diamond point.
    The separation of light into its elements by a grating depends on its action
 on the constituent light-waves.
    Let Fig. 2 represent a highly magnified cross section of a diffraction grating
 with plane waves of light falling upon it normally, as indicated by the ar-
* Lord Rayleigh has obtained results with prism of carbon disulphide which promise a
much higher resolving power.


168        1907 A.A. MICHELSON




                           Fig.2.




                           Fig. 3.




  Fig.1.




                          Fig. 4.


                          ADVANCES IN SPECTROSCOPY                           169
rows. The wave motion will pass through the apertures, and will continue
as a series of plane waves; and if brought to a focus by a telescope will
produce an image of the slit source just as if no grating were present (save
that it is fainter, as some of the light is cut off by the opaque portions). This
image may be considered as produced by the concurrence of all the elemen-
tary waves from the separate apertures meeting in the same phase of vibra-
tion, thus re-inforcing each other. But this may also be true in an oblique
direction, as shown in the figure, if the retardation of the successive waves
is just one whole wavelength (or any whole number) as is illustrated in
Fig. 3, where the successive waves from apertures 1, 2, 3 ... are shown to re-
inforce each other just as if they all belong to a single wave-train. In this
direction therefore there will also be an image of the slit source; and this
direction is determined by the relation:




where l is the length of the light-wave of this particular color, s the distance
between the apertures (the grating space), and m the number of waves in
the common retardation (1,2,3, etc.). But even if the light thus diffracted
be absolutely homogeneous ( that is, consist of an infinite wave-tram of con-
stant wavelength) it does not follow that the light is all diffracted in the
given direction; there will be some light in directions differing slightly from
this - growing less until the extreme difference of path is (say) n + 1 waves,
(instead of n when it is ml).
   In fact, if we divide the pencil having this new direction into two equal
parts AC and CB, the ray AA, will be n + 1/2 waves in advance of CCI and
the two will be in opposite phases of vibration, and will therefore neutralize
each other. The same will be true of each pair of rays taken in the same
manner over the whole grating space, and the result is total darkness for this
direction. Let us suppose we are examining the double sodium line. The dif-
ference between the components is about one thousandth of the wave-
length. With a grating of n lines there will be total darkness in a direction
corresponding to a retardation of ( n + 1 ) l. Let this direction correspond
to the brightest part of the image for the second sodium line 1 2 so that (n
+ I ) l = n 12 or (12- 1 1)/s = l/n. Under these conditions the two images
are just <<resolved>>. But (12 - 11)/l = l/ 1,000 for sodium lines, whence n =
1,000. That is, a grating of 1,000 lines will "resolve" the sodium lines in the
first spectrum, or R = 1,000. In the second (where the common retardation


170                         1907 A.A. MICHELSON

is two wavelengths) the resolving power is twice as great or 2n, and in the
mth spectrum, m times as great. The resolving power is therefore the prod-
uct of the number of lines in the grating by the order of the spectrum, that
is, R = mn.
   In order, therefore, to obtain high resolving power the grating must have
a great number of rulings and if possible a high order of spectrum should
be used. The rulings need not be exceedingly close together, but it is found
practically sufficient if there are from 500 to 1,000 lines per millimeter. The
earlier gratings were relatively small and contained only a few thousand lines.
The best of these were ruled by Nobert (1851). A very great advance was
made by Rutherford of New York, who (1868) ruled gratings two inches
long on speculum metal and containing about 20,000 lines. These gratings
exceeded in resolving power the best prism trains in use at the time. The
next advance was made by Rowland of the Johns Hopkins University, who
succeeded in ruling gratings six inches long (by two to three inches stroke)
having about one hundred thousand lines, and capable (theoretically, at
least) of resolving in the spectrum, double lines whose distance apart was
only one one-hundredth as great as that of the sodium lines. Practically this
is about the limit of the power of the best Rowland grating which I have
examined.
   The difference between the theoretical and the actual performance is due
to want of absolute uniformity in the grating space. This is due to the enor-
mous difficulty in constructing a screw which shall be practically perfect
throughout its whole length, a difficulty which increases very rapidly as the
length of the screw increases; and it has been supposed that the limit of ac-
curacy was reached in these gratings.
   The great and rapidly increasing importance of spectrum analysis - espe-
cially in determining the distribution of light in so-called spectral lines under
normal conditions, the resolution of complicated systems of lines, and in the
investigation of the effects of temperature, of pressure, and especially of a
magnetic field -justified the untertaking of much larger gratings than these.
As an example of progress made in this direction, I have the honor of
exhibiting a grating having a ruled surface nine inches long by four and one
half inches stroke (220 x 110mm). This has one hundred and ten thousand
lines and is nearly perfect in the second order; so that its resolving power is
theoretically 220,000 and this is very nearly realized in actual experiments.
   It will be observed that the effect produced at the focus of the telescope
depends on the concurrence or opposition - in general on the interference of


                          ADVANCES IN SPECTROSCOPY                          171
the elementary trains of light-waves. We are again indebted to the genius
of Newton for the first observation of such interference; and a comparative-
ly slight modification of the celebrated experiment of "Newton’s rings"
leads to a third method of spectrum analysis which, if more indirect and less
convenient than the methods just described, is far more powerful. If two
plane surfaces (say the inner surfaces of two glass plates) are adjusted very
accurately to parallelism, and sodium light fall on the combination at nearly
normal incidence, the light reflected from the two surfaces will interfere,
showing a series of concentric rings alternately bright and dark, according
to the relative retardation of the two reflected light beams.
    If this retardation changes (by slowly increasing the distance between the
 surfaces) the center of the ring system goes through alternations of light and
 darkness, the number of these alternations corresponding exactly to the num-
 ber of light-waves in twice the increase in distance. Hence the measurement
 of the length of the waves of any monochromatic light may be obtained by
 counting the number of such alternations in a given distance. Such meas-
 urement of wavelengths constitutes one of the most important objects of
 spectroscopic research.
    Another object accomplished by such measurement is the establishment
 of a natural standard of length in place of the arbitrary standard at present
 in use - the meter. Originally it was intended this should be the ten-mil-
 lionth part of an earth-quadrant, but it was found that the results of meas-
 urements differed so much that this definition was abandoned. The proposi-
 tion to make the ultimate standard the length of a pendulum which vibrates
 seconds at Paris met with a similar fate.
     Shortly after the excellent gratings made by Rutherford appeared, it was
 proposed ( by Dr. B. A. Gould) to make the length of a wave of sodiumlight
 the ultimate standard; but this idea was never carried out. It can be shown
 that it also is not susceptible of the requisite degree of accuracy, and in fact
 a number of measurements made with a Rowland grating have been shown
 to be in error by about one part in thirty thousand. But modern conditions
 require a much higher degree of accuracy. In fact, it is doubtful if any natural
 standard could replace the arbitrary standard meter, unless it can be shown
 that it admits of realization in the shape of a material standard which can
 not be distinguished from the original.
     One of the most serious difficulties encountered in the attempt to carry
 into practice the method of counting the alternations of light and darkness
 in the interference method, is the defect in homogeneity of the light em-


172                           1907 A.A. MICHELSON

ployed. This causes indistinctness of the interference rings when the distance
is greater than a few centimeters. The light emitted by various kinds of gases
and metallic vapors, when made luminous by the electric discharge, differ
enormously in this respect. A systematic search showed that among some
forty or more radiations nearly all were defective, some being represented
by a spectrum of broad hazy "lines", others being double, triple, or even
more highly complex. But the red light emitted by luminous vapor of
metallic cadmium was found to be almost ideally adapted for the purpose.
Accordingly this was employed: and the results of three independent meas-
urements, made by different observers and at different times, of the number
of light-waves of red cadmium light in the standard meter are as follows:




It will be seen that the differences are less than half a millionth part, and this
is about the limit of accuracy of the comparative measurements of the mate-
rial standards. Within the last year a similar determination has been carried
out by Perot and Fabry, with a result not to be distinguished from the above.
It follows that we now have a natural standard of length, the length of a
light-wave of incandescent cadmium vapor; by means of which a material
standard can be realized, whose length can not be distinguished from the
actual standard meter - so that if, through accident or in time, the actual
standard meter should alter, or if it were lost or destroyed, it could be re-
placed so accurately that the difference could not be observed.
   In the search for a radiation sufficiently homogeneous for the purpose of
a standard it became evident that the interference method might be made to
yield information concerning the distribution of light in an approximately
homogeneous source when such observations would be entirely beyond the
power of the best spectroscopes. To illustrate, suppose this source to be again
the double radiation from sodium vapor. As the wavelengths of these two
radiations differ by about one part in a thousand, then at a difference of path
of five hundred waves (about 0.36 mm) the bright fringes of one wave-train
would cover the dark fringes of the other, so that if the two radiations were
of equal intensity, all traces of interference would vanish. At twice this
distance they would reappear and so on indefinitely, if the separate radiations
were absolutely homogeneous. As this is not the case, however, there would


                         ADVANCES IN SPECTROSCOPY                             I73
be a gradual falling off in the clearness or visibility of the bands. Inversely, if
such changes are observed in actual experiment, we infer that we are dealing
with a double source. Further, from the distance between the maxima of
distinctness, we may determine (and with extraordinary accuracy) the ratio
of wavelenghts of the components; from the ratio of maxima to minima
we may infer the ratio of their intensities; and finally the gradual falling off
when the distance becomes large gives accurate information of the "width"
of the corresponding spectral lines.




   In this way it was found that the red line of hydrogen is a double with
components about one fortieth of the distance apart of the sodium lines.
Thallium has a brilliant green radiation which is also double, the distance
being one sixtieth that of the sodium lines. Mercury shows a brilliant green
line, which is highly complex, but whose chief component is a doublet,
whose separation is only one seven-hundredth of that of sodium. The inter-


I74                            1907 A.A. MICHELSON

ference fringes are still visible when the difference of path is of the order of
five hundred millimeters, corresponding to over a million light-waves; and
the corresponding width of spectral line would be less than a thousandth
part of that which separates the sodium lines.
   Fig. 5 illustrates the arrangement of the apparatus as it is actually used. An
ordinary prism spectroscope gives a preliminary analysis of the light from
the source. This is necessary because the spectra of most substances consist of
numerous lines. For example, the spectrum of mercury contains two yellow
lines, a very brilliant green line, and a less brilliant violet line, so that if we
pass all the light together into the interferometer, we have a combination
of all four. It is usually better to separate the various radiations before they
enter the interferometer. Accordingly, the light from the vacuum tube at
a passes through an ordinary spectroscope b c, and the light from only one
of the lines in the spectrum thus formed is allowed to pass through the slit
d into the interferometer.
   As explained above, the light divides at the plate e, part going to the
mirror f, which is movable, and part passing through, to the mirror g. The
first ray returns on the path f e h. The second returns to e, is reflected, and
passes into the telescope h.
   The resolving power of the interferometer is measured by the number of
light-waves in the difference of path of the two interfering pencils, and as
 this is unlimited, the interferometer furnishes the most powerful means for
investigating the structure of spectral lines or groups. Its use is, however,
 somewhat handicapped by the fact that the examination of a single group
 of lines may require a considerable number of observations which take some
time and during which it may be difficult to prevent changes in the light
 source. Nevertheless it was found possible by its means to investigate the
 wonderful discovery of Zeeman - of the effect of a magnetic field on the
 character of the radiation from a source subjected to its influence; and the
 results thus obtained have been since confirmed by methods which have
 been subsequently devised.
    One of these is the application of the echelon. This is in effect a diffraction
 grating in which high resolving power is obtained by using a very high
 order of spectrum into which practically all, the light is concentrated. The
 number of elements may be quite moderate - since the resolving power is
 the product of the two. The order of the spectrum is the number of wave-
 lengths in the retardation at each step. This retardation (which must be very
 accurately constant) is secured by allowing the incident light to fall upon a


                        ADVANCES IN SPECTROSCOPY                            175
pile of glass plates optically plane parallel and of the same thickness - each
one a little wider than the preceding as in Fig.6.




                                    Fig.6.

   Thus if the pile has forty plates, each one centimeter thick, the retardation
will be about ten thousand light-waves; and the resolving power would be
forty times this or four hundred thousand - which is about four times as that
of a six-inch diffraction grating of the usual form. The number of elements
might be increased till the absorption of the glass brought a limit. A diffi-
culty, which appears long before this limit is reached, is due to the loss of
light by repeated reflections between the many surfaces. This has been very
ingeniously overcome by Mr. Twyman of the firm of Hilger & Company
by pressing the plates together to actual contact - when the reflection van-
ishes. It is likely that the echelon under these conditions may be used by
reflection instead of transmission (the plates being silvered for the purpose)
with the advantage of quadrupling the resolving power for the same num-
ber of plates and eliminating the absorption.
   An illustration of the efficiency of the echelon spectroscope is furnished
by the following photographs of the spectrum of green radiations from
mercury vapor. The first of the figures shows the spectrum of the second
order of a diffraction grating whose ruled surface is nine inches by four and
a half - the largest in existence. The second is by an echelon of thirty plates,
seven millimeters thick, and in the third the echelon consisted of forty plates,
each an inch and a fourth thick (30 mm). The corresponding lines are
similarly lettered in the three figures. The scale is in Å.U.(Ångstrom units).
It will be noted in the last of the three figures that the midth of the fainter
companion is about one one-hundredth of an Å.U. The limit of resolution
of the instrument is about half as much, or its resolving power is over a
million ( Figs. 7, 8 and 9).
   It will be observed that the echelon spectra are repeated - thus a1 and a2
are two successive spectra of the same line. This is true of any grating
spectrum, and the difficulties which arise from the overlapping of the suc-


176   1907 A.A. MICHELSON




          Fig.7.




          Fig.8.




         Fig.9.




        Fig.10.


    ADVANCES IN SPECTROSCOPY        I77




Fig.11.                   Fig.12.


178                               1907 A.A. MICHELSON

cessive orders of spectrum may be overcome by separating these by a prism
whose refracting edge is perpendicular to the lines of the grating. The same
is true of the echelon spectrum - save that the order of the overlapping
spectra is so high that a prism is hardly adequate and recourse must be had
to a grating - with its plane of diffraction perpendicular to that of the eche-
lon, as shown in Fig. 10.
   With this arrangement it is possible to photograph a large part of the
spectrum at once.*
   Fig. 11 shows such a photograph of the iron spectrum, and it may be noted
that this combination of grating and echelon makes it possible to observe
absorption spectra as well as bright line spectra.
   Fig. 12 shows a photograph of the solar spectrum taken in this way. It will
be noted that the spectral "lines" are generally too broad to justify the use
of so great a resolving power.
   Finally it may be pointed out that this combination gives us the means of
comparing the wavelengths of spectral lines with a degree of accuracy far
superior to that of the grating.




* If the preliminary analysis has been made before the light entered the slit of echelon
spectroscope, it would be possible to examine but one - at most a few - lines at a time.
