

ALBERTEINSTEIN

Fundamental  ideas  and problems of the  theory  of relativity
Lecture delivered  to the Nordic Assembly o/ Na/0rflIlsfs at Gothenburg* Jul    11,  1923

If we consider  that part of the theory  of relativity  which  may nowadays  in a sense be regarded 
as bona fide scientific  knowledge,  we note two aspects which  have a major  bearing  on this 
theory.  The whole  development  of the theory turns on the question of whether there are 
physically preferred states of  motion  in  Nature  (physical  relativity  problem).  Also,  
concepts  and  dis- tinctions  are  only  admissible  to  the  extent  that  observable  facts  can 
 be  as- signed to them without ambiguity (stipulation that concepts and distinctions should have 
meaning). This postulate, pertaining to epistemology,  proves to be of fundamental  importance.
These  two  aspects  become  clear  when  applied  to  a  special  case,  e.g.  to  clas- sical  
mechanics.  Firstly  we  see  that  at  any  point  filled  with  matter  there  exists a preferred 
 state  of  motion,  namely  that  of  the substance  at the point con- sidered.  Our problem  
starts  however  with the question whether  physically preferred  states  of  motion  exist  in 
reference  to  extensive  regions.  From  the viewpoint of classical mechanics  the answer is in 
the affirmative;  the physic- ally preferred states of motion from the viewpoint of mechanics are 
those of the  inertial  frames.
This assertion,  in common with the  basis of the whole of mechanics  as it generally  used  to  be 
described  before  the relativity  theory, far from  meets the  above  "stipulation  of  meaning".  
Motion  can  only  be conceived  as  the relative  motion  of  bodies.  In  mechanics,  motion  
relative  to  the  system  of coordinates  is implied when merely motion is referred  to. 
Nevertheless  this interpretation  does  not  comply  with  the  "stipulation  of  meaning"  if  
the  co- ordinate system is considered as something purely imaginary. If we turn our attention to 
experimental  physics we see that there the coordinate system is invariably  represented  by  a  
"practically  rigid"    body.  Furthermore  it  is  as- sumed  that  such  rigid  bodies  can  be  
positioned  in rest  relative  to  one  another
* The Lecture was not delivered  on  the occasion  of  the  Nobel  Prize  award,  and  did not, 
therefore, concern  the discovery  of  the photoelectric effect.



TH E ORY   OF   RE LAT IV I TY                                             483
in common with the bodies of Euclidian  geometry.  Insofar as we may think of  the rigid  measuring 
 body  as  existing  as an object  which can  be  experienced, the  "system  of  coordinates"  
concept  as  well  as  the  concept  of  the  motion  of matter  relative  thereto  can  be  
accepted  in  the  sense  of  the  "stipulation  of meaning".  At the same  time Euclidian  
geometry,  by  this conception,  has  been adapted  to  the  requirements  of  the  physics  of  
the  "stipulation  of  meaning". The question whether Euclidian geometry is valid becomes 
physically signif- icant; its validity  is assumed in classical physics and also later in the 
special theory of relativity.
In  classical  mechanics  the  inertial  frame  and  time  are  best  defined  together by a 
suitable  formulation  of the law of inertia:  It is possible  to fix the time and  assign  a  
state  of  motion  to  the  system  of  coordinates  (inertial  frame)  such that, with reference  
to  the latter, force-free  material  points  undergo  no ac- celeration; furthermore it is assumed 
that this time can be measured without disagreement  by identical  clocks  (systems  which run down 
 periodically)  in any arbitrary  state of  motion.  There  are then an infinite  number  of 
inertial frames which are in uniform translational  motion relative to each other, and hence  there 
 is  also  an  infinite  number  of  mutually  equivalent,  physically  pre- ferred  states  of  
motion.  Time  is  absolute,  i.e.independent  of  the  choice  of the particular  inertial  frame; 
 it is defined  by more characteristics  than  log- ically  necessary,  although  - as implied  by 
mechanics  - this  should  not lead to contradictions with experience.  Note in passing that the 
logical weakness of  this  exposition  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  stipulation  of  
meaning  is the  lack  of  an  experimental  criterion  for  whether  a material  point  is force- 
free or not; therefore  the concept  of the inertial  frame remains  rather  prob- lematical.  This 
 deficiency  leads to the general  theory  of relativity.  We shall not consider  it for the 
moment.
The concept  of  the rigid  body  (and  that  of  the clock)  has  a key  bearing on the foregoing 
consideration  of the fundamentals  of mechanics, a bearing which  there is some justification  for 
challenging.  The rigid  body is only ap- proximately  achieved  in Nature,  not even with desired 
approximation; this concept  does  not  therefore  strictly  satisfy  the  "stipulation  of  
meaning".  It  is also  logically  unjustifiable  to base all physical consideration  on the rigid  
or solid  body  and  then  finally  reconstruct  that  body  atomically  by  means  of elementary  
physical  laws which  in turn have been determined  by means of the  rigid  measuring  body.  I  am 
 mentioning  these  deficiencies  of  method because  in the same sense they are also a feature of 
the relativity  theory  in the schematic  exposition which I am advocating here. Certainly it would 
be


484                                              19 21    A. E INST E IN
logically  more correct to begin with the whole of the laws and to apply the "stipulation  of  
meaning"  to this  whole  first,  i.e.  to put the  unambiguous  rela- tion to the world of 
experience  last instead of already fulfilling it in an im- perfect  form for an artificially  
isolated  part,  namely  the space-time  metric. We  are  not,  however,  sufficiently  advanced  
in our  knowledge  of Nature's elementary laws to adopt this more perfect method without going out 
of our depth. At the close of our considerations we shall see that in the most recent studies  
there  is  an  attempt,  based  on  ideas  by  Levi-Civita,  Weyl,  and  Edding- ton, to implement  
that logically  purer method.
It more clearly  follows  from the above  what  is implied  by "preferred  states of motion". They 
are preferred as regards the laws of Nature. States of mo- tion are preferred  when,  relative  to 
the formulation  of the laws of Nature, coordinate  systems  within  them  are  distinguished  in  
that  with  respect  to  them those laws assume a form preferred by simplicity. According to 
classical me- chanics the states of motion of the inertial frames in this sense are physically 
preferred. Classical mechanics permits a distinction to be made between (ab- solutely) 
unaccelerated and accelerated  motions; it also claims that velocities have  only  a  relative  
existence  (dependent  on  the  selection  of  the  inertial frame),  while  accelerations  and  
rotations  have  an  absolute  existence  (in- dependent  of the selection  of the inertial frame). 
This state of affairs can be expressed  thus:  According  to  classical  mechanics  "velocity  
relativity"  exists, but  not  "acceleration  relativity".  After  these  preliminary  
considerations  we can pass  to the actual  topic  of our contemplations, the relativity theory,  
by characterizing its development  so far in terms of principles.
The special  theory  of relativity  is an adaptation  of physical  principles  to Maxwell-Lorentz 
electrodynamics. From earlier physics it takes the assump- tion that Euclidian  geometry  is valid 
for the laws governing  the position of rigid bodies, the inertial frame and the law of inertia. 
The postulate of equiv- alence  of  inertial  frames  for  the  formulation  of  the  laws  of  
Nature  is  assumed to be valid for the whole of physics (special relativity principle). From Max- 
well-Lorentz  electrodynamics it takes the postulate  of invariance  of the ve- locity  of  light  
in a  vacuum  (light  principle).
To harmonize the relativity principle with the light principle, the assump- tion  that  an  
absolute  time  (agreeing  for  all  inertial  frames)  exists,  had  to be abandoned. Thus the 
hypothesis is abandoned that arbitrarily moved and suitably set identical clocks function in such a 
way that the times shown by two of them, which meet, agree. A specific  time is assigned to each 
inertial frame; the state of motion and the time of the inertial frame are defined, in


THE O RY   OF   RE LAT IVI TY                                            485
accordance  with  the  stipulation  of  meaning,  by  the  requirement  that  the light principle  
should  apply  to  it.  The  existence  of  the  inertial  frame  thus defined and the validity of 
the law of inertia with respect to it are assumed. The time for each inertial frame is measured  by 
identical clocks that are sta- tionary relative to the frame.
The laws of transformation for space coordinates  and time for the transi- tion from one inertial 
frame to another, the Lorentz transformations as they are termed, are unequivocally  established  
by these definitions and the hypo- theses  concealed  in  the  assumption  that  they  are free 
from  contradiction. Their immediate physical significance lies in the effect of the motion 
relative to the used inertial frame on the form of rigid bodies (Lorentz contraction)  and on the 
rate of the clocks. According to the special relativity principle the laws of Nature  must  be  
covariant  relative  to  Lorentz  transformations;  the  theory thus provides a criterion for 
general laws of Nature. It leads in particular  to a modification  of the Newtonian  point motion  
law in which  the velocity  of light in a vacuum is considered  the limiting velocity, and it also 
leads to the realization that energy and inertial mass are of like nature.
The  special  relativity  theory  resulted  in  appreciable  advances.  It  reconciled mechanics  
and  electrodynamics.  It  reduced  the  number  of  logically  inde- pendent hypotheses regarding 
the latter. It enforced the need for a clarifica- tion of the fundamental concepts in 
epistemological terms. It united the mo- mentum  and  energy  principle,  and  demonstrated  the  
like  nature  of  mass  and energy.  Yet it was not entirely  satisfactory  - quite apart from the 
quantum problems,  which  all  theory  so  far  has  been  incapable  of  really  solving.  In 
common  with  classical  mechanics  the  special  relativity  theory  favours  certain states of 
motion - namely those of the inertial frames - to all other states of motion.  This was actually  
more  difficult  to tolerate  than the preference  for a single state of motion as in the case of 
the theory of light with a stationary ether, for this imagined  a real reason for the preference,  
i.e. the light ether. A theory  which from the outset  prefers  no state  of motion  should  appear 
 more satisfactory. Moreover the previously mentioned vagueness in the definition of the inertial 
frame or in the formulation  of the law of inertia raises doubts which obtain their decisive 
importance,  owing to the empirical principle for the equality of the inertial and heavy mass, in 
the light of the following con- sideration.
Let K be an inertial frame without a gravitational  field, K’ a system of co-
ordinates  accelerated  uniformly  relative  to  K.  The  behaviour  of  material points relative 
to K’ is the the same as if K’ were an inertial frame in respect


486                    1921   A. EINST EI N
of which  a homogeneous  gravitational  field exists.  On the  basis of the em- pirically  known  
properties  of  the  gravitational  field,  the  definition  of  the inertial  frame  thus  proves  
to be weak.  The conclusion  is obvious  that  any arbitrarily  moved frame of reference  is 
equivalent  to any  other for the for- mulation of the laws of Nature, that there are thus no 
physically  preferred states  of motion  at all in respect  of regions  of finite extension  
(general  rel- ativity  principle).
The implementation of this concept  necessitates  an even more profound modification  of  the  
geometric-kinematical  principles  than  the  special  rel- ativity  theory.  The  Lorentz  
contraction,  which  is  derived  from  the  latter, leads to the conclusion that with regard to a 
system K’ arbitrarily moved rel- ative  to  a  (gravity  field  free)  inertial  frame  K,  the  
laws  of  Euclidian  geometry governing  the position  of rigid  (at rest relative  to K’)  bodies  
do not apply. Consequently  the Cartesian system of coordinates also loses its significance in 
terms of the stipulation of meaning. Analogous reasoning applies to time; with reference to K’ the 
time can no longer meaningfully  be defined  by the indication on identical clocks at rest relative 
to K’, nor by the law governing the propagation of light. Generalizing, we arrive at the conclusion 
that grav- itational  field and  metric  are  only  different  manifestations of the same  physical 
field.
We arrive at the formal description  of this field by the following consid- eration.  For  each  
infinitesimal  point-environment  in  an  arbitrary  gravita- tional field a local frame of 
coordinates can be given for such a state of mo- tion that relative to this local frame no 
gravitational field exists (local inertial frame).  In terms  of  this inertial  frame  we may  
regard  the results  of the  special relativity  theory  as  correct  to  a first  approximation  
for  this  infinitesimally small  region.  There  are an infinite  number  of  such  local  
inertial  frames  at any space-time point; they are associated by Lorentz transformations. These 
latter  are  characterised  in  that  they  leave  invariant  the  "distance"  ds  of  two 
infinitely  adjacent  point  events  - defined  by the equation:



which distance can be measured by means of scales and clocks. For, x, y, z, f represent  
coordinates  and  time  measured  with reference  to a local  inertial frame.
To describe space-time regions of finite extent arbitrary point coordinates in four dimensions  are 
required which serve no other purpose than to pro-


THEORY   OF   RE LAT IVITY                                            487
vide an unambiguous  designation  of the space-time points by four numbers each,  x   •2.  x  and  
x4, which  takes  account  of  the  continuity  of  this  four- dimensional    manifold  (Gaussian 
coordinates).  The mathematical expression of the  general  relativity  principle  is  then,  that  
the  systems  of  equations  expres- sing the general laws of Nature are equal for all such systems 
of coordinates.
Since the coordinate  differentials  of the local inertial frame are expressed linearly  by  the  
differentials  dx  of  a Gaussian  system  of  coordinates,  when the latter is used, for the 
distance ds of two events an expression of the form


is  obtained.  The  g„  which  arc  continuous  functions  of  x„  determine  the metric  in  the  
four-dimensional  manifold  where  ds  is  defined  as  an  (absolute) parameter measurable by 
means of rigid scales and clocks. These same para- meters  gg  however  also  describe  with  
reference  to  the  Gaussian  system  of coordinates  the  gravitational  field  which  we  have  
previously  found  to  be identical with the physical cause of the metric. The case as to the 
validity of the special  relativity  theory for finite regions  is characterised  in that when the  
system  of  coordinates  is  suitably  chosen,  the  values  of  gg, for  finite  regions are 
independent  of z„.
In accordance  with the general  theory  of relativity  the law  of point  mo-
tion in the pure gravitational  field  is expressed  by the equation  for the ge- odetic line. 
Actually  the geodetic  line is the simplest  mathematically which in  the  special  case  of  
constant  gg   becomes  rectilinear.  Here  therefore  we are  confronted  with  the  transfer  of  
Galileo's  law  of  inertia  to  the  general theory  of relativity.
In mathematical terms the search for the field equations amounts to ascer- taining  the simplest  
generally  covariant  differential  equations  to which  the gravitational  potentials  gg, can  be 
 subjected.  By  definition  these  equations should  not  contain  higher  derivatives  of  g    
with respect  to x  than  the  sec- ond, and these only linearly, which condition reveals these 
equations to be a logical  transfer  of  the  Poisson  field  equation  of  the  Newtonian  theory  
of  grav- ity to the general  theory of relativity.
The considerations  mentioned  led  to  the  theory  of  gravity  which  yields the Newtonian 
theory as a first approximation  and furthermore  it yields the motion of the perihelion  of 
Mercury, the deflection  of light by the sun, and the red shift of spectral  lines  in agreement  
with experience.*
*  As regards the red shift, the agreement  with experience  is not  yet completely  assured, 
however.


488                      1921   A.EINSTEIN
To  complete  the  basis  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  the  electro- magnetic  field 
must still be introduced into it which, according to our pres- ent  conviction,  is  also  the  
material  from  which  we  must  build  up  the  el- ementary  structures  of matter.  The 
Maxwellian  field  equations  can readily be  adopted  into  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  
This  is  a  completely  un- ambiguous  adoption  provided  it is assumed  that the  equations  
contain  no differential  quotients  of  gq  higher  than the first, and that in the customary 
Maxwellian  form they apply in the local inertial frame. It is also easily pos- sible  to  
supplement  the  gravitational  field  equations  by  electromagnetic terms in a manner  specified  
by the Maxwellian  equations  so that they con- tain the  gravitational  effect  of the 
electromagnetic  field.
These  field  equations  have  not  provided  a  theory  of  matter.  To  incor-
porate the field generating effect of ponderable masses in the theory, matter had therefore  (as in 
classical  physics) to be introduced  into the theory in an approximate,  phenomenological 
representation.
And  that  exhausts  the  direct  consequences  of  the  relativity  principle.  I  shall turn to 
those problems  which are related  to the development  which I have traced.  Already Newton 
recognized  that the law of inertia is unsatisfactory in a context  so far  unmentioned  in this 
exposition,  namely  that it gives  no real cause for the special physical position of the states 
of motion of the in- ertial  frames  relative  to all  other  states  of  motion.  It  makes  the  
observable material  bodies  responsible  for  the  gravitational  behaviour  of  a  material 
point, yet indicates  no material cause for the inertial behaviour  of the mate- rial point  but 
devises  the cause for it (absolute  space or inertial  ether). This is  not  logically  
inadmissible  although  it  is  unsatisfactory.  For  this  reason
E. Mach demanded a modification  of the law of inertia in the sense that the inertia  should  be  
interpreted  as  an acceleration  resistance  of  the  bodies  against one  another  and  not  
against  "space".  This  interpretation  governs  the  expecta- tion that accelerated  bodies have 
concordant  accelerating  action in the same sense on other bodies (acceleration induction).
This  interpretation is even more  plausible  according  to general  relativity which  eliminates  
the  distinction  between  inertial  and  gravitational  effects. It amounts  to stipulating  that, 
apart from the arbitrariness  governed  by the free  choice  of coordinates,  the g„  -field  shall 
 be  completely  determined  by the  matter.  Mach's  stipulation  is  favoured  in  general  
relativity  by  the  circum- stance that acceleration  induction  in accordance  with the 
gravitational  field equations really exists, although of such slight intensity that direct 
detection by mechanical  experiments  is out of the question.


THEORY   OF  RELATIVITY                                             489
Mach's stipulation can be accounted for in the general theory of relativity by regarding the world 
in spatial terms as finite and self-contained. This hy- pothesis also makes it possible to assume 
the mean density of matter in the world  as  finite,  whereas  in  a spatially  infinite  
(quasi-Euclidian) world  it  should disappear.  It cannot, however,  be concealed  that to satisfy  
Mach's postulate in  the  manner  referred  to  a  term  with  no  experimental  basis  whatsoever 
must  be  introduced  into  the  field  equations,  which  term  logically  is  in  no way  
determined  by  the  other  terms  in  the  equations.  For  this  reason  this solution  of the  
"cosmological  problem"  will  not  be completely  satisfactory for  the  time  being.
A second  problem  which  at present  is the subject  of lively  interest  is the identity  between 
 the  gravitational  field  and  the  electromagnetic  field.  The mind  striving  after  
unification  of  the  theory  cannot  be  satisfied  that  two fields  should  exist  which,  by  
their  nature,  are quite  independent.  A math- ematically  unified field theory is sought in 
which the gravitational field and the  electromagnetic  field  are  interpreted  only  as  
different  components  or manifestations of the same uniform field, the field equations  where 
possible no longer consisting  of logically  mutually  independent  summands.
The gravitational  theory, considered  in terms of mathematical  formalism,
i.e. Riemannian  geometry, should be generalized so that it includes the laws of the 
electromagnetic field.  Unfortunately  we are unable  here  to base our- selves on empirical facts 
as when deriving the gravitational  theory  (equality of the inertial and heavy mass), but we are 
restricted to the criterion of math- ematical  simplicity  which  is  not free from arbitrariness. 
The  attempt  which at  present  appears  the  most  successful  is that,  based  on  the  ideas  
of  Levi- Civita,  Wey1  and  Eddington,  to  replace  Riemannian  metric  geometry  by the  more  
general  theory  of  affine  correlation.
The characteristic assumption  of  Riemannian  geometry  is the attribution to  two  infinitely  
adjacent  points  of  a  "distance"  ds,  the  square  of  which  is  a homogeneous  second  order  
function  of  the  coordinate  differentials.  It  fol- lows  from  this  that  (apart  from  
certain  conditions  of  reality)  Euclidian  ge- ometry  is valid  in any  infinitely  small  
region.  Hence  to every  line element (or vector) at a point P is assigned a parallel and equal 
line element (or vec- tor)  through any  given  irifinitesimally adjacent  point  P’  (affine 
correlation). Riemannian  metric  determines  an  affine  correlation.  Conversely,  however, when  
an  affine  correlation  (law  of  infinitesimal  parallel  displacement)  is  math- ematically 
given, generally  no Riemannian metric  determination  exists from which it can be derived.


490                                                  1921  A.EINSTEIN
The  most  important  concept  of  Riemannian  geometry,  "space  curvature", on which the 
gravitational  equations  are also based, is based exclusively on the   "affine correlation".  If 
one is given  in a continuum,  without  first  pro- ceeding  from a metric, it constitutes  a 
generalization of Riemannian  geom- etry  but  which  still  retains  the  most  important  derived 
 parameters.  By seeking the simplest differential equations which can be obeyed by an affine 
correlation  there  is reason  to  hope  that  a  generalization  of  the  gravitation equations  
will  be  found  which  includes  the  laws  of  the  electromagnetic  field. This hope has in fact 
been fulfilled although I do not know whether the for- mal  connection  so  derived  can  really  
be regarded  as  an  enrichment  of  physics as  long  as  it does  not  yield  any  new  physical  
connections.  In  particular  a field theory can, to my mind, only be satisfactory when it permits 
the elementary electrical  bodies  to  be  represented  as  solutions  free  from  singularities.
Moreover  it should not be forgotten  that a theory relating to the elemen- tary electrical  
structures  is inseparable  from the quantum theory  problems. So far also relativity  theory  has  
proved  ineffectual  in relation  to  this most profound physical problem of the present time. 
Should the form of the gen- eral equations some day, by the solution of the quantum problem, 
undergo a change  however  profound,  even  if  there  is a complete  change  in  the  param- eters 
by means of which we represent the elementary  process, the relativity principle  will  not  be  
relinquished  and  the  laws  previously  derived  therefrom will at least retain their 
significance as limiting laws.
