         RANDOM WALK TO GRAPHENE

         Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2010
         by
         ANDRE K. GEIM
         School of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Manchester, Oxford
         Road, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom.




         If one wants to understand the beautiful physics of graphene, they will
         be spoiled for choice with so many reviews and popular science articles
         now available. I hope that the reader will excuse me if on this occasion I
         recommend my own writings [1–3]. Instead of repeating myself here, I have
         chosen to describe my twisty scientiﬁc road that eventually led to the Nobel
         Prize. Most parts of this story are not described anywhere else, and its time-
         line covers the period from my PhD in 1987 to the moment when our 2004
         paper, recognised by the Nobel Committee, was accepted for publication.
         The story naturally gets denser in events and explanations towards the end.
         Also, it provides a detailed review of pre-2004 literature and, with the beneﬁt
         of hindsight, attempts to analyse why graphene has attracted so much inter-
         est. I have tried my best to make this article not only informative but also easy
         to read, even for non-physicists.


         ZOMBIE MANAGEMENT
         My PhD thesis was called “Investigation of mechanisms of transport relaxa-
         tion in metals by a helicon resonance method”. All I can say is that the stuff
         was as interesting at that time as it sounds to the reader today. I published ﬁve
         journal papers and ﬁnished the thesis in ﬁve years, the ofﬁcial duration for
         a PhD at my institution, the Institute of Solid State Physics. Web of Science so-
         berly reveals that the papers were cited twice, by co-authors only. The subject
         was dead a decade before I even started my PhD. However, every cloud has
         its silver lining, and what I uniquely learned from that experience was that I
         should never torture research students by offering them “zombie” projects.
            After my PhD, I worked as a staff scientist at the Institute of Micro-
         electronics Technology, Chernogolovka, which belongs to the Russian
         Academy of Sciences. The Soviet system allowed and even encouraged junior
         staff to choose their own line of research. After a year of poking in different
         directions, I separated research-wise from my former PhD supervisor, Victor
         Petrashov, and started developing my own niche. It was an experimental
         system that was both new and doable, which was nearly an oxymoron, taking
         into account the scarce resources available at the time at Soviet research

         70




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 2                                                                     2011-08-29 08:48:46


                       institutes. I fabricated a sandwich consisting of a thin metal ﬁlm and a super-
                       conductor separated by a thin insulator. The superconductor served only to
                       condense an external magnetic ﬁeld into an array of vortices, and this highly
                       inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld was projected onto the ﬁlm under investiga-
                       tion. Electron transport in such a microscopically inhomogeneous ﬁeld
                       (varying on a submicron scale) was new research territory, and I published
                       the ﬁrst experimental report on the subject [4], which was closely followed
                       by an independent paper from Simon Bending [5]. It was an interesting
                       and reasonably important niche, and I continued studying the subject for
                       the next few years, including a spell at the University of Bath in 1991 as a
                       postdoctoral researcher working with Simon.
                          This experience taught me an important lesson: that introducing a new
                       experimental system is generally more rewarding than trying to ﬁnd new
                       phenomena within crowded areas. The chances of success are much higher
                       where the ﬁeld is new. Of course, the fantastic results one originally hopes
                       for are unlikely to materialise, but, in the process of studying any new system,
                       something original inevitably shows up.


                       ONE MAN’S JUNK, ANOTHER MAN’S GOLD
                       In 1990, thanks to Vitaly Aristov, director of my Institute in Chernogolovka
                       at the time, I received a six month visiting fellowship from the British
                       Royal Society. Laurence Eaves and Peter Main from Nottingham University
                       kindly agreed to accept me as a visitor. Six months is a very short period for
                       experimental work, and circumstances dictated that I could only study de-
                       vices readily available in the host laboratory. Available were submicron GaAs
                       wires left over from previous experiments, all done and dusted a few years
                       earlier. Under the circumstances, my experience of working in a poverty-
                       stricken Soviet academy was helpful. The samples that my hosts considered
                       practically exhausted looked like a gold vein to me, and I started working
                       100 hours per week to exploit it. This short visit led to two Phys. Rev. Letters
                       of decent quality [6,7], and I often use this experience to tease my younger
                       colleagues. When things do not go as planned and people start complaining,
                       I provoke them by proclaiming ‘there is no such thing as bad samples; there
                       are only bad postdocs/students’. Search carefully and you will always ﬁnd
                       something new. Of course, it is better to avoid such experiences and explore
                       new territories, but even if one is fortunate enough to ﬁnd an experimental
                       system as new and exciting as graphene, meticulousness and perseverance
                       allow one to progress much further.
                          The pace of research at Nottingham was so relentless and, at the same time
                       so inspiring, that a return to Russia was not an option. Swimming through
                       Soviet treacle seemed no less than wasting the rest of my life. So at the age
                       of thirty-three and with an h-index of 1 (latest papers not yet published), I
                       entered the Western job market for postdocs. During the next four years I
                       moved between different universities, from Nottingham to Copenhagen to
                       Bath and back to Nottingham. Each move allowed me to get acquainted with

                                                                                                    71




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 3                                                                           2011-08-29 08:48:46


         yet another topic or two, signiﬁcantly broadening my research horizons. The
         physics I studied in those years could be broadly described as mesoscopic and
         involved such systems and phenomena as two-dimensional electron gases
         (2DEGs), quantum point contacts, resonant tunnelling and the quantum
         Hall effect (QHE), to name but a few. In addition, I became familiar with
         GaAlAs heterostructures grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and
         improved my expertise in microfabrication and electron-beam lithography,
         technologies I had started learning in Russia. All these elements came
         together to form the foundation for the successful work on graphene a
         decade later.


         DUTCH COMFORT
         By 1994 I had published enough quality papers and attended enough con-
         ferences to hope for a permanent academic position. When I was offered
         an associate professorship at the University of Nijmegen, I instantly seized
         upon the chance of having some security in my new post-Soviet life. The ﬁrst
         task in Nijmegen was of course to establish myself. To this end, there was no
         start-up and no microfabrication to continue any of my previous lines of re-
         search. As resources, I was offered access to magnets, cryostats and electronic
         equipment available at Nijmegen’s High Field Magnet Laboratory, led by Jan
         Kees Maan. He was also my formal boss and in charge of all the money. Even
         when I was awarded grants as the principal investigator (the Dutch funding
         agency FOM was generous during my stay in Nijmegen), I could not spend
         the money as I wished. All funds were distributed through so-called ‘working
         groups’ led by full professors. In addition, PhD students in the Netherlands
         could formally be supervised only by full professors. Although this probably
         sounds strange to many, this was the Dutch academic system of the 1990s. It
         was tough for me then. For a couple of years, I really struggled to adjust to
         the system, which was such a contrast to my joyful and productive years at
         Nottingham. In addition, the situation was a bit surreal because outside the
         university walls I received a warm-hearted welcome from everyone around,
         including Jan Kees and other academics.
            Still, the research opportunities in Nijmegen were much better than in
         Russia and, eventually, I managed to survive scientiﬁcally, thanks to help
         from abroad. Nottingham colleagues (in particular Mohamed Henini)
         provided me with 2DEGs that were sent to Chernogolovka, where Sergey
         Dubonos, a close colleague and friend from the 1980s, microfabricated
         requested devices. The research topic I eventually found and later focused
         on can be referred to as mesoscopic superconductivity. Sergey and I used
         micron-sized Hall bars made from a 2DEG as local probes of the magnetic
         ﬁeld around small superconducting samples. This allowed measurements
         of their magnetisation with accuracy sufﬁcient to detect not only the entry
         and exit of individual vortices but also much more subtle changes. This was
         a new experimental niche, made possible by the development of an original
         technique of ballistic Hall micromagnetometry [8]. During the next few

         72




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 4                                                                   2011-08-29 08:48:46


                       years, we exploited this niche area and published several papers in Nature
                       and Phys. Rev. Letters which reported a paramagnetic Meissner effect, vortices
                       carrying fractional ﬂux, vortex conﬁgurations in conﬁned geometries and so
                       on. My wife Irina Grigorieva, an expert in vortex physics [9], could not ﬁnd
                       a job in the Netherlands and therefore had plenty of time to help me with
                       conquering the subject and writing papers. Also, Sergey not only made the
                       devices but also visited Nijmegen to help with measurements. We established
                       a very productive modus operandi where he collected data and I analysed
                       them within an hour on my computer next door to decide what should be
                       done next.


                       A SPELL OF LEVITY
                       The ﬁrst results on mesoscopic superconductivity started emerging in 1996,
                       which made me feel safer within the Dutch system and also more inquisi-
                       tive. I started looking around for new areas to explore. The major facility
                       at Nijmegen’s High Field Lab was powerful electromagnets. They were a
                       major headache, too. These magnets could provide ﬁelds up to 20 T, which
                       was somewhat higher than 16 to 18 T available with the superconducting
                       magnets that many of our competitors had. On the other hand, the elec-
                       tromagnets were so expensive to run that we could use them only for a few
                       hours at night, when electricity was cheaper. My work on mesoscopic super-
                       conductivity required only tiny ﬁelds (< 0.01T), and I did not use the electro-
                       magnets. This made me feel guilty as well as responsible for coming up with
                       experiments that would justify the facility’s existence. The only competitive
                       edge I could see in the electromagnets was their room temperature (T)
                       bore. This was often considered as an extra disadvantage because research
                       in condensed matter physics typically requires low, liquid-helium T. The con-
                       tradiction prompted me, as well as other researchers working in the lab, to
                       ponder on high-ﬁeld phenomena at room T. Unfortunately, there were few
                       to choose from.
                          Eventually, I stumbled across the mystery of so-called magnetic water. It
                       is claimed that putting a small magnet around a hot water pipe prevents
                       formation of scale inside the pipe. Or install such a magnet on a water tap,
                       and your kettle will never suffer from chalky deposits. These magnets are
                       available in a great variety in many shops and on the internet. There are also
                       hundreds of articles written on this phenomenon, but the physics behind it
                       remains unclear, and many researchers are sceptical about the very existence
                       of the effect [10]. Over the last ﬁfteen years I have made several attempts
                       to investigate “magnetic water” but they were inconclusive, and I still have
                       nothing to add to the argument. However, the availability of ultra-high ﬁelds
                       in a room T environment invited lateral thinking about water. Basically, if
                       magnetic water existed, I thought, then the effect should be clearer in 20 T
                       rather than in typical ﬁelds of <0.1 T created by standard magnets.
                          With this idea in mind and, allegedly, on a Friday night, I poured water
                       inside the lab’s electromagnet when it was at its maximum power. Pouring

                                                                                                   73




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 5                                                                          2011-08-29 08:48:46


         water in one's equipment is certainly not a standard scientiﬁc approach, and
         I cannot recall why I behaved so ‘unprofessionally’. Apparently, no one had
         tried such a silly thing before, although similar facilities existed in several
         places around the world for decades. To my surprise, water did not end up
         on the ﬂoor but got stuck in the vertical bore of the magnet. Humberto
         Carmona, a visiting student from Nottingham, and I played for an hour with
         the water by breaking the blockage with a wooden stick and changing the
         ﬁeld strength. As a result, we saw balls of levitating water (Figure 1). This was
         awesome. It took little time to realise that the physics behind was good old
         diamagnetism. It took much longer to adjust my intuition to the fact that the
         feeble magnetic response of water (~10–5), billions of times weaker than that
         of iron, was sufﬁcient to compensate the earth’s gravity. Many colleagues,
         including those who worked with high magnetic ﬁelds all their lives, were
         ﬂabbergasted, and some of them even argued that this was a hoax.
            I spent the next few months demonstrating magnetic levitation to colleagues
         and visitors, as well as trying to make a ‘non-bofﬁn’ illustration for this
         beautiful phenomenon. Out of the many objects that we had ﬂoating inside
         the magnet, it was the image of a levitating frog (Figure 1) that started the
         media hype. More importantly, though, behind all the media noise, this
         image found its way into many textbooks. However quirky, it has become a
         beautiful symbol of ever-present diamagnetism, which is no longer perceived
         to be extremely feeble. Sometimes I am stopped at conferences by people
         exclaiming “I know you! Sorry, it is not about graphene. I start my lectures
         with showing your frog. Students always want to learn how it could ﬂy.” The
         frog story, with some intricate physics behind the stability of diamagnetic
         levitation, is described in my review in Physics Today [11].




         Figure 1. Levitating moments in Nijmegen. Left – Ball of water (about 5 cm in diameter)
         freely ﬂoats inside the vertical bore of an electromagnet. Right – The frog that learned to
         ﬂy. This image continues to serve as a symbol showing that magnetism of ‘nonmagnetic
         things’, including humans, is not so negligible. This experiment earned Michael Berry and
         me the 2000 Ig Nobel Prize. We were asked ﬁrst whether we dared to accept this prize, and
         I take pride in our sense of humour and self-deprecation that we did.


         74




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 6                                                                               2011-08-29 08:48:48


                       FRIDAY NIGHT EXPERIMENTS

                       The levitation experience was both interesting and addictive. It taught me
                       the important lesson that poking in directions far away from my immediate
                       area of expertise could lead to interesting results, even if the initial ideas
                       were extremely basic. This in turn inﬂuenced my research style, as I started
                       making similar exploratory detours that somehow acquired the name ‘Friday
                       night experiments’. The term is of course inaccurate. No serious work can
                       be accomplished in just one night. It usually requires many months of lateral
                       thinking and digging through irrelevant literature without any clear idea in
                       sight. Eventually, you get a feeling – rather than an idea – about what could
                       be interesting to explore. Next, you give it a try, and normally you fail. Then,
                       you may or may not try again. In any case, at some moment you must decide
                       (and this is the most difﬁcult part) whether to continue further efforts or cut
                       losses and start thinking of another experiment. All this happens against the
                       backdrop of your main research and occupies only a small part of your time
                       and brain.
                          Already in Nijmegen, I started using lateral ideas as under- and post-
                       graduate projects, and students were always excited to buy a pig in a poke.
                       Kostya Novoselov, who came to Nijmegen as a PhD student in 1999, took part
                       in many of these projects. They never lasted for more than a few months,
                       in order not to jeopardise a thesis or career progression. Although the
                       enthusiasm inevitably vanished towards the end, when the predictable
                       failures materialised, some students later conﬁded that those exploratory
                       detours were invaluable experiences.
                          Most surprisingly, failures sometimes failed to materialise. Gecko tape
                       is one such example. Accidentally or not, I read a paper describing the
                       mechanism behind the amazing climbing ability of geckos [12]. The physics
                       is rather straightforward. Gecko’s toes are covered with tiny hairs. Each hair
                       attaches to the opposite surface with a minute van der Waals force (in the
                       nN range), but billions of hairs work together to create a formidable attraction
                       sufﬁcient to keep geckos attached to any surface, even a glass ceiling. In
                       particular, my attention was attracted by the spatial scale of their hairs. They
                       were submicron in diameter, the standard size in research on mesoscopic
                       physics. After toying with the idea for a year or so, Sergey Dubonos and I
                       came up with procedures to make a material that mimicked a gecko’s hairy
                       feet. He fabricated a square cm of this tape, and it exhibited notable adhesion
                       [13]. Unfortunately, the material did not work as well as a gecko’s feet,
                       deteriorating completely after a couple of attachments. Still, it was an
                       important proof-of-concept experiment that inspired further work in the ﬁeld.
                       Hopefully, one day someone will develop a way to replicate the hierarchical
                       structure of gecko’s setae and its self-cleaning mechanism. Then gecko tape
                       can go on sale.




                                                                                                    75




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 7                                                                           2011-08-29 08:48:48


         BETTER TO BE WRONG THAN BORING

         While preparing for my lecture in Stockholm, I compiled a list of my Friday
         night experiments. Only then did I realise a stunning fact. There were two
         dozen or so experiments over a period of approximately ﬁfteen years and, as
         expected, most of them failed miserably. But there were three hits: levitation,
         gecko tape and graphene. This implies an extraordinary success rate: more
         than 10%. Moreover, there were probably near-misses, too. For example, I
         once read a paper [14] about giant diamagnetism in FeGeSeAs alloys, which
         was interpreted as a sign of high-T superconductivity. I asked Lamarches for
         samples and got them. Kostya and I employed ballistic Hall magnetometry
         to check for giant diamagnetism but found nothing, even at 1 K. This
         happened in 2003, well before the discovery of iron pnictide superconductiv-
         ity, and I still wonder whether there were any small inclusions of a supercon-
         ducting material which we missed with our approach. Another miss was an
         attempt to detect “heartbeats” of individual living cells. The idea was to use
         2DEG Hall crosses as ultrasensitive electrometers to detect electrical signals
         due to physiological activity of individual cells. Even though no heartbeats
         were detected while a cell was alive, our sensor recorded huge voltage spikes
         at its “last gasp” when the cell was treated with excess alcohol [15]. Now I
         attribute this near-miss to the unwise use of yeast, a very dormant micro-
         organism. Four years later, similar experiments were done using embryonic
         heart cells and – what a surprise – graphene sensors, and they were successful
         in detecting such bioelectrical activity [16].
            Frankly, I do not believe that the above success rate can be explained by
         my lateral ideas being particularly good. More likely, this tells us that poking
         in new directions, even randomly, is more rewarding than is generally
         perceived. We are probably digging too deep within established areas,
         leaving plenty of unexplored stuff under the surface, just one poke away.
         When one dares to try, rewards are not guaranteed, but at least it is an
         adventure.


         THE MANCUNIAN WAY
         By 2000, with mesoscopic superconductivity, diamagnetic levitation and
         four Nature papers under my belt, I was well placed to apply for a full
         professorship. Colleagues were rather surprised when I chose the University
         of Manchester, declining a number of seemingly more prestigious offers.
         The reason was simple. Mike Moore, chairman of the search committee,
         knew my wife Irina when she was a very successful postdoc in Bristol rather
         than my co-author and a part-time teaching lab technician in Nijmegen.
         He suggested that Irina could apply for the lectureship that was there
         to support the professorship. After six years in the Netherlands, the idea
         that a husband and wife could ofﬁcially work together had not even
         crossed my mind. This was the decisive factor. We appreciated not only
         the possibility of sorting out our dual career problems but also felt

         76




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 8                                                                    2011-08-29 08:48:48


                       touched that our future colleagues cared. We have never regretted the
                       move.
                          So in early 2001, I took charge of several dilapidated rooms storing ancient
                       equipment of no value, and a start-up grant of £100K. There were no central
                       facilities that I could exploit, except for a helium liqueﬁer. No problem. I
                       followed the same routine as in Nijmegen, combining help from other
                       places, especially Sergey Dubonos. The lab started shaping up surprisingly
                       quickly. Within half a year, I received my ﬁrst grant of £500K, which allowed
                       us to acquire essential equipment. Despite being consumed with our one
                       year old daughter, Irina also got her starting grant a few months later. We
                       invited Kostya to join us as a research fellow (he continued to be ofﬁcially
                       registered in Nijmegen as a PhD student until 2004 when he defended his
                       thesis there). And our group started generating results that led to more
                       grants that in turn led to more results.
                          By 2003 we published several good-quality papers including Nature, Nature
                       Materials and Phys. Rev. Letters, and we continued beeﬁng up the labora-
                       tory with new equipment. Moreover, thanks to a grant of £1.4M (research
                       infrastructure funding scheme masterminded by the then science minister
                       David Sainsbury), Ernie Hill from the Department of Computer Sciences
                       and I managed to set up the Manchester Centre for Mesoscience and
                       Nanotechnology. Instead of pouring the windfall money into bricks-and-
                       mortar, we utilised the existing clean room areas (~250 m2) in Computer
                       Sciences. Those rooms contained obsolete equipment, and it was thrown
                       away and replaced with state-of-the-art microfabrication facilities, including
                       a new electron-beam lithography system. The fact that Ernie and I are most
                       proud of is that many groups around the world have more expensive facilities
                       but our Centre has continuously, since 2003, been producing new structures
                       and devices. We do not have a posh horse here that is for show, but rather a
                       draft horse that has been working really hard.
                          Whenever I describe this experience to my colleagues abroad, they ﬁnd
                       it difﬁcult to believe that it is possible to establish a fully functional labora-
                       tory and a microfabrication facility in less than three years and without an
                       astronomical start-up grant. If not for my own experience, I would not
                       believe it either. Things progressed unbelievably quickly. The University was
                       supportive, but my greatest thanks are reserved speciﬁcally for the responsive
                       mode of the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
                       (EPSRC). The funding system is democratic and non-xenophobic. Your
                       position in an academic hierarchy or an old-boys network counts for little.
                       Also, ‘visionary ideas’ and grand promises to ‘address social and economic
                       needs’ play little role when it comes to the peer review. In truth, the
                       responsive mode distributes its money on the basis of a recent track record,
                       whatever that means in different subjects, and the funding normally goes
                       to researchers who work both efﬁciently and hard. Of course, no system is
                       perfect, and one can always hope for a better one. However, paraphrasing
                       Winston Churchill, the UK has the worst research funding system, except for
                       all the others that I am aware of.

                                                                                                      77




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 9                                                                             2011-08-29 08:48:48


         THREE LITTLE CLOUDS

         As our laboratory and Nanotech Centre were shaping up, I got some spare
         time for thinking of new research detours. Gecko tape and the failed attempts
         with yeast and quasi-pnictides took place during that time. Also, Serge
         Morozov, a senior fellow from Chernogolovka, who later became a regular visi-
         tor and invaluable collaborator, wasted his ﬁrst two visits on studying magnetic
         water. In the autumn of 2002, our ﬁrst Manchester PhD student, Da Jiang,
         arrived, and I needed to invent a PhD project for him. It was clear that
         for the ﬁrst few months he needed to spend his time learning English and
         getting acquainted with the lab. Accordingly, as a starter, I suggested to him a
         new lateral experiment. It was to make ﬁlms of graphite ‘as thin as possible’ and,
         if successful, I promised we would then study their ‘mesoscopic’ properties.
         Recently, trying to analyse how this idea emerged, I recalled three badly
         shaped thought clouds.
            One cloud was a concept of ‘metallic electronics’. If an external electric
         ﬁeld is applied to a metal, the number of charge carriers near its surface
         changes, so that one may expect that its surface properties change, too.
         This is how modern semiconductor electronics works. Why not use a metal
         instead of silicon? As an undergraduate student, I wanted to use electric ﬁeld
         effect (EFE) and X-ray analysis to induce and detect changes in the lattice
         constant. It was naïve because simple estimates show that the effect would
         be negligible. Indeed, no dielectric allows ﬁelds much higher than 1V/nm,
         which translates into maximum changes in charge carrier concentration n
         at the metal surface of about 1014 per cm2. In comparison, a typical metal
         (e.g., Au) contains ~1023 electrons per cm3 and, even for a 1 nm thick ﬁlm,
         this yields relative changes in n and conductivity of ~1%, leaving aside much
         smaller changes in the lattice constant.
            Previously, many researchers aspired to detect the ﬁeld effect in metals.
         The ﬁrst mention is as far back as 1902, shortly after the discovery of the
         electron. J. J. Thomson (1906 Nobel Prize in Physics) suggested to Charles
         Mott, the father of Nevill Mott (1977 Nobel Prize in Physics), to look for
         the EFE in a thin metal ﬁlm, but nothing was found [17]. The ﬁrst attempt
         to measure the EFE in a metal was recorded in scientiﬁc literature in 1906
         [18]. Instead of a normal metal, one could also think of semimetals such
         as bismuth, graphite or antimony which have a lot fewer carriers. Over the
         last century, many researchers used Bi ﬁlms (n ~1018 cm–3) but observed
         only small changes in their conductivity [19,20]. Aware of this research
         area and with experience in GaAlAs heterostructures, I was continuously,
         albeit casually, looking for other candidates, especially ultra-thin ﬁlms of
         superconductors in which the ﬁeld effect can be ampliﬁed in proximity to
         the superconducting transition [21,22]. In Nijmegen, my enthusiasm was
         once sparked by learning about nm-thick Al ﬁlms grown by MBE on top of
         GaAlAs heterostructures but, after estimating possible effects, I decided that
         the chances of success were so poor it was not worth trying.
            Carbon nanotubes were the second cloud hanging around in the late

         78




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 10                                                                     2011-08-29 08:48:48


                       1990s and early 2000s. Those were the years when nanotubes were at the
                       peak of their glory. Living in the Netherlands, I heard talks by Cees Dekker
                       and Leo Kouwenhoven and read papers by Thomas Ebbesen, Paul McEuen,
                       Sumio Iijima, Pheadon Avouris and others. Each time, those exceptionally
                       nice results inevitably triggered thoughts about entering this research area.
                       But I was too late and needed to ﬁnd a different perspective, away from the
                       stampede.
                          As for the third cloud, I read a review of Millie Dresselhaus about interca-
                       lated graphite compounds [23], which clearly showed that, even after many
                       decades, graphite was still a material little understood, especially in terms of
                       its electronic properties. This inﬂuential review prompted me to look further
                       into graphite literature. In doing so, I encountered papers by Pablo Esquinazi
                       and Yakov Kopelevich, who reported ferromagnetism, superconductivity and
                       a metal-insulator transition, all in the same good old graphite and at room T
                       [24,25]. Those provocative papers left me with a distinct feeling that graphite
                       was very much worth having a careful look at.
                          The three thought clouds (and maybe some more that I cannot recall)
                       somehow merged into Da’s project. I reckoned that if we were to succeed in
                       making thin ﬁlms of graphite, instead of Bi, they could exhibit some electric
                       ﬁeld effect and/or some other interesting properties resembling those of
                       carbon nanotubes. In the worst-case scenario, our mesoscopic samples would
                       be monocrystals and this could help to clarify those controversies about
                       graphite. Why not try to poke in this direction for a few months, I thought.


                       LEGEND OF SCOTCH TAPE
                       To make thin graphite ﬁlms, I provided Da with a tablet of pyrolytic graphite,
                       which was several mm thick and an inch in diameter, and suggested using
                       a polishing machine. We had a fancy one that allowed submicron ﬂatness.
                       A few months later, Da declared that he had reached the ultimate thick-
                       ness and showed me a tiny speck of graphite at the bottom of a Petri dish. I
                       looked at it in an optical microscope and, by focusing on the top and bottom
                       surfaces, estimated that the speck was ~10 Pm thick. Too thick, I thought
                       and suggested trying a ﬁner polishing liquid. However, it turned out that Da
                       had polished away the whole tablet to obtain this one speck. It was actually
                       my fault: Da successfully ﬁnished his PhD later, but at that time he was just
                       a fresh foreign student with a huge language barrier. Moreover, by mistake I
                       gave him high-density graphite instead of highly-oriented pyrolytic graphite
                       (HOPG) as was intended. The former does not shed as easily as HOPG.
                          Oleg Shklyarevskii, a senior fellow from Kharkov, Ukraine was working
                       nearby and had to listen to the typical ﬂow of my teasing remarks, this time
                       about polishing a mountain to get one grain of sand. Oleg was an expert in
                       scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) and worked on a project that later
                       turned out to be another bad ‘Friday night’ idea of mine. He interjected
                       by bringing over a piece of cellotape with graphite ﬂakes attached to it.
                       Allegedly, he just ﬁshed out the tape from a litter bin. Indeed, HOPG is

                                                                                                    79




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 11                                                                          2011-08-29 08:48:49


         the standard reference sample for STM, where a fresh surface of graphite
         is normally prepared by removing a top layer with sticky tape. We used this
         technique for years but never looked carefully at what was thrown away along
         with the tape. I looked in the microscope at the remnants of graphite (Figure
         2) and found pieces much thinner than Da’s speck. Only then did I realise
         how silly it was of me to suggest the polishing machine. Polishing was dead,
         long live Scotch tape!
            This moment was not a breakthrough yet, but things started to look
         promising and required more people to get involved. Oleg did not volunteer
         to take on yet another project but Kostya did. ‘Volunteer’ is probably not the
         right word. Everyone in our lab has always been welcome to move around
         and participate in whatever project they want. At that time, Kostya was work-
         ing on a nicely-moving project on ferromagnetism [26]. He was also our
         ‘caretaker’ when things went wrong, especially with measuring equipment.
         As for me, at that time I used to spend a few hours a day in the lab preparing
         samples, doing measurements and analysing results. It was only after 2006
         that I turned into a paper-writing machine combined with a data analyser. I
         have always loved the latter but hated to write papers. Unfortunately, no lab
         can survive without its Shakespeare.




         Figure 2. In hindsight, thin crystals of graphite are easy to obtain. a – Remnants of HOPG
         left attached to Scotch tape. b – Some of the crystals are optically transparent if viewed in
         an optical microscope or just with a magnifying glass. c – If placed on an oxidised Si wafer,
         transparent crystals give rise to various shades of blue. d – One of our very ﬁrst devices
         made by using ‘a shoestring and sealing wax’: in this case, tweezers, a toothpick and silver
         paint.


         80




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 12                                                                                2011-08-29 08:48:49


                          Kostya and I decided to check out the electrical properties of the graphite
                       ﬂakes found on the cellotape and, to this end, he started transferring them
                       onto glass slides, initially by using just tweezers. A few days later and keeping
                       in mind the initial motivation, I brought in oxidised Si wafers in order to use
                       them as substrates and detect the EFE. This delivered an unexpected bonus.
                       Placing thin graphite fragments onto those wafers allowed us to observe
                       interference colours that indicated that some of the fragments were optically
                       transparent. Moreover, the colours provided us with a very intuitive way of
                       judging which ﬂakes were thin (Figure 2c). We quickly found that some of
                       them were just a few nm thick. This was our ﬁrst real breakthrough.


                       EUREKA MOMENT
                       In graphene literature and especially in popular articles, a strong emphasis
                       is placed on the Scotch tape technique, and it is hailed for allowing the
                       isolation and identiﬁcation of ultra-thin graphite ﬁlms and graphene. For
                       me, this was an important development but still not a Eureka moment. Our
                       goal always was to ﬁnd some exciting physics rather than just observing ultra-
                       thin ﬁlms in a microscope.
                          Within a couple of days after Oleg prompted the use of Scotch tape, Kostya
                       was already using silver paint to make electrical contacts to graphite platelets
                       transferred from the Scotch tape. To our surprise, they turned out to be
                       highly conductive and even the painted contacts exhibited a reasonably low
                       resistance. The electronic properties could be studied, but we felt it was too
                       early to put the ugly-looking devices (see Fig. 2d) in a cryostat for proper
                       measurements. As a next step, we applied voltage, ﬁrst, through the glass
                       slides and, a bit later, to the Si wafer, using it as a back gate to check for the
                       ﬁeld effect. Figure 2 shows a photograph of one of our ﬁrst devices. The
                       central part is a graphite crystal that is ~20 nm thick, and its lateral size is
                       comparable to the diameter of a human hair. To transfer the crystal by tweez-
                       ers from the tape and then make four such closely-spaced contacts by using
                       just a toothpick and silver paint is the highest level of experimental skill.
                       These days, not many researchers have ﬁngers green enough to make such
                       samples. I challenge readers to test their own skills against this benchmark!
                          The very ﬁrst hand-made device on glass exhibited a clear EFE such that
                       its resistance could be changed by several per cent. It may sound small and
                       of marginal importance but, aware of how hard it was previously to detect
                       any EFE at all, I was truly shocked. If those ugly devices made by hand from
                       relatively big and thick platelets already showed some ﬁeld effect, what
                       could happen, I thought, if we were to use our thinnest crystallites and apply
                       the full arsenal of microfabrication facilities? There was a click in my head
                       that we had stumbled onto something really exciting. This was my Eureka
                       moment.
                          What followed was no longer a random walk. From this point, it was
                       only logical to continue along the same path by improving procedures for
                       cleaving and ﬁnding thinner and thinner crystals and making better and

                                                                                                      81




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 13                                                                            2011-08-29 08:48:49


         better devices, which we did. It was both painstaking and incredibly rapid,
         depending on one’s viewpoint. It took several months until we learned how
         to identify monolayers by using optical and atomic force microscopy. On the
         microfabrication side, we started using electron-beam lithography to deﬁne
         proper Hall bar devices and started making contacts by metal evaporation
         rather than silver painting. The microfabrication development was led by
         Dubonos, aided by his PhD student Anatoly Firsov. Initially, they employed
         facilities in Chernogolovka but, when our new postdoc Yuan Zhang got fully
         acquainted with the recently-installed lithography system at our Nanotech
         Centre, the process really speeded up.
            The move from multilayers to monolayers and from hand-made to
         lithography devices was conceptually simple but never straightforward. We
         took numerous detours and wasted much effort on ideas that only led us into
         dead ends. An example of grand plans that never worked out was the idea
         to plasma-etch graphite mesas in the form of Hall bars which, after cleavage,
         would provide readily shaped devices, or so I thought. Later, we had to
         return to the unprocessed graphite. The teething problems we experienced
         at that time can also be illustrated by the fact that initially we believed that
         Si wafers should have a very precise thickness of oxide (within several nm)
         to allow hunting for monolayers. These days we can ﬁnd graphene on practi-
         cally any substrate. Crystal sizes also went up from a few microns to nearly a
         millimetre, just by tinkering with procedures and using different sources of
         graphite.
            The most essential part of our 2004 report [27] was the electrical measure-
         ments, and this required a lot of work. For several months, Kostya and Serge
         Morozov were measuring full time, and I was around as well, discussing and
         analysing raw data, often as soon as they appeared on the screen. The feed-
         back to our microfabrication guys was almost instantaneous. As always in the
         case of encountering a new system where one does not know what to expect,
         we had to be particularly careful in those ﬁrst experiments. We disregarded
         any curve, unless it was reproducible for many devices and, to avoid any pre-
         mature conclusions, we studied more than 50 ultra-thin devices. Those were
         years of hard work compressed into just a few months, but we were excited
         as every new device got better and better, and we could work 24x7, which
         typically meant fourteen hour days and no breaks for the weekends.
            Finally, by the end of 2003, we got a reliable experimental picture ready
         for publication. Between that moment and the end of my timeline when the
         Science paper was accepted in September 2004, there is a lengthy gap. Those
         nine months were consumed by excruciating efforts to publish the results in
         a high-proﬁle journal. We continuously added data and polished the presen-
         tation. Irina’s help was invaluable in this time-consuming process, which can
         be fully appreciated only by those readers who ever published in such glossy
         journals. First, we submitted the manuscript to Nature. It was rejected and,
         when further information requested by referees was added, rejected again.
         According to one referee, our report did “not constitute a sufﬁcient scientiﬁc
         advance.” Science referees were more generous (or more knowledgeable?),

         82




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 14                                                                   2011-08-29 08:48:49


                       and the presentation was better polished by that time. In hindsight, I should
                       have saved the time and nerves by submitting to a second-tier journal, even
                       though we all felt that the results were ground-breaking. Readers aspiring
                       to get published in those glossy magazines and having their papers recently
                       rejected can use this story to cheer up: Their papers may also be prize
                       winning!


                       DEFIANT EXISTENCE
                       One of the most surprising results of our Science report was the observation
                       that, after being isolated, atomic planes remained continuous and conduc-
                       tive under ambient conditions. Even with hindsight, there are many reasons
                       to be surprised.
                          First, for many decades researchers studied ultra-thin ﬁlms, and their
                       collective experience proves that continuous monolayers are practically im-
                       possible to make (see, e.g., [28,29]). Try to evaporate a metal ﬁlm a few nm
                       in thickness, and you will ﬁnd it discontinuous. The material coagulates into
                       tiny islands. This process, called island growth, is universal and driven by the
                       fact that a system tries to minimise its surface energy. Even by using epitaxial
                       substrates that provide an interaction working against the surface energy
                       contribution and cooling them down to liquid-helium T, which prevents
                       migration of deposited atoms, it is hard to ﬁnd the right conditions to create
                       continuous nm thick ﬁlms, let alone monolayers [28,29].
                          The second reason to be surprised is that theory unequivocally tells us
                       that an isolated graphene sheet should be thermodynamically unstable.
                       Calculations show that ‘graphene is the least stable [carbon] structure
                       until about 6000 atoms’ [30]. Until ~24,000 atoms (that is, a ﬂat sheet with
                       a characteristic size of ~25 nm), various 3D conﬁgurations are energetically
                       more favourable than the 2D geometry [30,31]. For larger sizes, theory shows
                       again that a graphene sheet is unstable but now with respect to scrolling.
                       The latter conclusion is based on considering competing contributions from
                       the bending and surface energies [32,33]. These calculations are speciﬁc to
                       carbon, but the underlying physics is conceptually connected to the surface
                       energy mechanism that leads to island growth.
                          Third, 2D crystals cannot be grown in isolation, without an epitaxial
                       substrate that provides an additional atomic bonding. This follows from the
                       Landau-Peierls argument that shows that the density of thermal ﬂuctuations
                       for a 2D crystal in the 3D space diverges with temperature [1]. Although the
                       divergence is only logarithmic, crystal growth normally requires high T such
                       that atoms become sufﬁciently mobile. This also implies a softer lattice with
                       little shear rigidity. The combination of the two conditions sets a limit on pos-
                       sible sizes L of 2D atomic crystals. One can estimate L as ~aexp(E/TG) where
                       a ~1Å is the lattice spacing, E~1eV the atomic bond energy and TG the growth
                       temperature. This consideration should not be applied to graphene at room
                       T, which would yield astronomical sizes. TG is usually comparable to the
                       bond energy, which renders the disorder-generating mechanism irrelevant

                                                                                                     83




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 15                                                                           2011-08-29 08:48:49


         at much lower T. Note that, in principle, self-assembly may allow growth of
         graphene at room T but, so far, this has been achieved only for nm-sized
         graphene sheets [34].
            The fourth and probably the most important reason to be surprised is that
         graphene remains stable under ambient conditions. Surfaces of materials
         can react with air and moisture, and monolayer graphene has not one but
         two surfaces, making it more reactive. Surface science research involves ultra-
         high vacuum facilities and, often, liquid-helium T to keep surfaces stable
         and away from reactive species. For example, gold is one of the most inert
         materials in nature but, even for Au, it is hard to avoid its near-surface layer
         being partially oxidised in air. What then are the chances for a monolayer
         exposed to ambient conditions to remain unaffected?
            Graphene ﬂouts all the above considerations. It is instructive to analyse
         how. First, any existing method of obtaining graphene starts with 3D rather
         than 2D growth. Graphene sheets are initially formed either within the
         bulk or on top of an epitaxial substrate, which quenches the diverging
         thermal ﬂuctuations. The interaction can be relatively weak, as in the case of
         graphene grown on graphite [35], but it is always present. This allows gra-
         phene to dodge the Landau-Peierls argument and, also, to avoid coagulation
         into islands and 3D carbon structures. Second, if graphene is cleaved or
         released from a substrate, the process is normally carried out at room T so
         that energy barriers remain sufﬁciently high. This allows atomic planes to
         persist in an isolated, non-scrolled form without any substrate [36], even
         though this is energetically unfavourable. If placed on a substrate, the van
         der Waals interaction may also be sufﬁcient to prevent a graphene sheet
         from scrolling. Third, graphite is even more chemically inert than gold.
         Although graphene is more reactive than graphite and weakly reacts with
         air and pollutants at room T, this does not destroy its crystal lattice and high
         conductivity [37,38]. It requires T twice as high as room T to irreversibly
         damage graphene in air. Our ambient conditions appear fortuitous enough
         for the graphene lattice to survive.


         REQUIEM FOR BRILLIANT IDEAS
         Science literature is full of brilliant ideas that did not work. Searching the
         literature for those is not a good idea at all. At a start of a new project, a
         couple of decent reviews usually do the job of making sure that one does
         not reinvent the wheel. The alternative can be truly detrimental. I have
         met many promising researchers who later failed to live up to their promise
         because they wasted their time on searching literature, instead of spending
         it on searching for new phenomena. What’s more, after months of literature
         search, they inevitably came to the same conclusion: Everything they planned
         had been done before. Therefore, they saw no reason to try their own ideas
         and, consequently, began a new literature search. One should realise that
         ideas are never new. However brilliant, every idea is always based on previous
         knowledge and, with so many smart people around, the odds are that some-

         84




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 16                                                                   2011-08-29 08:48:49


                       one somewhere had already thought of something similar before. This
                       should not be used as an excuse for not trying because local circumstances
                       vary and, moreover, facilities change with time. New technologies offer a
                       reasonable chance that old failed ideas may work unpredictably well the next
                       time round.
                          In 2002–2003, the merged thought clouds that I would not even call a
                       brilliant idea were sufﬁcient to instigate the project. They also provided
                       us with an Ariadne’s thread that helped with choosing speciﬁc directions.
                       Literature search was done in due course, after we roughly scouted the new
                       area and especially when the results were being prepared for publication. In
                       addition to the literature relevant to the thought clouds, our Science paper
                       cited the challenges of obtaining isolated 2D crystals, their thermodynamic
                       instability, the observation of nanoscrolls and papers on epitaxial growth.
                       Those references were important to show the experimental progress we
                       achieved. The ﬁrst review of earlier literature was done in our 2007 progress
                       article [1]. Since then, I updated my conference presentations whenever
                       a historically important paper came to light. This is the ﬁrst opportunity
                       to update the history chapter in writing by adding several new references.
                       Furthermore, my recent call for further historical insights [39] was answered
                       by a number of researchers and, for completeness, I want to acknowledge
                       their early ideas and contributions, too.


                       GRAPHENE INCARNATIONS
                       Looking back at graphene history, we should probably start with an obser-
                       vation by the British chemist Benjamin Brodie [40]. In 1859, by exposing
                       graphite to strong acids, he obtained what he called ‘carbonic acid’ (Figure
                       3a). Brodie believed that he discovered ‘graphon’, a new form of carbon with
                       a molecular weight of 33. Today we know that he observed a suspension of
                       tiny crystals of graphene oxide, that is, graphene sheets densely covered with
                       hydroxyl and epoxide groups [41]. Over the next century, there were quite
                       a few papers describing the laminated structure of graphite oxide, but the
                       next crucial step in graphene history was the proof that this ‘carbonic acid’
                       consisted of ﬂoating atomic planes. In 1948, G. Ruess and F. Vogt used
                       transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and, after drying a droplet of a
                       graphene-oxide suspension on a TEM grid, they observed creased ﬂakes
                       down to a few nm in thickness [42]. These studies were continued by the
                       group of Ulrich Hofmann. In 1962, he and Hanns-Peter Boehm looked for
                       the thinnest possible fragments of reduced graphite oxide and identiﬁed
                       some of them as monolayers [43] (Figure 3b).
                          This remarkable observation received little attention until 2009–2010.
                       I have to mention that the 1962 identiﬁcation relied on a relative TEM
                       contrast, an approach that would not stand today’s scrutiny because the
                       contrast strongly depends on focusing conditions [44]. For example, Rahul
                       Nair and I tried but predictably failed to distinguish between monolayers
                       and somewhat thicker ﬂakes by using only their TEM contrast. Graphene

                                                                                                  85




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 17                                                                        2011-08-29 08:48:49


         monolayers were unambiguously identiﬁed in TEM only forty years after the
         1962 paper by counting the number of folding lines [45–47]. Nonetheless,
         the Boehm-Hofmann work should, in my opinion, stand as the ﬁrst observa-
         tion of graphene because monolayers should have been present among
         the residue, and the idea was correct. Furthermore, it was Boehm and his
         colleagues who in 1986 introduced the term graphene, deriving it from the
         combination of the word ‘graphite’ and the sufﬁx that refers to polycyclic
         aromatic hydrocarbons [48].




         Figure 3. Prehistory of graphene. a – Graphene as probably seen by Brodie 150 years ago.
         Graphite oxide at the bottom of the container dissolves in water making the yellow suspen-
         sion of ﬂoating graphene ﬂakes. b – TEM image of ultra-thin graphitic ﬂakes from the
         early 1960s (copied with permission from ref. [43]). c – Scanning electron microscopy
         (SEM) image of thin graphite platelets produced by cleavage (similar to images reported
         in ref. [60]). d – STM of graphene grown on Pt (copied with permission from ref. [53]).
         The image is 100x100 nm2 in size. The hexagonal superstructure has a period of ~22 Å and
         appears due to the interaction of graphene with the metal substrate.


            In addition to the TEM observations, another important line in pre-2004
         graphene research was its epitaxial growth. Ultra-thin graphitic ﬁlms and,
         sometimes, even monolayers were grown on metal substrates [49–53],
         insulating carbides [54–57] and graphite [35] (see Fig. 3d). The ﬁrst papers
         I am aware of go back to 1970 when John Grant reported graphitic ﬁlms on
         Ru and Rh [49] and Blakely et al. on Ni [50]. Epitaxial growth on insulating
         substrates was ﬁrst demonstrated by van Bommel et al. in 1975 [54] whereas

         86




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 18                                                                             2011-08-29 08:48:50


                       Chuhei Oshima found other carbides allowing graphene growth (for
                       example, TiC) [55]. The grown ﬁlms were usually analysed by surface
                       science techniques that average over large areas and say little about the ﬁlm’s
                       continuity and quality. Occasionaly, STM was also used for visualisation and
                       local analysis.
                          Even more relevant were earlier attempts to obtain ultra-thin ﬁlms of
                       graphite by cleavage, similar to what we did in 2003. In 1990, Heinrich Kurz’s
                       group reported ‘peeling optically thin layers with transparent tape’ (read
                       Scotch tape), which were then used to study carrier dynamics in graphite
                       [58]. In 1995, Thomas Ebbesen and Hidefumi Hiura described few-nm-thick
                       ‘origami’ visualised by atomic force microscopy (AFM) on top of HOPG
                       [59]. Rod Ruoff also photographed thin graphite platelets in SEM [60] (Fig.
                       3c). In 2003, monolayers were reported by Yang Gan who used STM for their
                       cleavage on top of HOPG [61].
                          Finally, there were electrical studies of thin graphite ﬁlms. Between 1997
                       and 2000, Yoshiko Ohashi succeeded in cleaving crystals down to ~20 nm in
                       thickness, studied their electrical properties including Shubnikov – de Haas
                       oscillations and, quite remarkably, observed the electric ﬁeld effect with
                       resistivity changes of up to 8% [62,63]. Also, Ebbesen’s group succeeded in
                       growth of micron-sized graphitic disks with thickness down to 60 layers and
                       measured their electrical properties [64].
                          As for theory, let me make only a short note (for more references, see
                       [1,65]). Theoretically, graphene (‘a monolayer of graphite’) was around
                       since 1947 when Phil Wallace ﬁrst calculated its band structure as a starting
                       point to understanding the electronic properties of bulk graphite [66].
                       Gordon Semenoff and Duncan Haldane realised that graphene could
                       provide a nice condensed-matter analogue of (2+1)-dimensional quantum
                       electrodynamics [67,68] and, since then, the material served as a toy model
                       to address various questions of QED (see, e.g., [69,70]). Many of the theories
                       became relevant to experiment well before 2004, when electronic properties
                       of carbon nanotubes (rolled-up graphene ribbons) were investigated. A large
                       amount of important theoretical work on graphene was done by Tsuneya
                       Ando, and Millie Dresselhaus and co-workers (see, e.g., [71–73]).
                          To complete the history of graphene, let me also acknowledge some
                       earlier ideas. Thomas Ebbesen and Hidefumi Hiura envisaged a possibility
                       of graphene-based nanoelectronics in 1995 (as an example, they referred
                       to epitaxial graphene grown on TiC) [59]. In patent literature, speculations
                       about “ﬁeld effect transistors employing pyrolytic graphite” go back as far as
                       1970 [74]. Also, it was pointed out to me by Rod Ruoff and Reginald Little
                       that their pre-2004 papers discussed possibilities and mentioned an intention
                       of obtaining isolated monolayers [60,75]. Finally, the layered structure of
                       graphite was known since early days of X-ray crystallography, and research-
                       ers certainly have been aware of graphite being a deck of weakly bonded
                       graphene planes for an even longer time. This property has been widely used
                       to create a variety of intercalated graphite compounds [23] and, of course,
                       to make drawings. After all, we now know that isolated monolayers can be

                                                                                                   87




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 19                                                                         2011-08-29 08:48:50


         found in every pencil trace, if one searches carefully enough in an optical
         microscope [2]. Graphene has literally been before our eyes and under our
         noses for many centuries but was never recognised for what it really is.


         0ȜĮȞȒĲȘ GRAPHENE
         The reader may ﬁnd some of the cited ideas and historical papers irrelevant,
         but I tried my best to avoid any pre-2004 result, especially experimental,
         being overlooked. All the mentioned studies poked in the right direction,
         but there were no big surprises to spark a graphene gold rush. This is
         probably because the earlier experiments had one thing in common. They
         were observational. They observed ultra-thin graphitic ﬁlms, and occasionaly
         even monolayers without reporting any of graphene’s distinguishing proper-
         ties. The very few electrical and optical measurements cited above were done
         using thin ﬁlms of graphite and could not assess the physics that graphene
         has brought to the fore since 2004.
            Our Science paper provided a clear watershed. Of course, the article
         reported the isolation of graphene crystals large enough to do all sorts
         of measurements, beyond the observation in an electron or scanning
         probe microscope. The method of graphene isolation and identiﬁcation it
         described was so straightforward and accessible that even schoolchildren
         could probably do it. This was important but, if we were to stop there, just
         with the observations, our work would only add to the previous literature
         and, I believe, disappear into oblivion. It is not the observation and isolation
         of graphene but its electronic properties that took researchers by surprise.
         Our measurements delivered news well beyond the Scotch tape technique,
         which persuaded many researchers to join in the graphene rush.
            First, the 2004 paper reported an ambipolar electric ﬁeld effect, in which
         resistivity changed by a factor of ~100. This is thousands of times more than
         the few per cent changes observed previously for any metallic system and
         amounted to a qualitative difference. To appreciate the exquisiteness of this
         observation, imagine a nanometre thick Au ﬁlm. No matter what you do
         with such a ﬁlm by physical means, it will remain a normal metal with the
         same properties. In contrast, properties of graphene can be altered by simply
         varying the gate voltage. We can tune graphene from a state close to a normal
         metal with electrons in concentration ~1021 cm–3 to a metal with a similar
         concentration of holes, all the way through a ‘semiconducting’ state with few
         charge carriers.
            Even more remarkably, our devices exhibited an astonishing electronic
         quality. Graphene was completely unprotected from the environment, as
         it was placed on a microscopically rough substrate and covered from both
         sides with adsorbates and a polymer residue. Still, electrons could travel
         submicron distances without scattering, ﬂouting all the elements outside.
         This level of electronic quality is completely counterintuitive. It contradicts
         the common wisdom that surface science requires ultra-high vacuum and,
         even then, thin ﬁlms become progressively poorer in quality as their thickness

         88




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 20                                                                   2011-08-29 08:48:50


                       decreases. Even with hindsight, such electronic quality is mystifying and, in
                       fact, not fully understood so far.
                          In semiconductor physics, electronic quality is described in terms of
                       charge carrier mobility P. Our Science paper reported graphene with
                       room-T P |10,000 cm2/Vs (as of 2010, P can be 10 and 100 times higher
                       at room and low T, respectively [76,77]). For a general reader, 10,000 may
                       sound like just another number. To explain its signiﬁcance, let us imagine
                       that in 2004 we made devices from, for example, reduced graphene oxide,
                       which exhibits P ~1cm2/Vs due to its irreversibly damaged crystal lattice [78].
                       In our second paper on graphene [79], we reported 2D dichalcogenides with
                       equally low P. Since then, there has been little interest in them. The reported
                       ballistic transport over submicron distances was essential to spark interest in
                       graphene and to allow the observation of many quantum effects reported
                       both in 2004 and later. This would have been impossible if graphene exhibited
                       P below several 1,000 cm2/Vs.
                          If not for graphene’s high quality and tunability, there would be no new
                       physics and, therefore, no graphene boom. In this respect, graphene his-
                       tory has something in common with that of solar planets. Ancient Greeks
                       observed them and called them wandering stars, ʌȜĮȞȒĲİȢ. After the physics
                       behind this wandering was discovered, people started perceiving planets
                       quite differently from ʌȜĮȞȒĲİȢ. Similarly, during the last six years people
                       discovered what graphene really is, which completely changed the earlier
                       perception. Our Science paper offered the ﬁrst glimpse of graphene in its new
                       avatar as a high quality 2D electronic system and beyond.


                       MAGIC OF FLAT CARBON
                       What is this new incarnation? For me, 2004 was only the starting point for
                       the unveiling of many unique properties of graphene. Since then, we have
                       demonstrated that charge carriers in graphene are massless fermions
                       described by a Dirac-like equation rather than by the standard Schrödinger
                       equation [80]. In bilayer graphene, electrons receive yet another makeup
                       as massive Dirac fermions [81]. These properties were unveiled by the
                       observation of two new types of the integer quantum Hall effect, which
                       corresponded to the two types of Dirac fermions [1,65]. We also found
                       that graphene remained metallic in the limit of no charge carriers, even
                       when just a few electrons remained present in a micron-sized device [1,77].
                       Our experiments have revealed that graphene exhibits a universal optical
                       conductivity of Se2/2h, such that its visible opacity is just SD, where D is
                       the ﬁne structure constant [82]. We suggested that the phenomenon of
                       Klein tunnelling, which was known in relativistic quantum physics for many
                       decades but assumed non-observable, could be probed using graphene
                       devices [83]. Several groups later demonstrated this experimentally. We were
                       lucky to be slightly quicker than others in showing that bilayer graphene was
                       a tuneable-gap semiconductor [84] and that graphene could be carved into
                       devices on a true nm scale [85]. We demonstrated sensors capable of detecting

                                                                                                   89




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 21                                                                         2011-08-29 08:48:50


         individual molecules, more sensitive than any sensor before [38]. We suggested
         that strain in graphene creates pseudo-magnetic ﬁelds that alter its electro-
         nic properties [86] and later discussed the possibility of creating uniform
         pseudo-ﬁelds and observation of the quantum Hall effect without an
         external magnetic ﬁeld [87]. Pseudo-magnetic ﬁelds in excess of 400 T were
         reported experimentally half a year later. We made the ﬁrst step into graphene
         chemistry by experimentally introducing its derivatives, graphane and
         stoichiometric ﬂuorographene [88,89]. This is not even an exhaustive list of
         the nice phenomena that we and our collaborators found in graphene and,
         of course, many other researchers reported many other beautiful discoveries
         that propelled graphene into its new status of a system that can nearly deliver
         magic.


         ODE TO ONE
         After reading about the beautiful properties of graphene, the reader may
         wonder why many atomic layers stacked on top of each other, as in graphite,
         do not exhibit similar properties. Of course, any graphitic derivative has
         something in common with its parent, but in the case of graphene, differ-
         ences between the parent and descendants are fundamental. To appreciate
         this, let us simplify the task and compare graphene with its bilayer. The
         crucial distinctions are already there.
           First, graphene exhibits record stiffness and mechanical strength [90]. As
         for its bilayer, this strength is jeopardised by the possibility that the two layers
         will slide relative to each other. This leads to a principal difference if, for
         example, graphene or any thicker platelets are used in composite materials.
         Second, graphene chemistry is different depending on whether one or both
         surfaces of a monolayer are exposed. For example, atomic hydrogen cannot
         bind to graphene from one side but makes a stoichiometric compound
         (graphane) if both surfaces are exposed. This makes graphene much more
         reactive than its bilayer. Third, an electric ﬁeld is screened in graphite at
         distances of about the interlayer separation, and the electric screening
         becomes important even for a bilayer. For multilayer graphene, the electric
         ﬁeld can dope no more than a couple of near-surface atomic planes, leaving
         the bulk unaffected. This makes it naïve to speculate about the use of gra-
         phitic multilayers in active electronics. Fourth, charge carriers in a monolayer
         are massless Dirac fermions whereas they are massive in a graphene bilayer.
         This leads to essential differences in many electronic properties including
         Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations, quantum Hall effect, Klein tunnelling and
         so on. The Sorites paradox refers to a moment when a heap is no longer a
         heap if the grains are removed one by one. For graphene, even its bilayer is
         so different that two already make a heap.




         90




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 22                                                                       2011-08-29 08:48:50


                       TO COLLEAGUES AND FRIENDS

                       Our Science report was a collective effort, and I would again – on behalf of
                       Kostya and myself – like to thank all the other contributors. Serge Morozov
                       was and remains our ‘multitasking measurement machine’ working 24x7
                       when in Manchester. His electrical measurement skills are unmatched, and
                       I know that any curve he brings in is completely reliable and no questions
                       are ever asked whether this and that was checked and crosschecked. Da
                       Jiang was around from the very start, and it is unfortunate that I had to take
                       the project away from him because it was beyond the scope of a single new
                       PhD student. Sergey Dubonos and Yuan Zhang were the ones who made all
                       the devices without which our work would obviously have been impossible. I
                       utterly regret that our life trajectories have later diverged and, especially, that
                       Sergey has switched from microfabrication technology to goat farming. I also
                       acknowledge help of Anatoly Firsov in making those devices. Irina Grigorieva
                       helped with scanning electron microscopy but, more importantly, with
                       writing up the 2004 manuscript.




                       Figure 4. Those who made our ﬁrst graphene paper possible but did not get the Prize.

                                                                                                               91




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 23                                                                                     2011-08-29 08:48:52


            The end of my timeline was only a start for further hard work involving
         many collaborators. Our rapid progress would be impossible without Misha
         Katsnelson who provided us with all the theoretical help an experimentalist
         can only dream of. Since 2006, I have been enjoying collaboration with
         other great theory guys including Antonio Castro Neto, Paco Guinea, Nuno
         Peres, Volodya Fal’ko, Leonid Levitov, Allan MacDonald, Dima Abanin, Tim
         Wehling and their co-workers. In particular, I want to acknowledge many
         illuminating discussions and banter over dinners with Antonio and Paco.
         As for experimentalists, the list is longer and includes Philip Kim, Ernie
         Hill, Andrea Ferrari, Eva Andrei, Alexey Kuzmenko, Uschi Bangert, Sasha
         Grigorenko, Uli Zeitler, Jannik Meyer, Marek Potemskii and many of their
         colleagues.
            Philip deserves special praise. In August 2004, before our Science paper
         was published, his group submitted another important paper [91]. His
         report described electronic properties of ultra-thin graphite platelets (down
         to ~35 layers). Except for the thicker devices, Philip’s group followed the
         same route as our now-celebrated paper. How close he was can be judged
         from the fact that, after adopting the Scotch tape technique, Philip started
         studying monolayers in early 2005. This allowed him to catch up quickly and,
         in mid-2005, our two groups submitted independent reports that appeared
         back-to-back in Nature, both describing the all-important observation of Dirac
         fermions in monolayer graphene [80,92]. Later, I had the pleasure of closely
         working with Philip on two joint papers, for Science and Scientiﬁc American. For
         me personally, those back-to-back Nature papers signiﬁed a watershed. People
         within the large semiconducting community no longer rumoured that ‘the
         results were as difﬁcult to reproduce as those by Hendrik Schön’, and friends
         no longer stopped me in corridors with ‘be more careful; you know …’ I owe
         Philip a great deal for this, and many people heard me saying – before and
         after the Nobel Prize – that I would be honoured to share it with him.
            Last but not least, let me acknowledge many bright young, and not so
         young, colleagues: Peter Blake, Rahul Nair, Roman Gorbachev, Leonid
         Ponomarenko, Fred Schedin, Daniel Elias, Sasha Mayorov, Rui Yang, Vasyl
         Kravets, Zhenhua Ni, Wencai Ren, Rashid Jalil, Ibtsam Riaz, Soeren Neubeck,
         Tariq Mohiuddin and Tim Booth. They were PhD students and postdocs
         here in Manchester over the last six years and, as always, I avoid using the
         feudal word ‘my’.
            Finally, I acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of EPSRC in its best, that is,
         the responsive mode. This Nobel Prize would be absolutely impossible with-
         out this mode. Let me also thank the Royal Society and the Leverhulme Trust
         for reducing my teaching loads, which allowed me to focus on the project.
         I have also received funding from the Ofﬁce of Naval Research and the Air
         Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research, which helped us to run even faster. The
         Körber Foundation is gratefully acknowledged for its 2009 award. However,
         I can offer no nice words for the EU Framework programmes which, except
         for the European Research Council, can be praised only by Europhobes for
         discrediting the whole idea of an effectively working Europe.

         92




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 24                                                                   2011-08-29 08:48:52


                       REFERENCES
                        1.   A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov. Nature Mater. 6, 183 (2007).
                        2.   A. K. Geim, P. Kim. Sci. Am. 298, 90 (2008).
                        3.   A. K. Geim. Science 324, 1530 (2009).
                        4.   A. K. Geim. JETP Lett. 50, 389 (1989).
                        5.   S. J. Bending, K. von Klitzing, K. Ploog. Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1060 (1990).
                        6.   A. K. Geim, P. C. Main, P. H. Beton, P. Streda, L. Eaves, C. D. Wilkinson, S. P.
                             Beaumont. Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3014 (1991).
                        7.   A. K. Geim, P. C. Main, P. H. Beton, L. Eaves, C. D. W. Wilkinson, S. P. Beaumont.
                             Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1248 (1992).
                        8.   A. K. Geim, S. V. Dubonos, J. G. S. Lok, I. V. Grigorieva, J. C. Maan, L. T. Hansen, P.
                             E. Lindelof. Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 2379 (1997).
                        9.   I. V. Grigorieva. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 7, 161 (1994).
                       10.   J. S. Baker, S. J. Judd. Water Research 30, 247 (1996).
                       11.   A. Geim. Phys. Today 51, No. 9, 36 (1998).
                       12.   K. Autumn, Y. A. Lang, S. T. Ksieh, W. Zesch, W. P. Chan, T. W. Kenny, R. Fearing, R.
                             J. Full. Nature 405, 681 (2000).
                       13.   A. K. Geim, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, K. S. Novoselov, A. A. Zhukov, S. Y.
                             Shapoval. Nature Mater. 2, 461 (2003).
                       14.   G. Lamarche, F. Lamarche, A. M. Lamarche, Europhys. Lett. 53, 378 (2001).
                       15.   I. I. Barbolina, K. S. Novoselov, S. V. Morozov, S. V. Dubonos, M. Missous, A. O.
                             Volkov, D. A. Christian, I. V. Grigorieva, A. K. Geim. Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 013901
                             (2006).
                       16.   T. Cohen-Karni, Q. Qing, Q. Li, Y. Fang, C. M. Lieber. Nano Lett. 10, 1098 (2010).
                       17.   Nevill Mott, A Life in Science, Taylor & Francis, 1986.
                       18.   E. Bose, Phys. Z. 7, 373 (1906).
                       19.   A. V. Butenko, Dm. Shvarts, V. Sandomirsky, Y. Schlesinger, R. Rosenbaum. J. Appl.
                             Phys. 88, 2634 (2000).
                       20.   V. T. Petrashov, V. N. Antonov, B. Nilsson. J. Phys.– Cond. Mat. 3, 9705 (1991).
                       21.   R. E. Glover, M. D. Sherrill. Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 248 (1960).
                       22.   C. H. Ahn et al. Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 1185 (2006).
                       23.   M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus. Adv. Phys. 30, 139 (1981).
                       24.   Y. Kopelevich, P. Esquinazi, J. H. S. Torres, S. Moehlecke. J. Low Temp. Phys. 119, 691
                             (2000).
                       25.   H. Kempa, P. Esquinazi, Y. Kopelevich. Phys. Rev. B 65, 241101 (2002).
                       26.   K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Dubonos, E.W. Hill, I. V. Grigorieva. Nature 426, 812
                             (2003).
                       27.   K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V.
                             Grigorieva, A. A. Firsov. Science 306, 666 (2004).
                       28.   J. A. Venables, G. D. T. Spiller, M. Hanbucken. Rep. Prog. Phys. 47, 399 (1984).
                       29.   J. W. Evans, P. A. Thiel, M. C. Bartelt. Sur. Sci. Rep. 61, 1 (2006).
                       30.   O. A. Shenderova, V. V. Zhirnov, D. W. Brenner, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci. 27 227
                             (2002).
                       31.   D. Tománek, W. Zhong, E. Krastev. Phys. Rev. B 48, 15461 (1993).
                       32.   R. Seton. Carbon 34, 69 (1996).
                       33.   S. Braga, V. R. Coluci, S. B. Legoas, R. Giro, D. S. Galvão, R. H. Baughman. Nano Lett.
                             4, 881 (2004).
                       34.   C. D. Simpson, J. D. Brand, A. J. Berresheim, L. Przybilla, H. J. Rader, K Mullen. Chem.
                             Eur. J. 8, 1424 (2002).
                       35.   A. Affoune, B. Prasad, H. Sato, T. Enoki, Y. Kaburagi, Y. Hishiyama, Chem. Phys. Lett.
                             348, 17 (2001).
                       36.   T. J. Booth, P. Blake, R. R. Nair, D. Jiang, E. W. Hill, U. Bangert, A. Bleloch, M. Gass,
                             K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim. Nano Lett. 8, 2442 (2008).



                                                                                                                   93




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 25                                                                                        2011-08-29 08:48:52


         37.    S. Ryu, L. Liu, S. Berciaud, Y. J. Yu, H. Liu, P. Kim, G. W. Flynn, L. E. Brus. Nano Lett.
                10, 4944 (2010).
         38.    F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E.W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S.
                Novoselov. Nature Mater. 6, 652 (2007).
         39.    Letter to the Editor. “October 22, 2004: Discovery of Graphene” www.aps.org/publications/
                apsnews/201001/letters.cfm
         40.    B. C. Brodie. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London 149, 249 (1859).
         41.    D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski, R. S. Ruoff. Chem. Soc. Rev. 39, 228 (2010).
         42.    G. Ruess, F. Vogt. Monatshefte Chem. 78, 222 (1948).
         43.    H. P. Boehm, A. Clauss, G. O. Fischer, U. Hofmann. Z. anorg. allgem. Chem. 316, 119
                (1962).
         44.    J. C. Meyer, A. K. Geim, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, D. Obergfell, S. Roth, C.
                Girit, A. Zettl. Solid State Commun. 143, 101 (2007).
         45.    H. Shioyama. J. Mat. Sci. Lett. 20, 499 (2001).
         46.    L. M. Viculis, J. J. Mack, R. B. Kaner. Science 299, 1361 (2003).
         47.    S. Horiuchi, T. Gotou, M. Fujiwara, T. Asaka, T. Yokosawa, Y. Matsui. Appl. Phys. Lett.
                84, 2403 (2004).
         48.    H. P. Boehm, R. Setton, E. Stumpp. Carbon 24, 241 (1986).
         49.    J. T. Grant, T. W. Haas. Surf. Sci. 21, 76 (1970).
         50.    J. M. Blakely, J. S. Kim, H. C. Potter. J. Appl. Phys. 41, 2693 (1970).
                51. R. Rosei, M. De Crescenzi, F. Sette, C. Quaresima, A. Savois, P. Perfetti. Phys. Rev.
                B 28, 1161 (1983).
         52.    C. F. McConville, D. P. Woodruff, S. D. Kevan, M. Weinert, J. W. Davenport. Phys. Rev.
                B 34, 2199 (1986).
         53.    T. A. Land, T. Michely, R. J. Behm, J. C. Hemminger, G. Comsa. Surf. Sci. 264, 261
                (1992).
         54.    A. J. van Bommel, J. E. Crombeen, A. van Tooren. Surf. Sci. 48, 463 (1975).
         55.    A. Nagashima, K. Nuka, K. Satoh, H. Itoh, T. Ichinokawa, C. Oshima, S. Otani. Surf.
                Sci. 287, 609 (1993).
         56.    M. Terai, N. Hasegawa, M. Okusawa, S. Otani, C. Oshima. Appl. Surf. Sci. 130, 876
                (1998).
         57.    I. Forbeaux, J. M. Themlin, J. M. Debever. Phys. Rev. B 58, 16396 (1998).
         58.    K. Seibert, G. C. Cho, W. Kütt, H. Kurz, D. H. Reitze, J. I. Dadap, H. Ahn, M. C.
                Downer, A. M. Malvezzi. Phys. Rev. B 42, 2842 (1990).
         59.    T. W. Ebbesen, H. Hiura, Adv. Mater. 7, 582 (1995).
         60.    X. Lu, M. Yu, H. Huang, R. S. Ruoff. Nanotechnology 10, 269 (1999).
         61.    Y. Gan, W. Chu, L. Qiao, Surf. Sci. 539, 120 (2003).
         62.    Y. Ohashi, T. Koizumi, T. Yoshikawa, T. Hironaka, K. Shiiki. TANSO 180, 235 (1997).
         63.    Y. Ohashi, T. Hironaka, T. Kubo, K. Shiiki. TANSO 195, 410 (2000).
         64.    E. Dujardin, T. Thio, H. Lezec, T. W. Ebbesen. Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 2474 (2001).
         65.    A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim. Rev. Mod.
                Phys. 81, 109 (2009).
         66.    P. R. Wallace. Phys. Rev. 71, 622 (1947).
         67.    G. W. Semenoff. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 2449 (1984).
         68.    F. D. M. Haldane. Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2015 (1988).
         69.    J. Gonzales, F. Guinea, M. A. H. Vozmediano. Phys. Rev. B 59, 2474 (1999).
         70.    E. V. Gorbar, V. P. Gusynin, V. A. Miransky, I. A. Shovkovy. Phys. Rev. B 66, 045108
                (2002).
         71.    T. Ando, T. Nakanishi, R. Saito. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 67, 2857 (1998).
         72.    Y. Zheng, T. Ando. Phys. Rev. B 65, 245420 (2002).
         73.    R. Saito, M. Fujita, G. Dresselhaus, M. S Dresselhaus. Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 2204 (1992).
         74.    H. J. Teuschler. Method of producing isolated ﬁeld effect transistors employing pyrolytic
                graphite. US Patent 3,522,649.
         75.    R. B. Little. J. Cluster Sci. 14, 135 (2003).



         94




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 26                                                                                    2011-08-29 08:48:52


                       76.   C. R. Dean et al. Nature Nano 5, 722 (2010).
                       77.   E. V. Castro, H. Ochoa, M. I. Katsnelson, R. V. Gorbachev, D. C. Elias, K. S. Novoselov,
                             A. K. Geim, F. Guinea. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 266601 (2010).
                       78.   K. Erickson, R. Erni, Z. Lee, N. Alem, W. Gannett, A. Zettl. Adv. Mat. 22, 4467 (2010).
                       79.   K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov, and
                             A. K. Geim. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 10451 (2005).
                       80.   K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. M. Morozov, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V.
                             Dubonos, A. A. Firsov. Nature 438, 197 (2005).
                       81.   K. S. Novoselov, E. McCann, S. V. Morozov, V. I. Fal’ko, M. I. Katsnelson, U. Zeitler, D.
                             Jiang, F. Schedin, A. K. Geim. Nature Phys. 2, 177 (2006).
                       82.   R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M.
                             R. Peres, A. K. Geim. Science 320, 1308 (2008).
                       83.   M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim. Nature Phys. 2, 620 (2006).
                       84.   E.V. Castro, K. S. Novoselov, S. V. Morozov, N. M. R. Peres, J. M. B. Lopes dos Santos,
                             J. Nilsson, F. Guinea, A. K. Geim, A. H. Castro Neto. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 216802
                             (2007).
                       85.   L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson, R. Yang, E. W. Hill, K. S. Novoselov,
                             A. K. Geim. Science 320, 356 (2008).
                       86.   S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, L. A. Ponomarenko, D.
                             Jiang, A. K. Geim. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 016801 (2006).
                       87.   F. Guinea, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim. Nature Phys. 6, 30 (2010).
                       88.   D. C. Elias et al. Science 323, 610 (2009).
                       89.   R. R. Nair et al. Small 6, 2877 (2010).
                       90.   C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar, J. Hone. Science 321, 385 (2008).
                       91.   Y. Zhang, J. P. Small, M. E. S. Amori, P. Kim. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 176803 (2005).
                       92.   Y. B. Zhang, Y. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer, P. Kim. Nature 438, 201 (2005).

                       Portrait photo of Professor Geim by photographer Ulla Montan.




                                                                                                                   95




eGeim_lect_s70_95.indd 27                                                                                        2011-08-29 08:48:53
