PULSARS AND HIGH DENSITY PHYSICS
Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1974

by
A NTONY H EWISH
University of Cambridge, Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, England



D ISCOVERY   OF   PULSARS

The trail which ultimately led to the first pulsar began in 1948 when I joined
Ryle’s small research team and became interested in the general problem of
the propagation of radiation through irregular transparent media. We are
all familiar with the twinkling of visible stars and my task was to understand
why radio stars also twinkled. I was fortunate to have been taught by
Ratcliffe, who first showed me the power of Fourier techniques in dealing
with such diffraction phenomena. By a modest extension of existing theory I
was able to show that our radio stars twinkled because of plasma clouds in
the ionosphere at heights around 300 km, and I was also able to measure the
speed of ionospheric winds in this region (1) .
   My fascination in using extra-terrestrial radio sources for studying the
intervening plasma next brought me to the solar corona. From observations
of the angular scattering of radiation passing through the corona, using
simple radio interferometers, I was eventually able to trace the solar atmo-
sphere out to one half the radius of the Earth’s orbit (2).
    In my notebook for 1954 there is a comment that, if radio sources were of
small enough angular size, they would illuminate the solar atmosphere with
sufficient coherence to produce interference patterns at the Earth which would
be detectable as a very rapid fluctuation of intensity. Unfortunately the in-
formation then available showed that the few sources known were more than
one hundred times too large to produce this effect, and I did not pursue the
idea. This was sad because the phenomenon was discovered by chance, about
eight years later, by Margaret Clarke long after I had forgotten all about my
comment. She was involved with a survey of radio sources at Cambridge and
noticed that three particular sources showed variations of intensity. She
pointed out that two of the sources were known to have angular sizes of less
than 2” and estimated that a scintillation mechanism required plasma ir-
regularities at distances of thousands of km but she concluded that the fluc-
tuations were an unsolved mystery (3). During a group discussion I suddenly
remembered my earlier conclusion and realised that, if the radio sources sub-
tended an angle of less than l”, they might show the predicted intensity scin-
tillation caused by plasma clouds in the interplanetary medium. With the
assistance of Scott and Collins special observations of 3C 48 and other quasi-
stellar radio sources were made and the scintillation phenomenon was im-
mediately confirmed (4).
   Since interplanetary scintillation, as we called this new effect, could be


                                    A. Hewish                                  175


detected in any direction in space I used it to study the solar wind, which had
by then been discovered by space probes launched into orbits far beyond the
magnetosphere. It was interesting to track the interplanetary diffraction pat-
terns as they raced across England at speeds in excess of 300 km s -1, and to
sample the behaviour of the solar wind far outside the plane of the ecliptic
where spacecraft have yet to venture (5).
   The scintillation technique also provided an extremely simple and useful
means of showing which radio sources had angular sizes in the range 0”.l-
l”.0. The first really unusual source to be uncovered by this method turned up
in 1965 when, with my student Okoye, I was studying radio emission from
the Crab Nebula. We found a prominent scintillating component within the
nebula which was far too small to be explained by conventional synchotron
radiation and we suggested that this might be the remains of the original star
which had exploded and which still showed activity in the form of flare-type
radio emission (6). This source later turned out to be none other than the
famous Crab Nebula Pulsar.
    In 1965 I drew up plans for a radio telescope with which I intended to
carry out a large-scale survey of more than 1000 radio galaxies using inter-
planetary scintillation to provide high angular resolution. To achieve the
required sensitivity it was necessary to cover an area of 18,000 m2 and, be-
cause scintillation due to plasmas is most pronounced at long wavelengths,
I used a wavelength of 3.7 m. The final design was an array containing 2048
dipole antennas. Later that year I was joined by a new graduate student,
Jocelyn Bell, and she become responsible for the network of cables connecting
the dipoles. The entire system was built with local effort and we relied
heavily upon the willing assistance of many members of the Cambridge team.
    The radio telescope was complete, and tested, by July 1967 and we im-
mediately commenced a survey of the sky. Our method of utilising scintilla-
tion for the quantitative measurement of angular sizes demanded repeated
observations so that every source could be studied at many different solar
elongations. In fact we surveyed the entire range of accessible sky at intervals
of one week. To maintain a continuous assessment of the survey we arranged
to plot the positions of scintillating radio sources on a sky-chart, as each
record was analysed, and to add points as the observations were repeated at
weekly intervals. In this way genuine sources could be distinguished from
electrical interference since the latter would be unlikely to recur with the
same celestial coordinates. It is greatly to Jocelyn Bell’s credit that she was
able to keep up with the flow of paper from the four recorders.
    One day around the middle of August 1967 Jocelyn showed me a record
indicating fluctuating signals that could have been a faint source undergoing
scintillation when observed in the antisolar direction. This was unusual since
strong scintillation rarely occurs in this direction and we first thought that the
signals might be electrical interference. So we continued the routine survey.
By the end of September the source had been detected on several occasions,
 although it was not always present, and I suspected that we had located a
flare star, perhaps similar to the M-type dwarfs under investigation by Lovell.


                                     Physics 1974




Fig. 1. The first signals from CP 1919.

But the source also exhibited apparent shifts of right ascension of up to 90
seconds which was evidence against a celestial origin. We installed a high-
speed recorder to study the nature of the fluctuating signals but met with no
success as the source intensity faded below our detection limit. During October




Fig. 2. The first indication of pulsed radio emission from CP 1919.


                                       A. Hewish                              177




                                            20




                                            -5


Fig. 3. Timing measurements show-
ing Doppler shift due to the orbital
motion of the Earth.


this recorder was required for pre-arranged observations of another source,
3C 273, to check certain aspects of scintillation theory, and it was not until
November 28th that we obtained the first evidence that our mysterious source
was emitting regular pulses of radiation at intervals of just greater than one
second. I could not believe that any natural source would radiate in this
fashion and I immediately consulted astronomical colleagues at other ob-
servatories to enquire whether they had any equipment in operation which
might possibly generate electrical interference at a sidereal time near 19h 19 m.
   In early December the source increased in intensity and the pulses were
clearly visible above the noise. Knowing that the signals were pulsed enabled
me to ascertain their electrical phase and I reanalysed the routine survey
records. This showed that the right ascension was constant. The apparent
variations had been caused by the changing intensity of the source. Still
sceptical, I arranged a device to display accurate time marks at one second
intervals broadcast from the MSF Rugby time service and on December 11th
began daily timing measurements. To my astonishment the readings fell in a
regular pattern, to within the observational uncertainty of 0.1s, showing that
the pulsed source kept time to better than 1 part in 10 6. Meanwhile my col-


178                                 Physics 1974


leagues Pilkington, and Scott and Collins, found by quite independent methods
that the signal exhibited a rapidly sweeping frequency of about -5 MHz s-1.
This showed that the duration of each pulse, at one particular radio frequency,
was approximately 16 ms.
   Having found no satisfactory terrestrial explanation for the pulses we now
began to believe that they could only be generated by some source far beyond
the solar system, and the short duration of each pulse suggested that the
radiator could not be larger than a small planet. We had to face the possibility
that the signals were, indeed, generated on a planet circling some distant star,
and that they were artificial. I knew that timing measurements, if continued
for a few weeks, would reveal any orbital motion of the source as a Doppler
shift, and I felt compelled to maintain a curtain of silence until this result
was known with some certainty. Without doubt, those weeks in December
1967 were the most exciting in my life.
   It turned out that the Doppler shift was precisely that due to the motion
of the Earth alone, and we began to seek explanations involving dwarf stars,
or the hypothetical neutron stars. My friends in the library at the optical ob-
servatory were surprised to see a radio astronomer taking so keen an interest
in books on stellar evolution. I finally decided that the gravitational oscillation
of an entire star provided a possible mechanism for explaining the periodic
emission of radio pulses, and that the fundamental frequency obtainable from
white dwarf stars was too low. I suggested that a higher order mode was
needed in the case of a white dwarf, or that a neutron star of the lowest
allowed density, vibrating in the fundamental mode, might give the required
periodicity. We also estimated the distance of the source on the assumption that
the frequency sweep was caused by pulse dispersion in the interstellar plasma,
and obtained a value of 65 parsec, a typical stellar distance.
   While I was preparing a coherent account of this rather hectic research,
in January 1968, Jocelyn Bell was scrutinising all our sky-survey record-
ings with her typical persistence and diligence and she produced a list of
possible additional pulsar positions. These were observed again for evidence of
pulsed radiation and before submitting our paper for publication, on
February 8th, we were confident that three additional pulsars existed although
their parameters were then only crudely known. I well remember the morning
when Jocelyn came into my room with a recording of a possible pulsar that
she had made during the previous night at a right ascension 09 h 5 0m. When
we spread the chart over the floor and placed a metre rule against it a pe-
riodicity of 0.25s was just discernible. This was confirmed later when the
receiver was adjusted to a narrower bandwidth, and the rapidity of this
pulsar made explanations involving white dwarf stars increasingly difficult.
   The months that followed the announcement (7) of our discovery were busy
ones for observers and theoreticians alike, as radio telescopes all over the
world turned towards the first pulsars and information flooded in at a
phenomenal rate. It was Gold (8) who first suggested that the rotation of
neutron stars provided the simplest and most flexible mechanism to explain
the pulsar clock, and his prediction that the pulse period should increase with


                                           A. Hewish                          179




0                                   2

Fig. 4. Radiation from a typical pulsar.


time soon received dramatic confirmation with the discovery of the pulsar in
the Crab Nebula (9, 10). Further impressive support for the neutron star
hypothesis was the detection of pulsed light from the star which had previous-
ly been identified as the remnant of the original explosion. This, according
to theories of stellar evolution, is precisely where a young neutron star should
be created. Gold also showed that the loss of rotational energy, calculated
from the increase of period for a neutron star model, was exactly that needed
to power the observed synchrotron light from the nebula.
   Now, in 1974, with more than 130 pulsars charted in the heavens, there is
overwhelming evidence that the neutron star “lighthouse” model is correct.
No other star could spin fast enough, without fragmenting, to account for the
most rapid pulsars yet periods ranging from 33 ms to 3.5 s are readily ac-
commodated by the rotation theory. At the same time there is unfortunately
no satisfactory theory to account for the radio emission generated by these
tiny stars which have radii of only 10 km.


H IGH D ENSITY P HYSICS    INSIDE   N EUTRON S T A R S
                                                                               -
The prediction that matter at the almost unimaginable density of 10 18 kg m 3
might be formed under gravitational compression inside stars was first made by
Baade and Zwicky (11) in 1934, soon after Chadwick’s discovery of the
neutron. At this density only a small fraction of the original protons and
electrons could exist and matter would consist predominantly of neutrons. It is
the denegeracy pressure arising from the neutrons, which obey Fermi
statistics, that balances further gravitational compression, although finally the
Fermi energy becomes relativistic and further gravitational collapse ensues.
Since complex nuclei are generated by nuclear fusion inside hot stars, where
there is a large thermal pressure, the degenerate neutron state can only be
found when fusion ceases and we deal with the cooling “ashes” of stellar
evolution. The stars that give rise to neutron stars are more massive than the
Sun, and it is believed that the formation of neutron stars is associated with
supernova explosions.
   Since the discovery of pulsars there has been great activity amongst solid-
state physicists around the world because neutron matter, at any temperature
less than about 109 K, behaves rather like ordinary matter close to the ab-
solute zero of temperature. The generally agreed model of a neutron star
consists of concentric shells with very different physical properties as reviewed
by Ruderman (12).


180                                Physics 1974




Fig. 5. Model of a neutron star.




   At the surface of the star it is likely that there exists a shell of iron since
56
  Fe is the most stable nucleus. The atoms would be normal if no magnetic
field were present. In astrophysics it is unwise to ignore magnetic phenomena
and gravitational collapse following a supernova explosion probably com-
presses the original stellar magnetic flux to produce surface field strengths of
10 8 T or more. In fields of this magnitude the radius of gyration of electrons
in atomic energy levels becomes smaller than the Bohr radius and the electronic
wave functions adopt a cylindrical shape. It is far harder to ionize distorted
atoms of this kind and this is of importance when considering the generation
of a magnetosphere surrounding the neutron star.
   Beneath the iron skin the increasing compression forces electrons into higher
energy states until they are entirely freed from the positive nuclei. The un-
screened nuclei then settle into a rigid lattice having a melting temperature of
          9
about 10 K. At greater depths the electron energies become relativistic and
they begin to combine with protons in the nuclei, thus adding to the neutron
population. This is the process of inverse β decay. At a sufficient depth nearly
all the electrons and protons have disappeared and the nuclei have been
converted to a sea of neutrons.
   The energy gap for neutron pairing is of the order of several MeV, cor-
responding to a superfluid transition temperature of 109-10 10 K, and since
young neutron stars cool rapidly to temperatures below 109 K, the neutron sea
is expected to behave like a quantum superfluid. The few remaining protons
will similarly pair and enter a superconducting state, while the residual elec-
trons will behave normally. The bulk motion of the neutron superfluid must
be irrotational, but an effective solid body rotation can be simulated with a


                                    A. Hewish                                 181


distribution of quantised vortex lines containing a small fraction of normal
fluid neutrons.
   At yet deeper levels the neutron-neutron interaction may result in the crea-
tion of a solid neutron lattice, although this possibility is under debate, and
finally there is the question of a material composed of stable hyperons.
   Evidence that neutron stars do indeed have a structure similar to the pre-
dicted models has been obtained from extended timing observations of pulsars
 (13). These show that the systematic increase of period, corresponding to a
steady loss of rotational energy from the spinning star, is sometimes inter-
rupted by discontinuous changes. Most pulsars are observed to be slowing
down on a typical timescale of 106-10 7 years, although the most rapid pulsars,
in the Crab and Vela supernovae, have timescales of only 103 and 10 4 years
respectively. The discontinuities often show an abrupt decrease of period, fol-
lowed by a recovery to a slightly reduced value with a characteristic relaxation
time.
   For the Crab pulsar this effect can be explained by a rigid crust-liquid core
model. Young neutron stars are likely to be spinning rapidly at birth, with
angular velocities up to 104 radian s-1, and they will therefore have a spheroidal
shape. As a star slows down it will tend to become less spheroidal and the
rigid crust will fracture at irregular intervals as the increasing strain over-
comes rigidity. When this occurs the crust will momentarily spin more rapidly,
but later the increased angular momentum will be coupled into the fluid
interior, where the bulk of the mass resides. The observed time constant for
coupling is in good agreement with the superfluid model, and would be far
smaller in the case of a normal fluid interior. It is remarkable that a crust
shrinkage of only 10 µm is sufficient to explain the period anomalies for the
Crab pulsar. When similar reasoning is applied to the Vela pulsar, for which
the anomalies are larger, it is found necessary to invoke a solid neutron lattice
core in which strains imposed when the star was young are intermittently
relaxed.


P LASMA P HYSICS   OUTSIDE NEUTRON STARS

It is strange that there appears to be more understanding of the interior of
neutron stars, than of their atmospheres wherein is generated the radiation
which makes them detectable. Ginzburg and Zheleznyakov (14) have sum-
marised the electrodynamic problems in detail. The model upon which
theorists are concentrating most attention is that of an oblique magnetic
rotator, in which the pulsar may be regarded as a dynamo, powered by the
initial store of rotational kinetic energy, and converting this into radiation
together with a flux of relativistic particles by means of the large magnetic
field. The oblique rotator model was first considered by Pacini (15) before
pulsars had been found, and it was Gold (8) who suggested that an extended
corotating magnetosphere played a vital role.
   Goldreich and Julian (16) showed that electrical forces arising from uni-
polar induction would be sufficient to drag charges from the stellar surface


182                                 Physics 1974




Fig. 6. The neutron star magnetosphere for an aligned magnetic rotator.



and then distribute them in a corotating magnetosphere. It is not yet known
whether such a distribution is stable, and the plasma differs from laboratory
plasmas in that almost complete charge separation occurs. Inertial forces must
dominate when the corotation velocity approaches c, and beyond the velocity
of light cylinder the plasma breaks away to create a stellar wind. In such
models the polar regions are believed to play a crucial role since particles can
escape along ‘open’ field lines.
   Within such an overall framework exists the ordered motion of the charges
which generate the beamed radio waves that we observe, and also those
regions which emit light and X-rays for the youngest pulsar in the Crab. The
fascinating richness of the phenomena involving polarisation, pulse shapes,
radio spectra, intensity variations, and complex secondary periodicities, must
eventually provide vital evidence to resolve our present uncertainties. There is
good reason to believe that the general outline is correct. Simple dynamics




                                                       .

Typical ages are 10 6-10 7 years although 10 3 years is obtained for the Crab
pulsar, in good agreement with the known age of the supernova.


C ONCLUSION

In outlining the physics of neutron stars, and my good fortune in stumbling
upon them, I hope I have given some idea of the interest and rewards of


                                        A. Hewish                                     183


extending physics beyond the confines of laboratories. These are good times
in which to be an astrophysicist. I am also deeply aware of my debt to all my
colleagues in the Cavendish Laboratory. Firstly to Sir Martin Ryle for his
unique flair in creating so congenial and stimulating a team in which to work.
Secondly to Jocelyn Bell for the care, diligence and persistence that led to our
discovery so early in the scintillation programme, and finally to my friends
who contributed so generously in many aspects of the work.



      R EFERENCES
 1. Hewish, A., Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), 214, 494, (1952).
 2. Hewish, A. and Wyndham, J. D., Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc., 126, 469, (1963).
 3. Clarke, M. E., Ph.D. Thesis. Cambridge (1964).
 4. Hewish, A., Scott, P. F. and Wills, D., Nature, 203, 1214, (1964).
 5. Dennison, P. A. and Hewish, A., Nature, 213, 343, (1967).
 6. Hewish, A. and Okoye, S. E., Nature, 207, 59, (1965).
 7. Hewish, A., Bell, S. J., Pilkington, J. D. H., Scott, P. F. and Collins, R. A., Nature
     217, 709, (1968).
 8. Gold, T., Nature, 218, 731, (1968).
 9. Staelin, D. H. and Reifenstein, E. C., Science, 162, 1481, (1968).
10. Comella, J. M., Craft, H. D., Lovelace, R. V. E., Sutton, J. M. and Tyler, G. L.,
     Nature, 221, 453, (1969).
11. Baade, W., and Zwicky, F., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 20, 255, (1934).
12. Ruder-man, M., Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 20, 427, (1972).
13. Pines, D., Shaham, J., and Ruder-man, M., I.Au.c Symposium No 53, (1973).
14. Ginzburg, V. L. and Zheleznyakov, V. V., Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 13.
     (1975) in press.
15. Pacini, F., Nature, 219, 145, (1968).
16. Goldreich, P. and Julian, W. H., Astrophys. J., 157, 869, (1969).
