THE ORIGIN OF ELEMENTS
Nobel Lecture, 8 December, 1978
by
ARNO A. PENZIAS
Bell Laboratories, Holmdel, N. J. USA




Throughout most of recorded history, matter was thought to be composed
of various combinations of four basic elements; earth, air, fire and water.
Modern science has replaced this list with a considerably longer one; the
known chemical elements now number well over one hundred. Most of
these, the oxygen we breathe, the iron in our blood, the uranium in our
reactors, were formed during the fiery lifetimes and explosive deaths of
stars in the heavens around us. A few of the elements were formed before
the stars even existed, during the birth of the universe itself.
   The story of how the modern understanding of the origin of the chemi-
cal elements was acquired is the subject of this review. A good place to
begin is with Lavoisier who, in 1789, published the first scientific list of the
elements. Five of the twenty or so elements in Lavoisier’s list were due to
the work of Carl Wilhelm Scheele of Köping. (He was rewarded with a
pension by the same Academy to whom the present talk is adressed, more
than a century before Alfred Nobel entrusted another task of scientific
recognition to it.) Toward the end of the last century the systematic
compilation of the elements into Mendeleev’s periodic table carried with it
the seeds of hope for a systematic understanding of the nature of the
elements and how they came to be.
   The full scientific understanding of the origin of the elements requires a
description of their build-up from their common component parts (e.g.,
protons and neutrons) under conditions known to exist, or to have existed,
in some accessible place. Thus, the quest for this understanding began
with nuclear physics. Once plausible build-up processes were identified
and the conditions they required were determined, the search for appro-
priate sites for the nuclear reactions followed. Although this search was
begun in earnest in the nineteen thirties, it was only toward the end of the
nineteen sixties that the full outlines of a satisfactory theoretical
framework emerged. In the broad outlines of the relevant scientific
thought during this period one can discern an ebb and flow between two
views. In the first, the elements were thought to have been made in the
stars of our galaxy and thrust back out into space to provide the raw
material for, among other things, new suns, planets and the rock beneath
our feet. In the second view, a hot soup of nuclear particles was supposed
to have been cooked into the existing elements before the stars were
formed. This pre-stellar state was generally associated with an early hot
condensed stage of the expanding universe.
   Historically, the first quantitative formulations of element build-up were


                                  A. A. Penzias                            445


attempted in the nineteen thirties; they were found to require conditions
then thought to be unavailable in stars. As a consequence, attention turned
in the 1940’s to consideration of a pre-stellar state as the site of element
formation. This effort was not successful in achieving its stated goal, and in
the 1950’s interest again turned to element formation in stars. By then the
existence of a wide range of stellar conditions which had been excluded in
earlier views had become accepted. Finally, the 1960’s saw a reawakened
interest in the idea of a pre-stellar state at the same time that decisive
observational support was given to the “Big Bang” universe by the disco-
very of cosmic microwave background radiation and its identification as
the relict radiation of the initial fireball.
   Given the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the process of understan-
ding was severely impeded by limitations imposed by the narrow range of
temperature and pressure then thought to be available for the process of
nuclear build-up in stars. The theory of stellar interiors based upon classi-
cal thermodynamics (Eddington, 1926) seemed able to explain the state of
the then known stars in terms of conditions not vastly different from those
in our sun. The much higher temperatures and pressures suggested by the
nuclear physics of element formation were thought to be possible only
under conditions of irreversible collapse (i.e. the theory lacked mecha-
nisms for withstanding the tremendous gravitational forces involved);
hence no material produced under those conditions could have found its
way back into the interstellar medium and ordinary stars. The arguments
and mechanisms required to depict the formation of heavy elements and
their ejection into space are subtle ones. In describing them, S. Chandra-
sekhar wrote, ". . one must have faith in drawing the consequences of the
existence of the white dwarf limit. But that faith was lacking in the thirties
and forties for reasons set out in my (to be published) article ‘Why are the
Stars as they are?.” Thus, our story of a forty-year-long journey begins with
the absence of sufficient faith.
   The nuclear physics picture of element formation in an astrophysical
 setting was the subject of von Weizsäcker’s “Über Elementumwandlungen
 im Innern der Sterne” (1937, 1938). (Interested readers can find a guide
 to earlier literature in Alpher and Herman’s 1950 review.) The central
 feature of von Weizsäcker’s work is a “build-up hypothesis” of neutrons
 and intervening β -decays; the direct build-up from protons would be
 blocked by the Coulomb repulsion of the positively charged nuclei of the
 heavier elements. Quantitative predictions that follow from this hypothesis
can be obtained from the general features of empirical abundance-stability
 data through use of thermodynamic equilibrium relations like those used
 in the study of chemical reactions.
   Consider the reversible exothermic reaction of two elements A and B
 combining to form a stable compound AB with an energy of formation
      i. e.,


446                                        Physics 1978


Using square brackets to indicate concentration, we can compute relative
abundances at thermal equilibrium from the relation




where k is Boltzmann’s constant.
    The stable isotopes of the lighter elements have approximately equal
numbers of neutrons and protons (fig. 1). The sequential addition of
neutrons to a nucleus, O say, results in heavier isotopes of the same
                          16



element, 17O and then 18O in this case, until the imbalance of neutrons and
protons is large enough to make the nucleus unstable. ( 19 O β - decays to
19
   F i n ~ 29 seconds.) A measure of the stability of an isotope is the
increment in binding energy due to the last particle added. In the case of
17
   O, for example, we have for this increment,




where M(16), M(n) and M(17) are the masses of 16 O, a neutron and 17 O ,
respectively, and c 2 is the square of the speed of light. In our example, the
mass of 17O is 17.004533 A.M.U., that of the neutron is 1.008986 and that
of 16 O is 16.00000. Substituting in eqn (3) we find the binding energy
increment to be .004453 A.M.U. or 6.7x10 -6ergs. We can get some idea of
the temperatures involved in the addition of a neutron to 16O from the use
of relation (2). Because of the exponential nature of this relation, we can

                     9
                     8




Fig. 1 The Elements, Hydrogen Through Flourine. The stable nuclei are plotted as a function of
the number of protons and neutrons they contain. Radioactive combinations are indicated by
an asterisk, an empty box indicates that the corresponding combination of protons and
neutrons doesn’t exist. (Note that both mass-5 boxes are empty.) The question mark indicates
8
    Be; it can exist under special conditions as a metastable combination of two 4 He nuclei, thus
providing the key stepping-stone in the transformation of three 4 He’s into     12
                                                                                     C.


                                   A. A. Penzias                              447


expect       and kT to be of comparable magnitude for a wide range of
relative isotopic abundances. Thus, from the approximation,



we find that 6.7x10ergs corresponds to a temperature of 5x10 10 K .
     Following earlier workers, von Weizsäcker applied the above relations to
the relative abundance of the isotopes of a given element having three
stable isotopes, ( 16O , O and O for example) in a state of equilibrium
                             17      18



established by thermal contact with a bath of neutrons at temperature T. If
[ 16 O], [17 O], [18 O] and [n] are the concentrations of the two oxygen nuclei
and the neutrons respectively, we may use the relations (2) and (3) to write




as well as




Thus the relative abundances of the three isotopes yield a pair of expres-
sions involving the neutron density and temperature which permit the
separate determination of these two quantities from the oxygen abun-
dance data alone. (The abundances of several hundred stable nuclei -fig. 2
- had been determined from terrestrial samples supplemented by stellar
spectra and meteorites.)
   Using this three-isotope method, Chandrasekhar and Henrich (1942)
obtained thermal equilibrium neutron densities and temperatures for five
elements. Not surprisingly, in view of previous work, each element re-
quired a different temperature and neutron density. While the range of
the temperature values was relatively small, between 2.9x10 9 for neon and
1 2 . 9 x 1 0 9 for silicon, the neutron densities ranged from ~ 10 3 1 c m-3 f o r
silicon to ~ 1 019 c m-3 for sulphur, some twelve orders of magnitude! The
high values of the temperatures and pressures derived as well as their lack
of element-to-element consistency shows the shortcomings of this thermal
equilibrium picture of stellar element formation.
   Another problem with this neutron build-up picture was the simulta-
neous requirement of very rapid neutron capture in the formation of
elements such as uranium and thorium, and very slow neutron capture for
the formation of others. The “slow” elements require the capture sequence
of neutrons to be slow enough to permit intervening β-decays, while others
require rapid sequential neutron capture in order to permit their forma-
tion from a series of short-lived nuclei. The elements formed by these slow
and rapid processes correspond, respectively, to the s and r peaks of fig. 2
[A concise early discussion of this problem is presented in the final chapter
of Chandrasekhar’s 1939 text.]
   Another approach to the element formation problem provided an enor-
mous contribution to understanding the nuclear physics of stars. In a


448                                    Physics 1978




                          8


                          6




Fig. 2 Relative Abundances of the Elements: Smoothed curves representing the abundances of
various groups of elements, after Burbidge et. al, 1957, who presented a total of eight
processes to fit this data (See Clayton 1968 for a more modern treatment.) Lithium, Beryl-
lium and Boron (circled) are not formed in the build-up process which goes from helium to
carbon. The small amounts of these elements found in nature are fragments from the break-
up of heavier elements.




beautiful paper entitled, “Energy Production in Stars”, Bethe (1939) con-
sidered the individual nuclear reactions of the light nuclei, from hydrogen
through oxygen. This paper established the role of the fusing of hydrogen
into helium by two processes and demonstrated their quantitative agree-
ment with observations. In the first process, protons combine to form a
deuteron which is then transformed into 4He by the further capture of
protons. In the second, carbon and nitrogen are used as catalysts, viz




(The notation and format are taken from the cited reference.)
  As to the build-up of the heavier elements, however, no stable build-up
process beyond the mass-4 nucleus had been found; a mass-4 nucleus
cannot be combined with any other nucleus to form a heavier nucleus. In
particular, no stable mass-5 nucleus exists, so the addition of a neutron or
proton to 4He doesn’t work. Bethe wrote, “The progress of nuclear physics


                                    A. A. Penzias                              449


in the past few years makes it possible to decide rather definitely which
processes can and which cannot occur in the interior of stars . . under
present conditions, no elements heavier than helium can be built up to any
appreciable extent”. In an attempt to bypass the mass-4 barrier, Bethe
considered, and correctly rejected, the direct formation of 12 C from the
simultaneous collision of three helium nuclei. He also noted that the
formation of 8Be from two helium nuclei was prevented by the fact that
this nucleus was known to be unstable, having a negative binding energy of
“between 40 and 100 keV”. This energy difference corresponds to a
t e m p e r a t u r e o f s o m e 1 0 9 K, again to be compared with the ~ 2x10 7 K
which was then thought to be the allowed stellar temperature. It was not
realized at that time that it is possible to form 8Be from 4He at a sufficiently
high 4He density and temperature and so bypass the mass-4 barrier. So it
was that recognition of the crucial role of 8 Be in the build-up of the
elements had to await the acceptance, in the early 1950’s, of a new under-
standing of the physics of stellar interiors.
    In the intervening decade, therefore, attention was diverted toward
processes which could have occurred before the formation of the stars,
namely a hot dense state associated with the birth of the universe. The
formalism associated with the birth of the universe had been laid out by
Friedman (1922), Lemaitre (1927) and Einstein and deSitter (1932). The
applicability of this formalism to the real world was established by the
beautiful simplicity of Hubble’s (1929) powerful result that the observed
velocities of the “extragalactic nebulae” [i.e. the galaxies which make up
the universe] were proportional to their distances from the observer. In its
simplest form, the most distant galaxy is moving away at the fastest rate
and the nearest at the slowest. This is exactly what one would expect if all
the galaxies had begun their flight from a common origin and, at a
common starting time, had been given their start in a trememdous explo-
sion.
    Not widely popular among respectable scientists of the time, this idea of
an expanding universe was taken up in the 1940’s in part because the
theories of the stellar origin of the elements had failed in the 1930’s. (The
expanding universe picture was generally ignored again in the 1950’s
when the wide variety of stellar phenomena became understood. It was
only in the 1960’s that a more balanced view emerged, but that comes later
in our story.) The title of Chandrasekhar and Henrich’s 1942 paper “An
Attempt to Interpret the Relative Abundances of the Elements and Their
Isotopes” reflects the tentative and unsatisfactory nature of the state of
understanding at that time. The paper begins, “It is now generally agreed
that the chemical elements cannot be synthesized under conditions n o w
believed (emphasis added) to exist in stellar interiors.” As an alternative, the
authors suggested that the expansion and cooling of the early universe
might be a possible site for the processes. In this view, each of the elements
had its abundance “frozen out” at an appropriate stage of the expansion of
the hot          109K), dense         106gr/cm 3) universe.


450                               Physics 1978


   As was shown by George Gamow (1946), however, the formation of
elements in the early universe could not have occurred through these
equilibrium processes. He accomplished this demonstration by a straight-
forward calculation of the time scales involved. (The interested general
reader can find more on this and related points in the mathematical
appendices of S. Weinberg’s (1977) delightful book “The First Three
Minutes”.)
   Consider a point mass m located on the surface of an expanding sphere
with mass density       The energy E of the mass with respect to the center of
the sphere is a fixed quantity, the sum of its kinetic and potential energies
(the latter is a negative quantity), viz




where G is the constant of gravitation,         the density, R, the radius of the
sphere, and v, the outward velocity of the point mass, are all functions of
time. Since        R3/3, the mass within the sphere, is not an increasing
function of R, the far right-hand term must become arbitrarily large for
sufficiently small values of R(t), i.e., at early times in the expansion. Under
this “early time approximation” both right-hand terms must become very
large because the difference between them is fixed. Thus we can regard
the two terms as essentially equal at early times and, upon simple rearran-
gement, obtain




Now R/v is a characteristic time scale for the expansion: it is the reciprocal
of Hubble’s constant and is referred to as the Hubble age in cosmology.
(Hubble’s “constant” is constant in the spatial sense; it varies in time.)
Putting numerical values in (6), we have




where    is expressed in gr/cm 3 . Thus, as Gamow pointed out, a neutron
density of 1030cm -3 (about 10 6gr/cm3) would exist for less than one second
in the early universe. Since the β-decays necessary to establish the appro-
priate equalities between protons and neutrons are typically measured in
minutes, it is clear that the time period needed to establish equilibrium
with neutrons at the high densities required simply was not available in the
early expanding universe.
   This demonstration set the stage for the consideration of nonequili-
brium processes. Fortunately, two timely developments for the undertak-
ing of such a study had just occurred. The first was the publication of the
values of neutron capture cross-sections in the open literature after the
end of World War II. The second was a bright graduate student in need of
a thesis topic. Lifshitz (1946) solved the problem that Gamow’s student,


                                   A. A. Penzias                            451


R. A. Alpher, had originally selected for a thesis topic, one having to do
with turbulence and galaxy formation in the early universe. As a result,
Alpher soon set to work on a new topic, the nonequilibrium formation of
the elements by neutron capture. Since not all cross-sections were available,
Alpher fitted a smooth curve through the published points, and used this
curve for his calculations. The results of Alpher’s calculation were intro-
duced to the scientific world in a brief letter whose list of authors makes it
part of the folklore of physics (Alpher, Bethe and Gamow 1948).
   At this point the trail divides. Two different paths of investigation must
be followed before they merge again into final results. We proceed to
follow one of them with the understanding that we must return here later
to follow the other.
   In presenting his thesis results Alpher initiated a series of interactions
between scientists which led to a succession of results very different from
what he might have expected. First, Enrico Fermi, present at a seminar
given by Alpher, soon raised an important objection: The straight line
interpolation of capture cross-sections leads to a serious error in the case of
the light nuclei. The neutron capture cross-section of a mass-4 particle is
known to be essentially zero, whereas Alpher’s curve was fitted to the
average cross-sections of the nearby nuclei, which are quite large. Fermi
had his student Turkevitch redo Alpher’s calculations using explicit mea-
sured values for the cross-sections. Fermi and Turkevitch’s results, never
published separately but merely sent directly to Alpher, showed what
Gamow and his co-workers knew and admitted privately, that their me-
chanism could produce nothing heavier than mass-4 from neutrons alone.
   Second, Fermi pressed his friend Martin Schwartzschild for observa-
tional evidence of the formation of the heavy elements in stars. Together
with his wife Barbara, Schwartzschild amply fulfilled this request. In one
of the classic papers of observational astronomy (Schwartzschild and
Schwartzschild 1950) they measured the faint spectra of two groups of
stars of the same stellar type, F dwarfs, stars with long uneventful lifetimes.
A separation into two groups, Population I and Population II, was done on
the basis of velocity. This distinction, due to Baade, makes use of the fact
that interstellar gas is almost totally confined to the galactic plane because
vertical (i.e., perpendicular to the plane) gas motions are quickly damped
out by cloud-to-cloud collisions. Thus, new stars born from this gas are to
be found in the plane, without appreciable vertical motion. (These stars,
which are easier to find, were found first and hence are called Population
I.) Old stars, formed before the formation of the galactic disc retain the
high velocities of the gas from which they were formed because dissipative
encounters between stars are negligibly rare. Consequently, older (Pop II)
stars can be distinguished by their higher velocities. The Schwartzschilds’
comparison of the spectra of the two populations provided a clear answer:
the younger Population I stars had the greater abundance of iron and
other metals, thus revealing the enrichment of the interstellar medium
between the times that the older and younger stars were formed.


452


   This unmistakable evidence of metal production by stars during the
lifetime of the galaxy removed the need for a pre-stellar mechanism for
element formation. Only the path around the mass-4 barrier for element
build-up in stars still had to be found. This was the third and final step.
   Martin Schwartzschild presented this challenge to a young nuclear phys-
icist, Ed Salpeter. Salpeter set to work, having a much wider range of
accepted stellar conditions to work with than did Bethe in his earlier
investigation. He soon found (Salpeter 1952) that 8Be, unstable though it
is, can be present in the hot dense cores of red giant stars in sufficient
quantities to provide a convenient stepping stone for the formation of 12C
through the addition of a helium-4 nucleus.
   With both observational support and the theoretical path around the
mass-4 barrier, the triumph of stellar element formation now seemed
complete. Fred Hoyle dismissed all pre-stellar theories of element build-up
as “requiring a state of the universe for which we have no evidence”
(Burbidge, et. al. 1957). So much for Alpher and Gamow’s theory! “If the
curve is simple the explanation must be simple” Gamow (1950) had said.
But the curve of elemental abundances is not a simple one (Fig. 2).
Burbidge et. al. presented no less than seven separate processes to account
for the data, and left room for more under an eighth heading to fill in the
few remaining gaps of their picture.
   Ironically, it was Fred Hoyle himself who found a gap that could not be
filled in the stellar picture, a gap in the best-understood process of them
all, the formation of helium from hydrogen. Although the burning of
hydrogen into helium provides the sun and the other stars with their
energy and with building blocks for the formation of the heavier elements,
Hoyle concluded that about ninety percent of the helium found in stars
must have been made before the birth of the galaxy. The basis for this
conclusion was an energy argument: the total amount of energy released
by the formation of all the observed helium is some ten times greater than
the energy radiated by the galaxies since their formation. Thus, “it is
difficult to suppose that all the helium has been produced in ordinary
stars” (Hoyle and Taylor 1964). Instead, attention was turned to helium
formation in the early stages of an expanding universe, reviving work
begun by George Gamow some sixteen years earlier. As indicated above,
our description of Gamow’s work was deferred in order to first follow the
progress of the stellar picture of element build-up. We can now follow the
second path.
   Despite the problems inherent in Alphers treatment, (see, e.g., Alpher
and Herman 1950), it provided the basis for a statement of profound
simplicity and great power (Gamow 1948). Although wrong in almost
every detail, Gamow’s new insight pointed the way for others to follow. He
noted that nuclear build-up cannot take place in the hottest, most con-
densed, state of the early universe because thermal photons at high tem-
peratures        10 1 0 K a r e e n e r g e t i c e n o u g h t o b r e a k u p b o u n d p a r t i c l e
groups. Only when the temperature has cooled to ~ 10 9K, can nuclear


                                          A. A. Penzias                                      453


reactions begin. Any build-up, however, must be completed during the few
hundred seconds before all the free neutrons decay into protons. Gamow
considered a cylinder (Fig. 3) swept out by a neutron with a 10 9K thermal
velocity during its lifetime. The cross-section of the cylinder was the cap-
ture cross-section for deuteron formation. If there was to have been
appreciable element build-up in the early universe, Gamow reasoned,
some fraction, say one half, of the initial neutrons had to have collided
with protons to form deuterons before they had time to decay. Thus, half
of Gamow’s sample cylinders should contain a proton. This statement
determines the number of protons per unit volume. From this result, the
mass of the proton, and his estimate of the fraction of matter that was in
the form of protons (roughly one half), Gamow obtained the mass density
of matter in the universe at 109K, about 10-6g m / c m 3.

                , AREA = COLLISION CROSS-SECTION




Fig. 3 Gamows Sample Cylinder; The volume swept out by a neutron in the early universe. The
length of the cylinder is the product of the neutron’s thermal velocity (at 10 9 K) and its decay
time. The cross-sectional area is the neutron-proton collision cross-section for deuteron
formation. The fraction of neutrons forming deuterons is equal to the probability that the
cylinder contains a proton.



   Gamow then noted that the mass density of radiation at 10 9K (i.e., its
energy density divided by c2) was about 10gr/cm3, as compared with only
1 0-6gr/cm 3 for matter. This makes radiation the dominant component in
the entropy of the early universe, permitting it to cool during the expan-
sion as if the matter were not present. In that case, the temperature varies
inversely with the radius of the expanding volume element (Tolman 1934,
Peebles 1971) i.e.,



Now since      the density of matter, varies inversely as the cube of the
radius, we can replace (8) with



                                          or


454                              Physics 1978


This neat relation between temperature and matter density holds as long
as radiation remains the dominant component. When the temperature
drops below ~ 3x10 K, the matter is too cool to remain ionized, and once
                      3



it becomes neutral it is essentially transparent to the radiation. The radi-
ation is then no longer coupled to the matter, it is free to expand forever in
untroubled isolation, and eqn (9) continues to apply.
   Gamow was only interested in tracing the radiation to the epoch when
the matter becomes neutral and decouples from the radiation. From that
point on, the matter has only its own thermal energy to support itself
against gravitational collapse, so it fragments and condenses to form galax-
ies. Gamow used eqn (9) to find the density of matter at 3X 10 3K and the
Jeans criterion to determine the size of the collapsing fragments. Thus he
was able to obtain a relation for the mass of galaxies containing only
fundamental constants and the single assumption that half the initial
neutrons collided to form deuterons. This was quite a trick, even for him!
   Gamow’s paper inspired his former student, Alpher and his collaborator
Robert Herman to do the calculations more rigorously (Alpher and Her-
man 1949). Most importantly they replaced the “early-time” approxima-
tion Gamow used with a more exact formulation and traced the tempera-
ture of the relict primordial radiation to the present epoch. Taking the
present matter density of the universe to be 10- 30g m / c m3, they concluded
that the present energy density of the relict radiation should correspond to
a temperature of a few degrees Kelvin. Although mention of this predic-
tion persisted in Gamow’s popular writing, it was only repeated explicitly
in a few of their subsequent scientific works. As for detection, they appear
to have considered the radiation to manifest itself primarily as an in-
creased energy density (Alpher and Herman 1949, pg. 1093). This contri-
bution to the total energy flux incident upon the earth would be masked by
cosmic rays and integrated starlight, both of which have comparable ener-
gy densities. The view that the effects of three components of approxi-
mately equal additive energies could not be separated may be found in a
letter by Gamow written in 1948 to Alpher (unpublished, and kindly
provided to me by R. A. Alpher from his files). “The space temperature of
        o
about 5 K is explained by the present radiation of stars (C-cycles). The
only thing we can tell is that the residual temperature from the original
                                           o
heat of the Universe is not higher than 5 K.” They do not seem to have
recognized that the unique spectral characteristics of the relict radiation
would set it apart from the other effects.
   The first published recognition of the relict radiation as a detectable
microwave phenomen appeared in a brief paper entitled “Mean Density of
Radiation in the Metagalaxy and Certain Problems in Relativistic Cosmol-
ogy”, by A. G. Doroshkevich and I. D. Novikov (1964a) in the spring of
 1964. Although the English translation (1964b) appeared later the same
year in the widely circulated “Soviet Physics-Doklady”, it appears to have
escaped the notice of the other workers in this field. This remarkable
paper not only points out the spectrum of the relict radiation as a black-


                                 A. A. Penzias                          455


body microwave phenomenon, but also explicity focuses upon the Bell
Laboratories twenty-foot horn reflector at Crawford Hill as the best avail-
able instrument for its detection! Having found the appropriate reference
(Ohm 1961), they misread its results and concluded that the radiation
predicted by the “Gamow Theory” was contradicted by the reported mea-
surement.
   Ohm’s paper is an engineering report on a low-noise microwave receiv-
ing system. The reported noise of this system contained a residul excess of
almost exactly three degrees ! Ohm had measured a total system noise
temperature of some 22K including the contribution of the receiver, the
antenna, the atmosphere and the sky beyond. Separate measurements of
each of the components of this noise temperature, except the sky beyond
the atmosphere, totalled - 19K. (From an analysis of his measurement
errors, Ohm concluded that both sets of measurements, the total and the
sum of individual contributions, could be consistent with an intermediate
value). The atmospheric contribution was measured by moving the anten-
na in elevation and fitting the change in system temperature to a cosecant
relation, a standard procedure which is described by Wilson (1978). To
avoid confusion with other quantities, the atmospheric contribution thus
derived was denoted T sky , the “sky temperature”. Ohm’s value of 2.3K for
this quantity was in good agreement with atmospheric attenuation theory.
The background contribution due to the relict radiation has no elevation
dependence and cannot be detected by this technique. Perhaps due to the
unfortunate name, Doroshkevitch and Novikov regarded T sky , as contain-
ing the background radiation and therefore leading to a null result. The
disappointment is reflected in Section IV of Zeldovitch’s concurrent (1965)
review.
   The year 1964 also marked a reawakened interest in the "Gamow
Theory” by Hoyle and Taylor (1964) as well as the first unambiguous
detection of the relict radiation. The rough outlines of Gamow’s initial
treatment had long since been refined by the work of others. For example,
it was pointed out by Hayashi (1950) that the assumption of an initial
neutron material was incorrect. The radiation field at T > 10 9K generates
electron- positron pairs which serve to maintain quasi-thermal equilibrium
between neutrons and protons (see also Chandrasekhar and Henrich,
 1942, who made the same point). Alpher, Follin and Herman (1953)
incorporated this process into their rigorous treatment of the problem.
Their work benefited from the availability of what was, by the standard of
those days, a powerful electronic computer which permitted them to
include the dynamic effects of expansion and cooling upon collisional and
photo-disintegrated processes. Their results, which have not been substan-
tially altered by subsequent work, are chiefly marked by (1) conversion of
some 15 %’ of the matter into helium, with the exact amount dependent
only slightly upon the density at T ≈ 1 09K and (2) production of deuterium
whose surviving abundance is sensitively dependent upon the initial tem-
perature/density relation. The same ground was covered in Hoyle and


456                              Physics 1978


Taylor’s 1964 paper, which cited Alpher, Follin and Herman’s paper and
noted the agreement with the earlier results. Neither paper made any
mention of surviving relict radiation.
   Shortly thereafter, P. J. E. Peebles treated the same subject for a diffe-
rent reason. R.H. Dicke had, with P.G. Roll and D.T. Wilkenson, set out to
measure the background brightness of the sky at microwave wavelengths.
At his suggestion, Peebles began an investigation of the cosmological
constraints that might be imposed by the results of such a measurement.
Peebles’ paper, which was submitted to the Physical Review and circulated
in preprint form in March of 1965. This paper paralleled the above light
element production picture and included Hoyle and Taylor (1964) among
its references. In addition, it explicitly delineated the surviving relict
radiation as a detectable microwave phenomenon. At about the same time,
microwave background radiation was detected at Bell Laboratories and its
extragalactic origin established. No combination of the then known
sources of radio emission could account for it. Receipt of a copy of Peebles’
preprint solved the problem raised be this unexplained phenomenon.
Eddington tells us: “Never fully trust an observational result until you have
at least one theory to explain it. “The theory and observation were then
brought together in a pair of papers (Dicke et al, 1965, Penzias and Wilson
 1965) which led to decisive support for evolutionary cosmology and
further renewal of interest in its observational consequences.
   The existence of the relict radiation established the validity of the
expanding universe picture with its cosmological production of the light
elements, deuterium, helium-3 and helium-4 during the hot early stages of
the expansion. The build-up of the heavier elements occurs at a much later
stage, after the stars have formed. In stars, the cosmologically produced
helium-4, together with additional amounts of helium produced by the
stars themselves, is converted (via beryllium-8) into carbon-12 from which
the heavier elements are then built. The stellar process described by
Burbidge et al (1957) have been supplemented and, in some cases, re-
placed by processes whose existence was established trough later work, of
which explosive nucleosynthesis is the most significant one. (See Clayton
1968 for a review.) Much of the build-up of the heavier elements goes on in
a few violent minutes during the life of massive stars in which their outer
shells are thrown outward in supernova explosions. This mechanism ac-
counts both for the formation of the heavy elements as well as for their
introduction into interstellar space. Thus, the total picture seems close to
complete but puzzling gaps remain, such as the absence of solar neutrinos
(Bahcall and Davis, 1976). One thing is clear however, observational cos-
mology is now a respectable and flourishing science.

Acknowledgment
  My first thanks must go to the members of the Academy for the great
honor they have bestowed upon me. The work which resulted in the
occasion for this talk is described in an accompanying paper by my friend


                                                                                    A. A. P e nzi as                                                                     457


a n d c oll e a g u e R o b e rt W. Wil s o n. I a m p r of o u n dl y g r at ef ul f o r hi s u nf ail-
i n g h el p t h r o u g h o ut o u r fift e e n y e a r s of p a rt n e r s hi p.
     T h e p r e p a r ati o n of t h e t al k u p o n w hi c h t hi s m a n u s c ri pt i s b a s e d o w e s
 m u c h t o m a n y p e o pl e. C o n v e r s ati o n s wit h R. A. Al p h e r, J o h n B a h c all, S.
 C h a n d r a s e k h a r a n d M a rti n S c h w a rt z s c hil d w e r e p a rti c ul a rl y h el pf ul. I a m
al s o g r at ef ul t o A. B. C r a wf o r d, R. H. Di c k e, G. B. Fi el d, R. K o m pf n e r, P.
J. E. P e e bl e s, D. S ci a m a, P. T h a d d e u s a n d S. W ei n b e r g f o r e a rli e r h el p
gi v e n p e r s o n all y a n d t h r o u g h t h ei r p u bli s h e d w o r k.




REFE RE N CES


   1.    Al p h e r, R.              A., B et h e,      H.     A., a n d        G a m o w,     G., 1 9 4 9, P h y s. R e v. 7 3. 8 0 3.
  2.     Al p h e r, R.              A. a n d       H e r m a n, R.       C., 1 9 4 9, P h y s. R e v. 7 5, 1 0 8 9
  3.    Al p h e r, R.               A. a n d       H e r m a n, R. C., 1 9 5 0, R e v.                 M o d. P h y s. 2 2. 1 5 3.
  4.    Al p h e r. R.              A., F olli n, J.          W. a n d      H e r m a n, R.          C., 1 9 5 3, P h y s. R e v. 9 2, 1 3 4 7.
  5.    B et h e,        H.         A., 1 9 3 9, P h y s.         R e v. 5 5, 4 3 4.
  6. B u r bi d g e, E.                 M., B u r bi d g e,         G. R., F o wl e r,          W.     A., a n d      H o yl e, F., 1 9 5 7, R e v.         M o d. P h y s.
        2 9, 5 4 7.
  7.    C h a n dr a s e k h ar, S., 1 9 3 9, A n I ntr o d u cti o n t o t h e St u d y                            of St ell a r St r u ct u r e, ( U ni v e r sit y of
        C hi c a g o).
  8.     C h a n d r a s e k h a r, S. a n d                 H e n ri c h, L.      R., 1 9 4 2,       A p. J. 9 5, 2 2 8.
  9. Cl a yt o n, D. D., 1 9 6 8 Pri n ci pl es of St ell ar E v ol uti o n a n d                                  N u cl e os y nt h esis ( M c G r a w- Hill).
1 0.    Di c k e, R.               H., P e e bl e s, P. J. E., R oll, P.                G. a n d        Wil ki n s o n,    D. T., 1 9 6 5,      A p. J. 1 4 2, 4 1 4.
1 1.     D o r o s h k e vi c h.          A.      G. a n d      N o vi k o v, I.      D.. 1 9 6 4 a      D o kl.     A k a d.   N a v k. S S R 1 5 4, 8 0 9.
1 2.    D o r o s h k e vi c h,           A.      G. a n d      N o vi k o v, I.       D., l 9 6 4 b S o v. P h y s- D o kl. 9. 1 1 1.
1 3.    Ei n st ei n,          A. a n d d e Sitt e r,             W., 1 9 3 2 P r o c.       N at.     A c a d. S ci. 1 8, 3 1 2.
1 4.     E d di n gt o n, A. S., 1 9 2 6, T h e I nt er n al C o nstit uti o n                        of       t h e St ars, ( C a m bri d g e U ni v er sit y Pr e s s).
1 5.    F o wl e r, R.                H., 1 9 2 6,      M. N. R. A. 8 7, 1 1 4.
1 6.    F ri e d m a n n,             A., 1 9 2 2.     Z eit s. F u r P h y si k 1 0, 3 7 7.
1 7.     G a m o w,            G., 1 9 4 6, P h y s.          R e v. 7 0, 5 7 2.
1 8.     G a m o w,            G., 1 9 4 8,        N at u r e 1 6 2, 6 8 0.
 1 9.    G a m o w,            G., 1 9 5 0, P h y si c s T o d a y 3,               N o. 8, 1 6
2 0.     H a y a s hi,             C., 1 9 5 0, P r o g. T h e o. P h y s. (J a p a n) 5, 2 2 4.
2 1.     H o yl e, F. a n d T a yl o r,                  R. J., 1 9 6 4,           N at u r e 2 0 3, 1 1 0 8.
2 2.     H u b bl e, E. P., 1 9 2 9, P r o c.                      N. A. S. 1 5, 1 6 8.
2 3.     L e m ait r e,            G., 1 9 2 7,      A n n. S o c. S ci. B r u x. A 4 7, 4 9.
2 4.     Lif s c hit z, E., 1 9 4 6, J. P h y s.                   U S S R 1 0, 1 1 6.
2 5.     O h m. E.                 A., 1 9 6 1, B ell S y st. T e c h. J. 4 0, 1 0 6 5.
2 6. P e e bl e s, P. J.                 E., 1 9 7 1, P h y si c al         C o s m ol o g y ( P ri n c et o n        U ni v e r sit y P r e s s).
2 7.     P e n ri a s,        A.      A. a n d       Wil s o n, R.        W., 1 9 6 5,       A p. J. 1 4 2, 4 1 9.
2 8.    S al p et e r, E. E., 1 9 5 2.                A p. J. 1 1 5, 3 2 6.
2 9.    S c h w a rt z c hil d, B. a n d S c h w a rt z s c hil d,                       M. 1 9 5 0,       A p. J. 2 1 2, 2 4 8.
3 0. T ol m a n, R. C., 1 9 3 4, R el ati vit y T h er m o d y n a mi cs a n d C os m ol o g y,                                   ( Cl ar e n d o n   Pr e s s,   O xf or d).
3 1. v o n W ei z s ä c k e r, C. F., 1 9 3 7, P h y si k. Z eit s. 3 8, 1 7 6.
3 2.    von         W ei z s ä c k e r,        C. F., 1 9 3 8, P h y si k. Z eit s. 3 9, 6 3 3.
3 3.     W ei n b e r g, S., T h e Fi r st T h r e e                      Mi n ut e s, ( B a si c B o o k s).
3 4.      Wil s o n,          R.      W., 1 9 7 8      N o b el     L e ct u r e
3 5.     Z el d o vi c h, 1 9 6 5,              A d v a nc es i n        A st r. a n d       A p. 3. 2 4 1.
