                                                                               65




Optical Tweezers and their
Application to Biological
Systems
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2018 by
Arthur Ashkin*
Bell Laboratories, Holmdel, NJ, USA.

it is a pleasure to present this summary of my 2018 Physics Nobel
Lecture [1] that was delivered in Stockholm, Sweden, on December 8,
2018 by my fellow Bell Labs scientist and friend René-Jean Essiambre.
This summary is presented chronologically as in the Lecture. It starts
with my fascination with light as a youngster and goes on to the invention
of the optical tweezer and its applications to biological systems, the work
that was recognized with a Nobel Prize. Along the way, I provide simple
and intuitive explanations of how the optical tweezer can be understood
to work. This document is a personal recollection of events that led me to
invent the optical tweezer. It should not be interpreted as being complete
in the historical attribution of the scientific discoveries discussed here.


CROOKES RADIOMETER: THERMAL EFFECTS
I have always been fascinated by the forces that light can exert on objects.
I started to play with a Crookes radiometer [2] in my early teenage years
and tried all kinds of experiments with it. I learned that thermal effects
can explain the motion of the Crookes radiometer.

* Arthur Ashkin's Nobel Lecture was delivered by René-Jean Essiambre.


66   THE NOBEL PRIZES




     Figure 1. Crookes radiometer: a) side view b) top view showing the direction of rotation.
     Thermal effects are responsible for the rotation of the vanes.




        Black surfaces absorb light which heats up the surface. In contrast,
     metallic surfaces reflect light with negligible heat generation. A Crookes
     radiometer, represented schematically in Fig. 1a, is a set of four vanes on a
     spindle with each vane having a black and a metallic side, everything
     being placed in a low-pressure glass bulb. They are disposed at 90-degree
     angles so as to always show the black side on the left and the metallic side
     on the right when looking at the radiometer from any side. Upon shining
     light on the radiometer, with light from the sun for instance, the vanes
     will turn in the direction where the black side moves away from the light.
     This direction of rotation originates from the heating of the black surface
     (thermal effect) by the absorption of the photons that in turn heat up the
     air around the black side of the vanes. The heated air moves around in the
     bulb resulting in a net force on the black surface that makes it move away
     from the light as represented in Fig. 1b.


     LIGHT PRESSURE
     The motion of the Crookes radiometer can be explained by thermal
     effects alone. During my teenage years I was acquainted with the experi-
     ment of Nichols and Hull [3], which demonstrated the effect of light pres-
     sure. This was accomplished with the development of high vacuum
     pumps that achieved lower pressure, therefore reducing the thermal
     effects until radiation pressure became the dominant effect. With a device
     like the Crookes radiometer, better vacuum results in the vanes rotating
     in the opposite direction as the one indicated on Fig. 1b.


                                                          Arthur Ashkin Lecture   67


HIGH-POWER MAGNETRONS
Shortly after the entry of the United States in World War II, I was drafted
and asked to help with building a high-power magnetron in the Columbia
Radiation Laboratory for radar application. I learned to make and solder
high-power magnetrons for use with radar. I built a magnetron named the
“rising-sun” magnetron because its geometry resembled the rays of the
sun at sunrise. It operated at about 10 GHz, a frequency about 50,000
times smaller than visible light. The magnetron emitted high-intensity
pulses at a frequency of 1000 cycles per seconds. If one shined it on a
metallic vane of a phone earpiece and detected a thousand cycle fre-
quency on an oscilloscope matching this frequency. I interpreted this as
possibly the effect of light pressure on the receiver plate.


ARRIVING AT BELL LABS
I joined Bell Labs in New Jersey, in 1952, tasked to work on vacuum tube
amplifiers. It was both interesting and time-consuming work. I joined
Calvin Quate’s sub-department, as it was called in those days, and was
assigned to do an experiment on cancelling noise. This was a flawed idea,
but it was not known at the time I started. Of course, it was doomed to
failure, and I ended up being blamed for lack of positive results. After one
year working fruitlessly on this topic, I was almost fired. But, fortunately,
Quate saved me. This endeavor came to an end a few months later, with
the arrival of Neville Robinson, a student of Rudolf Kompfner, who
showed that the cancellation of noise was impossible. He showed that
rather than being cancelled, the noise was transferred to other frequen-
cies. I was barely saved, and thereafter started work of my own.


THE ADVENT OF THE LASER
Shortly after the first laser was demonstrated in 1960, I began to work
with light pressure again, now with much more powerful and well-colli-
mated light sources than previously available. The experiments per-
formed in the early to mid-1960s were primarily exploring various linear
and nonlinear effects of laser light on different materials and waveguides.
This new tool that was the laser enabled a fast pace of discovery.


THE FIRST LIGHT PRESSURE EXPERIMENTS WITH A LASER
In 1966, I attended the International Quantum Electronics Conference
(IQEC) in Phoenix, AZ. At the conference, Eric Rawson and his mentor
Professor A.D. May from the University of Toronto presented a video
showing particles behaving like “runners and bouncers” in the internal


68   THE NOBEL PRIZES




     Figure 2. “Runners and Bouncers” in the internal beam of a laser cavity as observed by
     Rawson and May.


     beam of a laser cavity [4], as depicted in Fig. 2. This curious behavior
     piqued my curiosity. One among various other possible explanations
     given for this phenomenon was light pressure. I figured out from a back-
     of-the-envelope calculation that light pressure could not be responsible
     for this behavior. Not long after the talk, all persons involved with the
     question agreed that the heating of the particles through absorption of
     light was responsible for the observed motion. The main impact of this
     experiment on me, however, was to reignite my desire to explore how
     light pressure from lasers could be observed and used to move small par-
     ticles.


     LIGHT PRESSURE ON A MIRROR AND ON A TRANSPARENT SPHERE
     Let’s consider the effect of light pressure on two different types of objects
     that do not absorb light: a highly reflective mirror and a highly transpar-
     ent sphere. The mirror and the transparent sphere are assumed to be tiny
     (micrometer sized) and the effects of any other forces other than light
     pressure are considered negligible. First, what happens when a particle of
     light, a photon, hits a perfectly reflecting mirror at normal incidence as
     represented schematically in Fig. 3a? Of course, the photon is reflected,
     and its momentum is reversed. The mirror experiences a slight recoil,
     opposite to the change of momentum of the photon, so that the overall
     momentum is conserved. Now, let’s consider a transparent object such as
     a small sphere made of glass or polystyrene as depicted in Fig. 3b. What
     follows is the core principle on which the operation of optical traps and
     optical tweezers is based. When a photon is incident on the sphere on its
     outer side, it generally goes through the sphere and is deflected towards
     the center of the sphere. This change of direction of the photon corre-


                                                                     Arthur Ashkin Lecture     69




Figure 3. Two scenarios that show the impact of light pressure: a) a photon incident on an
ideal reflective mirror; b) photons incident on a transparent sphere. When the mirror or the
sphere are small (micrometers in size) and many photons are incident, the radiation pressure
forces exerted on these objects can exceed gravity by several orders of magnitude.



sponds to a change of momentum. From conservation of momentum, the
transparent sphere reacts and acquires a motion. Thus, a photon hitting
the upper part of a sphere exits the sphere in the downward direction as
shown in Fig. 3b. This change of direction of the photon induces a change
of momentum that results in a force that makes the sphere move both
forward and upward. On the other hand, when a photon hits the lower
part of the sphere, the photon is deflected in the upward direction. The
sphere then experiences a force that has a forward and a downward com-
ponent. When two photons symmetrically located on each side of the
sphere hit it simultaneously, the sphere moves only in the forward direc-
tion as the downward and upward components cancel. I gave the label
“scattering force” to the component of the light pressure force on a trans-
parent sphere as it arises from the scattering of light. As a consequence,
the small sphere moves in the direction of the beam. An estimate of the
scattering force exerted by a one-watt laser on a glass sphere of one
micrometer in diameter gives a force that is six orders of magnitude larger
than gravity. This is a tremendous force.


70   THE NOBEL PRIZES



                                             Figure 4. Forces exerted on a transparent
                                             sphere located off-axis in a laser beam.
                                             The force Fa resulting from photons
                                             hitting the upper part of the sphere is
                                             larger than the force Fb coming from the
                                             photons arriving on the lower part of the
                                             sphere due to a larger number of photons
                                             incident on the upper part of the sphere
                                             (higher laser intensity).




     MOTION OF A SPHERE WITHIN A LASER BEAM
     A laser beam is not uniform in the transverse direction as it follows the
     distribution of the spatial modes of the cavity. Let’s consider what the net
     effect of light pressure is on a transparent sphere located off-center
     within a laser beam as depicted in Fig. 4. A typical laser beam has its high-
     est intensity near its center, with the intensity decreasing gradually with
     the distance from the center. We refer to this difference in light intensity
     as light gradient, with a positive gradient being defined as the direction
     from low to high light intensity. In the case of the transparent sphere
     located off-axis as in Fig. 4, there is more light intensity hitting the upper
     part of the sphere (path a) closer to the beam center than the lower part
     (path b) further away from the beam center because it is closest to the
     region of the beam that has the highest intensity. Because there are more
     photons near the center of the beam, the net effect of the gradient radia-
     tion pressure is to push the sphere towards the center of the beam. I refer
     to this light pressure force as “gradient force” as the sphere is pulled
     towards the region having the highest gradient of intensity. As a result of
     light pressure, the sphere in Fig. 4 will move forward due to the scattering
     force and, at the same time, will move upward toward the center of the
     beam due to the gradient force. It will then stop when it hits the vertical
     microscope slide in Fig. 4 and be trapped at the center of the beam. It is
     trapped from the left by the laser beam and from the right by the micro-
     scope slide and can be referred to as an opto-mechanical trap.


     TWO-BEAM OPTICAL TRAP IN LABORATORY NOTEBOOK
     In 1969, I thought that placing a particle between two laser beams would
     create the first all-optical trap due to light pressure. Figure 5 shows two
     parts of an entry to my notebook. Figure 5a shows the schematic of the
     two-beam all-optical trap. In this figure, it uses a donut-shaped mode to
     trap a metallized sphere. Transparent spheres are discussed later in this


                                                                Arthur Ashkin Lecture    71



                                                            Figure 5. Two excerpts of
                                                            an entry in my laboratory
                                                            notebook at Bell Labs
                                                            on September 8, 1969.
                                                            It presents the idea of a
                                                            two-beam all-optical trap.
                                                            From Bell Labs archives.




entry. Figure 5b also shows the two witnesses of this entry, Erich P. Ippen,
who became Professor at MIT and Peter A. Wolfe, who was my boss at
the time. This led to the first paper on all-optical trapping in 1970 [5].


OPTICAL LEVITATION
In the two-beam trapping experiment, each laser provides the opposing
force to trap the sphere. By using a single laser oriented upwards, one can
compensate for gravity. As a result, the sphere is levitated in the air.
Because light pressure can produce forces much larger than gravity, only
low powers are necessary to achieve optical levitation. Figure 6 shows
pictorially how the scattering force of a slightly diverging laser compen-
sates for the gravitational force on the sphere. By
changing the power of the laser one can change
the height of the sphere.
   The light pressure from the laser beam ori-
ented upward can be used to levitate particles.
Consider a glass ball resting on a microscope
slide. If a low power laser beam goes through the
ball from below, the ball experiences an upward


Figure 6. Transparent sphere levitating above a mi-
croscope slide as a result of light pressure from a laser
pointing upwards.


72   THE NOBEL PRIZES


     force but does not move. As the power is increased above a certain
     threshold the scattering force exceeds gravity (neglecting van der Waals
     forces), and the ball will start to levitate. The final height reached depends
     on the laser power and its divergence.


     OPTICAL TWEEZERS
     Finally, in 1983, I discovered that a transparent sphere could be trapped
     by a single highly focused laser beam. I named this single-beam trap
     “optical tweezers”. It is generated by using a large numerical aperture
     microscope objective. Such an objective produces a strong gradient of
     intensity along the direction of the laser beam near the laser focus as
     depicted in Fig. 7. This axial gradient generates a light pressure force in
     the backward direction relative to the beam and of a magnitude that can
     exceed the forward scattering force. At a certain distance downstream but
     close to the beam focus center, both the gradient and scattering light
     pressure forces are equal. This is the equilibrium point where a sphere is
     trapped. This invention of the optical tweezers is cited in the 2018 Nobel
     Prize for Physics.




     Figure 7. The layout of an optical tweezer (above) along with a magnification near the
     beam focus. A transparent sphere settles on the beam axis just beyond the beam focus
     where the gradient and scattering forces are equal.


                                                                   Arthur Ashkin Lecture   73


OPTICAL MANIPULATION OF MICROORGANISMS
The understanding and development of optical tweezers were based on
transparent spheres but were not limited to this ideal shape. They can
also apply to other objects that can greatly depart from sphericity. It sim-
ply requires that the sum of the rays traversing a portion of an object is
such that a net gradient force becomes comparable in magnitude to the
scattering force. When this happens, the object can be “grabbed” by the
optical tweezers and freely manipulated. The only requirement is that the
object lets some light through. Note that most “small living things” are
highly transparent at certain wavelengths where high-power lasers exist.
   One of the first microorganisms manipulated by optical tweezers was
the protozoan, Paramecium: a large, single-celled organism measuring
between 50 to 330 μm in length. The internal components are called
organelles and they range in size from a few μm to a few tens of μm. A
picture of Paramecium with its organelles is shown in Fig. 8. The dimen-
sions of these organelles are on the same order as the beam waist of a
1-micrometer laser, and therefore a natural subject to trap optically. Soon
after we put together the set-up, we were able to manipulate its orga-
nelles. The circle, indicated by the arrow in Fig. 8, shows the organelle
that could be moved around inside Paramecium or trapped in space. In
the latter case, the trapped organelle eventually escapes the optical
tweezer trap when it hits the walls of the moving cell.
   In a period of over a year, we went on to use optical tweezers to manip-




Figure 8. Picture of a paramecium where one can see the internal organelles. The arrow
points to the specific organelle that we manipulated using an optical tweezer (see Nobel
Lecture [1] for the video).


74   THE NOBEL PRIZES


     ulate “all sorts of living things”. This included tobacco mosaic viruses
     (TMVs) that can be trapped easily by its ends. We also trapped sperm
     cells, manipulated chlorophyll in onion cells, and trapped various other
     microorganisms including bacteria.


     OPTICAL TWEEZERS TO MEASURE THE MOTION OF KINESIN
     Motor proteins are enzymes that move objects inside living cells. Optical
     tweezers are particularly well suited to measure the displacement of indi-
     vidual motor proteins, revealing their dynamics and properties.
        Figure 9a shows a single motor protein, called kinesin, attached to a
     tiny plastic bead, about half a micrometer in diameter [6]. The bead is
     first captured by an optical trap and then positioned directly over a
     microtubule. The kinesin molecule binds to the microtubule and begins to
     walk out of the trap, carrying the bead with it. Its motion is fueled by mol-
     ecules of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in the solution. The displacement
     of the bead is measured using a position-sensitive detector that monitors
     tiny deflections of the laser beam produced by the bead moving inside the
     trap. Figure 9b shows three different records of displacement, all showing
     that kinesin takes discrete steps as it moves along the microtubule. Each
     step measures just 8 nm.
        Steven Block is one of the pioneers who studied the properties of indi-
     vidual biomolecules using optical tweezers, and his lab was the first to
     measure directly the steps taken by kinesin motors. He started his
     research with optical traps within days of the publication of our study in
     Nature, which reported that living bacteria, such as E. coli, could be




     Figure 9. a) A schematic representation of the transport of a transparent bead by a
     kinesin molecule walking on a microtubule; b) three measurements of the position
     of the bead with time showing that the motion occurs by discrete steps of 8 nm. With
     permission from Steven Block.


                                                         Arthur Ashkin Lecture   75


trapped noninvasively by optical tweezers. Block first worked with his
mentor, Howard Berg (at Harvard), to measure the nanomechanical prop-
erties of individual bacterial flagella, which propel swimming bacteria. He
later built a series of sensitive optical trapping instruments that allowed
him to study individual motor proteins, such as kinesin and myosin,
nucleic acid enzymes, such as RNA polymerase, exonuclease, and heli-
case, and folded RNA molecules, like hairpins and riboswitches.


MEASUREMENTS OF GENE TRANSCRIPTION
– DUAL OPTICAL TWEEZERS
Gene transcription by a single molecule of ribonucleic acid (RNA) poly-
merase (an enzyme) can be followed as it moves along a template of deox-
yribonucleic acid (DNA), synthesizing a corresponding RNA [7]. In a
technique represented in Fig. 10, one end of the DNA template is attached
to one bead, while a single RNA polymerase enzyme is attached to the
second bead. This forms a bead – DNA – bead chain, also called a sin-
gle-molecule “dumbbell” assay. Each bead is trapped by a separate optical
trap, with one trap being stronger than the other. In this configuration,
the assay can be used to measure both the force and the displacement
that the polymerase enzyme experiences. As the enzyme proceeds along
the DNA template, transcribing the corresponding RNA, the distance
between the two beads changes. The video shown in the Nobel Lecture
[1] displays how the separation between the beads, and therefore the
location of the RNA polymerase, changes over time. High-resolution
records of the relative motion of the beads reveal interesting RNA poly-
merase behavior, including transcriptional pausing, stepping, backtrack-
ing, and termination.




                                                 Figure 10. Two optical
                                                 tweezers hold transparent
                                                 spheres with one attached
                                                 to a DNA template and the
                                                 second attached to an RNA
                                                 polymerase (RNAP) enzyme,
                                                 actively transcribing RNA.
                                                 With permission from Steven
                                                 Block.


76   THE NOBEL PRIZES


     MEASUREMENT OF BASE-PAIR STEPPING BY RNA POLYMERASE
     Figure 11 shows a measurement of the extension between the two beads
     of the single-molecule dumbbell assay as a function of time [7]. Note the
     transcriptional pauses, which occur reproducibly, at specific locations in
     the DNA template. This is an extremely sensitive apparatus that allows
     very precise measurements of displacement. At the large magnification
     shown in Fig. 11, we notice that the distance between the beads always
     changes in discrete increments of 3.4 Ångströms, which corresponds
     exactly to the distance between successive base pairs of the DNA dou-
     ble-helix. This was the highest-resolution measurement ever made
     directly on a single enzyme at that time. Optical tweezers, in combination
     with atomic force microscopy, is now being used to study these and other
     DNA-dependent processes, such as the work of Thomas Perkins at JILA/
     University of Colorado.




     Figure 11. Measurements of the extension between the spheres as a result of the
     transcription of DNA by the RNA polymerase. A step size of 3.4 Ångströms was
     measured, which corresponds to the distance between the adjacent base pairs in
     the DNA double helix. With permission from Steven Block.


                                                        Arthur Ashkin Lecture   77


OTHER BIOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS OF OPTICAL TWEEZERS
There are many other applications of optical tweezers in biology such as
1) Measuring the properties of biopolymers produced in living organisms
   such as DNA and RNA
2) Measuring motion and forces of molecular motors, linear and rotary,
   that are agents of movement in living organisms
3) Studying the folding of proteins and structured nucleic acids
4) Studying the binding and assembly of biomolecular components
5) Micro-manipulation of small objects in general, including cells and
   organelles
6) … and probably many other applications yet to come.
There are now several companies commercializing optical tweezers for
   diverse applications.


CONCLUSIONS
Since the invention of the optical tweezer in 1983, the technique has
proven to be applicable to a wide range of particle sizes, from small num-
bers of atoms up to entire living cells. A key advantage has been the for-
midable power with which optical tweezers are able to manipulate and
measure the motion of tiny objects. This has proven to be of particular
value in studying the behavior of biomolecules. However, much work
remains to be done in this area. Many of the nanomechanical properties
of even the most essential proteins and nucleic acids remain unknown,
and further investigation is needed to elucidate important processes
involving these biomolecules. Advanced physical techniques, including
optical tweezers, scanned-force microscopy, and the like, offer greatly
improved capabilities to understand life’s fundamental mechanisms.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to acknowledge the contributions of my dear wife, Aline, my
long-time research partner Joseph Dziedzic with whom many of the opti-
cal trapping experiments were performed, a close colleague, John Bjork-
holm, and many other collaborators. I owe special thanks to René-Jean
Essiambre for helping prepare and delivering the Nobel Lecture and for
contributions to this summary. I am also indebted to Steven Block for
graciously sharing materials, providing comments, and for a careful read-
ing of the manuscript.


78   THE NOBEL PRIZES


     BOOK
     I wrote a comprehensive book on optical trapping [8] with the help of my
     wife, Aline. It contains a description of the discovery and evolution of
     optical trapping from its inception until 2005. It also includes reprints of
     key articles on optical trapping. Of course, work continues as new discov-
     eries are made. One of the motivating factors for writing the book were
     assertions made by certain researchers to the effect that magneto-optical
     traps (MOTs) were “much more important” than optical tweezers for
     trapping. I did not accede to this school of thought, and therefore decided
     to write a book demonstrating the power of using radiation pressure to
     trap tiny objects.




     references
     1)   Arthur Ashkin Nobel Lecture entitled “Optical Tweezers and their Applica-
          tion to Biological Systems”, https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2018/
          ashkin/lecture. Delivered in Stockholm, Sweden on December 8, 2018.
     2)   W. Crookes, “On Attraction and Repulsion Resulting from Radiation”. Phil.
          Trans. Roy. Soc. London, Vol. 164, pp. 501–527 (1874).
     3)   E. F. Nichols and G. F. Hull, “A preliminary communication on the pressure of
          heat and light radiation,” Phys Rev. Series I, pp. 307–320 (1901). Also demon-
          strated by P. Lebedev, ‘‘Untersuchungen über die Druckkräfte des Lichtes,”
          Ann. Phys. (Leipzig), Vol. 6, pp. 433–458 (1901).
     4)   E. G. Rawson, A. H. Hara and A. D. May, “Orientation Stability and Propulsion
          of Dust Particles in a Laser Cavity,” International Quantum Electronics Con-
          ference (IQEC), Phoenix, AZ, Paper 8C-3 (1966); E. G. Rawson and A. D. May,
          Propulsion and angular stabilization of dust particles in a laser cavity, App.
          Phys. Lett., Vol. 8, pp. 93–95 (1966).
     5)   A. Ashkin, “Acceleration and trapping of particles by radiation pressure”,
          Phys. Rev. Lett., Vol. 24, No 4, pp. 156–159 (1970).
     6)   K. Svoboda, C. F. Schmidt, B. J. Schnapp, and S. M. Block, “Direct observation
          of kinesin stepping by optical trapping interferometry,” Nature, Vol. 365, pp.
          721–727 (1993).
     7)   E. A. Abbondanzieri, W. J. Greenleaf, J. W. Shaevitz, R. Landick and Steven M.
          Block, “Direct observation of base-pair stepping by RNA polymerase,” Nature,
          Vol. 438, pp. 460–465 (2005).
     8)   A. Ashkin, “Optical Trapping and Manipulation of Neutral Particles using
          Lasers: A Reprint with Commentaries”, edited by World Scientific Press
          (2006).
