SPECTROSCOPY IN A NEW LIGHT
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1981

by
ARTHUR L. SCHAWLOW
Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA




INTRODUCTION

Scientific spectroscopy really began in Uppsala, Sweden, where Anders Ångström
in 1853 showed that some of the lines in the spectrum of an electric spark
                                                                            1
 come from the metal electrodes and others from the gas between them. Even
 earlier, Joseph Fraunhofer had charted the dark lines in the spectrum of the
                                                2
sun, and had measured their wavelengths. But it was Ångström who first
identified some of these lines as corresponding to bright lines emitted by
 particular substances in the spark. Most importantly, he showed the red line of
hydrogen, now known as             In subsequent years, Ångström found several
more visible lines from hydrogen, and measured their wavelengths accurately.
 When W. Huggins3 and H. W. Vogel4 succeeded in photographing the spectra
 of stars in 1880, they found that these visible lines were part of a longer series
 extending into the ultraviolet. J. J. B almer in 1885 was able to reproduce the
                                              5



 wavelengths of these lines by a formula, which we might write as

                                   1


Balmer obtained the values of the constants from Angström’s measurements.
  Five years later Johannes Rydberg6, without knowing of Balmer’s work,
developed a more general formula for the atomic spectra of alkali metals such
as sodium.
                           1
                               =       =


Rydberg’s formula includes Balmer’s as a special case where d = 0. The con-
stant R is now universally known as the Rydberg constant. We know now that
it measures the strength of the binding between electrons and nuclei in atoms.
   It is well known that the Balmer equation for the hydrogen spectrum helped
Niels Bohr to introduce a quantum theory of atoms. In the 1920s atomic and
molecular spectroscopy was the principal experimental tool leading to the
discoveries of the laws of quantum mechanics, from which comes most of our
understanding of modern physics and chemistry.
   In the 1940s when I was a graduate student at the University of Toronto,


nuclear physics seemed to be the most active branch of the subject but we had
no accelerator. Therefore, I worked with two other students, Frederick M.
Kelly and William M. Gray, under the direction of Professor M. F. Crawford
to use high-resolution optical spectroscopy to measure nuclear properties from
their effects on the spectra of atoms. The shifts and splittings of spectral lines
from the interactions between electrons and nuclei were so small that they are
known as hyperfine structures. To resolve them, we needed to build high
resolution spectroscopic equipment. We also had to reduce the widths of the
spectral lines from our light source, because broad lines cause overlapping that
could completely hide much of the detail that we were seeking. When the gas
density is so low that collisions could be neglected, the principal source of the
line widths is the Doppler-broadening from the thermal motions of the atoms.
Atoms moving toward the observer emit light that is shifted upward in frequen-
cy, while atoms moving away emit light of lower frequency than atoms at rest.
Since there is a distribution of velocities, the line is broadened, with a Doppler
width given by




where v is the line frequency, k is Boltzmann's constant,           is Avogadro's
number, T is the absolute temperature, and M is the molecular weight.
   This Doppler width, as a fraction of the line frequency is of the order of
where is the atomic velocity and c is the velocity of light, or typically about
1 0-5. We were able to reduce it by a factor of ten or so, by using a roughly
collimated beam of atoms, excited by an electron beam, as had been done
earlier by Meissner and Luft7 and by Minkowski and Bruck8, and by observ-
ing the emitted light from a direction perpendicular to the atomic beam. The
hyperfine structures we sought could be resolved, but four hours exposure time
on our photographic plates was required. It seemed that there really ought to
be an easier method that would give still sharper spectral lines, and indeed a
large part of our work in laser spectroscopy has been devoted to finding such
methods.


LASER SPECTROSCOPY

By the time that Charles Townes and I were working to see if it was possible to
make a laser’, in 1957 and 1958, both of us had experience in microwave
spectroscopy. Thus, it was a familiar idea to us that spectra could be observed
without a spectrograph, by tuning a narrowband source across the spectrum.
At some wavelengths the light would be absorbed, at others it would be
transmitted. This was one of the few applications we could then foresee for
lasers. But each of the early lasers gave its own characteristic wavelength,
depending on the material used. They could not be tuned very far, just across
the width of the laser line. More tuning could be obtained sometimes by
applying an external magnetic field, or by changing the temperature of a solid
laser material. For instance, a ruby laser emits at 6943 Angstrom units at room


38                                       Physics 1981


temperatures and 6934 Angstrom units at liquid nitrogen temperature of 77K.
William Tiffany, Warren Moos and I used a temperature-tuned ruby laser to
map out a small portion of the absorption spectrum of gaseous bromine and see
how changing the laser wavelength affected the chemical reactivity of the
bromine. 10 We studied bromine because it had a rich spectrum with many
absorption lines within the range of the available laser.
   Others studied the spectra of the atoms used in a gas laser, particularly neon,
and interesting phenomena were discovered. To understand them, we must
note that the output wavelength of a laser is determined only roughly (within
the Doppler line width) by the amplifying medium, and more precisely by the
tuning of the laser resonator. By changing the spacing between the end mirrors,
the laser can be tuned over the frequency range for which amplification is
enough to overcome the losses. One might expect that in the center of the
atomic line, where the gain is largest, the laser output will be greatest. But
Willis E. Lamb, Jr. predicted, from a detailed theoretical analysis of laser
principles, that there would be a dip in power output at the center of the line.”
It would occur because light beams travel in both directions inside the laser
resonator. At the center of the line both beams stimulate the same excited
atoms, those with zero velocity, as indicated in Figure 1. At any other tuning,
the light waves interact with those atoms whose velocity provides just the




Fig. 1. Moving molecules interact with an approaching lower frequency wave Doppler-shifted
upward in frequency, or a following higher-frequency wave shifted downward.


                                   A. L. Schawlow                               39


Doppler shift needed to bring the light into resonance with them. Thus there
are two groups of atoms, with the same speed but opposite directions, which
can be stimulated to provide the laser output. This “Lamb dip” at the center of
the laser line was very soon observed by Bennett, Macfarlane and Lamb. 12 It
was used for spectroscopy by Szoke and Javant13, who also showed that the
narrow resonance at the dip, free from Doppler-broadening, is sensitive to
broadening by collision unless the gas pressure is quite low.
   Paul Lee and M. L. Skolnick 14 also showed that if an absorbing gas is
present inside the laser resonator, an “inverse Lamb dip” can occur, in which
the laser output shows a peak at the center of the absorption line where the
absorption of the molecules is saturated by the beams from both directions.
The narrow, Doppler-free, optical resonances revealed by the Lamb dip and its
inverse have been used for stabilizing the wavelength of lasers.
   Thus by the middle of the 1960s it could be seen that, for spectroscopy, laser
light possesses several advantages in addition to monochromaticity. Its intensi-
ty makes it possible to at least partially saturate absorption or stimulated
emission transitions, and so to burn a narrow absorption or emission hole in a
Doppler-broadened line. The directionality permits us to observe the combined
effects of oppositely directed beams. Thus we could recognize the absorption
from just those atoms or molecules which have zero velocity component along a
chosen direction, and observe spectral details without Doppler-broadening.
But at that time, we could only do so inside the resonator of some laser, and we
could only work at those wavelengths where there happened to be laser lines.
Later in the decade, Theodor W. Hänsch and Peter Toschek prepared the way
for the subsequent advances by using the beam from a second laser on a
cascade transition to probe the distribution of molecules as it was affected by
saturation inside a laser. l5


SATURATION SPECTROSCOPY

Laser spectroscopy became much more widely useful when, in 1970, Theodor
W . H ä n s c h ,1 6 . 1 7 and Christian Bordé independently introduced a method
                                              18



which uses these properties of laser light to give Doppler-free spectra of gases
external to the laser. As shown in Figure 2, the light from the laser is divided by
a partial mirror into two beams which pass through the sample in nearly
opposite directions. The stronger “pump” beam is chopped at an audio fre-
quency. When it is on, it is strong enough to partially saturate the absorption of
the molecules in the region through which it passes. The probe beam then is
less attenuated by its passage through the gas, and a stronger signal reaches the
detector. When the chopper obstructs the pump beam, the gas absorption
returns, and less of the probe’s light reaches the detector. Thus the probe beam
is modulated as the pump is alternately turned on and off by the chopper.
However, this modulation occurs only when the two beams interact with the
same molecules, and that happens only when the laser is tuned to interact with
molecules at rest, or at least with zero velocity component along the direction of
the beams. Any molecule moving along the beams sees one wave as shifted up


40                                             Physics 1981



           SATURATION SPECTROMETER

                                                                         LOCK- IN
                                                                         AMPLIFIER




Fig. 2.   Apparatus for Doppler-free spectroscopy by saturated absorption in an external cell.




in frequency and the other shifted down, and so a moving molecule cannot be
simultaneously in resonance with both beams.
   Hänsch and Marc Levenson applied this method first using a single-mode
krypton ion laser which could be tuned over a range of about a twentieth of a
reciprocal centimeter, that is, 1500 Megahertz, around the wavelengths of a few
visible lines. This tuning range, although still quite limited, was enough to
explore the details of several of the many lines in the dense visible absorption
spectrum of the iodine molecule, I2. For example, Figure 3 shows the hyperfine
structure of a single line in that spectrum, produced by the interaction between
the molecular axial field gradient and the quadrupole moments of the two
iodine nuclei. Although other workers subsequently attained considerably bet-
ter resolution by more carefully stabilizing the laser wavelength, the power of
the method was already a spectacular advance over what could be done before.
Thus, if Figure 3 is projected on a screen two meters wide, on the same scale the
visible portion of the spectrum would have a width of more than 500 kilo-
meters! Moreover, the individual lines in the pattern, although still limited by
pressure broadening and laser frequency jitter, had a width of about 6 MHz, or
about one part in 108. The hyperfine structures revealed, which had up to then


                                                                               41




always been obscured by the Doppler-broadening of 600 MHz even with the
best spectrographs, can be interpreted as in microwave spectroscopy to provide
                                                                  19
information about the distribution of electrons in the molecule.
   Narrow as these lines were, they were still broadened by intermolecular
collisions at the operating pressure of about one torr. It was easy to reduce the
vapor density by cooling the iodine cell, but then the absorption of the probe
beam would be negligible whether the pump beam was on or not. However, C.
Freed and Ali Javan had shown, in some infrared spectroscopic studies, that
                      20



when absorption is saturated, any fluorescence that follows from the absorption
also shows a saturation. That is, the fluorescence intensity is not linearly
proportional to the laser power, but levels off when the laser intensity is enough
to deplete the number of molecules contributing to it. In our case the Javan-
Freed method was not immediately applicable because, if the two oppositely
directed beams were to work together to saturate one of the hyperfine-structure
lines, it would cause only a very small change in the unresolved fluorescence in
all of the components. Sorem and I, therefore, introduced a method of inter-
 modulated fluorescence. We chopped both of the counterpropagating beams
                           21



 at different audio frequencies, by using two rings with different numbers of
 holes on the chopping wheel. Our fluorescence detector was tuned to respond
 to modulation at the sum of the two chopping frequencies, which arose when
 the stationary molecules were simultaneously excited by the two laser beams.
 Thus we obtained a good signal, free from Doppler-broadening, even at pres-
 sures as low as one millitorr or a thousand times less than we had been able to
use with the saturated absorption method.


42                                  Physics 1981


   This is still far from the sensitivity that could ultimately be attained. When
continuous wave, broadly tunable lasers became available, William M. Fair-
bank, Jr. and Theodor W. Hänsch tuned the laser to the orange-yellow wave-
length of the sodium resonance lines. With a sodium cell designed to avoid
stray light from the walls, we were able to measure the intensity of the light
scattered from the sodium atoms, down to as few as a hundred atoms per cubic
centimeter. At that density, attained when the cell was cooled to -30° C,
             22



there was on the average only one or two atoms at a time in the beam. With this
method, we were able to measure the vapor density of sodium metal with a
million times greater sensitivity than could previously be obtained. It was
evident that laser methods could be much more sensitive than other tech-
niques, such as radioactive methods, for detecting small amounts of suitable
substances. A single atom can scatter very many light quanta without being
destroyed, and so it should be possible to observe and study a single atom or
molecule of a substance. Indeed, in favorable cases this sensitivity can already
be achieved, by a method that uses resonant laser excitation followed by
ionization. 23The principal difficulty in making such methods broadly applica-
ble is the lack of suitable lasers at some of the wavelengths needed, especially in
the ultraviolet regions.


BROADLY TUNABLE LASERS

During the 1960s there was a rapid growth in discoveries of new laser materi-
als and ways to excite them. Solids, liquids, and gases were made to produce
laser action under optical excitation, as well as electrical discharges in gases
and semiconductors. But each of them operated at its own characteristic
wavelength, determined by the properties of the material, and there was no
way to obtain an arbitrary wavelength even in the same spectral region. We did
not at first expect to be able to produce laser operation over a continuous band
of wavelengths, because we knew that the available optical amplification was
inversely proportional to the width of the lasing line or band. Nevertheless,
Peter Sorokin and J. R. Lankard 24 and, independently, Fritz Schäfer25 were
able to use intense flashlamps to excite laser action in organic dyes, whose
emission bands could be as wide as a hundred Angstrom units or more.
   A further advance came when it was realized that the high light intensity to
pump broadband laser materials could be best obtained from another laser. I
must admit that at first I wondered why anyone would want to compound the
inefficiencies by using one laser to pump another. But when you need concen-
trated light for pumping, a suitable laser is a good way to get it. Thus J. A.
Myer, C. L. Johnson, E. Kierstead, R. D. Sharma, and I. Itzkan 26 used a
pulsed ultraviolet nitrogen laser to pump a tunable dye laser. As shown in
Figure 4, the dye laser can consist of just a cell containing a dye in solution, an
output mirror and a diffraction grating. The grating replaces the second mirror
of the ordinary laser structure, and acts as a good mirror for one wavelength
that changes as the grating is rotated. By now, dyes are available to give laser
action at all wavelengths in the visible, extending into the near ultraviolet and


                                             A. I,. Schawlow




Fig. 4. Photograph of a simple pulsed dye laser, pumped by an ultraviolet beam from a nitrogen
laser, and tuned by a diffraction grating.




infrared. When pumped by a nitrogen laser, the dye laser typically gives pulses
of a few nanoseconds duration. The amplification is very high, so that the end
mirror and the diffraction grating or other tuning element do not need to have
very high reflectivity.
   But such a simple dye laser of this kind typically gives an output too widely
spread in wavelength to be useful for high resolution spectroscopy. Hänsch was
able to obtain narrow line output by adding a telescope between the dye cell
and grating. Then the light at the grating was spread over more of the rulings,
and was better collimated, so that the sharpness of its tuning was improved. To
get output with sub-Doppler narrowness limited only by the length of the light
pulse, or about 300 Megahertz, he placed a tilted etalon in front of the grating
(Figure 5). Even more monochromatic output, with a corresponding increase
             27



in pulse length could be obtained by filtering the output through a passive
resonator.
   Continuous-wave dye laser operation was obtained in 1970 by Peterson,
Tuccio, and Snavely,28 who used an argon ion laser to excite it. The pumping
laser and dye laser beams were collinear, as had been used for C.W. ruby lasers
by Milton Birnbaum, 29 rather than in the transverse arrangement used in
most earlier lasers. Refining the output of continuous-wave lasers presented
difficulties because the available amplification was small, so that any tuning


44                                           Physics 1981


                                                                           ECHELLE
                                                                           GRATING



                                                                           FABRY PEROT
                                                                           ETALON




 NITROGEN
 LASER                                                                     DYE CELL


                                                                           POLARIZER

                                                                           MIRROR
Fig. 5. Diagram of an improved dye laser, with a telescope and an etalon between the dye cell and
the diffraction grating.



elements had to present low losses. But by now, extremely stable, narrowband
lasers have been made, with line widths much less than one Megahertz.
   Once a powerful, narrowband but broadly tunable, laser was available, it
became possible to adapt the laser to the problem rather than the reverse. The
methods of saturation spectroscopy could be applied to examine in detail the
spectral lines of atoms simple enough to be of theoretical interest. With the
pulsed dye laser, Hänsch and Issa S. Shahin first obtained Doppler-free spectra
of the sodium atom’s D lines at 5890 and 5896 Angstrom units, with the ground
state hyperfine structure clearly resolved. Then they applied it to study the
                                           30


                                                                      31
fine structure of the red line                   of atomic hydrogen. For this purpose, they
c o n s t r u c t e d a n e l e c t r i c g l o w d i s c h a r g e tube with end windows through which
the two beams could pass. One beam was, as before, the saturating beam, while
the other, weaker beam was the probe to detect the absorption from atoms with
no velocity component along the beam direction.


                                         A. L. Schawlow                         45



              HYDROGEN TERMS




  I   -
Fig. 6. Energy levels and transitions of atomic hydrogen




   Figure 6 recalls the energy levels and spectral lines of the hydrogen atom
according to the quantum theory of Niels Bohr. The transitions from higher
levels to the level with principal quantum number, n, equal to 2 give rise to the
Balmer series spectrum, drawn at the top of Figure 7. Below it is shown the fine
structure of the red line, on a scale expanded by a factor of 40000, as it would be


46                                 Physics 1981



      SPECTRUM OF HYDROGEN




revealed by a perfect conventional spectrograph. The line is known, from
theory and from radiofrequency measurements, to have the several line struc-
ture components indicated, but they would be nearly obscured by the large
Doppler width. At the bottom of the Figure is shown the tine structure of this
line revealed by laser saturation spectroscopy. The improvement is dramatic,
and most of the details of the fine structure can be clearly seen. In particular,


the Lamb shift between the         and the       levels is clearly revolved, which
had not been possible previously in hydrogen, although Gerhard Herzberg had
resolved the Lamb shift in the corresponding line of ionized helium, where the
shift is four times greater.32
    Microwave measurements had already given an accurate account of all of
these details, and the optical resolution had little hope of improving on them.
What could be done much better than before was to make an accurate determi-
nation of the wavelength of one of the components, and thereby obtain an
improved value of the Rydberg constant. Of course, if the positions and relative
intensities of the components are known, it is possible to compute the line shape
and compare it precisely with the shape and position determined by optical
spectroscopy. But the relative intensities are determined by the detailed pro-
cesses of excitation and deexcitation in the gas discharge, and their uncertainty
was the principal source of error in earlier measurements of the line wave-
length.
    Hänsch and his associates Issa S. Shahin, Munir Nayfeh, Siu Au Lee,
Stephen M. Curry, Carl Wieman, John E. M. Goldsmith, and Erhard W.
Weber, have refined the measurement of the wavelength of the line and thereby
of the Rydberg constant, through a series of careful and innovative re-
searches. They have imp roved the precision by a factor of about eighty over
           33



previous work, so that the Rydberg is now one of the most accurately known of
the fundamental constants. The value obtained,              = 109737.3148 ± .0010
cm -1 is in good agreement with that obtained in a recent experiment using
laser excitation of an atomic beam, by S. R. Amin, C. D. Caldwell, and W.
 Lichten. 34
    In the course of these investigations, Wieman and Hänsch35 found a new
 method to increase the sensitivity of the saturation method for avoiding Dopp-
 ler-broadening. As shown in Figure 8, they used a polarized pump beam. It
 preferentially excites molecules with some particular orientation, leaving the
 remainder with a complementary orientation. The probe beam is sent through
 two crossed polarizers, one before and one after the sample region, so that no
 light reaches the detector except at the wavelengths where the light is depolar-
 ized by the oriented molecules. The saturation signal then appears as an




Fig. 8. Apparatus for Doppler-free polarization spectroscopy


                                           Physics 1981




                                                                  SPATIAL FILTER




Fig. 9. Apparatus for Doppler-free saturated interference spectroscopy.




increased transmission with nearly no interfering background. Thus the noise
caused by fluctuations in intensity of the probe laser is nearly eliminated, and
the spectra can be observed at lower density or with lower light intensity. This
method is now known as polarization spectroscopy.
   Another way of balancing out the background was introduced by Frank V.
Kowalski and W. T. Hill36 and, independently, by R. Schieder.37 They used a
configuration like a Jamin interferometer, in which the probe beam is split into
two parts which travel parallel paths through the sample cell, as shown in
Figure 9. The beams are recombined in such a way that they cancel each other.
Then when a saturating beam reduces the absorption along one of the paths,
the interferometer becomes unbalanced and a Doppler-free signal is seen. In a
way, polarization spectroscopy can be thought of as a special case of saturated-
interference spectroscopy. The plane polarized probe wave is equivalent to two
waves circularly polarized in opposite senses. They combine to produce a plane
wave of the original polarization, which is stopped by the second polarizer,
unless one of the two circularly polarized components experiences a different
absorption or a different effective path length than the other.


                                          A. L. Schawlow                        49


SIMPLIFYING SPECTRA BY LASER LABELING

Spectra of molecules are very much more complicated than those of atoms.
Even a diatomic molecule such as Na2 has dozens of vibrational and hundreds
of rotational levels for every electronic level. We have, therefore, sought system-
atic ways to use lasers to simplify molecular spectra so as to identify their
various states. Even before lasers, something like this could be done by using a
monochromatic light source, such as a filtered mercury lamp, to excite just one
level, and observing the fluorescence from it to lower levels. With monochro-
matic, tunable lasers this can be used, for instance, to explore the vibrational
and rotational structure of the ground electronic state of molecules. The upper
state in this case may be said to be “labeled,” since it is identified by having
molecules excited to it, while neighboring states have none.
   But if anything at all is known about a molecule, it is likely to be the
constants of the ground electronic state, which can also be studied by micro-
wave, infrared and Raman spectroscopy. Mark E. Kaminsky, R. Thomas
Hawkins, and Frank V. Kowalski therefore inverted the process, by using a
laser to pump molecules out of a chosen lower level. 38 All of the absorption
lines originating on this chosen level were, then, weakened. If the pumping
laser was chopped, the absorption lines from the labeled level were modulated
at the chopping frequency. Thus when a high-resolution optical spectrometer
was scanned across the spectrum, the lines from the labeled level could be
recognized by their modulation, even if perturbations displaced them far from
their expected position.
   Almost as soon as Hänsch and Wieman introduced the method of polariza-
tion spectroscopy, it was apparent to us that it could be adapted for searching
for and identifying the levels of molecules or complex atoms. 39 Apparatus for
the polarization labeling method is shown in Figure 10. A polarized beam from
a repetitively pulsed dye laser is used to pump molecules of a particular
orientation from a chosen lower level, and leave the lower level with the
complementary orientation. A broadband probe from a second laser is directed
through two crossed polarizers, before and after the sample, and then into a




                    POLARIZER

Fig. 10. Apparatus for simplifying spectra by polarization labeling.


50                                                       Physics 1981




(a)




Fig. Il. A small section of the Na 2 s p e c t r u m r e v e a l e d b y c o n v e n t i o n a l s p e c t r o s c o p y a n d b y
polarization labeling.




photographic spectrograph. Figure 11 shows the spectra observed by Richard
Teets and Richard Feinberg, 39 as several neighbouring lines of N 2 a r e
pumped. It is seen that from each labeled level, there are just two rotational
lines for each vibrational level (J’ = J” + 1 and J’ = J” - 1). A small portion of
the spectrum as obtained by simple absorption spectroscopy is shown for
comparison. As the tuning of the pump laser is changed slightly, different
groups of lines appear. For each of them, the upper state vibrational quantum
number can be inferred simply by recognizing that the lines of lowest frequency
end on the v’ = 0 level of the upper electronic state.
   As the molecules raised to the excited electronic level by the polarized pump
laser are also oriented, the probe can record transitions from that to still higher
levels. Nils W. Carlson, Antoinette J. Taylor, and Kevin M. Jones 40, 41, 42
have identified 24 excited singlet electronic states in Na 2 by this method,
whereas all previous work on this molecule had only produced information
about 6 excited states. The new levels include Σ, Π, and          states from the
electron configurations 3sns and 3snd, as indicated in Figure 12. For larger
values of n, these arc molecular Rydberg states, with one electron far outside
the core of two Na+ions bound mostly by the single 3s electron. In the        states
the outer electron contributes something to the bonding, so that the depth of


                                            A. L. Schawlow                                   51




                                                r




Fig. 12. Excited electronic states of Na 2 , as revealed by two-step polarization labeling




the potential well increases as n is decreased which brings the outer electron
closer to the core, as is seen in Figure 13. In the Π states, the outer electron is
antibonding, and so it decreases the molecular bonding when it is close to the
core. Corresponding behaviors are observed for the other molecular constants,
vibrational energy and bond length. Thus they can all be extrapolated to
obtain good values for the constants of the ground state of the Na 2+ ion. 36 This
method and the several related techniques of optical-optical double resonance
arc making increasing contributions to the analysis of complex atomic and
molecular spectra.


52                                          Physics 1981




Fig. 13. Dissociation energy for Na 2 molecular Rydberg states as a function of l/n .
                                                                                   2


TWO-PHOTON DOPPLER-FREE SPECTROSCOPY

In 1970, L. S. Vasilenko, V. P. Chebotayev, and A. V. Shishaev proposed a
method for obtaining two-photon spectral lines without Doppler-broaden-
ing. As shown schematically in Figure 14, a molecule moving along the
    43




                                                                 V
Fig. 14. Principles of Doppler-free two-photon spectroscopy.




direction of one of two oppositely-directed light beams, from the same laser,
sees one of them shifted up in frequency and the other shifted down by just the
same amount. Thus the sum of the photon frequencies is, to first order,
unaffected by the Doppler shifts. All molecules contribute equally to the
Doppler-free two-photon line. The predicted effect was observed in atomic
sodium vapor by B. Cagnac, G. Grynberg, and F. Biraben, 44 by M. D.
Levenson and N. Bloembergen, 45 and by Hänsch, K. C. Harvey, and G.
Meisel. 46 They observed transitions from the 3s ground state to 4d or 5s levels
(Figure 15). The lines were not only sharp, but remarkably prominent and easy
to detect because of the presence of very strong allowed transitions, the well
known sodium D lines, less than 100 Angstroms from the wavelength needed


54                                          Physics 1981


                TWO - PHOTON SPECTROSCOPY OF
                                        2
                              Na 4d D STATE




Fig. 15. Energy levels and some two-photon transitions in sodium atoms.




for the two-photon transitions. The allowed transition makes the atom more
polarizable at the light frequency. Thus it enhances the two-photon absorption
coefficient by a factor proportional to the inverse square of the offset, or
frequency difference between the light frequency and the frequency of the
allowed transition. Subsequently, R. T. Hawkins, W. T. Hill, F. V. Kowalski,
and Sune Svanberg47 were able to use two lasers of different frequencies in the
beams, and so to take advantage of different enhancing lines to reach a number
of other levels in the sodium atom, and to measure the Stark shifts caused by an
applied electric field. They used a roughly collimated atomic beam illuminated
transversely by the lasers, to provide further reduction of the Doppler-broaden-
ing.
   It was rather surprising, in Kenneth Harvey’s early work, that some other
two-photon lines were seen in the neighborhood of the expected atomic lines.48
Since they did not exhibit the well known hyperfine structure of the sodium
ground state, they could only come from molecular sodium, Na 2 (Figure 16).
But that was remarkable, because the number of molecules at that temperature
was very small in comparison with the number of atoms, and there would be
still fewer in any individual level. Yet the molecular lines were as strong as the
atomic lines. We realized that the explanation must be a more or less accidental
close coincidence with some allowed, and therefore enhancing, molecular line.


                                          A. L. Schawlow                           55


 DOPPLER FREE TWO PHOTON SPECTROSCOPY IN Na VAPOR

                                        Na 3s-5s




Fig. 16. Atomic and molecular two-photon lines in Na 2.




J. P. Woerdman49 also observed some of these lines, and was able to identify
 the rotational quantum number through the nearby enhancing line of the A
       band of Na2. Recently Gerard P. Morgan, Hui-Rong Xia, and Guang-
Yao Yan 50,51 have found and identified a large number of these strong two-
 photon lines in Na2. The offsets from neighboring enhancing lines have been
 measured by simultaneous one-photon and two-photon Doppler-free spectros-
 copy. They are indeed small, ranging from 0.1 cm -1 to as little as 38 Mega-
 hertz or about .001 cm- 1. Thus we see how it is possible to have the probability
 of two-photon absorption, and thus two steps of excitation, nearly as strong as
 that of a single step.
    On the other hand, two-photon Doppler-free lines may also be observed if
 there is no enhancing state anywhere near, if there is enough laser intensity and
 sufficiently sensitive detection. Thus Hänsch, Siu Au Lee, Richard Wallen-
 stein, and Carl Wieman 52, 53 have observed the 1s to 2s two-photon transition
 in atomic hydrogen, excited by the second harmonic (2430 Angstroms) of a
 visible dye laser which simultaneously scans the blue            Balmer line. They
 have, thus, made an accurate comparison between the 1s to 2s interval and four
 times the 2s to 4s interval in hydrogen. According to the Bohr theory, the ratio
 of these level spacings should be exactly 4 to 1. The deviation observed is a
 measure of the Lamb shift in the ground 1s state, which is otherwise not
 measurable.
     The 1s to 2s transition is particularly intriguing, because the lower state is
  stable, and the upper state is metastable so that it has a lifetime of l/7 second.
 Thus the lifetime width need to be no more than one Hertz, or a part in 10 15.
  Since we can usually locate the center of a line to one percent of the linewidth, it


56




                                                (COLLISIONS)




Fig. 17. Energy levels and transitions for measuring the Lamb shift of the 1s level of atomic
hydrogen.




should be possible eventually to measure this line to one part in l0 17 or so. But
nobody measures anything to a part in 1017! Before we can hope to achieve
that, such things as second order Doppler effect, transit time broadening,
radiation recoil and power broadening will have to be eliminated. The chal-
lenge is great, and should occupy experimental physicists for some years.


                                            A. L. Schawlow                                        57


OTHER METHODS

There is not enough room to discuss all of the laser spectroscopic methods that
have interested our colleagues. Serge Haroche and Jeffrey A. Paisner have used
short, broadband laser pulses to produce quantum beats in fluorescence, by
                                                               54
exciting a coherent superposition of several hyperfine levels. James E. Lawler
                                                                       55
extended the methods of optogalvanic detection of laser absorption to detect
                                                      56
Doppler-free intermodulation and two-photon lines. In turn, this method has
been extended by Donald R. Lyons and Guang-Yao Yan,57 to use electrodeless
radiofrequency detection of Doppler-free resonances.
   Even less is it possible to begin to describe the many exciting discoveries and
developments from other laboratories. Some indication of them can be ob-
tained from the proceedings of the five biennial conferences on Laser Spectro-
scopy.“s The field has had an almost explosive growth, and laser spectroscopy
in some form or other extends from the submillimeter wavelengths in the far
infrared to the vacuum ultraviolet and soft x-ray regions.
   Thus in the powerful, directional, coherent and highly monochromatic new
light of lasers, we are learning to do entirely new kinds of spectroscopy. We can
resolve fine details hitherto obscured by thermal broadening, can observe and
study very small numbers of atoms, and can simplify complex spectra. We can
take the measure of simple atoms with a precision that is providing a real
challenge to the best theoretical calculations. Our experimental capabilities
have been extended so rapidly in the past few years, that there has not been
time to bring them fully to bear on the interesting, fundamental problems for
which they seem so well suited. But the spectroscopy with the new light is
illuminating many things we could not even hope to explore previously, and we
are bound to encounter further intriguing surprises.




REFERENCES
 1. Ångström, A. J., Kungl. Svenska Vetensk. Akad. Handl., p. 327 (1852); Poggendorff Annalen
   94, 141 (1855); Phil. Mag. 9, 327 (1855)
 2. Fraunhofer, J., Gilbert’s Annalen 56, 264 (1817).
 3. Huggins, W., Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London 171, 669 (1880).
 4. Vogel, H. W., Monatsbericht der Königl. Academie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, July 10,
    1879, reported by Huggins, op.   cit.
 5. Balmer, J. J., Poggendorff's Annalen, N. F. 25, 80 (1885).
 6. Rydberg, J. R., Kungl. Svenska Vetensk. Akad. Handl. 32, 80 (1890); Phil. Mag. 29, 331
    (1890).
 7. Meissner K. W., and Luft, K. F.. Ann. der Physik, 28, 667 (1937).
 8. Minkowski, R., and Bruck, G., Zeits. f. Phys. 95, 284 (1935).
 9. Schawlow, A. L., and Townes, C. H., Phys. Rev. 112, 1940 (1958).
10. Tiffany, W. B., Moos, H. W., and Schawlow A. L., Science, 157, 40 (1967).
11. Lamb, W. E. talk at the Third International Conference on Quantum Electronics, Paris. February 11
    15, 1963; Phys. Rev. 134A, 1429 (1964).


58                                           Physics 1981


12. McFarlane, R. A., Bennett, W. R. Jr., and Lamb, W. E., Jr, Appl. Phys. Letters, 2, 189 (1963).
13. Szoke. A., and Javan, A., Phys. Rev. Letters IO, 521 (1963).
14. Lee, P. H., and Skolnick, M. L., Appl. Phys. Letters 10, 303 (1967).
15. Hänsch, T. W. and Toschek, P., I.E.E.E. J. Quant. Electr. 4, 467 (1968).
16. Smith, P. W., and Hänsch, T. W., Phys. Rev. Letters 26, 740 (1971).
17. Hänsch, T. W., Levenson, M. D., and Schawlow, A. L., Phys. Rev. Letters 27, 707 (1971).
18. Bordé, C., C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 271, 371 (1970).
19. Levenson, M. D., and Schawlow, A. L., Phys. Rev. A6, 10 (1972).
20. Freed, C., and Javan, A., Appl. Phys. Letters 17, 53 (1970).
21. Sorem, M. S., and Schawlow, A. L.. Opt. Comm. 5, 148 (1972).
22. Fairbank, W. M., Hänsch, T. W., Jr., Schawlow, A. L., J. Opt. Soc. Am. 65, 199 (1975).
23. Hurst, G. S., Payne, M. G., Kramer, S. D., and Young, J. P., Rev Mod. Phys. 51, 767 (1979).
24. Sorokin, P. P., and Lankard, J. R., IBM J. Res. Develop. IO, 306 (1966).
25. Schafer, F. P., Schmidt, W., and Volze, J., Appl. Phys. Letters 9, 306 (1966).
26. Myer, J. A., Johnson, C. L., Kierstead, E., Sharma, R. D., and Itzkan, I., Appl. Phys. Letters
     16, 3 (1970).
27. Hänsch, T. W., Appl. Opt. 11, 895 (1972).
28. Peterson, 0. G., Tuccio, S. A., and Snavely, B. B., Appl. Phys. Letters 17, 245 (1970).
29. Birnbaum, M., Wendizowski, P. H., and Fincher, C. L., Appl. Phy. Letters 16, 436 (1970).
30. Hänsch, T. W., Shahin, I. S., and Schawlow, A. L., Phys. Rev. Letters 27, 707 (1971).
3 I. Hänsch, T. W., Shahin, I. S., and Schawlow, A. L., Nature 235, 63 (1972).
32. Herzberg, G., Physik, 146, 269 (1956).
33. Goldsmith, J. E. M., Weber, E. W. and Hänsch, T. W., Phys. Rev. Letters 41, 1525 (1978).
34. Amin, S. R., Caldwell, C. D., and Lichten, W., Phys. Rev. Letters 47, 1234 (1981).
35. Wiemann C., and Hänsch, T. W., Phys. Rev. Letters 36, 117O (1976).
36. Kowalski, F. V., Hill, W. T., and Schawlow, A. L., Optics Letters, 2, 112 (1978).
37. Schieder, R., Opt. Comm. 26, 113 (1978).
38. Kaminsky, M. E., Hawkins, R. T., Kowalski, F. V., and Schawlow, A. L., Phys. Rev. Letters
     36, 671 (1976).
39. Teets, R. E., Feinberg, R., Hänsch, T. W., and Schawlow, A. L., Phys. Rev. Letters 37, 683
     (1976).
40. Carlson, N. W., Kowalski, F. V., Teets, R. E., and Schawlow, A. L., Opt. Comm. 18, 1983
     (1979).
41. Carlson, N. W., Taylor, A. J., Jones, K. M., and Schawlow A. L., Phys. Rev. A24,822 (1981).
42. Taylor, A. J., Jones, K. M., and Schawlow, A. L., Opt. Comm. 39, 47 (1981).
43. Vasilenko, L. S., Chebotayev, V. P., and Shishaev, A. V., JETP Letters 12, 113 (1970).
44. Cagnac, B., Grynberg, G., and Biraben, F., J. Phys. (Paris) 34, 845 (1973).
45. Levenson, M. D., and Bloembergen, N., Phys. Rev. Letters 32,645 (1974).
46. Hänsch, T. W., Harvey, K. C., Miesel, G. and Schawlow, A. L., Opt. Comm. 11, 50 (1974).
47. Hawkins, R. T., Hill, W. T., Kowalski, F. V., Schawlow, A. L., and Svanberg, S., Phys. Rev.
     A15, 967 (1977).
48. Harvey, K. C., thesis, Stanford University, M. L. Report No. 2442 (1975).
49. Woerdman, J. P., Chem. Phys. Letters 43, 279 (1976).
50. Xia, H.-R., Yan, G.-Y., and Schawlow, A. L., Opt. Comm. 39, 153 (1981).
51. Morgan, G. P., Xia, H.-R.; and Schawlow A. L., J. Opt. Soc. Am., 72, 315 (1982).
52. Lee, S. A., Wallenstein, R., and Hänsch, T. W., Phys. Rev. Letters 35, 1262 (1975).
53. Wieman, C., and Hänsch, T. W., Phys. Rev. A22, 1 (1980).
54. Haroche, S., Paisner, J. A., and Schawlow, A. L., Phys. Rev. Letters 30, 948 (1973).
55. Green, R. B., Keller, R. A., Luther, G. G., Schenck, P. K., and Travis, J. C., Appl. Phys.
     Letters 29, 727 (1956).
56. Lawler, J. E., Ferguson, A. I., Goldsmith, J. E. M., Jackson, D. J., and Schawlow, A. L., Phys.
     Rev. Letters 42, 1046 (1979).
57. Lyons, D. R., Schawlow, A. L., and Yan, G.-Y., Opt. Comm. 38, (1981).
58. The most recent of these is Laser Spectroscopy V, McKellar, A. R. W., Oka, T., and Stoicheff, B.
     P., editors, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg and New York (1981).
