FROM THE PSI TO CHARM - THE EXPERIMENTS
OF 1975 AND 1976
Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1976
by
BURTON RICHTER
Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA



 1. INTRODUCTION
Exactly 25 months ago the announcement of the             particle by Professor
Ting’s and my groups [1, 2] burst on the community of particle physicists.
Nothing so strange and completely unexpected had happened in particle
physics for many years. Ten days later my group found the second of the
     [3] and the sense of excitement in the community intensified, The long
awaited discovery of anything which would give a clue to the proper direction
in which to move in understanding the elementary particles loosed a flood of
theoretical papers that washed over the journals in the next year.
   The experiments that I and my colleagues carried through in the two years
after the discovery of the ψ have, I believe, selected from all the competing
explanations the one that is probably correct. It is these experiments that I
wish to describe. The rapid progress is a consequence of the power of the
electron-positron colliding-beam technique, and so I also want to describe
this technique and tell something of my involvement in it.

2. COLLIDING BEAMS
I completed my graduate studies at M.I.T. in 1956, and in the Fall of that
year I took a position at the High-Energy Physics Laboratory (HEPL) at
Stanford University. My main research interest at that time was in exploring
the high momentum-transfer or short-distance behavior of quantum electro-
dynamics (QED). My original plan for a QED experiment had been to use
the 700-MeV electron linac at HEPL in a study of electron-electron scattering.
Within a short time, however, I came to realize that a different experiment
would be both technically simpler to carry out and would also probe QED
more deeply (though somewhat differently). During my first year at HEPL
I did this latter experiment, which involved the photoproduction of electron-
positron pairs in which one of the members of the pair emerged at a large
angle. This experiment succeeded in establishing the validity of QED down to
distances of about 10 -l3 c m .

2.1 The Stanford-Princeton Electron-Electron Storage Rings
In 1957 the idea of an electron-electron scattering experiment came alive
again, although in a much different form. This happened when G. K. O’Neill
of Princeton University informally proposed the construction at HEPL of a
figure 8-shaped set of rings capable of storing counter-rotating beams of
electrons at energies up to 500 meV for each beam. In this plan the HEPL


282                                 Physics 1976


linac was to act as the injector for the rings, and the circulating electron beams
would collide in the common straight section between the two rings. O’Neill’s
aim was not only to demonstrate the feasibility of colliding electron beams, but
also to carry out electron-electron scattering at an energy that could signif-
icantly extend the range of validity of QED.
   The potential of such an e-e-, colliding-beam experiment, with its total
center-of-mass energy of 1000 MeV, was much greater than the ~ 50 MeV
that would have been available to test QED in my original e - e - scattering
idea. Thus when O’Neill asked me to join in this work, I accepted enthusiasti-
cally and became an accelerator builder as well as an experimenter. With two
other collaborators, W. C. Barber and B. Gittelman, we set out in 1958 to
build the first large storage ring, and we hoped to have our first experimental
results in perhaps three years. These results were not in fact forthcoming until
seven years later, for there was much to learn about the behavior of beams
in storage rings; but what we learned during that long and often frustrating
time opened up a new field of particle physics research. [4]

2.2 A Moment of Realization
Let me digress here for a moment to recount a formative experience. In 1959,
as the work on the HEPL rings progressed, I was also trying to learn some-
thing about how to calculate cross sections in QED under the tutelage of
Stanford theorist J. D. Bjorken. One of the problems Bjorken gave me was to
calculate the cross section for the production of a pair of point-like particles
having zero spin (bosons) in electron-positron annihilation. I carried out this
calculation, but I was troubled by the fact that no point-like bosons were
known to exist. The only spin-zero bosons I knew about were pions, and the
strong interactions to which these particles were subject gave them a finite
size. I realized that the structure function of the particle would have to enter
into the cross section to account for this finite size. The structure function for
the pion could be measured in an experiment in which e + e - annihilation
resulted in the production of pion pairs. Further, the structures of any of the
family of strongly interacting particles (hadrons) could be determined by
measuring their production cross sections in e+ e - annihilation. It’s certain that
many people had realized all this before, but it came as a revelation to me at
that time, and it headed me firmly on the course that eventually led to this
platform.

2.3 The Electron-Positron Annihilation Process
This connection between e + e - annihilation and hadrons is worth a brief
elaboration here, since it is central to the experimental results I shall describe
later. The method by which new particles are created in electron-positron
collisions is a particularly simple one that I have always naively pictured in the
following way. The unique annihilation process can occur only in the collision
between a particle and its antiparticle. The process proceeds in two steps:
 1. The particle and antiparticle coalesce, and all the attributes that give
      them their identities cancel. For a brief instant there is created a tiny


                                     B. Richter                                 283


    electromagnetic fireball of enormous energy density and precisely defined
    quantum numbers:                      all others cancel out to zero.
2. The energy within the fireball then rematerializes into any combination of
    newly created particles that satisfies two criteria: (a) the total mass of the
    created particles is less than or equal to the total energy of the fireball;
    (b) the overall quantum numbers of the created particles are the same as
    those of the fireball. There is no restriction on the individual particles that
    comprise the final state, only on their sum.
   The formation of the fireball or virtual-photon intermediate state in e+ e -
annihilation is described in QED, a theory whose predictions have so far been
confirmed by every experimental test. Since we therefore understand Step 1,
the creation of the fireball, we are in a sense using the known e +e - annihilation
process to probe the unknown hadrons that are produced in Step 2 of the pro-
cess. Our ignorance is thus limited to the structure of the final-state hadrons
and to the final-state interactions that occur when particles are created close
together. And while that is a great deal of ignorance, it is much less than that
of any other particle-production process. In addition, the quantum numbers
of the final state in e+ e - annihilation are simple enough so that we can hope to
calculate them from our theoretical models. This is in sharp contrast, for
example, to high-energy hadron-hadron collisions, in which very many
different angular-momentum states may be involved and thus must be cal-
culated.

2.4 The SPEAR Electron-Positron Storage Ring
 In 1961, while work on the e - e - rings at HEPL continued, I began with D.
Ritson of Stanford some preliminary design on a larger e + e - storage ring.
In 1963 I moved from HEPL to the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center
 (SLAC), and set up a small group to carry out the final design of the e+ e - ring.
The design energy chosen was 3 GeV ( each beam). A preliminary proposal for
this colliding-beam machine was completed in 1964, and in 1965 a full, formal
proposal was submitted to the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission (now ERDA).
   There followed a period of about five years before any funding for this
proposed project could be obtained. During this time, other groups became
convinced of the research potential of the e+ e - colliding-beam technique,
and several other projects began construction. We watched this other activity
enviously, worked at refining our own design, and tried to appropriate any
good ideas the others had come up with. Finally, in 1970, funds were made
available for a reduced version of our project, now called “SPEAR”, and we
all fell to and managed to get it built in record time - some 21 months from
the start of construction to the first beam collisions [5].
   The SPEAR storage ring is located in a part of the large experimental area
at the end of the 3-kilometer-long SLAC linac. The facility is shown sche-
matically in Fig. 1. Short pulses of positrons, then electrons, are injected
from the SLAC accelerator through alternate legs of the Y-shaped magnetic
injection channel into the SPEAR ring. The stored beams actually consist of
only a single short bunch of each kind of particle, and the bunches collide


284                                 Physics 1976



             EXPERIMENTAL   PIT,

         ELECTRIC QUAD-



                                                         NO. 3 RF CAVITY



                                                               NO. 4 RF CAVITY




                                                                  FAST FEED BACK



                     POWER SUPPLY




INJECTION BEAM.




only at the mid-points of the two straight interaction areas on opposite sides of
the machine. Special focusing magnets are used to give the beams a small
cross-sectional area at these two interaction points. The time required to fill
the ring with electrons and positrons is typically 15-30 minutes, while the
data-taking periods between successive fillings are about 2 hours. To achieve
this long lifetime, it is necessary to hold a pressure of about 5 x 1 0-9 torr in
the vacuum chamber. The center-of-mass (c.m.) energy of the colliding e + e -
system can be varied from 2.6 to 8 GeV. The radiofrequency power required
to compensate for synchrotron radiation losses rises to 300 kilowatts at the
maximum operating energy. The volume within which the e + e - collisions
occur is small and well-defined (        x   x   = 0.1 x 0.01 x 5 cm 3), which is
a great convenience for detection.

2.5 The Mark I Magnetic Detector
While SPEAR was being designed, we were also thinking about the kind of
experimental apparatus that would be needed to carry out the physics. In
the 1965 SPEAR proposal, we had described two different kinds of detectors:
the first, a non-magnetic detector that would have looked only at particle
multiplicities and angular distributions, with some rather crude particle-
identification capability; the second, a magnetic detector that could add
accurate momentum measurement to these other capabilities. When the early
results in 1969, from the ADONE storage ring at Frascati, Italy, indicated


                                           B. Richter                      285


that hadrons were being produced more copiously than expected, I decided
that it would be very important to learn more about the final states than
could be done with the non-magnetic detector.
   Confronted thus with the enlarged task of building not only the SPEAR
facility itself but also a large and complex magnetic detector, I began to face
up to the fact that my group at SLAC had bitten off more than it could
reasonably chew, and began to search out possible collaborators. We were
soon joined by the groups of M. Perl, of SLAC; and W. Chinowsky, G. Gold-
haber and G. Trilling of the University of California’s Lawrence Radiation
Laboratory (LBL). This added manpower included physicists, graduate
students, engineers, programmers and technicians. My group was responsible
for the construction of SPEAR and for the inner core of the magnetic detector,
while our collaborators built much of the particle-identification apparatus and
also did most of the programming work that was necessary to find tracks and
reconstruct events.
   This collaborative effort results in the Mark 1 magnetic detector, shown
schematically in Fig. 2. The Mark I magnet produces a solenoidal field,
coaxial with the beams, of about 4 kilogauss throughout a field volume of
about 20 cubic meters. Particles moving radially outward from the beam-
interaction point pass successively through the following elements: the beam
vacuum pipe; a trigger counter; 16 concentric cylinders of magnetostrictive
wire spark chambers that provide tracking information for momentum
measurements; a cylindrical array of 48 scintillators that act as both trigger
and time-of-flight counters; the one-radiation-length thick aluminium magnet
coil; a cylindrical array of 24 lead-scintillator shower counters that provide


                  MUON SPARK CHAMBERS

                  FLUX RETURN----------,

                  SHOWER COUNTERS




                  COMPENSATING SOLENOID




        ‘-LUMINOSITY   MONITOR

2. An exploded view of the SLAG-LBL magnetic detector.


286                                Physics 1976


electron identification; the 20-cm-thick iron flux-return plates of the magnet;
and finally an additional array of plane spark chambers used to separate
muons from hadrons.
   The Mark I magnetic detector was ready to begin taking data in February
 1973. During the fall of 1977 it will be replaced at SPEAR by a generally
similar device, the Mark II, that will incorporate a number of important
improvements. During its career, however, the Mark I has produced a re-
markable amount of spectacular physics [6].

3. EARLY EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
I would like to set the stage for the description of the journey from the       to
charm by briefly reviewing here the situation that existed just before the
discovery of the new particles. The main international conference in high-
energy physics during 1974 was held in July in London. I presented a talk at
the London Conference [7] in which I tried to summarize what had been
learned up until that time about the production of hadrons in e +e - annihilation.
This information, shown in Fig. 3, will require a little bit of explanation.
                                          8




                                          6




3. The ratio R as of July 1974.




3.1. The Hadron/Muon-Pair Ratio
Measurements of the process e + e - → h a d .       can be presented straight-
forwardly in a graph which plots the hadron-production cross section against
the c.m. energy of the colliding e + e - system. For reasons that I shall explain
later, it has become common practice to replace the hadron-production cross
section in such graphs by the following ratio:

                                                                              (1)


                                              B. Richter                               287


It is that ratio R that is plotted vs. c.m. energy in Fig. 3. Historically, the
earliest measurements of R were made at the ADONE ring at Frascati; these
occupy the lower-energy region of the graph, and they indicate values of
R ranging from less than 1 to about 6. These were followed by two important
measurements of R made at the storage ring that had been created by rebuild-
ing the Cambridge Electron Accelerator (CEA) at Harvard; the CEA mea-
surements gave an R value of about 5 at         of 4 GeV, and R ≅ 6 at 5 GeV.
The early experimental results from the SLAC-LBL experiment at SPEAR
filled in some of the gap between the ADONE and CEA results, and between
the two CEA points, in a consistent manner; that is, the SPEAR data appear
to join smoothly onto both the lower and higher energy data from ADONE
and from CEA. With the exception of the experimental points at the very
lowest energies, the general picture conveyed by Fig. 3 is that the value of R
seems to rise smoothly from perhaps 2 to 6 as         increases from about 2 to
5 GeV.

3.2. The Theoretical Predictions
During the same London Conference in 1974, J. Ellis of CERN [8] undertook
the complementary task of summarizing the process                         from a
theoretical point of view. Once again, the predictions of many different theories
could most conveniently be expressed in terms of the hadron/muon-pair ratio
R rather than directly as hadron-production cross sections. The most widely
accepted theory of the hadrons at that time gave the prediction that R = 2 ;
but there were many theories. Let me illustrate this by reproducing here, as
Table I, the compilation of R predictions that Ellis included in his London
Talk. As this table shows, these predictions of the hadron/muon-pair ratio
ranged upward from 0.36 to         with many a stop along the way.
   I included this table to emphasize the situation that prevailed in the Sum-
mer of 1974 - vast confusion. The cause of the confusion lay in the paucity
of e+ e - data and the lack of experimental clues to the proper direction from
elsewhere in particle physics. The clue lay just around the next corner, but
that corner itself appeared as a totally unexpected turn in the road.




Table I. Table of Values of R from the Talk by J. Ellis at the 1974 London Conference
[8] (references in table from Ellis’s talk)

Value            Model
0.36             Bethe-Salpeter bound quarks                 Bohm et al., Ref .42
2/3              Gell-Mann-Zweig     quarks
0.69             Generalized vector meson dominance          Renard, Ref. 49
~1               Composite quarks                            Raitio, Ref. 43
10/9             Gell-Mann-Zweig with charm                  Glashow et al., Ref. 31
2                Colored quarks
2.5 to 3         Generalized vector meson dominance           Greco, Ref. 30
2 to 5           Generalized vector meson dominance          Sakurai, Gounaris, Ref,
                                                               47


288                                         Physics 1976


3-1/3            Colored charmed quarks                              Glashow et al., Ref. 31

4                Han-Nambu quarks                                   Han and Nambu. Ref. 32

5.7±0.9          Trace anomaly and p dominance                      Terazawa, Ref. 27
5.8+3.2          Trace anomaly and         dominance                Orito et al., Ref. 25
   -3.5

6                Han-Nambu with charm                               Han and Nambu, Ref. 32

6.69 to 7.77     Broken scale invariance                             Choudhury, Ref. 18
8                Tati quarks                                        Han and Nambu, Ref. 32

8 ± 2            Trace anomaly, and        dominance                Eliezer, Ref. 26
9                Gravitational cut-off, Universality                 Parisi, Ref. 40
9                Broken scale invariance                            Yachtmann. Ref. 39
16               S U1 2 x S U2 )
                                   gauge models                     Fritzsch & Minkowski.
35-1/3           SU 1 6 X S U1 6)                                      Ref. 34
~    5000        High      quarks
                                                                    Yock. Ref. 73
70,383           Schwinger’s quarks )
                     of partons                                     Cabibbo and Karl, Ref. 9
                                                                    Matveev and Tolkachev,
                                                                       Ref. 35
                                                                    Rozenblit. Ref. 36



4. THE PSI PARTICLES

4.1. Widths of the Psi Resonances
Figure 4 shows the cross section for hadron production at SPEAR on a scale
where all of the data can be plotted on a single graph. This figure is clearly
dominated by the giant resonance peaks of the ψ and the ψ'.The extreme




4. The total cross section of hadron production vs. center-of-mass energy.


                                             B. Richter                                       289




      IO
b

                                                           0
                                                          60




5. Hadron. µ + µ - a n d e+ e - pair production cross section in the regions of the ψ a n d   The
curves arc fits to the data using the energy spread in the colliding beams as the determinant
of the widths.


narrowness of the peaks implies that these two states are very long-lived,
which is the principal reason why they could not be accounted for by the
previously successful model of hadronic structure. In Fig. 5 we show the ψ
and    peaks on a greatly expanded energy scale, and also as they are measured
for three different decay modes:                               and
In this figure the ψ and    peaks can be seen to have experimental widths of
about 2 MeV and 3 MeV, respectively. These observed widths are just about
what would be expected from the intrinsic spread in energies that exists within
the positron and electron beams alone, which means that the true widths of
the two states must be very much narrower. The true widths can be determined
accurately from the areas that are included under the peaks in Fig. 5 and are
given by the following expression:




where     is the cross section to produce final state i, Bi is the branching fraction
to that state, B e is the branching fraction to e + e -, M is the mass of the state,
and     is its total width. The analysis is somewhat complicated by radiative
corrections but can be done, with the result that [9]

                                                                                              (3)


290                                   Physics 1976


The widths that would be expected if the psi particles were conventional
hadrons are about 20% ( of their masses. Thus the new states are several thousand
times narrower than those expected on the basis of the conventional model.

4.2. Psi Quantum Numbers
The quantum numbers of the new psi states were expected to be                       = l--
because of their direct production in e + e - annihilation and also because of
the equal decay rates to e + e - and        In so new a phenomenon, however,
anything can go, and so that assumption needed to be confirmed. In particular,
one of the tentative explanations of the psi particles was that they might be
related to the hypothetical intermediate vector boson, a particle that had
long been posited as the carrier of the weak force. Such an identification
would permit the psi’s to be a mixture of        = l -- and 1 +- . T h e s e q u a n t u m
numbers can be studied by looking for an interference effect between on- and
off-peak production of muon pairs, since the latter is known to be pure 1 --. If
the new particles were also 1 ---, then an interference should occur and produce
two recognizable effects: a small dip in the cross section below the peak, and
an apparent shift in the position of the peak relative to that observed in the
hadron channels. In addition, any admixture of l +- could be expected to
show up as a forward/backward asymmetry in the observed angular distri-
bution.
   This analysis was carried out as soon as there were sufficient data available
for the purpose. The postulated interference effect was in fact observed, as
shown in Fig. 6, while no angular asymmetry was seen [8, 9]. Thus both of
the psi states were firmly established as        =


                                                      B. Richter                                                   291


4.3. Psi Decay Modes
We also studied the many decay modes of the ψ and            In these studies it
was important to distinguish between direct and “second-order” decay pro-
cesses, a point that is illustrated in Fig. 7. This figure shows the following




                                                                                                                   (4)




7. Feynmnn diagrams for ψ production and (a) direct decay to hadrons, (b) second-order
electromagnetic decay to hadrons. a n d ( c ) s e c o n d - o r d e r e l e c t r o m a g n e t i c d e c a y t o µ µ .
                                                                                                                   + -




In processes (b) and (c), hadrons and muon-pairs are produced by virtual
photons in exactly the same way that they are produced at off-resonance
energies. If the observed hadrons were produced only through second-order
electromagnetic decay, then the hadron/muon-pair production ratio, R, would
be the same on-resonance as off. This is decidedly not the case. Since R is
much larger on-resonance than off, both ψ and           do have direct hadronic
decays.
   More branching fractions for specific hadronic channels have been measured
for the ψ and     than for any other particles. Most of these are of interest only
to the specialist, but a few have told us a good deal about the psi particles.
Since the second-order electromagnetic decays also complicate these analyses,
we must again make on- and off-resonance comparisons between muon-pair
production and the production of specific hadronic final states. In Fig. 8 we
show such a comparison plotted against the number of pions observed in the
final state [10]. Even numbers of pions observed are consistent with what is


292                                Physics 1976




expected from second-order electromagnetic decays, while the observed odd-
pion decays are much enhanced. The ψ decays appear, from these data, to be
governed by a certain selection rule (G-parity conservation) that is known
to govern only the behavior of hadrons, thus indicating that the ψ itself is a
hadron.




4.4. Search for Other Narrow Resonances
By operating the SPEAR storage ring in a “scanning” mode, we have been
able to carry out a systematic search for any other very narrow, psi-like
resonances that may exist. In this scanning mode, the ring is filled and set to
the initial energy for the scan; data are taken for a minute or two; the ring
energy is increased by about an MeV; data are taken again; and so forth.
Figure 9 shows these scan data from c.m. energies of about 3.2 to 8 GeV
[11, 12]. No statistically significant peaks (other than the gf that was found
in our first scan) were observed in this search, but this needs two qualifications.
The first is that the sensitivity of the search extends down to a limit on possible
resonances that have a cross section x width of about 5% to 10%, of that of
the ψ. The second qualification is that the particular method of search is
sensitive only to extremely narrow resonances like the ψ and           other, much
broader resonances have been found at SPEAR, and we shall soon see how
these apparently much different states fit into the picture.


                                    B. Richter                              293




  6




  0.6




5. THE INTERMEDIATE STATES

5.1. Radiative Transitions
There are other new states, related to the ψ and       but not directly produced
in e+ e - annihilation, which are observed among the decay products of the
two psi particles. More specifically, these new states are produced when either
ψ or       decays through the emission of a gamma-ray:

                                                                             (6)


294                                Physics 1976


At least four (perhaps five) distinct intermediate states produced in this way
have been observed experimentally.
   The first such observation was made by an international collaboration
working at the DORIS e + e - storage ring at the DESY laboratory in Ham-
burg [13]. This state was named P C , and its mass was found to be about
3500 MeV. This same group [14] in collaboration with another group working
at DESY later found some evidence for another possible state, which they
called X, at about 1800 MeV [15]. At SPEAR, the SLAC-LBL group has
identified states with masses of about 3415, 3450 and 3550 MeV, and has
also confirmed the existence of the DESY 3500-MeV state. We have used the
name x to distinguish the state intermediate in mass between the ψ(3095) and
the           To summarize these new states :




5.2. Three Methods of Search
The three methods we have used at SPEAR to search for these intermediate
states are indicated schematically in Fig. 10. To begin with, the storage ring is
operated at the center-of-mass energy of 3684 MeV that is required for
resonant production of the       In the first search method, Fig. 10(a),    decays
to the intermediate state then decays to the ψ through              emission; and
finally the ψ decays, for example, into          The muon-pair is detected along
with one or both of the y-ray photons. This was the method used at DESY
to find the 3500-MeV state and also by our group at SLAC to confirm this
state [16]. In our apparatus at SPEAR, it will occasionally happen that one
of the two        photons converts into an e+e - pair before entering the tracking
region of the detector. This allows the energy of the converting             to be


                                      B. Richter                              295


  measured very accurately, and this information can be combined with the
  measured momenta of the final µ + µ - pair to make a two-fold ambiguous
  determination of the mass of the intermediate state. The ambiguity arises from
  the uncertainty in knowing whether the first or the second gamma-rays in the
  decay cascade have been detected. It can be resolved by accumulating enough
  events; to determine which assumption results in the narrower mass peak.
  The peak associated with the second               will be Doppler broadened
  because these photons are emitted from moving sources.) Figure 11 shows the
  alternate low- and high-mass solutions for a sample of our data [17]. There
  appears to be clear evidence for states at about 3.45, 3.5 and 3.55 GeV.
     The second search method we have used, Fig. 10(b), involves measuring
  the momenta of the final-state hadrons and reconstructing the mass of the
  intermediate state [18]. Figure 12 shows two cases in which the effective
  mass of the final-state hadrons recoils against a missing mass of zero (that is,
  a         In the case where 4 pions are detected, peaks are seen at about
  3.4, 3.5 and 3.55 GeV. In contrast, the 2-pion or 2-kaon case shows only one
  clear peak at 3.4 GeV, with perhaps a hint of something at 3.55 GeV. The
  appearance of the 2-pion or 2-kaon decay modes indicates that the quantum
  numbers of the states in question must be either 0 ++ or 2+ + .




3.25




3.20


296                                 Physics 1976


   In the third method of search, Fig. 10(c), only a single γ -ray is detected.
 The presence of a monoenergetic y-ray line would signal a radiative transition
directly to a specific intermediate state. In our apparatus, this method is
difficult to apply because of the severe background problems, but we were
able to identify the direct γ -ray transition to the 3.4 GeV state [17]. A different
experimental group working at SPEAR ( a collaboration among the Uni-
versities of Maryland, Princeton, Pavia, Stanford and UC-San Diego) was
able to make use of a more refined detection system to observe several of these
radiative transitions and to measure the branching franctions of those states [19]
.
   To summarize, these studies have led to the addition of four (the 2800-MeV
state is still marginal) new intermediate state, all with charge-conjugation
C = + 1, to the original ψ and    particles.

6. TOTAL CROSS SECTION AND BROADER STATES

6.1. Total Cross Section
So far our discussion of the process e+ e -→hadrons has been concerned largely
with the two psi particles, which are created directly in e + e - annihilation, and
with the intermediate states, which are not directly created but rather appear
only in the decay products of the ψ and       It is now time to turn our attention
to the larger picture of hadron production to see what else can be learned.
   Figure 4 presented the total cross section for e+e - →hadrons over the full
range of c.m. energies accessible to SPEAR. This figure was dominated by the
ψ and     resonance peaks, and very little else about the possible structure of the
cross section outside of these peaks was observable. We now remedy this
situation in Fig. 13, which shows the hadron/muon-pair ratio R, with the
dominating ψ and      resonance peaks removed, including their radiative tails.




    8   -




    6   -


                                    B. Richter                                297


We can characterize the data in the following way. Below about 3.8 GeV, R
lies on a roughly constant plateau at a value of        there is a complex
transition region between about 3.8 and perhaps 5 GeV in which there is
considerable structure; and above about 5.5 GeV, R once again lies on a
roughly constant plateau at a value of       GeV.

6.2. Broader (Psi?) States
The transition region is shown on a much expanded energy scale in Fig. 14.
This figure clearly shows that there seem to be several individual resonant
states superposed on the rising background curve that connects the lower and
upper plateau regions [20]. One state stands out quite clearly at a mass of
3.95 GeV, and another at about 4.4 GeV. The region near 4.1 GeV is re-
markably complex and is probably composed of two or more overlapping
states; more data will certainly be required to try to sort this out.




                                       6




                                       4




                                       3




   The properties of the several states within the transition region are very
difficult to determine with any precision. One obvious problem is that these
resonances sit on a rapidly rising background whose exact shape is presently
neither clear experimentally nor calculable theoretically. Since these new
states are, like the     produced directly in e + e - annihilation, they all have
      =     and can therefore interfere with each other, thus distorting the
classical resonance shape that would normally be expected from a new
particle. Additional shape-distortion might be expected because new particle-
production thresholds are almost certainly opening up in the transition region
between the lower and upper plateaus. While precise properties can’t be given
for the new states, we can get some rough numbers from the data. The 3.95-
GeV state         has a width of about 40-50 MeV. The 4.4-GeV state (ψ”“)
seems to be about 30-MeV wide. The 4.1-GeV region (temporarily called
      seems to consist of at least two peaks: one at 4.03 GeV, which is 10-20
MeV wide, and a broad enhancement at 4.1 GeV, about 100-MeV wide.


298                                  Physics 1976


   The widths of all of these states are much greater than the intrinsic energy
spread in the e + e - beams, and very much greater than the widths of the ψ
and      The suspicion remains, however, that they may still be correctly
identified as members of the psi sequence, and that the vast apparent differences
between their widths and those of the ψ and        may result simply from the
fact that the higher mass states can undergo rapid hadronic decay through
new channels that have opened up above the 3684-MeV mass of the               As
with most of the questions in the transition region, this matter will require a
good deal more experimental study before it is resolved. In the meantime,
however, we shall tentatively add the three or four new psi-like states shown
above to the growing list of members of the "psion" family.



Up to this point, we have been cataloguing new particles without much
worrying about what it all means. Granting full status to even the several
doubtful states, we have a total of 11 new particles. These are grouped together
in Fig. 15 in a kind of energy-level diagram, which also includes principal
decay modes.
   The system shown in Fig. 15, with its radiative transitions, looks remarkably
like the energy-level diagram of a simple atom, in fact like the simplest of all
“atoms’‘-positronium, the bound state of an electron and a positron. Although
the mass scale for this new positronium is much larger than that of the old,
the observed states of the new system can be placed in a one-to-one corresp-
ondence with the levels expected for a bound fermion-antifermion system
such as e+ e -. Table II shows these predicted levels together with the most
probable assignments of the new particles to the appropriate levels. To gain
some insight into the origins of the new positronium system, let’s now turn
to some specific theoretical models.




15. An energy-level diagram of the new particles. The many observed decay modes of the
psi family have been omitted.


                                        B. Richter                                    299


Table II. Some of the low lying bound states of a fermion-antifermion system together with
an assignment of the new particle to states with appropriate quantum numbers.

State             L                                                       Particle

                  0
                  0
                  0
                  2
                  2
                  0
                  0
                  I
                  I
                  1




7.1. The 3-Quark Model
Some 25 years ago, when only three kinds of hadrons were known (proton,
neutron and pi-meson), these particles were universally regarded as simple,
indivisible, elementary objects. In those days the central task in hadron physics
was the effort to understand the strong nuclear force between protons and
neutrons in terms of pi-meson exchange. But as the family of hadrons grew
steadily larger (they are now numbered in the hundreds), it became increas-
ingly difficult to conceive of them all as elementary. In 1963, M. Gell-Mann
and G. Zweig independently proposed a solution to this dilema - that none
of the hadrons was elementary, but rather that all were complex structures
in themselves and were built up from different combinations of only three
fundamental entities called quarks. These quarks were assumed to carry the
familiar l/2 unit of spin of fermions, but also to have such unfamiliar prop-
erties as fractional electric charge and baryon number. A brief listing of the
3 quarks and 3 antiquarks and their properties is given in Table III.

Table III. Properties of the 3 Quarks and 3 Antiquarks




  According to this 3-quark model, all mesons were made up of one quark
and one antiquark; ail baryons, of three quarks; and all antibaryons, of three
antiquarks. The quark compositions of some of the better known hadrons are
shown here as examples:
                                                      - - -
                                                                                       (8)


300                                 Physics 1976


Prior to 1974, all of the known hadrons could be accommodated within this
basic scheme. Three of the possible meson combinations of quark-antiquark
     dd,    could have the same quantum numbers as the photon, and hence
could be produced abundantly in e+ e - annihilation. These three predicted
states had all infact been found; they were the familiar               and
   1005) vector mesons.

7.2. R in the Quark Model
The quark model postulated a somewhat different mechanism for the process
e+-e--+hadrons than that previously described. For comparison,




16. Hadron production in the quark model.




   Since the quarks are assumed to be elementary, point-like fermions and thus
similar to electrons and muons in their electromagnetic properties, it was
possible to predict the ratio that should exist between the producton cross
sections for quark pairs and muon pairs:




where q is simply the quark’s electric charge. Of course, quarks were supposed
        i


to have half-integral spin and fractional charge in the final state, while all
hadrons have integral charge and some hadrons have integral spin. In a
breathtaking bit of daring it was assumed that the “final-state” interactions
between quarks that were necessary to eliminate fractional charge and half-
integral spin would have no effect on the basic production cross section. With
this assumption the ratio of hadron production to muon-pair production
becomes simply



As developed up to 1974, the quark model actually included 3 triplets of
quarks, rather than simply 3 quarks, so that with this 3 x 3 model the hadron/
muon-pair ration, R, would be


                                     B. Richter                               301


   This beautiful model had great simplicity and explanatory power, but it
could not accommodate the ψ and        particles. Nor could it account for the
two plateaus that were observed in the measured values of R. The model
allowed for excited states of         and      but the required widths were
typically some 20% of the mass of the excited state - more than 1000 times
broader than the observed widths of the ψ and       Before that time there had
been a number of suggested modifications or additions to the basic 3-quark
scheme. I shall not describe these proposed revisions here except for the one
specific model which seems now to best fit the experimental facts.

7.3. A Fourth Quark
The first publications of a theory based on 4 rather than 3 basic quarks go
all the way back to 1964 [21], only a year or so after the original Gell- Mann/
Zweig 3-quark scheme. The motivation at that time was more esthetic than
practical, and these models gradually expired for want of an experimental
fact that called for more than a S-quark explanation. In 1970, Glashow,
Iliopolous and Maiani [22] breathed life back into the 4-quark model in an
elegant paper that dealt with the weak rather than the strong interactions. In
this work the fourth quark - which had earlier been christened by Glashow
the “charmed” quark (c) - was used to explain the non-occurrence of certain
weak decays of strange particles in a very simple and straight-forward way.
The new c quark was assumed to have a charge of +2/3, like the u quark,
and also to carry + 1 unit of a previously unknown quantum number called
charm, which was conserved in both the strong and electromagnetic inter-
actions but not in the weak interactions. The c and       quarks were also re-
quired to have masses somewhat larger than the effective mass of the 3 original
quarks, and it was clear that they should be able to combine with the older
quarks and antiquarks to form many new kinds of “charmed” hadrons [23].

7.4. "Charmonium”
The 4-quark theoretical model became much more compelling with the
discovery of the psi particles. This model postulates that the ψ is the lowest
mass      system which has the quantum numbers of the photon. The            long
life is explained by the fact that the decay of the ψ into ordinary hadrons
requires the conversion of both c and into other quarks and antiquarks. The
positronium-like energy-level states of the psions discussed earlier are also
well accounted for by the         system; indeed, 5 specific intermediate states
were predicted by Applequist et al. [24], and by Eichten et al. [25], before they
were actually discovered. It was the close analogy with positronium that led
Applequist and Politzer to christen the new       system charmonium, a name
that has caught on.
   The 4-quark model also requires two plateaus on R. Above the threshold
for charmed-hadron production, the R = 2 calculation made above must be
modified by the addition of the fourth quark’s charge, which results in a
prediction of R = 10/3 (not enough, but in the right direction). The broad
psi-like states at 3.95, 4.1, and 4.4 GeV are accounted for by postulating that


302                               Physics 1976


the mass of the lightest charmed particle is less than half the mass of the
(3950) but more than half the mass of the very narrow             which means
that     can decay strongly to charmed-particle pairs, but     cannot.
   To summarize briefly, the 4-quark model of the hadrons seemed to account
in at least a qualitative fashion for all of the main experimental information
that had been gathered about the psions, and by the early part of 1976 the
consensus for charm had become quite strong. The         system of charmonium
had provided indirect but persuasive evidence for a fourth, charmed quark,
but there remained one very obvious and critically important open question.
The particles formed by the     system are not in themselves charmed particles,
since charm and anticharm cancel out to zero. But it is necessary to the theory
that particles which exhibit charm exist          cd, etc.). What was needed,
then, was simply the direct experimental observation of charmed particles,
and the question was: Where were they [26]?

8. THE DISCOVERY OF CHARM

8.1. What are We Looking For?
By early 1976 a great deal had been learned about the properties that the
sought-after charmed particles must have. As an example, it was clear that
the mass of the lightest of these particles, the charmed D meson, had to fall
within the range

                                                                            (13)
The lower limit was arrived at by noting once again that the              was
very narrow and therefore could not decay into charmed particles, and also
that the upper limit had to be consistent with the beginning of the rise of R
from its lower to its upper plateau. Since the principal decay product of the
c quark was assumed for compelling reasons to be the s quark, then the decay
products of charmed particles must preferentially contain strange particlcs
such as the K mesons. The charmed D mesons, for example, could con-
fidently be expected to have the following identifiable decay modes:




A further point was that, since the charmed quark would decay only through
the weak interactions, one might reasonably expect to see evidence of parity
violation in the decays of the D mesons.
   At SPEAR our collaboration had looked for such charm signatures in the
limited data taken before the psi discoveries, but without success. As the post-
psi data accumulated throughout 1975, it was evident that we should have
another go at it, with particular emphasis on the results obtained at energies
close to the expected charm threshold, where the simplest charmed mesons
would be produced without serious masking effects from extraneous back-
ground. Since I spent the academic year 1975-76 on sabbatical leave at
CERN, this chapter of the charmed-particle story belongs to my collaborators.


                                     B. Richter                               303


8.2. The Charmed Meson
 With the advantages of a much larger data sample and an improvement in the
 method of distinguishing between pi- and K-mesons in the Mark I detector,
 a renewed search for charmed particles was begun in 1976. Positive results
 were not long in coming. The first resonance to turn up in the analysis was
 one in the mass distribution of the twoparticle system K + π+ in multiparticle
 events [27]. The evidence for this is shown in Fig. 17. This was the first direct
 indication of what might be the D meson, for the mass of 1865 MeV was in
just the right region. If it was the     then presumably the production process
was :




‘The branching fraction was a little low compared to the charm-model pre-
dictions, but not alarmingly so. The measured width of the resonance was
consistent with the resolution of our apparatus, which in this case was de-
termined by the momentum resolution of the detector rather than by the more
precise energy resolution of the circulating beams. The measured upper bound
on the full width was about 40 MeV; the actual value could well be much
smaller, as a weak-interaction decay of the D meson would require.
   Continuing analysis of the data yielded two more persuasive findings. The
first was a resonance in               or             which appears to be an
alternate decay mode of the       since the mass is also 1865 MeV. The second


304                                    Physics 1976


was the discovery of the charged companions [28] of the         which were ob-
served at the slightly larger mass of 1875 MeV in the following decay channels :




The data for the charged D states are shown in Fig. 18. It is important to
note that these states are not observed in three-body decay when the pions
are oppositely charged:




                                                      60




18. The invariant mass distribution of the
      system. The      appears in the plot (a)
with same-sign pions and not in the plot (b)
with opposite-sign pions.




This is precisely what is required by the charmed-quark model. In addition
to the clear identification of both neutral and charged D mesons, an excited
state [29] of this meson (D*) has also turned up and has been seen to decay to
the ground state by both strong and electromagnetic interactions:




   Since we have several times mentioned the possibility that the psi-like states
having masses above that of the             may be much broader than ψ a n d
    because they are able to decay strongly into charmed-particle pairs, it is
interesting to note that this speculation has now been confirmed in the case
of the            It now appears, in fact, that the following are the principal
decay modes of this particle:


                                             B. Richter                         305




  As a final bit of evidence in support of the charmed-meson interpretation
of the experimental data, the predicted parity violation in D decay has also
been observed. In the decay process                   the K and π e a c h h a v e
spin-0 and odd intrinsic parity. This means that any spin possessed by the
must show up as orbital angular momentum in the          system, and thus that
the parity of the    must be given by




   The experimental data that have been described here arc strikingly con-
sistent with the predictions of the 4-quark or charm theory of the hadrons, and
there is little doubt that charmed particles have now in fact been found. In
addition to these charmed mesons uncovered at SPEAR, there has been
recent information from Fermilab that a collaborative group working there
under Wonyong Lee has now discovered the first of the charmed baryons [31]
actually an antibaryon designed        to identify it as the charmed counterpart
of the Λ.

9. OBSERVATION OF JETS
While this topic is not directly connected with the new particles, it does have
a direct bearing on the validity of the quark model. As I noted earlier, the
picture of e + e - annihilation that is derived from the quark model indicates
that the final-state hadrons do not come directly from the virtual-photon
intermediate state, but rather from the quark-antiquark pair that is first
created from the electromagnetic fireball and subsequently forms the final
hadrons. These hadrons are produced with low transverse momenta with
respect to the       direction, and as illustrated in Fig. 19, if the energy is suf-
ficiently high, form two collimated jets of particles whose axes lie along the
original      direction.




                                                             Jet

19. Jet production in the quark model   l.


306                                Physics 1976


   At SPEAR we have analyzed our highest-energy data [32] by determining
for each event those particular axes that minimize the transverse momentum
relative to those axes for all of the observed particles. This method of analysis
leads to the definition of a quantity we have called “sphericity,” which is
related to the quadrupole moment of the particle distribution in momentum
space. The more jet-like event, the lower the sphericity. Figure 20 shows the
data compared to the jet model and to an “isotropic” model with no jet-like
characteristics. As the energy increases, the events do become more jet-like
as required. The result was excellent agreement, not only in the general sense
but also in the finding that the angular distribution of the jet axes was con-
sistent with the 1         distribution that is expected if the jets originate from
parent particles of spin-1/2.




    In addition, under certain operating conditions the beams in the SPEAR
storage ring become polarized, with the electron spin parallel and the positron
spin antiparallel to the ring’s magnetic bending field. In this polarized con-
dition an azimuthal asymmetry in particle production can appear with
respect to the direction of the beams. Jets measured under these conditions
also displayed the azimuthal asymmetry that is expected of spin-l/2 particles.
    Further, the individual hadrons within the jets also displayed this asym-
metry [33]. It will be evident that the greater the momentum of a single
hadron, the closer that hadron must lie to the original direction defined by
the quark. By looking at pion production in detail, we were able to determine
that as the pion momentum approached the maximum value possible for the
particular machine energy, so did the azimuthal asymmetry approach the
maximum possible asymmetry expected for spin-l/2 particles. This point is
illustrated in Fig. 21.


                                        B. Richter


2 21. The azimuthal asymmetry parameter for
pions normalized to the asymmetry in µ-pair
production vs. the fractional pion momentum.




   I find it quite remarkable that a collection of hadrons, each of which has
integral spin, should display all of the angular-distribution characteristics that
are expected for the production of a pair of spin- 1/2 particles. Such behavior is
possible without assuming the existence of quarks (the final-state helicity must
be one along the direction of the particle or jet), but any other explanation
seems difficult and cumbersome. In my view the observations of these jet
phenomena in e + e - annihilation constitute one of the very strongest pieces of
evidence for believing that there really is a substructure to the hadrons.

10. CONCLUSIONS AND QUESTIONS
The electron-positron colliding-beam experiments of the past two years have,
I believe, settled the question of the significance of the psi particles. The
charmonium family, the two plateaus in R, the wide resonances above charm
threshold, the charmed particles themselves, the evidence for the weak decays
of the charmed particles and the existence of jets - all these support most
strongly the ideas of the quark model of hadron substructure and the 4-quark
version of that model. To me, one of the most remarkable features of the quark
model is that it correctly explains a great deal of data on strongly interacting
particles with the most simple-minded of calculations. The charmonium
spectrum, for example, is calculated with the nonrelativistic Schrödinger
equation using a simple potential. The two plateaus in R and jet structure are
explained by assuming that the final-state interactions of strongly interacting
particles can be ignored. Why it is all so simple, while at the same time the
quarks themselves appear confined to hadrons and are never seen in the free
state, is one of the central questions of strong-interaction physics.
   We already know, however, that the 4-quark model cannot be the complete
story. The colliding-beam experiments are not entirely consistent with this
model. The high energy plateau value of R is about 5.1 rather than 3-1/3
as demanded by the charm model. While R = 3-1/3 is only reached in the
 theory at very high energies, the difference between 3-1/3 and 5.1 arc too


308                                Physics 1976


large to be explained easily. At the same time, there is evidence in our data
for a class of events (the µ-e events) which are not easily explained within the
framework of 4-quarks and 4 leptons (e-,                 and which may require
an expansion of the lepton family and/or the quark family. These inconsisten-
cies immediately bring up the question of how many quarks and leptons there
are.
   There are two schools of thought on this question. One school says that
the quark system is complete or nearly complete-while there may be a few
more quarks to be found, there are a small number of indivisible elements,
among which are the present four, and all of the strongly interacting particles
are built out of these elementary and indivisible components. The other
school says that the quarks themselves are probably built from something still
smaller, and that we shall go on forever finding smaller and smaller entities
each inside the next larger group.
   These and other questions on particle structure may be answered by the next
generation of e + e - colliding-beam machines now being built at DESY and
SLAC which will reach 35 to 40 GeV in the center-of-mass system. Experi-
ments on these machines will begin in 4 to 5 years and should tell us promptly
about the existence of new plateaus in R, new “oniums”, or new leptons.
   An even more fundamental set of questions, which I find more interesting
than the number of quarks, will probably not be answered by experiments at
any accelerator now in construction. These questions have to do with the
possibility of a unified picture of the forces of nature: gravity, the weak inter-
action, the electromagnetic interaction, and the strong interaction. Wein-
berg [34] and Salam [35] have made the first models of a unified weak and
electromagnetic interaction theory. Attempts have been made at a unified
picture of the weak, electromagnetic and strong interactions - more primitive
than the Weinberg/Salam model, for the problem is more difficult, but still
a beginning. The experimental information required to establish these unified
pictures will almost certainly require still higher energies: several hundred
GeV in the center-of-mass and again, I believe, in the e+ e - system. If any of
these unified pictures is correct at very high energies, then our only correct
field theory, quantum electrondynamics, will necessarily have to break down,
and I will have come full circle back to the first experiment I wanted to do as
an independent researcher [36].


                                                B. Richter                                             309


REFERENCES




 1. J. J. Aubert et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 1404 (1974).
2. J. E, Augustin et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 33. 1406 (1974).
3. G. S. Abram et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 1453 (1974).
4. The early development of the colliding beams technique was an international effort.
     The two groups who. in those early days suffered with us through the discovery and
     conquest of what at times seemed to be an endless series of beam instabilities and
     technological problems. were those of F. Amman at Frascati and G. I. Budkcr at Novo-
     sibirsk.
 5. The success of the SPEAR project is in large measure due to J. Rees who was then my
     deputy, and to M. Allen, A. M. Boyarski. W. Davies-White. N. Dean, G. E. Fischer,
    J. Harris. J. Jurow, I,. Karvonen. M. J. Lee. R. McConnell. R. Melen. P. Morton.
     A. Sabersky, M. Sands, R. Scholl and J. Voss.
 6. The physicists of the SLAC/LBL group who were responsible for building the detector
     and for the experiments I will discuss arc S. M. Alam. J.-E. Augustin. A. M. Boyarski,
     M. Breidenbach, F. Bulos, J. M. Dorfan. G. J. Feldman. G. E. Fischer. D. Fryberger,
     G. Hanson, J. A. Jaros, B. Jean-Marie. R. R. Larsen, D. Lüke, V. Lüth. H. L. Lynch,
     C. C. Morehouse, J. hi. Paterson. M. L. Perl. I. Peruzzi, M. Piccolo. T. P. Pun. P.
     Rapidis, B. Richter, R. H. Schindler. R. F. Schwitters, J. Siegrist. W. Tanenbaum. and
     F. Vannucci from SLAC; and G. S. Abrams. D. Briggs. W. C. Carithers, W. Chinowsky,
     R. G. DeVoc, C. E. Friedberg. G. Goldhaber. R. J . H o l l e b e e k , A . D . J o h n s o n . J . A .
     Kadyk, A. Litke, B. Lulu. R. J. Madaras. H. K. Nguyen. F. Pierre, B. Sadoulet. G. H.
     Trilling, J. S. Whitaker, J. Wiss, and J. E. Zipse from LBL.
 7. B. Richter, Proceedings of the XVII International Conference on High Energy Physic-s, London
     (1974).
 8. J. Ellis, I b i d .
 9. A. M. Boyarski et al.. Phys. Rev. Lett. 34. 1357 (197.5) : V. Lüth et al.. Phys. Rev. Lett.
     35, 1124 (1975).
10. B. Jean-Marie et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 36, 291 (1976).
11. A. M. Boyarski et al.. Phys. Rev. Lett. 34, 762 (1975).
12. Review paper by R. Schwitters. Proceedings of the 1975 International Symposium on Lefton
     and Photon Interaction, Stanford University (1975).
13. W. Braunschweig et al., Phys. Lett. 57B. 407 (1975).
14. B. H. Wiik, Proceedings of the 1975 Symposium on Lepton and Photon Interactions. Stanford
    University (1975).
15. J. Heintze, Ibid.
16. W. Tanenbaum et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 35. 1323 (1975).
17. S. Whitaker et al., to be published in Phys. Rev. Lett.
18. G. H. Trilling. LBL Report 5535 and Proceedings of the SLAC Summer Institute on Particle
     Physics, Stanford (1976).
19. D. H. Badtke et al., paper submitted to the XVIII International Conference on High Energy
     Physics, Tbilisi, USSR (1976).
20. J. Siegrist et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 36, 700 (1976).
21. D. Amati et al., Phys. Lett 11, 1 9 0 ( 1 9 6 4 ) :
     J. D. Bjorken and S. L. Glashow, Phys. Lett. 11, 255 ( 1 9 6 4 ) :
     Z. Maki and Y. Chnuki, Prog. Theor. Phys. 32, 144 (1964):
     Y. Hara, Phys. Rev. 134B, 701 (1964).
22. S. L. Glashow, J. Iliopolous, and L. Maiani, Phys. Rev. D2, 128.5 (1970).
23. An excellent review of the status of the charm model at the end of 1974 is that of M. K;.
    Gaillard, B. Lee, and J. L. Rosner, Rev. Mod. Phys. 47. 277 (1975).


310                                       Physics 1976

24. T. Applequist et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 34. 365 (1975).
25. E. Eichten et al.. Phys. Rev. Lett. 34, 369 (1975).
26. One possible example of the production of a charmed baryon has been reported by E. G.
    Cazzoli et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 34. 1125 (1975).
27. G. Goldhaber et al.. Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 255 (1976).
28. I. Peruzzi et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 37. 569 (1976).
29. Papers on the D* decays and       decays are in preparation by the SLAC/LBL Group.
30. Strictly speaking. this argument is not airtight. If the D + is not in the same isotopic
      doublet as the      the comparison of D + a n d    decay gives no information on parity
      violation. The close values of the masses of D+ and      however, make it very probable
      that they are related.
31. B. Knapp et al.. Phys. Rev. Lett. 37. 822 (1976).
32. G. Hanson et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 35 1609 (1975).
33. R. F. Schwittcrs et al.. Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 1320 (1975).
34. S. Weinberg. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1.9, 1264 (1967).
35. A. Salam. Proceedings of the 8th Nobe1 Symposium (Almquist Wiksells, Stockholm, 1968).
36. I want to acknowledge here those who have been most important in helping me on
      my circular path in particle physics and whom I have not previously mentioned. They
      are L. S. Osborne. my thesis adviser; E. Courant and A. Sessler. who helped me under-
      stand the mysteries of the behavior of beams in storage rings; S. Drell and J. D. Bjorken,
      who have been my guides to theoretical physics; M. Sands, who helped me design the
      storage ring and whose encouragement helped keep me going in the frustrating years
      of waiting for the funds to build it; W. K. H. Panofsky, who was Director of HEPL and
      is Director of SLAC. without whose support and desire to see “good physics” done there
      would be no SPEAR: and Laurose Richter--wife, friend and adviser.
