                          C ARL D. AN D E R S O N

       The production and properties of positrons
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1936


Information of fundamental importance to the general problem of atomic
structure has resulted from systematic studies of the cosmic radiation carried
out by the Wilson cloud-chamber method.
   After Skobelzyn in 1927 had first shown photographs of tracks of cosmic-
ray particles, Professor R. A. Millikan and the writer in the spring of 1930
planned a cloud-chamber apparatus suitable for cosmic-ray studies, in par-
ticular to measure the energies of cosmic-ray particles by means of their
curvatures in a strong magnetic field. The chamber, of dimensions 17 x 17
 x 3 cm, was arranged with its long dimension vertical, and incorporated
into a powerful electromagnet capable of maintaining a uniform magnetic
field up to 24,000 gauss strength.
   In the summer of 1931 the first results were obtained with this technique.
The direct measurement of the energies of atomic particles was extended
from about 15 million electron-volts, the highest energy measured before
that time, to 5 billion electron-volts. In the spring of 1932 a preliminary
paper on the energies of cosmic-ray particles was published in which energies
over I billion electron-volts were reported. It was here shown that particles
of positive charge occurred about as abundantly as did those of negative
charge, and in many cases several positive and negative particles were found
to be projected simultaneously from a single center. The presence of posi-
tively charged particles and the occurrence of "showers" of several particles
showed clearly that the absorption of cosmic rays in material substances is
due primarily to a nuclear phenomenon of a new type.
   Measurements of the specific ionization of both the positive and negative
particles, by counting the number of droplets per unit length along the
tracks, showed the great majority of both the positive and negative particles
to possess unit electric charge. The particles of negative charge were readily
interpreted as electrons, and those of positive charge were at first tentatively
interpreted as protons, at that time the only known particle of unit positive
charge.
   If the particles of positive charge were to be ascribed to protons then those


366                           1936 C.D.ANDERSON

of low energy and sharp curvature in the magnetic field, (e.g. a curvature
greater than that corresponding to an electron having an energy of about
500 million electron-volts), should be expected to exhibit an appreciably
greater ionization than the negatively charged electrons. In general, how-
ever, the positive particles seemed to differ in specific ionization only inap-
preciably from the negative ones. To avoid the assumption, which appeared
very radical at that time, that the positive particles had electronic mass,
serious consideration was given to the possibility that the particles which
appeared to be positively charged and directed downward into the earth
were in reality negatively charged electrons which through scattering had
suffered a reversal of direction and were projected upwards away from the
earth. Although such a reversal of direction through scattering might be
expected to occur occasionally it seemed inadequate to account for the large
number of particle tracks which showed a specific ionization anomalously
small if they were to be ascribed to protons.
    To differentiate with certainty between the particles of positive and nega-
tive charge it was necessary only to determine without ambiguity their direc-
tion of motion. To accomplish this purpose a plate of lead was inserted
across a horizontal diameter of the chamber. The direction of motion of the
particles could then be readily ascertained due to the lower energy and there-
fore the smaller radius of curvature of the particles in the magnetic field after
they had traversed the plate and suffered a loss in energy.
    Results were then obtained which could logically be interpreted only in
terms of particles of a positive charge and a mass of the same order of
magnitude as that normally possessed by the free negative electron. In par-
ticular one photograph (see Fig. 1) shows a particle of positive charge trav-
ersing a 6 mm plate of lead. If electronic mass is assigned to this particle its
energy before it traverses the plate is 63 million electron-volts and after it
 emerges its energy is 23 million electron-volts. The possibility that this par-
 title of positive charge could represent a proton is ruled out on the basis of
 range and curvature. A proton of the curvature shown after it emerges from
 the plate would have an energy of 200,000 electron-volts, and according to
previously well-established experimental data would have a range of only
 5 mm whereas the observed range was greater than 50 mm. The only
 possible conclusion seemed to be that this track, indeed, was the track of a
 positively charged electron. Examples similar to this and others in which
 two or more particles were found to be produced at one center gave addi-
 tional evidence for the existence of particles of positive charge and mass,


             PRODUCTION AND PROPERTIES OF POSITRONS                                     367




Fig. 1. A 63 million electron-volt positron passing through a 6 mm lead plate and
emerging with an energy of 23 million electron-volts. The length of this latter path
is at least ten times greater than the possible length of a proton track of this curvature.
(Magnetic field 15,000 gauss.) In all the photographs the magnetic field is directed into the
                                           paper.

small compared with that of the proton. These results formed the basis of
the paper published in September 1932 announcing the existence of free
positive electrons.
  Measurements by the droplet counting method of the magnitude of the
specific ionization of the positive and negative electrons which occur with
energies low enough to be appreciably curved in the magnetic field have
shown that the mass and charge of the positive electron cannot differ by
more than 20 percent and 10 percent, respectively, from the mass and charge
of the negative electron.
   Blackett and Occhialini using an apparatus similar to ours but with the
added advantage that through the use of control by Geiger-Müller tube
counters their apparatus was made to respond automatically to the passage of
a cosmic-ray particle, in the spring of 1933 confirmed the existence of positive
electrons, or positrons, and obtained many beautiful photographs of com-
plex electron showers.


368                          1936   C .D .A N D E R S O N


   That positrons could be produced by an agent other than cosmic rays was
first shown by Chadwick, Blackett and Occhialini when they observed that
positrons were produced by the radiation generated in the impact of alpha
particles upon beryllium. The radiation produced in the beryllium is com-
plex in character, consisting both of neutrons and gamma rays. In their ex-
periment it was not possible to determine which of these rays was respon-
sible for the production of positrons. Curie and Joliot by a similar experi-
ment, in which they interposed blocks of lead and paraffin into the path of
the rays from beryllium and measured the yield of positrons as a function
of the thickness and material of the absorber concluded that the positrons
arose more likely as a result of the gamma rays than of the neutrons.
   Direct proof that the hard component of the gamma rays from ThC” can
give rise to positrons was first given by Neddermeyer and the writer, and
independently by Curie and Joliot, and by Meitner and Philipp in the spring
of 1933. In Figs. 2 and 3 positrons produced by gamma rays from ThC” are
shown.
   In addition to the methods of producing positrons already mentioned, i.e.
by absorption of cosmic-ray photons and electrons, and by the absorption
of sufficiently high energy gamma rays from terrestrial sources, positrons
have also been observed among the disintegration products of certain radio-
active substances. The artificially produced radioactive elements first dis-
covered by Curie and Joliot in 1934 are found to distintegrate either by the
ejection of a positive or negative electron. Those elements whose atomic
number is greater than that of the stable elements of the same mass number
in general distintegrate by the ejection of a positron. Fig. 4 shows positrons
resulting from the disintegration of       prepared by bombarding a boron
target with deuterons.



                          Theoretical interpretation

The present electron theory of Dirac provides a means of describing many
of the phenomena governing the production and annihilation of positrons.
Blackett and Occhialini first suggested that the appearance of pairs of positive
and negative electrons could be understood in terms of this theory as the
"creation" of a positive-negative electron pair in the neighborhood of an
atomic nucleus. The energy corresponding to the proper mass of both of the
particles, as well as to their kinetic energies, is, according to this view, sup-


              PRODUCTION AND PROPERTIES OF POSITRONS                                    369




Fig. 2. A positron of 0.82 million electron-volts ejected from a lead plate by gamma
rays from ThC” passes through a 0.5 mm aluminium plate and emerges with an
          energy of 0.52 million electron-volts. (Magnetic field 430 gauss.)




Fig. 3. A positive-negative electron pair produced in a lead plate by the gamma rays
from ThC”. (Magnetic field 800 gauss.) In this and the remaining photographs the direct
   image is at the left; the right-hand reversed image is taken for stereoscopic observation.


370                         1936 C.D.ANDERSON




Fig. 4. Positrons produced in the distintegration of radioactive carbon of mass eleven
units. (Magnetic field 780 gauss.) (The radioactive carbon was kindly supplied by
Professor C. C. Lauritsen and his collaborators who prepared it by bombarding with
                        deuterons a target containing boron.)


plied by the incident radiation. Since the energy corresponding to the proper
mass of a pair of electrons is approximately one million electron-volts one
should expect gamma rays of energy greater than this amount to produce
positrons in their passage through matter, and further that the sum of the
kinetic energies of the positive and negative electrons should be equal to the
energy of the radiation producing them diminished by approximately one
million electron-volts.
   Experiments by Neddermeyer and the writer, and by Chadwick, Blackett
and Occhialini, and others, have shown this relation to obtain in the produc-
tion of positrons by ThC” gamma rays, providing evidence for the correct-
ness of this view of the origin of positive-negative electron pairs.
   The theory of Dirac requires further that a positron, when it finds itself in
a very ordinary environment, as, for example, in passing through common
substances, will, on the average, have only a very short life, of the order of
one billionth of a second or less. The positrons and negative electrons will
mutually annihilate one another in pairs, and in their stead will appear a pair
of photons, each of approximately one-half million electron-volts energy.


            PRODUCTION AND PROPERTIES OF POSITRONS                          371
Although the lifetime of positrons has not been actually measured, it has
been shown to be very short, and the radiation which results from their anni-
hilation has been observed. The first to do this were Joliot and Thibaud. The
annihilation radiation is of the proper intensity and the energy of its individ-
ual corpuscles is approximately the required amount of one-half million
electron-volts, corresponding to the complete annihilation of the positrons.



                           Positrons of high energy

The experimental results on the production of positrons out of radiation
have been shown to be in approximate agreement with the theory for those
processes where the quantum energies are not too high. Gamma radiations
of quantum energy extending up to some 15 million electron-volts arise in
certain nuclear transformations produced in the laboratory. Measurements
of the absorption of these radiations and of the numbers and distribution in
energy of the positive and negative electrons produced by these radiations
are in sufficiently good agreement with the calculations of Oppenheimer,
Heitler, and Bethe based on the Dirac theory to provide evidence for the
essential correctness of the theory of absorption of gamma radiations in the
range of quantum energy up to some 15 million electron-volts.
   In the broad range of energies, however, which lies above 15 million
electron-volts and extends up to at least 20,000 million electron-volts, such
as the energies with which the cosmic-ray particles are endowed, the experi-
ments have only very recently provided strong evidence leading to a detailed
understanding of the absorption of photons and electrons in this range of
energies and to an explanation of the cosmic-ray showers.
   Closely related to the process of the production of positive and negative
electrons out of radiation, is the one which may be considered its inverse,
namely, the production of radiation through nuclear impacts by a positive
or negative electron in its passage through matter. Direct measurements on
the energy loss of electrons, in the energy range up to about 400 million
electron-volts, in their traversals through thin plates of lead, have shown
that the loss in energy due to direct ionization by the electrons is but a small
fraction of the total energy loss, and that the loss in energy over that due to
ionization is in good accord with that to be expected theoretically through
the production of radiation by nuclear impact. Furthermore a small number
of measurements at energies up to 1,000 million electron-volts has shown no


372                            1936 C.D.ANDERSON

significant deviation from the theoretical loss. These data on energy loss
of high-energy electrons afford strong evidence that, at least in part, the
origin of the cosmic-ray showers of photons and positive and negative elec-
trons can be understood in terms of a chain of successive processes of photon
production by radiative impacts with nuclei on the part of the high-energy
positive and negative electrons, and the subsequent absorption of these pho-
tons in nuclear collisions resulting in the production of numerous positive-
negative electron pairs which appear as the cosmic-ray showers. After more
detailed theoretical computations have been carried out on the rate of build-
ing-up of positive and negative electron secondaries resulting from these
multiple processes, and their subsequent removal through absorption, will a
more adequate test of the theory be possible. At present, however, it is very
difficult to doubt that the highly absorbable component of the primary cos-
mic-ray beam consists largely of electrons absorbed principally through the
mechanisms discussed above, which give rise to the electron showers.
   Until quite recently it was not clear that the high-energy positive and
negative electrons which have now been shown to exhibit a high absorb-
ability, behaved in a manner essentially differently from the cosmic-ray
particles of highly penetrating character. These highly penetrating particles,
although not free positive and negative electrons, appear to consist of both
positive and negative particles of unit electric charge, and will provide in-
teresting material for future study.
   Figs. 5-11 show examples of cosmic-ray showers of positive and negative
electrons, and Fig. 12* an example of a large energy loss of a fast positive
electron. Figs. 5,6,7,8, and 11 were photographed at 4,300 meters above
sea level, the remainder near sea level.
   It is a pleasure to express my sincere gratitude to Professor Millikan and
to Dr. Neddermeyer for the great part they have played in these investiga-
tions on the properties of positrons, and to the Carnegie Institution of Wash-
ington, whose funds administered to Professor Millikan have made the
investigations possible.




* No reproduction of this figure was given in the original.


             PRODUCTION AND PROPERTIES OF POSITRONS                               37




Fig. 5. A small cosmic-ray shower of positive and negative electrons. (Magnetic field
                                    7,900 gauss.)




Fig. 6. A cosmic-ray shower of more than one hundred positive and negative electrons
                            (Magnetic field 7,900 gauss.)


374                              1936 C.D.ANDERSON




Fig. 7. A shower in which eight electrons (+ and -) strike the upper surface of a
0.35 cm lead plate, and more than fifteen emerge from its lower surface. This photograph
is an example of the multiplication of shower tracks in a thin piece of absorbing material,
due to the production by radiative impacts of photons and their absorption through
                     pair-production (Magnetic field 7,900 gauss.)




Fig. 8. A positive-negative electron pair (energies of negative and positive 4.6 and
140 million electron-volts respectively) generated in the gas (argon) of the chamber
      by a photon associated with the cosmic rays. (Magnetic field 7,900 gauss.)


              PRODUCTION AND PROPERTIES OF POSITRONS                                  375




Fig. 9. A cosmic-ray shower of 22 positive and negative electrons produced by one
or more photons initially incident on the upper surface of a I cm lead plate. (Magnetic
                                 field 17,000 gauss.)




Fig. IO. Three high-energy cosmic-ray electrons incident on the upper surface of a
I cm platinum plate. A shower of more than 20 positive and negative electrons emerges
from the lower surface of the plate from a region below two of the three incident
electrons. The shower appears as a result of the production of photons by radiative impacts
and their absorption by pair-production in the platinum plate. (Magnetic field 7,900
                                          gauss.)


376                               1936 C.D.ANDERSON




Fig. 11. A positron of 480 million electron-volts strikes a 0.35 cm lead plate. Below
the plate three electrons appear having energies (in million electron-volts) respectively:
positron 45, negatron 45, and positron 31. One of the tracks below the plate presum-
ably represents the incident positron after passage through the plate, and the other two
tracks a pair generated by the absorption of a photon generated in the plate. The energy
lost in the plate by the incident positron is at least 435 million electron-volts and since
the loss by ionization in a plate of this thickness should not be greater than IO million
electron-volts, the greater part of the energy lost by the positron in this instance must
         have appeared in the form of radiation. (Magnetic field 7,900 gauss.)
