                              CH A R L E S G . BA R K L A


                Characteristic Röntgen radiation
                            Nobel Lecture, ]une 3, 1920



I have had some difficulty in deciding what to speak about to-day. Much of
my work on characteristic radiation is already comparatively old and may
be familiar to many of you, as it has been summarized in such works as the
]ahrbuch der Radioaktivität und Elektronik and Professor Stark’s Atomdynamik.
 I shall therefore choose two, and only two, points which are of more recent
interest - firstly, the results of my own experiments which have a bearing on
 the Quantum Theory of Radiation; secondly, the evidence for another series
 of characteristic radiations - a J series*.



                         The quantum theory of radiation

Phenomena of scattering - The results of experiments on the scattering of X-
rays, which have an obvious bearing on the Quantum Theory of Radiation,
may be briefly summarized.
   When X-rays traverse matter of any kind, this matter becomes a source of
a radiation similar in character to that of the primary radiation falling upon
it. A variation in the intensity of this scattered radiation with direction
around the primary beam shows slight polarization of the primary radiation
proceeding direct from an X-ray tube.
   The scattered radiation proceeding in a direction at right angles to that of
propagation of the primary radiation is highly polarized in the manner of
light scattered from the sky.
   The variation in intensity of the scattered radiation with direction relative
to the axis of the primary radiation agrees within certain limits very closely
with the theoretical distribution as given by the equation

                                  =       (I +

* References to the original papers by the author will be found in the Bakerian Lecture,
1916, published in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 1917.


                 CHARACTERISTIC RÖNTGEN RADIATION                          393
an equation readily derived on the orthodox electromagnetic wave theory.
These experimental results were looked for as necessarily following from
such a theory.
   Difficult as the first two results would be to explain on any entity or quan-
tum theory, that is, on any theory assuming radiation itself to exist in def-
inite indivisible bundles or quanta, perhaps the strongest evidence against
this is provided by the experimental verification, within limits, of the above
equation. The derivation of this equation depends essentially on a steady
variation with direction, not of a number of indivisible entities, but of the
energy density around a single radiating charge - an electron in this case.
   Further, measurement of the energy of radiation scattered furnishes one of
the most searching and critical of tests that could be applied to any theory.
The writer early concluded that neither atoms, molecules nor gaseous ions
were the scattering units, but that these were the constituent electrons in
matter, and that in general the number of electrons per atom, for light atoms
at any rate, was proportional to the atomic weight.* The fraction of a beam
lost by scattering per centimetre of substance traversed was shown by J. J.
 Thomson to be given by the expression




where N is the number per cubic centimetre of particles of charge e and
mass m. Applying this to the experimental data, it at first appeared that the
number of electrons per atom was several times the atomic weight. As the
data available for the values of N, e/m, and e were more accurately deter-
mined, the calculated value for the number of electrons per atom became
smaller, until with the most recent values the number indicated is one elec-
tron per atom of hydrogen, 6 per atom of carbon, 7 per atom of nitrogen,
8 for oxygen, 15 or 16 for sulphur, and so on.
   As these conclusions regarding the number of electrons (outer electrons)
within the atom have been confirmed by the researches of Rutherford, Bohr
and Moseley, it is perfectly legitimate to use the agreement as evidence in
support of the theory of radiation upon which it was based. The chances of
such an agreement being arrived at accidentally are almost infinitesimal, for,
apart from the orthodox theory of electromagnetic radiation, the intensity
of scattered radiation might have been anything between - say - one thou-
* Hydrogen excepted.


394                              1917 C.G.BARKLA

sandth part and a thousand times what was experimentally observed. Yet
the value experimentally determined in 1904 agrees with the calculated value
to a degree of accuracy as close as it is now possible to estimate the pressure
of the air upon which the experiments were performed!
   This confirmation is very remarkable. The theory on which it is based is
the spreading wave theory. It assumes that the scattered radiation is the radia-
tion resulting from the disturbance in electrons while under the influence of
the electrostatic field in the primary radiation.
   The theory assumes that radiation can take place from these electrons in
any quantity whatever, and is not confined to units or quanta; that the radia-
tion is a continuous process not depending on any limiting or critical con-
dition.
   Again, I have found that the intensity of the radiation scattered from light
elements over considerable ranges varies little with the wavelength of the
primary radiation. This is in perfect agreement with the theory based on the
assumption of independent action of the electrons. Further experiments have
shown that the intensity of scattered radiation from the heavy atoms in
which the constituent electrons are more closely packed, increases rapidly
and apparently continuously with the wavelength of the radiation, unless
this is fairly small. Also, in general, the rate of increase of intensity with
wavelength is greater, the heavier the atom from which the scattered radia-
tion proceeds. Such results are, again to be expected on the wave theory
when the wavelength becomes comparable with the size of the atom, for
there is very close agreement in phase of the radiations set up by neighbour-
ing electrons; ultimately a group of electrons and not an individual electron
moves as a whole and becomes the scattering unit. (When the group com-
prises all the electrons in the atom, the scattering per atom becomes on this
theory proportional to the atomic number squared, instead of to the atomic
number, when the electrons scatter independently.)
   There is thus in the phenomena of scattering, not only no suggestion of a
quantum or entity of radiation, or of any discontinuity in the process of
radiation involved, but there is some of the strongest positive evidence against
any such theory. The results appear conclusive, for the tests which have been
applied are the most searching and sensitive. The phenomena observed be-
come meaningless on any quantum or entity theory. This conclusion is true
also of absorption, for in the transmission of X-rays, particularly of short
wavelength through matter consisting of light elements only, the energy
absorbed is practically all re-emitted as scattered radiation. The quantities


                  CHARACTERISTIC RÖNTGEN RADIATION                           395
radiated by each electron are approximately identical with those absorbed.
It follows that this process of absorption is also a process which takes place
in any quantity whatever, and is unlimited by any critical condition.

Characteristic radiation - Each element when traversed by X-rays emits X-
radiations characteristic of the element; each characteristic radiation is in-
affected by changes in the physical condition or state of chemical combina-
tion of the radiating element, and its quality is independent of that of the
exciting primary radiation. But only primary radiations of shorter wave-
length are able to excite the characteristic X-radiations - an extension of
Stokes’s fluorescence law.
    All the radiations hitherto definitely observed have fallen into three series,
the K, L, and M series (the M series was discovered by Siegbahn and his col-
laborators). There is also strong evidence of a higher frequency series - a J
series. This will be discussed later. The absorption method of analysing a
radiation showed the radiation of the K series from a particular element to
be so homogeneous, that it was regarded as giving a spectral line, the K line;
but the possibility of the L radiation consisting of more than one line was
suggested by an obvious heterogeneity in the L radiation.
   The interference experiments of Bragg, Moseley and others have shown,
however, that both the K and L radiations give spectra consisting of a num-
ber of neighbouring lines.
   The uniformity in the distribution of the characteristic radiation around
the radiating substance, even when the primary beam is polarized, shows
that, in contrast with the process of emission of scattered radiation, the emis-
sion of a characteristic radiation is absolutely uncontrolled by the primary
radiation exciting it. The phenomena of emission is not an immediate conse-
quence of the passage of the primary beam, but arises only indirectly from
it; the process is dependent on some critical condition, as evidenced by
Stokes’ law. Here we see the possibility of the applicability of some kind of
quantum theory. The most significant evidence as to the origin of the char-
acteristic radiation comes from the study of the accompanying phenomena
of the absorption of the exciting primary radiation and the emission of elec-
trons by the radiating substance in the form of a corpuscular radiation. I have
shown that the total absorption of a primary radiation in the substance trav-
ersed can be analysed into what are apparently independent absorptions,
each - with the exception of that due to the process of scattering - definitely
associated with the emission of a characteristic X-radiation. Thus there are


396                              1917 C.G.BARKLA

the J, K, L, M absorptions. Similarly, a corpuscular radiation may be ana-
lysed into J, K, L, M corpuscular radiations, each associated* with the emis-
sion of the corresponding characteristic X-radiation.
   The results obtained from a study of the energy of the primary beam ab-
sorbed, of the energy of the characteristic radiation emitted, and of the cor-
puscular radiation emitted, are very significant. In certain substances - bro-
mine and probably substances of high atomic weight - nearly all the energy
of the primary beam absorbed in association with the emission of K char-
acteristic radiation is re-emitted partly as characteristic X-radiation of the K
series, and partly as corpuscular radiation of the K series. Not only this, but
there is a definite relation between the intensity of the K radiation and the
number of electrons emitted in the associated corpuscular radiation. For va-
rious wavelengths of the primary radiation it appears that the number of
quanta of K fluorescent radiation per K electron emitted is approximately 1.
The numbers actually obtained are 1.09, 0.95, 0.85, 0.81, 0.90. The max-
imum variation of 19% from unity is exceedingly small, considering the
number and nature of the experimental determinations involved. Apart from
the quantum theory, the range of possible values is so enormous, in com-
parison with the variation observed, that the emission of one quantum of
characteristic X-radiation for each electron in the associated corpuscular ra-
diation must be regarded as an experimentally established fact. If the two K
secondary radiations, the corpuscular and the characteristic X-radiations,
together accounted for the whole of the K energy absorbed, we should have
of the energy of the primary beam absorbed (K absorption) the fraction
             re-emitted as K corpuscular radiation, and fraction          +
re-emitted as K fluorescent X-radiation, where n and n k are the fre-
quencies of the primary and the characteristic radiation respectively. As a
matter of fact, when n is slightly greater than nk, the two secondary radia-
tions together account for about 88% of the primary radiation. As n in-
creases the two energies of fluorescent and corpuscular radiations remain ap-
proximately complementary, the energy of the former diminishing while
that of the other increases. There is indeed very close agreement between the
fractions observed and those given by the above expressions. It may be, how-
ever, that one quantum of L radiation, in addition to one quantum of L ra-
diation, is emitted for each K electron ejected. There is even closer agree-
ment between the observed and the calculated values, based on this assump-
tion. Whatever the process of radiation may be, there can be little doubt that
* Probably in the case of T radiation.


                CHARACTERISTIC RÖNTGEN RADIATION                             397
characteristic radiation is emitted in quanta by those atoms merely from
which an electron has been ejected.
   The same energy relations, however, show us that absorption is not in
quanta of primary radiation. Each absorbing atom, that is each atom which
ultimately emits an electron, absorbs the energy of one quantum of primary
radiation plus the energy of one quantum of characteristic radiation, which
is (1 +         quanta of primary radiation. This may be anything from 1 to
2 quanta. All the evidence suggests that the characteristic radiation is emitted
immediately after the ejection of the electron from the atom.

Summarizing, we may say that all the available evidence shows that X-ra-
diation may be, and is, emitted by electrons, probably in certain cases by
groups of electrons, or even atoms - as a continuous process and in any
quantity whatever. It is frequently emitted in quantities almost infinitesimal
in comparison with a quantum. It is, however, emitted in quanta from
atoms, when certain critical conditions resulting in the ejection of certain
electrons are reached, the process of radiation then taking place in a perfectly
definite manner, involving the radiation of a definite amount of energy
which is proportional to the frequency of vibration (Planck’s Law: E = hn).
   Absorption, too, normally takes place in very minute quantities - very
small in comparison with a quantum. But in certain processes, which usually
account for nearly the whole absorption, the radiation is absorbed in quan-
tities greater than a quantum of the primary radiation, quantities varying
with the conditions from one to two quanta approximately. There is no
evidence of absorption of X-radiation in whole quanta, though the condi-
tions are frequently such as to give an approximation to this.
    All this evidence seems to indicate that a quantum of radiation in the sense
in which it has frequently been used, i.e. as an indivisible bundle of radiation
energy, does not exist. The process of radiation may be, and is, continuous -
at any rate within limits extending to far smaller quantities than the quan-
tum. The quantum is a unit of atomic energy which must be absorbed in
order to change the configuration of the atom, and is radiated when that
configuration returns to its original state. It thus of necessity appears in cer-
tain processes of absorption and radiation.


398                             1917 C.G.BARKLA

                        Probable J series of radiation

Recent investigations have led me to the conclusion that a characteristic ra-
diation of higher frequency than the K radiation (forming a J series in the
various elements) is probably emitted by each of the light elements. For ex-
periments on (1) the absorption of X-rays, (2) the ionization of gases by X-
rays, and (3) the intensity of corpuscular (electronic) radiation from plates
exposed to X-rays, all show that a decrease in the wavelength of the primary
X-radiation is accompanied by a sudden increase in the particular effect
measured - an increase such as has invariably been found to accompany the
emission of a characteristic X-radiation, and such as has hitherto not been
observed except in association with such emission.
   There is also close agreement between the values of the critical wave-
lengths found by the three methods.
   Further, as with the phenomena accompanying K, L or M characteristic
radiation, an increase in the atomic weight of the element is accompanied by
a decrease in the critical wavelength in that element.
   Direct evidence of the emission of J characteristic radiations has proved to
be less easily obtained than appeared probable from preliminary experiments.
Certain experimental results appeared to indicate that, though the J radia-
tions might not be separable from the body of scattered radiation, their ex-
istence could readily be demonstrated. They have, however, proved more
elusive than early experiments led us to believe. Experiments at present in
progress are being gradually improved, and will, we hope, succeed in pro-
viding the direct evidence for which we are looking. It should, however, be
pointed out that the evidence obtained from experiments on the K charac-
teristic radiation would lead us to expect only a very weak characteristic ra-
diation from these light elements, for of the energy of a primary beam ab-
sorbed in association with the emission of a particular K fluorescent char-
acteristic radiation - i.e. K absorption - the fraction transformed into that
characteristic X-radiation becomes rapidly smaller, as the atomic weight of
the element decreases, so that even of the "K absorption" only a very small
fraction appears as K characteristic radiation from these light elements. Thus
the fraction K radiation (energy)/K absorption (energy) at its maximum
value in copper is about 40%, in iron 30%, in chromium 20%. There is
every indication of it becoming very small indeed in the lightest elements.
In addition, the "J absorption" in these light elements is only a small fraction
of the absorption by scattering - say of the order of magnitude of 15%.


                  CHARACTERISTIC RÖNTGEN RADIATION                           399
Consequently, from aluminium, oxygen, nitrogen and carbon we might
reasonably expect the energy of the fluorescent radiation to be something
much less than 3% - 15% of 2% - of the energy of the scattered radiation;
how much less it would be impossible to predict, but the probability is how-
ever, that it is less than 1%. We are, however, reasoning from our experience
of "K radiations": this might be regarded as unsafe ground if it did not find
confirmation in our experimental results, obtained in investigations of J ra-
diations.
   Duane and others have been unable to detect any J characteristic radiation
excited in aluminium when bombarded by cathode rays. This may mean
either that the J characteristic radiation is very weak in comparison with the
heterogeneous X-radiation produced in aluminium - for it must be remem-
bered that by analogy with the other characteristic radiations, J radiation is
produced only in association with the emission of J electrons, and these may
be very few or difficult to displace - or it may just possibly indicate that J
radiation cannot be excited at all or only in the most exceptional cases by the
impact of cathode particles. This is not at all unlikely, if the J electrons are
closely bound with other electrons, positive and negative, as they may be in
a nucleus. For the cathode particle may come under the influence of this
minute system as a whole and be deflected by it, without ever coming into
such intimate relationship with any constituent electron as to disturb its sta-
bility. Thus it is quite conceivable that the negative and positive components
of such a system are influenced separately by X-radiation, and that equilib-
rium is disturbed and J electrons are ejected and succeeded by the emission
of J characteristic X-radiation; whereas an electron of the corpuscular radia-
tion is unable to produce the necessary displacement of the J electron. Fur-
ther experiments alone can decide this point.
   One important feature of the discovery of a J series of characteristic X-
radiations lies in the fact that there is no room for it in Bohr’s theory of ra-
diation as applied to K and L radiations. It may, however, be that a J radia-
tion is emitted by electrons in a system of different kind, as for instance in the
nucleus itself instead of outside it. But the association of other phenomena -
an association similar to that observed with K and L characteristic radiations
- suggests a close similarity in the whole process involved. Experiments on
this subject are at present in progress.
