SAND FROM CENTURIES PAST: SEND FUTURE
VOICES FAST*

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2009
by
Charles K. Kao
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.




Introduction
First of all I would like to express my gratitude to the Royal Swedish Academy
of Sciences and its Nobel Committee for Physics for awarding me the 2009
Nobel Prize in Physics. It is not often that the award is given for work in
applied science. The practical nature of that work, and the time that has
since elapsed, means that much has been done over the years, by many
people, and the collective result has had a significant impact on society.
Therefore this lecture will be about both the research leading up to the key
discoveries, and some of the succeeding developments since.
   In the 43 years since the publication of my paper with Hockham on
glass fiber cables in 1966 [1], the world of telephony has changed vastly.
The skepticism of the early years has gradually been subdued by the steady
advance of the optical fiber revolution. In the 1970s, while I was working on
the pre-production stage research on optical fibers at the ITT Corporation
in Roanoke, Virginia, U.S.A., I received two letters: one contained a threa-
tening message accusing me of releasing an evil genie from its bottle; the
other, from a farmer in China, asked for a means to allow him to pass a
message to his distant wife to bring his lunch. Both letter writers saw a future
that has since become history.


The early days1
In 1960, I joined Standard Telecommunications Laboratories Ltd. (STL), a
subsidiary of ITT Corporation in the U.K., after having worked as a graduate
engineer at Standard Telephones and Cables in Woolwich for some time.
Much of the work at STL was devoted to improving the capabilities of the
existing communication infrastructure, with a focus on the use of millimeter
wave transmission systems.


* This lecture was prepared for Charles Kao by Gwen Kao, with the help of Lian Kuan Chen, Kwok Wai
Cheung, Melody Lee, Wing Shing Wong and Kenneth Young. The Lecture was delivered on December 8, 2009
by Gwen Kao on behalf of Charles Kao.
1 The following paragraphs are taken essentially verbatim from Ref. [2, 3]



                                                                                                71


   Millimeter waves at 35 to 70 GHz could have a much higher transmission
capacity. But the waters were uncharted and the challenges enormous, since
radio waves at such frequencies could not be beamed over long distances
due to beam divergence and atmospheric absorption. The waves had to be
guided by a waveguide. And in the 1950s, research and development work on
low-loss circular waveguides in the HE11 mode was started. A trial system was
deployed in the 1960s. Huge sums were invested, and more were planned, to
move this system into the pre-production stage. Public expectations for new
telecommunication services such as the video phone had heightened.
   I joined the long-haul waveguide group led by Dr. Karbowiak at STL. I was
excited to see an actual circular waveguide [4] (Figure 1). I was assigned to
look for new methods for microwave and optical transmission. Ray optics and
wave theory were used together to gain a better understanding of waveguide
problems – then a novel idea. Later, Dr. Karbowiak encouraged me to pur-
sue a doctorate while working at STL. So I registered at University College
London and completed the dissertation “Quasi-Optical Waveguides” in two
years.




Figure 1. A circular waveguide (after Ref [4]). © [1954] IEEE

   The development of the laser in the 1960s gave the telecom community
a great dose of optimism that optical communication could be just around
the corner. Coherent light was to be the new information carrier with capa-
city 105 times higher than point-to-point microwaves – based on the simple
comparison of frequencies: 3×1015 Hz (3000 THz) for light versus 3×109 Hz
(3 GHz) for microwaves.

   The race between circular microwave waveguides and optical communica-
tion was on, with the odds heavily in favor of the former. In 1960, optical lasers
were in their infancy, demonstrated at only a few research laboratories, and
performing much below the needed specifications. Optical systems seemed a
non-starter. But I still thought the laser had potential. I said to myself: “How
can we dismiss the laser so readily? Optical communication is too good to be
left on the theoretical shelf.” I asked myself two obvious questions:

1. Is the ruby laser a suitable source for optical communication?
2. What material has sufficiently high transparency at such wavelengths?

72


   At that time only two groups in the world were starting to look at the
transmission aspect of optical communication, while several other groups
were working on solid-state and semiconductor lasers. Lasers emit coherent
radiation at optical frequencies, but using such radiation for communication
appeared to be very difficult, if not impossible. For optical communication to
fulfill its promises, many serious problems remained to be solved.


The key discovery2
In 1963 I was already involved in free-space propagation experiments: The
rapid progress of semiconductor and laser technology had opened up a
broader scope to explore optical communication realistically. With a HeNe
laser beam directed to a spot some distance away, the STL team quickly
discovered that the distant laser light flickered. The beam danced around
several beam diameters because of atmospheric fluctuations. The team also
tried to repeat experiments done by other research laboratories around the
world. For example, we set up con-focal lens experiments similar to those at
Bell Laboratories: a series of convex lenses were lined up at intervals equal
to the focal length. But even in the dead of night when the air was still and
even with refocusing every 100 meters, the beam refused to stay within the
lens aperture.
   Bell Laboratories’ experiments using gas lenses were abandoned due
to the difficulty of providing satisfactory insulation while maintaining the
profiles of the gas lenses. These experiments were struggles in desperation,
to control light traveling over long distances.
                                                   At STL the thinking shifted
                                                towards dielectric waveguides.
                                                Dielectric means a non-
                                                conductor of electricity; a
                                                dielectric waveguide is a wave-
                                                guide consisting of a dielectric
                                                cylinder surrounded by air.
                                                Dr. Karbowiak suggested that
                                                I and three others should
                                                work on his idea of a thin
                                                film waveguide [5–6] (Figure
                                                2). But thin film waveguides
                                                failed: the confinement was
                                                not strong enough and light
                                                would escape as it negotiates
                                                a bend.

Figure 2. Thin film waveguide (after Ref [6]). © [1965] IEEE




2   The following paragraphs are also taken essentially verbatim from Ref. [2, 3]


                                                                                    73


   When Dr. Karbowiak decided to emigrate to Australia, I took over as the
project leader and recommended that the team should investigate the loss
mechanism of dielectric materials for optical fibers. A small group worked
on methods for measuring material loss of low-loss transparent materials.
George Hockham joined me to work on the characteristics of dielectric wave-
guides. With his interest in waveguide theory, he focused on the tolerance
requirements for an optical fiber waveguide, in particular, the dimensional
tolerance and joint losses. We proceeded to systematically study the physical
and waveguide requirements in glass fibers.
   In addition, I was also pushing my colleagues in the laser group to work
towards a semiconductor laser in the near infrared, with emission character-
istics matching the diameter of a single-mode fiber. A single-mode fiber is
an optical fiber that is designed for the transmission of a single ray or mode
of light as a carrier. The laser had to be made durable and to work at room
temperatures without liquid nitrogen cooling. So there were many obstacles.
But in the early 1960s, esoteric research was tolerated so long as it was not
too costly.
   Over the next two years, the team worked towards its goals. We were all
novices in the physics and chemistry of materials and in tackling new electro-
magnetic wave problems. But we made very credible progress in considered
steps. We searched the literature, talked to experts, and collected material
samples from various glass and polymer companies. We also worked on the
theories and developed measurement techniques to carry out a host of ex-
periments. We developed an instrument to measure the spectral loss of very
low-loss material, as well as one for scaled simulation experiments to measure
fiber loss due to mechanical imperfections.
   I zeroed in on glass as a possible transparent material. Glass is made from
silica – sand from centuries past – which is plentiful and cheap. The optical
loss in transparent materials is due to three mechanisms: (a) intrinsic absorp-
tion, (b) extrinsic absorption, and (c) Rayleigh scattering. The intrinsic loss
is caused by the infrared absorption of the material structure itself, which
determines the wavelength of the transparency regions. The extrinsic loss is
due to impurity ions left in the material and the Rayleigh loss is due to the
scattering of photons by the structural non-uniformity of the material. For
most practical applications such as windows, the transparency of glass was en-
tirely adequate, and no one had studied absorption down to such levels. After
talking with many people, I eventually formed the following conclusions.

1. Impurities, particularly transition elements such as Fe, Cu, and Mn, have
   to be reduced to parts per million (ppm) or even parts per billion (ppb).
   However, can impurity concentrations be reduced to such low levels?
2. High-temperature glasses are frozen rapidly and should have smaller
   micro-structures and more even distribution of non-homogeneities than
   low-temperature glasses such as polymers, and therefore a lower
   scattering loss.



74


   Our ongoing microwave simulation experiments were also completed.
The characteristics of the dielectric waveguide were fully defined in terms of
its modes, its dimensional tolerance both for end-to-end mismatch and for
its diameter fluctuation along the fiber lengths. Both theory and simulated
experiments supported our approach.
   Hockham and I wrote a paper entitled “Dielectric-Fibre Surface
Waveguides for Optical Frequencies” and submitted it to the Proceedings of
the Institute of Electrical Engineers (IEE). After the usual review and revision, it
appeared in July 1966 – the date now regarded as the birth of optical fiber
communication.




Figure 3. The 1966 paper. © [1966] IEEE



                                                                                 75


The paper
The paper started with a brief discussion of the mode properties in a fiber of
circular cross section. It then quickly zeroed in on the material aspects, which
were recognized to be the major stumbling block. At the time, the most
transparent glass had a loss of 200 dB/km, which would limit transmission
to about a few meters – this is very obvious to anyone who has ever peered
through a thick piece of glass: nothing can be seen. But our paper pointed
out that the intrinsic loss due to scattering could be as low as 1 dB/km, which
would have allowed propagation over practical distances. The culprit is the
impurities: mainly ferrous and ferric ions at these wavelengths. Quoting from
the paper:
         “It is foreseeable that glasses with a bulk loss of about
         20 dB/km at around 0.6 micron will be obtained, as the
         iron-impurity concentration may be reduced to 1 part per
         million.”
  In layman terms, if one has a sufficiently “clean” type of glass, one should
be able to see through a slab as thick as several hundred meters. That key
insight opened up the field of optical communications.

  The paper considered many other issues:
• The loss can be reduced if the mode is chosen so that most of the energy
  is actually outside the fiber.
• The fiber should be surrounded by a cladding of lower index (which later
  became the standard technology).
• The loss of energy due to bends in the fiber is negligible for bends larger
  than 1 mm.
• The losses due to non-uniform cross sections were estimated.
• The properties of a single-mode fibre (now the mainstream especially for
  long-distance and high-speed transmission) were analyzed. It was ex-
  plained how dispersion limits bandwidth; an example was worked out for
  a 10 km route – a very bold scenario in 1966.

  The paper concluded with the following [1]:
         “The realization of a successful fiber waveguide depends,
         at present, on the availability of suitable low-loss dielectric
         material. The crucial material problem appears to be one
         which is difficult but not impossible to solve. Certainly, the
         required loss figure of around 20 dB/km is much higher
         than the lower limit of loss figure imposed by fundamental
         mechanisms.”
  Basically all of the predictions pointed accurately to the path of develop-
ment, and we now have 10–2 of the loss and 105 times the bandwidth then
forecast – the revolutionary proposal in the 1966 paper was in hindsight too
conservative.

76


Convincing the world
The substance of the paper was presented at an IEE meeting on January 27,
1966 [7]. Most of the world did not take notice – except for the British Post
Office (BPO) and the U.K. Ministry of Defence, who immediately launched
major research programs [8, 9]. By the end of 1966, three groups in the U.K.
were studying the various issues involved: I myself at STL; Roberts at BPO;
Gambling at Southampton in collaboration with Williams at the Ministry of
Defence Laboratory [10].

   In the next few years, I traveled the globe to push my idea: to Japan, where
enduring friendships were made dating from those early days; to research
labs in Germany, in the Netherlands and elsewhere to spread the news. It
was obvious to me that until more and more jumped on the bandwagon, the
use of glass fibers would not take off. There was widespread skepticism, but
I remained steadfast. The global telephony industry is huge, too large to be
changed by a single person or even a single country, but I was stubborn and I
remained optimistic; slowly others were converted into believers.
   The experts at first proclaimed that the materials were the most severe
of the intrinsic insurmountable problems. Gambling [9] wrote that British
Telecom had been “somewhat scathing” about the proposal earlier, and Bell
Laboratories, which could have led the field, took notice only much later.
Approaches were made to many glass manufacturers to persuade them to
produce the clear glass required. There was eventually a response from
Corning, where Bob Maurer led the first group that later produced the glass
rods and developed the techniques to make the glass fibers to the required
specifications.




Figure 4. Glass fiber.


  Meanwhile, I continued to work on proving the feasibility of glass fibers as
the medium for long-haul optical transmission. There were a number of for-
midable challenges. The first was the measurement techniques for low-loss

                                                                            77


samples that were obtainable only in lengths of around 20 cm. The problem
of assuring surface perfection was also formidable. Another problem is end-
surface reflection loss, caused by the polishing process. There was a measure-
ment impasse that demanded the detection of a loss difference between two
samples of less than 0.1%, when the total loss of the entire 20 cm sample is
only 0.1%. An inexact measurement would have been meaningless.
   In 1968 and 1969, I and my colleagues at STL, T. W. Davies, M. W. Jones
and C. R. Wright, published a series of papers [11–13] on the attenuation
measurements of glass that addressed the above problems. At that time,
the measuring instruments called spectrophotometers had a rather limited
sensitivity – in the range of 43 dB/km. The measurement was very difficult:
even a minute contamination could have caused a loss comparable to the
attenuation itself, while surface effects could easily be ten times worse. We
assembled a homemade single-beam spectrophotometer that achieved a
sensitivity of 21.7 dB/km. Later improvements with a double-beam spectro-
photometer yielded a sensitivity down to 4.3 dB/km.




Figure 5. Double-beam spectrophotometer (after Ref [12]).


   The reflection effect was measured with a homemade ellipsom-
eter. Measurements were made with fused quartz samples made by plasma
deposition, in which the high temperature evaporated the impurity ions.
With the sensitive instrument, the attenuation of a number of glass samples
was measured and, eureka, the Infrasil sample from Schott Glass showed an
attenuation as low as 5 dB/km at a window around 0.85 µm (Figure 6) – at
last proving that the removal of impurity would lower the absorption loss to
useful levels.

78


Figure 6. Glass attenuation vs. wavelength (after Ref [12]).


   This was really exciting because the low-loss region is right at the GaAs
laser emission band. The measurements clearly pointed the way to optical
communication – compact GaAs semiconductor lasers as the source, low-
cost cladded glass fibers as the transmission medium, and Si or Ge semi-
conductors for detection [12]. The dream no longer seemed remote. These
measurements apparently turned the sentiments of the research community
around. The race to develop the first low-loss glass fiber waveguide was on.
   In 1967, at Corning, Maurer’s chemist colleague P. Schultz helped purify
the glass. In 1968, his colleagues D. Keck and F. Zimar helped draw the fibers.
By 1970, Corning had produced a fiber waveguide with a loss of 17 dB/km
at 0.633 µm using a Ti-diffused core with silica cladding, using the Outside
Vapor Deposition (OVD) method [15]. Two years later, they reduced the
loss to 4 dB/km for a multimode fiber by replacing the Ti-doped core with a
Ge-doped core.
   Bell Laboratories finally created a program in optical fiber research in
1969. Their work on hollow light pipes was finally stopped in 1972. Their
millimeter wave research program was wound down and eventually
abandoned in 1975.


Impact on the world
Since the deployment of the first-generation, 45 Mb/s fiber optic communi-
cation system in 1976, the transmission capacity in a single fiber has rapidly
increased: we now talk about terabits per second. In order to understand the
fundamental limits of fiber-optic communication, the Terabit per Second
Optoelectronic Project was launched [16] during 1982–85, involving ten
research organizations. The target technology, three orders of magnitude
higher than the then state-of-the-art, was considered impossible at the time.

                                                                            79


But the transmission capacity has gradually increased a millionfold from the
tens of Mb/s in the early days to many tens of Tb/s in recent years. Data can
be carried over millions of km of fibers without going through repeaters,
thanks to the invention of the optical fiber amplifier and wavelength division
multiplexing. So that is how the industry grew and grew.
   The world has been totally transformed because of optical fiber communi-
cation. The telephone system has been overhauled and international long
distance calls have become easily affordable. Brand new mega-industries in
fiber optics including cable manufacturing and equipment, optical devices,
network systems and equipment have been created. Hundreds of millions
of kilometers of glass fiber cables have been laid, in the ground and in the
ocean, creating an intricate web of connectivity that is the foundation of the
World Wide Web. The Internet is now more pervasive than the telephone
used to be. We browse, we search, we hold net conferences, we blog, we
watch videos, we shop, we socialize online. The information revolution that
started in the 1990s could not have happened without optical fibers. Over
the last few years, fibers have been laid all the way to our homes. All-optical
networks that are environmentally green are being contemplated. The
revolution in optical fiber communication has not ended – it might still just
be at the beginning.


Conclusion
The world-wide communication network based on optical fibers has truly
shrunk the world and brought human beings closer together. I hardly need
to cite technical figures to drive this point home. The news of the Nobel
Prize reached me in the middle of the night at 3 am in California, through
a telephone call from Stockholm (then in their morning) no doubt carried
on optical fibers; congratulations came literally minutes later from friends in
Asia (for whom it was evening), again through messages carried on optical
fibers. Too much information is not always a good thing: we had to take the
phone off the hook that night in order to get some sleep.
   In the last twenty years, creative minds have added many ingenious ways
to make use of the added bandwidth that has resulted from the use of
optical fibers. Optical communication is by now not just a technical advance,
but has also caused major changes in society. It will continue to change the
way people learn, the way they live and relate to each other, as well as the
way they work. For example, manufacturing of all the bits and pieces of a
single product can now take place over a dozen locations around the world,
providing huge opportunities for people worldwide. The ready accessibility
of information has obviously led to more equality and wider participation
in public affairs. The evolution continues. Who knows what other forward
thinkers will dream of in the future. The unused amount of bandwidth
beckons and tempts. Many words, indeed many books have been
written about the information society, and I do not wish to add to them
here – except to say that it is beyond the dreams of the first serious

80


concept of optical communication in 1966, when even 1 GHz was only a
hope.
  I would like to thank ITT Corporation, where I developed my career for
30 years, and all those who climbed on to the bandwagon with me in the
early days, since without the legions of believers the industry would not
have evolved as it did. I planted the seed; Bob Maurer watered it and John
MacChesney grew its roots.


References
[1] K. C. Kao and G. A. Hockham, “Dielectric-fibre surface waveguides for optical
     frequencies,” Proc. IEE, Vol. 113, pp. 1151–1158, 1966. (Republished in Proc. IEE,
     Vol. 133, Pt. J, pp. 191–198, 1986.)
[2] K. C. Kao, Autobiography of Charles K. Kao 《潮平岸闊——高錕自述》(translated by
     許迪鏘) Joint Publishing, 2005.
[3] K. C. Kao, “Optical Communication Systems,” pp. 3–100, in K. Young (ed),
     Opto-electronics, Lectures at the 1982 International Summer School at The Chinese
      University of Hong Kong, 26 July – 6 August 1982, The Chinese University of Hong
     Kong Press, 1982.
[4] H. E. Barlow and A. E. Karbowiak, “An experimental investigation of the properties
     of corrugated cylindrical surface waveguides,” Proc. IEE, Vol. 101, Part III,
     pp. 182–188, 1954.
[5] K. C. Kao, “Electromagnetic wave propagation on a double-layer dielectric film,”
     Elect. Lett., Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 35–37, 1965.
[6] A. E. Karbowiak, “New type of waveguide for light and infrared waves,” Elect. Lett.,
     Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 47–48, 1965.
[7] R. Dyott, “Some memories of the early years with optical fibres at the British Post
     Office: a personal account,” Proc. IEE, Vol.133, pp. 199–201, 1986.
[8] W. A. Gambling, “Optical fibres: the Southampton scene,” Proc. IEE., Vol. 133,
     pp. 205–210, 1986.
[9] STC Press Office, “STL develops techniques aimed at communication by guided
     light. British team’s work described at IEE Meeting in London”, January 1966.
[10] D. Williams and K. C. Kao, “Pulse communication along glass fibers,” Proc. of IEEE.,
     Vol. 56, No. 2, pp. 197–198, 1968.
[11] K. C. Kao and T. W. Davies, “Spectrophotometric studies of ultra low loss optical
     glasses I,” J. Sci. Instrum. (J. Phys. E), Vol. 1, pp. 1063–8, 1968.
[12] M. W. Jones and K. C. Kao, “Spectrophotometric studies of ultra low loss optical
     glasses II,” J. Sci. Instrum. (J. Phys. E), Vol. 2, pp. 331–5, 1969.
[13] C. R. Wright and K. C. Kao, “Spectrophotometric studies of ultra low loss optical
     glasses III,” J. Sci. Instrum. (J. Phys. E), Vol. 2, pp. 331–5, 1969.
[14] J. Lytollis, C. K. Kao and G. I. Turner, “Infra-red optical communication systems,”
     Infrared Physics, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 123–130, 1968.
[15] F. P. Kapron, D. B. Keck and R. D. Maurer, “Radiation losses in glass optical
     waveguides,” Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol. 17, pp. 423–5, 1970.
[16] C. K. Kao, “1012 bit/s optoelectronics technology,” Proc. IEE., Vol. 133, pp. 230–236,
     1986.
Portrait photo of Professor Kao by photographer Ulla Montan.




                                                                                        81
