HOLOGRAPHY, 1948-1971
Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1971

by
D ENNIS G A B O R

Imperial Colleges of Science and Technology, London




I have the advantage in this lecture, over many of my predecessors, that I
need not write down a single equation or show an abstract graph. One can of
course introduce almost any amount of mathematics into holography, but the
essentials can be explained and understood from physical arguments.
   Holography is based on the wave nature of light, and this was demonstrated
convincingly for the first time in 1801 by Thomas Young, by a wonderfully
simple experiment. He let a ray of sunlight into a dark room, placed a dark
screen in front of it, pierced with two small pinholes, and beyond this, at some
distance, a white screen. He then saw two darkish lines at both sides of a
bright line, which gave him sufficient encouragement to repeat the experi-
ment, this time with a spirit flame as light source, with a little salt in it, to
produce the bright yellow sodium light. This time he saw a number of dark
lines, regularly spaced; the first clear proof that light added to light can
produce darkness. This phenomenon is called interference. Thomas Young had
expected it because he believed in the wave theory of light. His great contri-
bution to Christian Huygens’s original idea was the intuition that mono-




                                                DARK




                      EXPLANATION

Fig. 1.
Thomas Young’s Interference Experiments, 1801


12                                    Physics 1971


chromatic light represents regular, sinusoidal oscillations, in a medium which
at that time was called “the ether”. If this is so, it must be possible to produce
more light by adding wavecrest to wavecrest, and darkness by adding wave-
crest to wavethrough.
   Light which is capable of interferences is called “coherent”, and it is evident
that in order to yield many interference fringes, it must be very monochromatic.
Coherence is conveniently measured by the path difference between two rays
of the same source, by which they can differ while still giving observable inter-
ference contrast. This is called the coherence length, an important quantity in
the theory and practice of holography. Lord Rayleigh and Albert Michelson
were the first to understand that it is a reciprocal measure of the spectroscopic
line width. Michelson used it for ingenious methods of spectral analysis and
for the measurement of the diameter of stars.
   Let us now jump a century and a half, to 1947. At that time I was very
interested in electron microscopy. This wonderful instrument had at that time
produced a hundredfold improvement on the resolving power of the best light
microscopes, and yet it was disappointing, because it had stopped short of re-
solving atomic lattices. The de Broglie wavelength of fast electrons, about
l/20 Ångström, was short enough, but the optics was imperfect. The best
electron objective which one can make can be compared in optical perfection
to a raindrop than to a microscope objective, and through the theoretical
work of O. Scherzer it was known that it could never be perfected. The
theoretical limit at that time was estimated at 4 Å, just about twice what was




Fig. 2.
The Basic Idea of Holography, 1947.


needed to resolve atomic lattices, while the practical limit stood at about 12 Å.
These limits were given by the necessity of restricting the aperture of the
electron lenses to about 5/1000 radian, at which angle the spherical aberration
error is about equal to the diffraction error. If one doubles this aperture so that
the diffraction error is halved, the spherical aberration error is increased 8
times, and the image is hopelessly blurred.
    After pondering this problem for a long time, a solution suddenly dawned
on me, one fine day at Easter 1947, more or less as shown in Figure 2. Why
not take a bad electron picture, but one which contains the            whole informa-
tion, and correct it by optical means?      It was clear to me for some time that
this could be done, if at all, only with coherent electron beams, with electron
waves which have a definite phase. But an ordinary photograph loses the
phase completely, it records only the intensities. No wonder we lose the phase,
if there is nothing to compare it with! Let us see what happens if we add a
standard to it, a “coherent background”.        My argument is illustrated in Figure
2, for the simple case when there is only one object point. The interference of
the object wave and of the coherent background or “reference wave” will then
produce interference fringes.       There will be maxima wherever the phases of
the two waves were identical. Let us make a hard positive record, so that it
transmits only at the maxima, and illuminate it with the reference source
alone. Now the phases are of course right for the reference source A, but as at
the slits the phases are identical, they must be right also for B; therefore the
wave of B must also appear, reconstructed.
    A little mathematics soon showed that the principle was right, also for more
than one object point, for any complicated object. Later on it turned out that
in holography Nature is on the inventor’s side; there is no need to take a hard
positive record; one can take almost any negative. This encouraged me to
complete my scheme of electron microscopy by reconstructed wavefronts, as I
then called it and to propose the two-stage process shown in Figure 3. The
electron microscope was to produce the interference figure between the object
beam and the coherent background, that is to say the non-diffracted part of
the illuminating beam. This interference pattern I called a “hologram”, from
the Greek word “holos’‘-the whole, because it contained the whole informa-
tion. The hologram was then reconstructed with light, in an optical system
which corrected the aberrations of the electron optics (1) .
    In doing this, I stood on the shoulders of two great physicists, W. L. Bragg
and Frits Zernike. Bragg had shown me, a few years earlier, his “X-ray micro-
scope” an optical Fourier-transformer device. One puts into it a small photo-
graph of the reciprocal lattice, and obtains a projection of the electron den-
sities, but only in certain exceptional cases, when the phases are all real, and
have the same sign. I did not know at that time, and neither did Bragg, that
Mieczislav Wolfke had proposed this method in 1920, but without realising it
experimentally. 1 So the idea of a two-stage method was inspired by Bragg. The
coherent background, on the other hand, was used with great success by Frits

1
    M. Wolfke, Phys. Zeits. 21, 495-7, Sept. 15, 1920.


                                         Physics 1971




Fig. 3.




Fig 4.
First Holographic Reconstruction, 1948


Fig. 5.
Another Example of Early Holography,    1948 (Gabor, Proc. Roy. Soc. A,   197, 454,
1949).


Zernike in his beautiful investigations on lens aberrations, showing up their
phase, and not just their intensity. It was only the reconstruction principle
which had escaped them.
   In 1947 I was working in the Research Laboratory of the British Thomson-
Houston Company in Rugby, England. It was a lucky thing that the idea of
holography came to me via electron microscopy, because if I had thought of
optical holography only, the Director of Research, L. J. Davies, could have
objected that the BTH company was an electrical engineering firm, and not
in the optical field. But as our sister company, Metropolitan Vickers were
makers of electron microscopes, I obtained the permission to carry out some


             -      -     -      -

                                                 Plate




                 PHOTOGRAPHY                                    HOLOGRAM




Fig. 6.
The Second Image. Explanation in Terms of Soret-lenses as Holograms of Single Object
Points.


optical experiments. Figure 4 shows one of our first holographic reconstruc-
tions. The experiments were not easy. The best compromise between coherence
and intensity was offered by the high pressure mercury lamp, which had a
coherence length of only 0.1 mm, enough for about 200 fringes. But in order
to achieve spatial coherence, we (my assistant Ivor Williams and I) had to
illuminate, with one mercury line, a pinhole of 3 microns diameter. This left
us with enough light to make holograms of about 1 cm diameter of objects,
which were microphotographs of about 1 mm diameter, with exposures of a
few minutes, on the most sensitive emulsions then available. The small co-
herence length forced us to arrange everything in one axis. This is now called
“in line” holography, and it was the only one possible at that time. Figure 5
shows a somewhat improved experiment, the best of our series. It was far from
perfect. Apart from the schlieren, which cause random disturbances, there was
a systematic defect in the pictures, as may be seen by the distortion of the
letters. The explanation is given in Figure 6. The disturbance arises from the
fact that there is not one image but two. Each point of the object emits a
spherical secondary wave, which interferes with the background and produces
a system of circular Fresnel zones. Such a system is known after the optician
who first produced it, a Soret lens. This is, at the same time, a positive and a


Fig. 7.
Elimination of the Second Image, by Compensation of the Spherical Aberration in
the Reconstruction (Gabor, 1948; published 1951).

negative lens. One of its foci is in the original position of the object point, the
other in a position conjugate to it, with respect to the illuminating wavefront.
If one uses “in-line holography” both images are in line, and can be separated
only by focusing. But the separation is never quite perfect, because in regular,
coherent illumination every point leaves a        “wake” behind it, which reaches to
long distances.
   I will tell later with what ease modern laser holography has got rid of this
disturbance, by making use of the superior coherence of laser light which was
not at my disposal in 1948. However, I was confident that I could eliminate
the second image in the application which alone interested me at that time:
seeing atoms with the electron microscope. This method, illustrated in Figure
7, utilized the very defect of electron lenses, the spherical aberration, in order
to defeat the second image. If an electron hologram is taken with a lens with
spherical aberration, one can afterwards correct           one of the two images by


18                                      Physics 1971


suitable optics, and the other has then twice the aberration, which washes it
out almost completely. Figure 7 shows that a perfectly sharp reconstruction, in
which as good as nothing remains of the disturbance caused by the second
image, can be obtained with a lens so bad that its definition is at least 10
times worse than the resolution which one wants to obtain. Such a very bad
lens was obtained using a microscope objective the wrong way round, and
using it again in the reconstruction.
   So it was with some confidence that two years later, in 1950 we started a
programme of holographic electron microscopy in the Research Laboratory of
the Associated Electrical Industries, in Aldermaston, under the direction of
Dr T. E. Allibone, with my friends and collaborators M. W. Haine, J. Dyson
and T. Mulvey. 2 By that time I had joined Imperial College, and took part in
the work as a consultant. In the course of three years we succeeded in con-
siderably improving the electron microscope, but in the end we had to give
up, because we had started too early. It turned out that the electron micro-
scope was still far from the limit imposed by optical aberrations. It suffered
from vibrations, stray magnetic fields, creep of the stage, contamination of the
object, all made worse by the long exposures required in the weak coherent
electron beam. Now, 20 years later, would be the right time to start on such
a programme, because in the meantime the patient work of electron micro-
scopists has overcome all these defects. The electron microscope resolution is
now right up to the limit set by the spherical aberration, about 3.5 Å, and only
an improvement by a factor of 2 is needed to resolve atomic lattices. More-
over, there is no need now for such very long exposures as we had to con-
template in 1951, because by the development of the field emission cathode
the coherent current has increased by a factor of 3-4 orders of magnitude. So
perhaps I may yet live to see the realisation of my old ideas.
   My first papers on wavefront reconstruction evoked some immediate
responses. G. L. Rogers (2) in Britain made important contributions to the
technique, by producing among other things the first phase holograms, and also
by elucidating the theory. In California Alberto Baez (3) Hussein El-Sum
and P. Kirckpatrick (4) made interesting forays into X-ray holography. For
my part, which my collaborator W. P. Goss, I constructed a holographic inter-
ference microscope, in which the second image was annulled in a rather
 complicated way by the superimposition of two holograms, “in quadrature”
with one another. The response of the optical industry to this was so dis-
 appointing that we did not publish a paper on it until 11 years later, in
 1966 (5). Around 1955 holography went into a long hybernation.
   The revival came suddenly and explosively in 1963, with the publication of
 the first successful laser” holograms by Emmett N. Leith and Juris Upatnieks

2
  Supported by a grant of the D.S.I.R. (Direction of Scientific and Industrial Research)
the first research grant ever given by that body to an industrial laboratory.
3
  I have been asked more than once why I did not invent the laser. In fact, I have
thought of it. In 1950, thinking of the desirability of a strong source of coherent light,
I remembered that in 1921, as a young student, in Berlin, I had heard from Einstein’s
own lips his wonderful derivation of Planck’s law which postulated the existence of


                                                                                                 19




Fig. 8.
Holography with Skew Reference Beam. E. N. Leith and J. Upatnieks, 1963.


of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Their success was due not only to
the laser, but to the long theoretical preparation of Emmett Leith, which
started in 1955. This was unknown to me and to the world, because Leith, with
his collaborators Cutrona, Palermo, Porcello and Vivian applied his ideas first
to the problem of the “side-looking radar”       which at that time was classified
(6). This was in fact two-dimensional holography with electromagnetic waves,
a counterpart of electron holography. The electromagnetic waves used in radar
are about 100,000 times longer than light waves, while electron waves are
about 100,000 times shorter. Their results were brilliant, but to my regret I
cannot discuss them for lack of time.
   When the laser became available, in 1962, Leith and Upatnieks could at
once produce results far superior to mine, by a new, simple and very effective
method of eliminating the second image (7). This is the method of the “skew
reference wave”, illustrated in Figure 8. It was made possible by the great
coherence length of the helium-neon laser, which even in 1962 exceeded that
of the mercury lamp by a factor of about 3000. This made it possible to
separate the reference beam from the illuminating beam; instead of going
through the object, it could now go around it. The result was that the two
reconstructed images were now separated not only in depth, but also angularly,
by twice the incidence angle of the reference beam. Moreover, the intensity of

stimulated emission. I then had the idea of the pulsed laser: Take a suitable crystal,
make a resonator of it by a highly reflecting coating, fill up the upper level by illuminat-
ing it through a small hole, and discharge it explosively by a ray of its own light. I offered
the idea as a Ph.D. problem to my best student, but he declined it, as too risky, and I
could not gainsay it, as I could not be sure that we would find a suitable crystal.


                                    Physics 1971




Fig. 9.
First Example of Multiple Image Storage in One Hologram. E. N. Leith and J.
Upatnieks, Journal , Optical Society of America, November 1964.

the coherent laser light exceeded that of mercury many millionfold. This made
it possible to use very fine-grain,    low speed photographic emulsions and to
produce large holograms, with reasonable exposure times.
   Figure 9 shows two of the earliest reconstructions made by Leith and
Upatnieks, in 1963, which were already greatly superior to anything that I
could produce in 1948. The special interest of these two images is, that they
are reconstructions from one hologram, taken with different positions of the
reference beam. This was the first proof of the superior storage capacity of


                                          D. Gabor                                 21




                       RECORDING




                       RECONSTRUCTION

Fig. 10.
3-D Holography of a Diffusing Object with Laser Light.




Fig. 11.
Three dimensional Reconstruction of a Small Statue of Abraham Lincoln. (Courtesy
of Professor G. W. Stroke, State University of New York, Stony Brook).


                                      Physics 1971




Fig. 12.
Strongly Magnified Image of a Hologram taken with Diffused    Illumination. The In-
formation is conveyed in a noiselike code. E. N. Leith and J. Upatnieks, 1964.



holograms. Leith and Upatnieks could soon store 12 different pictures in one
emulsion. Nowadays one can store 100 or even 300 pages of printed matter
in an area which by ordinary photography would be sufficient for one.
   From then on progress became very rapid. The most spectacular result of
the first year was the holography of three dimensional objects, which could be
seen with two eyes. Holography was of course three dimensional from the start,
but in my early, small holograms one could see this only by focusing through
the field with a microscope or short-focus eyepiece. But it was not enough to
make the hologram large, it was also necessary that every point of the photo-
graphic plate should see every point of the object. In the early holograms,
taken with regular illumination, the information was contained in a small area,
in the diffraction pattern.
   In the case of rough, diffusing objects no special precautions are necessary.
The small dimples and projections of the surface diffuse the light over a large
cone. Figure 10 shows an example of the setup in the case of a rough object,
such as a statuette of Abraham Lincoln. The reconstruction is shown in
Figure 11. With a bleached hologram (“phase hologram”) one has the impres-
sion of looking through a clear window at the statuette itself.


   If the object is non-diffusing, for instance if it is a transparency, the informa-
tion is spread over the whole hologram area by illuminating the object through
a diffuser. such as a frosted glass plate. The appearance of such a “diffused”
hologram is extraordinary; it looks like noise. One can call it “ideal Shannon
coding”, because Claude E. Shannon has shown in his Communication Theory
that the most efficient coding is such that all regularities seem to have dis-
appeared in the signal: it must be “noise-like”.         But where is the information in
this chaos? It can be shown that it is not as irregular as it appears. It is not as
if grains of sand had been scattered over the plate at random. It is rather a
complicated figure, the diffraction pattern of the object, which is repeated at
random intervals, but always in the same size and same orientation.
   A very interesting and important property of such diffused holograms is
that any small part of it, large enough to contain the diffraction pattern, con-
tains information on the whole object, and this can be reconstructed from the
fragment, only with more noise. A diffuse hologram is therefore              a distributed
memory, and this was evoked much speculation whether human memory is not
perhaps, as it were, holographic, because it is well known that a good part of
the brain can be destroyed without wiping out every trace of a memory. There
is no time here to discuss this very exciting question. I want only to say that in
my opinion the similarity with the human memory is functional only, but cer-
tainly not structural.
    It is seen that in the development of holography the hologram ha             s become
always more unlike the object, but the reconstruction always more perfect.
Figure 13 shows an excellent reconstruction by Leith and Upatnieks of a




Fig. 13.
Reconstruction of a Plane Transparency, Showing a Restaurant, from a Hologram
taken with Diffused Illuminations (E. N. Leith and J. Upatnieks, 1964).


                                      Physics 1971




Fig. 14.
Modern Holographic Equipment.

photograph, from a diffuse hologram like the one in the previous figure.
   The pioneer work carried out in the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, led
also to the stabilization of holographic techniques. Today hundreds if not
thousands of laboratories possess the equipment of which an example is shown
in Figure 14; the very stable granite slab or steel table, and the various op-
tical devices for dealing with coherent light, which are now manufactured by
the optical industry. The great stability is absolutely essential in all work
carried out with steady-state lasers,      because a movement of the order of a
quarter wavelength during the exposure can completely spoil a hologram.
   However, from 1965 onwards there has developed an important branch of
holography where high stability is not required, because the holograms are
taken in a small fraction of a microsecond, with a pulsed laser.
   Imagine that you had given a physicist the problem: “Determine the size of
the droplets which issue from a jet nozzle, with a velocity of 2 Mach. The sizes
are probably from a few microns upwards.” Certainly he would have thrown
up his hands in despair! But all it takes now, is to record a simple in-line
hologram of the jet, with the plate at a safe distance, with a ruby laser pulse of
20-30 nanoseconds. One then looks at the “real” image (or one reverses the
illuminating beam and makes a real image of the virtual one), one dives with
a microscope into the three-dimensional image of the jet and focuses the
particles, one after the other. Because of the large distance, the disturbance by
the second image is entirely negligible. Figure 15 shows a fine example.
   As the research workers of the TRW laboratories have shown, it is possible


                                      D. Gabor                                    25




Fig. 15.
Holography of Jets. (Courtesy of Laser Holography Inc., Santa Barbara, California.)


to record in one hologram the infusoriae in several feet of dirty water, or in-
sects in a meter of air space. Figure 16 shows two reconstructions of insects
from one hologram, focusing on one after the other. The authors, C. Knox
and R. E. Brooks, have also made a cinematographic record of a holographic
film, in which the flight of one mosquito is followed through a considerable
depth, by refocusing in every frame (9).
   Another achievement of the TRW group, Ralph Wuerker and his colleagues,
leads us into another branch of holography, to holographic interferometry.
Figure 17 shows a reconstruction of a bullet, with its train of shockwaves, as


Fig. 16.
Observation of Mosquitos in Flight. Both Pictures are extracted from one Hologram.
(Courtesy of C. Knox and R. E. Brooks, TRW, Redondo Beach, California.

it meets another  shockwave. But it is not just an image, it is an interferometric
image. The fringes show the loci at which the retardation of light is by integer
wavelengths, relative to the quiet air,         before the event. This comparison
standard is obtained by a previous exposure. This is therefore a double-
exposure hologram, such as will be discussed in more detail later (10).
   Figure 18 shows another high achi evement of pulse holography: a holographic,
three-dimensional portrait, obtained by L. Siebert in the Conductron Corpora-
tion (now merged into McDonnel-Douglas Electronics Company, St Charles,
Missouri). It is the result of outstanding work in the development of lasers.
The ruby laser, as first realised by T. H. Maiman, was capable of short pulses,
but its coherence length was of the order of a few cm only. This is no obstacle
in the case of in-line holography, where the reference wave proceeds almost in
step with the diffracted wavelets, but in order to take a scene of, say, one meter
depth with reflecting objects one must have a coherence length of at least one
meter. Nowadays single-mode pulses of 30 nanosecond duration with 10 joule
in the beam and coherence lengths of 5-8 meters are available, and have been
used recently for taking my holographic portrait shown in the exhibition at-
tached to this lecture.
   In 1965 R. L. Powell and K. A. Stetson in the University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, made an interesting discovery. Holographic images taken of moving
objects are washed out. But if double exposure is used, first with the object at
rest, then in vibration, fringes will appear, indicating the lines where the dis-
placement amounted to multiples of a half wavelength. Figure 19 shows
vibrational modes of a loudspeaker membrane, recorded in 1965 by Powell and
Stetson (11), Figure 20 the same for a guitar, taken by H. A. Stetson in the
laboratory of Professor Erik Ingelstam ( 12).
   Curiously, both the interferograms of the TRW group and the vibrational


                                           D. Gabor




Fig. 17.
Dynamic Holographic Interferometry. This Reconstruction of a Holographic Interfero-
gram shows the interaction of two air shock fronts and their associated flows. (Courtesy
of Dr R. F. Wuerker and his associates, TRW Physical Electronics Laboratory, Redondo
Beach, Calif.)


records of Powell and Stetson preceded what is really a simpler application of
the interferometrical principle, and which historically ought to have come
first - if the course of science would always follow the shortest line. This is the
observation of small deformations of solid bodies, by double exposure holo-
grams. A simple explanation is as follows: We take a hologram of a body in
State A. This means that we freeze in the wave A by means of a reference
beam. Now let us deform the body so that it assumes the State B and take a
second hologram in the same emulsion with the same reference beam. We
develop the hologram, and illuminate it with the reference beam. Now the
two waves A and B, frozen in at different times, and which have never seen
one another, will be revived simultaneously, and they interfere with one an-


28                                    Physics 1971




Fig. 18.
Holographic Portrait. (I,. Siebert, Conductron Corporation, now merged into Mc-
Donnell-Douglas Electronics Company, St Charles, Missouri.)




Fig. 19.
Vibrational Modes of a Loudspeaker hiernbrane, obtained by Holographic Interfero-
metry. (R. L. Powell and K. A. Stetson, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1965.)


                                       D. Gabor




Fig. 20.
Vibrational Modes of a Guitar, Recorded by Holographic Interferometry. (Courtesy
of Dr K. A. Stetson and Professor E. Ingelstarn.)

other. The result is that Newton fringes will appear on the object, each fringe
corresponding to a deformation of a half wavelength. Figure 21 shows a fine
example of such a holographic interferogram, made in 1965 by Haines and
Hillebrand. The principle was discovered simultaneously and independently
also by J. M. Burch in England, and by G. W. Stroke and A. Labeyrie in Ann




Fig. 21.
An early Example of Holographic Interferometry by Double Exposure. (Haines and
Hildebrand, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1965.)


                                      Physics 1971




Fig. 22.
Non-destructive Testing by Holography. Double Exposure Hologram, revealing two flaws
in a tyre (Courtesy of Dr Ralph Grant and GCO, Ann Arbor, Michigan).

Arbor, Michigan.
   Non-destructive testing by holographic interferometry is now by far the most
important industrial application of holography. It gave rise to the first in-
dustrial firm based on holography, GCO (formerly G. C. Optronics), in Ann
Arbor, Michigan, and the following examples are reproduced by courtesy of
GCO. Figure 22 shows the testing of a motor car tyre. The front of the tyre is
holographed directly, the sides are seen in two mirrors, right and left. First a
little time is needed for the tyre to settle down and a first hologram is taken.
Then a little hot air is blown against it, and a second exposure is made, on the
same plate. If the tyre is perfect, only a few, widely spaced fringes will appear,
indicating almost uniform expansion. But where the cementing of the rubber
sheets was imperfect, a little blister appears, as seen near the centre and near
the top left corner, only a few thousandths of a millimeter high, but indicating
a defect which could become serious. Alternatively, the first hologram is de-
veloped, replaced exactly in the original position, and the expansion of the
tyre is observed “live”.
    Other examples of non-destructive testing are shown in Figure 23; all defects
which are impossible or almost impossible to detect by other means, but which
reveal themselves unmistakably to the eye. A particularly impressive piece of
equipment manufactured by GCO is shown in Figure 24. It is a holographic
analyser for honeycomb sandwich structures (such as shown in the middle of


                                      D. Gabor                                    31




Fig. 23.
Examples of Holographic Non-destructive Testing. (Courtesy of GCO, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.)




Fig. 24.
Holographic Analyzer Mark II for Sandwich Structures, GCO, Ann Arbor, Michigan.


Fig. 25.
Holographic Contour Map, made by a method initiated by B. P. Hildebrand and K. A.
Haines (Journal, Optical Society of America, 57, 155, 1967). Improved by J. Varner,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1969.


Figure 23) which are used in aeroplane wings. The smallest welding defect
between the aluminum sheets and the honeycomb is safely detected at one
glance.
   While holographic interferometry is perfectly suited for the detection of very
small deformations, with its fringe unit of 1/4000 mm, it is a little too fine for
the checking of the accuracy of workpieces. Here another holographic tech-
nique called “contouring” is appropriate. It was first introduced by Haines and
Hildebrand, in 1965, and has been recently much improved by J. Varner, also
in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Two holograms are taken of the same object, but
with two wavelengths which differ by e.g. one percent. This produces beats
between the two-fringe system, with fringe spacings corresponding to about
1/40 mm, which is just what the workshop requires (Figure 25).
   From industrial applications I am now turning to another important de-
velopment in holography. In 1962, just before the “holography explosion” the
Soviet physicist Yu. N. Denisyuk published an important paper (13) in which
he combined holography with the ingenious method of photography in natural
colours, for which Gabriel Lippman received the Nobel Prize in 1908. Figure
26 a illustrates Lippmann’s method and Denisyuk’s idea. Lippmann produced
a very fine-grain emulsion, with colloidal silver bromide, and backed the
emulsion with mercury, serving as a mirror. Light falling on the emulsion was


How to view the Lippmann type reflection hologram
                                                          For maximum brightness (due to fulfillment
                                                          of the Bragg criterion) the hologram shall
                                                          be illuminated diagonally from the upper
                                                          righthand corner. An ordinary penlight at
                                                          a distance of about 25 cm is recommended,
                                                          see figure. Other approximately point source
                                                          lighting can be used, such as spotlight, slide
                                                          projector, or even direct unclouded sunlight.
                                                             NB: The hologram ought to be viewed
                                                          in subdued lighting, and direct overhead
                                                          light be avoided. The side screens (partly
                                                          book pages), as indicated in the figure, are
                                                          good for screening off room light.




 THE HOLOGRAM IS NOT REPRODUCED HERE DUE TO COMMERCIAL UNAVAILABILITY.




How the Lippman type reflection hologram has been constructed
The figure shows how the reference wave                   side. The dotted line indicates how, at the
comes from one side of the emulsion, the                  reconstruction, a wave reflected from the
signal wave from the object from the other                silver layers in the emulsion is obtained, and
                                                          you see in its extension backwards the
                                                          object as it was at the registration. (Stroke-
                                                          Labeyrie, see References.)
                                                             In fact, at the practical registration of a
                                                          reflection hologram, the signal wave comes
                                                          from the different points of the illuminated
                                                          object. In order to have the reconstructed
                                                          image of the object close to the hologram
                                                          included, an image of the object has been
                                                          transported there by means of a special lens.
                                                          This gives localization of the image closely
                                                          in front of and behind the hologram.
The hologram is manufactured by McDonnell Douglas Electronics Company, St. Charles, Missouri, USA.


                                         D. Gabor                                 33




Fig. 26 a. Gabriel Lippmann’s method of photography in natural colours.



reflected at the mirror, and produced a set of standing waves. Colloidal silver
grains were precipitated in the maxima of the electric vector, in layers spaced
by very nearly half a wavelength. After development, the complex of layers,
illuminated with white light, reflected only a narrow waveband around the
original colour, because only for this colour did the wavelets scattered at the
Lippmann layers add up in phase.
   Denisyuk’s suggestion is shown in the second diagram. The object wave and
the reference wave fall in from opposite sides of the emulsion. Again standing
waves are produced, and Lippman layers, but these are no longer parallel          to
the emulsion surface, they bisect the angle between the two wavefronts. If now,
and this is Denisyuk’s principle, the developed emulsion is illuminated by the




                                    Emulsion




    Reflected wave in
    the reconstruction
Fig. 26 b. Lippmann-Denisyuk-Stroke Reflection Hologram.


34                                     Physics 1971


reference wave, the object will appear, in the original position and (unless the
emulsion has shrunk) in the original colour.
   Though Denisyuk showed considerable experimental skill, lacking a laser in
1962 he could produce only an “existence proof”. A two-colour reflecting
hologram which could be illuminated with white light was first produced in
1965 by G. W. Stroke and A. Labeyrie (14) and is shown in Figure 27.
   Since that time single-colour reflecting holograms have been developed to
high perfection by new photographic processes, by K. S. Pennington (15) and
others, with reflectances approaching 100 percent, but two; and even more,
three-colour holograms are still far from being satisfactory. It is one of my
chief preoccupations at the present to improve this situation, but it would take
too long, and it would be also rather early to enlarge on this.
   An application of holography which is certain to gain high importance in
the next years is information storage. I have mentioned before that holography
allows storing 100-300 times more printed pages in a given emulsion than
ordinary microphotography. Even without utilizing the depth dimension, the
factor is better than 50. The reason is that a diffused hologram represents al-
most ideal coding, with full utilization of the area and of the gradation of the
emulsion, while printed matter uses only about 5-10% of the area, and the
gradation not at all. A further factor arises from the utilization of the third
dimension, the depth of the emulsion. This possibility was first pointed out in
an ingenious paper by P. J. van Heerden (16) in 1963. Theoretically it ap-
pears possible to store one bit of information in about one wavelength cube.
This is far from being practical, but the figure of 300, previously mentioned,
is entirely realistic.
   However, even without this enormous factor, holographic storage offers im-
portant advantages. A binary store, in the form of a checkerboard pattern on
microfilm can be spoiled by a single grain of dust, by a hair or by a scratch,
while a diffused hologram is almost insensitive to such defects. The holographic
store, illustrated in Figure 28, is according to its author L. K. Anderson (17)
 (1968) only a modest beginning, yet it is capable of accessing for instance any
one of 64x64 printed pages in about a microsecond. Each hologram, with a
diameter of 1.2 mm can contain about 10          4
                                                   bits. Reading out this information




                                       Holographic              Image and
                                        storage                   detector
                                          plane                    plane
Fig. 28.
Holographic Flying Spot Store. L. K. Anderson and R. J. Collier, Bell Telephone
Laboratories, 1968.


                                        D. Gabor                                       35




Fig. 27.
First two-colour Reflecting Hologram,     Reconstructed in White Light. G. W. Stroke
and A. Labeyrie, 1965.


36                                     Physics 1971




                   PRODUCING THE DISCRIMINATING HOLOGRAM




Fig. 29.
The Principle of Character Recognition by Holography.


sequentially in a microsecond would of course require an impossible wave-
band, but powerful parallel reading means can be provided. One can con-
fidently expect enormous extensions of these “modest beginnings” once the
project of data banks will be tackled seriously.
   Another application of holography, which is probably only in an early stage,
is pattern and character recognition. I can only briefly refer to the basic work
which A. Vander Lugt (18) has done in the field of pattern recognition. It will
be sufficient to explain the basic principle of character recognition with the
aid of Figure 29.
   Let us generalize a little the basic principle of holography. In all previous
examples a complicated object beam was brought to interference with a
simple or spherical reference beam, and the object beam was reconstructed by
illuminating the hologram with the reference beam. But a little mathematics
shows that this can be extended to any reference beam which correlates sharply
with itself. The autocorrelation function is an invariant of a beam; it can be
computed in any cross section. One can see at once that a spherical wave
correlates sharply with itself, because it issues from a “point”. But there are
other beams which correlate sharply with themselves, for instance those
which issue from a fingerprint, or from a Chinese ideogram, in an extreme
case also those which issue from a piece of frosted glass. Hence it is quite
possible for instance to translate, by means of a hologram, a Chinese ideogram
into its corresponding English sentence and           vice versa. J. N. Butters and M.
Wall in Loughborough University have recently created holograms which


                                          D. Gabor                                     37


from a portrait produce the signature of the owner, and           vice versa . 4 In other
words, a hologram can be a fairly universal translator. It can for instance
translate a sign which we can read to another which a machine can read.
   Figure 29 shows a fairly modest realisation of this principle. A hologram
is made of a letter “a” by means of a plane reference beam. When this holo-
gram is illuminated with the letter       “a” the reference beam is reconstructed,
and can activate for instance a small photocell in a certain position. This, I
believe, gives an idea of the basic principle. There are of course many ways of
printing letters, but it would take me too long to explain how to deal with
this and other difficulties.




 Fig. 30.
 Laser Speckle. The appearance of e.g. a white sheet of paper, uniformly illuminated
 by laser light.


38                                     Physics 1971


    With character recognition devices we have already taken half a step into
the future, because these are likely to become important only in the next
generation of computers or robots, to whom we must transfer a little more
of human intelligence. I now want to mention briefly some other problems
which are half or more than half in the future.
    One, which is already very actual, is the overcoming of laser speckle. Every-
body who sees laser light for the first time is surprised by the rough appearance
of objects which we consider as smooth. A white sheet of paper appears as
if it were crawling with ants. The crawling is put into it by the restless eye,
but the roughness is real. It is called “laser speckle” and Figure 30 shows
a characteristic example of it. This is the appearance of a white sheet of
paper in laser light, when viewed with a low-power optical system. It is
not really noise; it is information which we do not want, information on the
microscopic unevenness of the paper in which we are not interested. What can
we do against it?
    In the case of rough objects the answer is, regrettably, that all we can
do is to average over larger areas, thus smoothing the deviations. This means
that we must throw a great part of the information away, the wanted with
the unwanted. This is regrettable but we can do nothing else, and in many
cases we have enough information to throw away, as can be seen by the fully
satisfactory appearance of some of the reconstructions from diffuse holograms
which I have shown. However, there are important areas in which we can do
much more, and where an improvement is badly needed. This is the area of
microholograms, for storing and for display. They are made as diffused holo-
grams, in order to ensure freedom from dust and scratches, but by making
them diffused, we introduce speckle, and to avoid this such holograms are
made nowadays much larger than would be ideally necessary. I have shown
recently (19), that advantages of diffuse holograms can be almost completely
retained, while the speckle can be completely eliminated by using, instead
of a frosted glass, a special illuminating system. This, I hope will produce
a further improvement in the information density of holographic stores.
    Now let us take a more radical step into the future. I want to mention
briefly two of my favourite holographic brainchilden. The first of this is
Panoramic Holography, or one could also call it Holographic Art.
    All the tree-dimensional holograms made so far extend to a depth of a few
meters only. Would it not be possible to extend them to infinity? Could one
not put a hologram on the wall, which is like a window through which one
looks at a landscape, real or imaginary        ? I think it can be done, only it will
not be a photograph but a work of art. Figure 31 illustrates the process. The
artist makes a model, distorted in such a way that it appears perspectivic, and
extending to any distance when viewed through a large lens, as large as the
hologram. The artist can use a smaller lens, just large enough to cover both
his eyes when making the model. A reflecting hologram is made of it, and
illuminated with a strong, small light source. The viewer will see what the
plate has seen through the lens; that is to say a scene extending to any distance,
in natural colours. This scheme is under development, but considerable work


                                      D. Gabor                                  39




Fig. 31.
Panoramic Holography.

will be needed to make it satisfactory, because we must first greatly improve
the reflectance of three-colour holograms.
  An even more ambitious scheme, probably even farther in the future, is
three-dimensional cinematography, without viewing aids such as Polaroids.
The problem is sketched out in Figure 32. The audience (in one plane or two)




Fig. 32.
3-D Cinematography with Holographic Screen.


40                                    Physics 1971


is covered by zones of vision, with the width of the normal eye spacing, one
for the right eye, one for the left, with a blank space between two pairs. The
two eyes must see two different pictures; a stereoscopic pair. The viewer can
move his head somewhat to the right or left. Even when he moves one eye
into the blank zone, the picture will appear dimmer but not flat, because
one eye gives the impression of “stereoscopy by default”.
   I have spent some years of work on this problem, just before holography,
until I had to realise that it is strictly unsolvable with the orthodox means of
optics, lenticules, mirrors, prisms.        One can make satisfactorily small screens
for small theatres, but with large screens and large theatres one falls into a
dilemma. If the lenticules, or the like, are large, they will be seen from the
front seats; if they are small, they will not have enough definition for the
back seats.
   Some years ago I realised to my surprise,           that holography can solve this
problem too. Use a projector as the reference source, and for instance the
system of left viewing zones as the object. The screen, covered with a Lipp-
mann emulsion, will then make itself automatically into a very complicated
optical system such that when a picture is projected from the projector, it
will be seen only from the left viewing zones. One then repeats the process
with the right projector, and the right viewing zones. Volume, (Lippmann-
Denisyuk) holograms display the phenomenon of directional selectivity. If
one displaces the illuminator from the original position by a certain angle,
there will be no reflection. We put the two projectors at this angle (or a
little more) from one another, and the effect is that the right picture will
not be seen by the left eye and vice versa.
   There remains of course one difficulty, and this is that one cannot practise
holography on the scale of a theatre, and with a plate as large as a screen.
But this too can be solved, by making up the screen from small pieces, not
with the theatre but with a         model of the theatre, seen through a lens, quite
similar to the one used in panoramic holography.
    I hope I have conveyed the feasibility of the scheme, but I feel sure that
I have conveyed also its difficulties. I am not sure whether they will be over-
come in this century, or in the next.
   Ambitious schemes, for which I have a congenital inclination, take a long
time for their realisation. As I said at the beginning, I shall be lucky if I shall
be able to see in my lifetime the realisation of holographic electron microscopy,
on which I have started 24 years ago. But I have good hope, because I have
been greatly encouraged by a remarkable achievement of G. W. Stroke (20),
which is illustrated in Figure 33. Professor Stroke has recently succeeded in
deblurring micrographs taken by Professor Albert Crewe, Chicago, with his
scanning transmission electron microscope, by a holographic filtering process,
improving the resolution from 5 Angstrom to an estimated 2.5 Angstrom.
This is not exactly holographic electron microscopy, because the original was
not taken with coherent electrons, but the techniques used by both sides, by
A. Crewe and by G. W. Stroke are so powerful, that I trust them to succeed
also in the next, much greater and more important step.


                                        D. Gabor                                      41




Fig. 33.
Scanning Transmission Electron Micrograph. Professor Albert Crewe, University of
Chicago, holographically deblurred by Professor G. W. Stroke, 1971. The bottom
photographs prove that the effect could not be obtained by hard printing, because
some spatial frequencies which appear in the original with reversed phase had to be
phase-corrected.

   Summing up, I am one of the few lucky physicists who could see an idea
of theirs grow into a sizeable chapter of physics. I am deeply aware that this
has been achieved by an army of young, talented and enthusiastic researchers,
of whom I could mention only a few by name. I want to express my heartfelt
thanks to them, for having helped me by their work to this greatest of scientific
honours.


REFERENCES

It is impossible to do justice to the hundreds of authors who have significantly
contributed to the development of holography. The number of articles exceeds
2 000, and there are more than a dozen books in several languages.
   An extensive bibliography may be found for instance in: T. Kallard, Editor,
Holography (Optosonic Press, New York, 1969 and 1970)


BOOKS
Barrekette, E. S., Kock, W. E., Ose, T., Tsujiuchi, J. and Stroke, G. W., Eds. Applica-
  tions of Holography (Plenum Press, New York, 197 1 )
Caulfield, H. J. and Sun Lu, The Applications of Holography (Wiley Interscience,
  New York, 1970).
Collier, R. J., Burckhardt, C. B. and Lin, L. H., Optical Holography (Academic Press,
  New York, 1971).
DeVelis, J. B. and Reynolds, G. O., Theory and Applications of Holography (Addison
  Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1967).
Francon, M., Holographie (Masson et Cie, Paris, 1969).
Kiemle, H. und Röss, D., Einführung in die Technik der Holographic (Akademische
  Verlagsgesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main,            1969). Ibid. Introduction to Holographic
  Techniques (Plenum Press, 1972, in print).
Kock, W. E., Lasers and Holography (An Introduction to Coherent Optics) (Doubleday
   & Co., Garden City, NY. Y, 1969).
Ostrovsky, Yu. I., Holography (in Russian) Nauka, Leningrad, 1970).
Robertson E. R. and Harvey, J. M., Eds., The Engineering Uses of Holography (Cam-
  bridge University Press, 1970).


                                           D. Gabor                                        43


Stroke, G. W., An Introduction to Coherent Optics and Holography (Academic Press,
   New York: 1st Edition, 1966, Second Edition, 1969).
Viénot, J. Ch., Smigielski, P. et Royer, H.,           Holographie Optique (Developments,
   Applications) (Dunod, Paris, 197 1) .
  1. Gabor, D., “A New Microscopic Principles”,             Nature 161, No. 4098, 777-778
       (1948).
      Gabor, D., “Microscopy by Reconstructed Wavefronts”, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London)
      A 197, 454-487      (1949).
      Gabor, D., “Microscopy by Reconstructed Wavefronts: II”, Proc. Phys. Soc.
       (London) 64 (Pt. 6) No. 378 B, 449-469 (1951).
  2. Rogers, G. L., “Experiments in Diffraction Microscopy”, Proc. Roy. Soc. (Edin-
      burgh) 63 A, 193 (1952).
  3. Baez, A., “Resolving Power in Diffraction Microscopy”, Nature,            169, 963-964
       (1952).
  4. El-Sum, H. M. A. and Kirkpatrick, P.,          “Microscopy by Reconstructed Wavefronts”
      Phys. Rev., 85, 763 (1952).
  5. Gabor, D. and Goss, W. P.,         “Interference Microscope with Total Wavefront Re-
      construction”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 56, 849-858 (1966).
  6. Cutrona, L. J., Leith, E. N., Porcello, L. J. and Vivian, W. E., “On the Applica-
      tion of Coherent Optical Processing Techniques to Synthetic Aperture Radar”,
       Proc. IEEE, 54, 1026-1032 (1966).
  7. Leith, E. N. and Upatnieks, J.,       “Wavefront Reconstruction with Continuous Tone
      Transparencies”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 53, 522 (1963) (Abstract).
       Leith, E. N. and Upatnieks, J.,         “Wavefront Reconstruction with Continuous-
      Tone Objects”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 53, 1377-1381 (1963).
      Leith, E. N., and Upatnieks, J., “Wavefront Reconstruction with Diffused Illumina-
       tion and Three-Dimensional Objects” J. Opt. Soc. Amer., 54, 1295 (1964.)
  8. An early reference is:
       Stroke, G. W., “Theoretical and Experimental Foundations of High-Resolution
       Optical Holography” (Presented in Rome on 14 September 1964) in Vol. II,
      pp. 53-63 of Pubblicazioni IV Centenario della Nascita di Galileo Galilei (G.
       Barbera, Firenze, 1966).
  9. Knox, C. and Brooks, R. E.,           “Holographic Motion Picture Microscopy” Proc.
       Roy. Soc. (London), B 174,         115-121 (1969).
 10. Heflinger, L. O., Wuerker, R. F. and Brooks, R. E., J. Appl. Physics, 37, No. 2,
       642-649 (February 1966).
11. Burch, J. M., “The Application of Lasers in Production Engineering”, Produc-
       tion Engineer, 44, 431-442 (1965).
       Powell, R. L. and Stetson, K. A.,       “Interferometric Vibration Analysis by Wave-
       front Reconstruction”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 55, 1593-1598 (1965).
       Stroke, G. W. and Labeyrie, A. E.,            “Two-Beam Interferometry by Successive
       Recording of Intensities in a Single Hologram”, Appl. Physics Letters, 8, No.
       2, 42-44 (15 January 1966).
 12. Stetson, K. A., Thesis (under direction of E. Ingelstam), Royal Institute of
       Technology, Stockholm (1969).
13. Denisyuk, Yu. N.,       “Photographic Reconstruction of the Optical Properties of an
       Object in its Own Scattered Radiation”, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSR, 144, 1275-
       1278 (1962).
14. Stroke, G. W. and Labeyrie, A. E.,           “White-Light Reconstruction of Holographic
       Images using the Lippmann-Bragg Diffraction Effect”, Physics Letters, 20, 368-
       370 (1966).
15. Pennington, K. S. and Harper, J. S.,           “Techniques for Producing Low-Noise, Im-
       proved-Efficiency Holograms”, Appl. Optics, 9, 1643-1650 (1970).
 16. Van Heerden, P. J., “A New Method of Storing and Retrieving Information”, Appl.
       Optics, 2, 387-392 (1963).


44


17. Anderson, L. K.,      “Holographic Optical Memory for Bulk Data Storage”, Bell
     Lab Rep. 46, 318 (1968).
18. Vander Lugt, A.,     “Signal Detection by Complex Spatial Filtering”, IEEE Trans.
     on Information Theory, IT-10, 139-145 (1964).
19. Gabor, D., “Laser Speckle and its Elimination”, IBM J. of Res. and Dev. 14,
     509-514 (Sept. 1970).
20. Stroke, G. W.,    “Image Deblurring and Aperture Synthesis Using ‘A Posteriori’
     Processing by Fourier-Transform Holography”,     Optica Acta, 16, 401-422 (1969).
     Stroke, G. W. and Halioua, M.,      “Attainment of Diffraction-Limited Imaging in
     High-Resolution Electron Microscopy by ‘A Posteriori’ Holographic Image Sharpen-
     ing”, Optik (1972) (in print).
