                           D ONALD A. G L A S E R

        Elementary particles and bubble chambers
                       Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1960



It is a very great honor and privilege that I have this opportunity to describe
to you the invention, development, and uses of bubble chambers for study-
ing elementary particles.
   From the earliest beginning of serious scientific thought up to the present
day, men have tried to understand the properties of matter by imagining
it to be built up out of a small number of basic irreducible elements. Ac-
cording to current scientific ideas, these irreducible elements are actually sub-
microscopic particles which are supposed to be indivisible and therefore not
made up out of yet smaller particles. We imagine all matter to be agglom-
erations of molecules built up from atoms which are, in turn, constructed
from electrons, protons, and neutrons. These three particles have definite
masses, spins, electric charges, magnetic moments, and other properties. All
electrons are supposed to be identical and so are all protons and all neutrons.
During the last twenty years a number of other apparently indivisible par-
ticles have been discovered so that now there are thirty of them altogether.
Although a few of these thirty have not yet been observed experimentally,
they are included in the list because the theoretical expectation of their exist-
ence is very strong and it seems virtually certain that they will be observed
during the next few years. Some of the thirty elementary particles were
found experimentally, only after theoretical arguments had predicted their
existence and the conditions required for creating and observing them. Others
were discovered more or less accidentally before we had any theoretical
ideas about them or their properties. Among these are the µ-meson and the
first « strange particles ». Although we have a lot of experimental knowledge
about them there is still no satisfactory mathematical theory which can pre-
dict their physical properties or interpret their existence in terms of the other
known elementary particles. Physicists find it distasteful to believe that all
thirty of these elementary particles are « really fundamental », and hope some
day to understand them all as compounds of a smaller number of truly
fundamental particles or in terms of some other concepts involving simple
underlying laws.


530                         1960    D.A. GLASER

   Advances in our knowledge of the elementary particles have depended
heavily on the development of techniques for detecting them and observing
their properties in detail. Among the most important instruments used in
these experimental studies have been the cloud chambers and the nuclear
emulsion. Both techniques permit detailed visual study of the paths of
charged elementary particles, but each has limitations that seriously hamper
some studies of elementary particles and other phenomena of high-energy
nuclear physics.
    I became interested in trying to devise new experimental methods for in-
vestigating the physics of elementary particles in 1950, not long after the
new « strange particles » had been discovered in cosmic rays. In those days
a rather small number of these particles had been observed, and they were
still called « V-particles » or « pothooks » because of their unusual appearance
in the cloud chamber photographs. In fact, I remember that when I left the
California Institute of Technology in 1949 after finishing my doctoral re-
search on cosmic radiation under the direction of Professor Carl D. Ander-
son, there was written at the top of his blackboard the question: « What
have we done about the pothooks today? » No one had predicted the exist-
ence of these particles or had any idea how they might fit into theoretical
schemes describing the particles already well known at that time. Their dis-
covery in cosmic ray interactions in 1947 by Butler and Rochester and later
observation by others created high excitement among physicists. Here was
a whole new family of particles that might well lead to some novel and
deep ideas about the laws and symmetries of Nature on the submicroscopic
level of the elementary particles. More experimental information was des-
perately needed concerning the production, decay, and interactions of these
new particles.
    Greatly stimulated by these developments, I began to wonder whether
it would be possible somehow to speed up the rate of observing the strange
particles and their interactions. Most examples of their decays were seen in
cloud chamber photographs of penetrating cosmic ray showers originating
in lead plates just above the chamber. Because of the rarity of strange-par-
ticle production and the low density of gas in a cloud chamber, production
events almost never occurred in the gas itself. For this reason it was difficult
to get convincing experimental evidence on even such simple ideas as the
law of associated production, which had been invented to explain how the
new particles could have such long lifetimes. Nuclear emulsions are not use-
ful in these studies because the neutral « V particles » have typical mean decay


       ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS                              531
lengths of a few centimeters. This makes it virtually impossible to associate
correctly a decaying       or    with its parent star in an emulsion stack con-
taining a reasonable density of events.
   There was therefore a great need for a particle detector of high density
and large volume - tens to hundreds of liters - in which tracks could be pho-
tographed and scanned at a glance, and in which precision measurements
of track geometry could be made. Expansion cloud chambers which operated
with internal gas pressures up to 300 atmospheres had been built for this
reason, but they were elaborate and cumbersome machines which required
waiting times of 15 to 30 minutes between expansion cycles.
   Since all detectors capable of recording the passage of a single minimum
ionizing particle must use some amplifying process to be sensitive to the
minute amounts of energy deposited by a fast charged particle, I began to
list all the amplifying mechanisms I could imagine that might serve as the
basis for a detector of the type that was needed. Previous detectors had used
the instability of a gas, liquid, or solid, against dielectric breakdown in an
intense electric field, the chemical instability of nuclear emulsion with re-
spect to its developing solution, or the thermodynamic instability of a super-
cooled or supersaturated vapor. Since I wished to attain high density with-
out using very high pressures, I considered mainly instabilities that can exist
in liquids and solids, such as chemical instabilities including the tendency of
monomers to polymerize, instabilities due to intense electric fields, and ther-
modynamic instabilities such as are present in supercooled liquids, super-
heated solids, or superheated liquids. At the time that I was studying these
instabilities, I knew that the large proton synchrotons in the few GeV en-
ergy range would come into operation in the early 1950’s and that they
would have pulse repetition times of a few seconds. It was therefore im-
portant that the new detector be able to cycle in a few seconds to be most
useful with these machines as well as with the cosmic rays. For this reason I
rejected chemical and solid systems as being probably too difficult to recycle
rapidly.
   The thermodynamic instability of a superheated liquid can be used to
detect minimum ionizing radiation only if the density of ionization energy
deposited in the liquid along the path of the particle is sufficient to form a
vapor bubble nucleus large enough to grow to photographable size. If the
vapor pressure in a bubble at the temperature T exceeds the external pressure
applied to the liquid by the amount         the radius of this critical nucleus is


532                                  1960 D.A.GLASER

                                     =



where (T) is the surface tension of the liquid-vapor interface. A lower
limit for the nucleation energy required for forming this bubble is obtained
by calculating the energy required for its isothermal reversible formation




Then the minimum energy density required per unit length of track is



                                         3   AP

If we imagine that we can quickly reduce the external pressure on the hot
liquid almost to zero compared with the vapor pressure as a means of pre-
paring the final superheated state, we approximate       by P(T), the sat-
urated vapor pressure. Then the energy loss of the minimum ionizing par-
ticle must exceed



                               2rc       3

When we insert the actual value of the energy loss of a minimum ionizing
particle, we find that the only way to attain the low surface tension and high
vapor pressure required by this equation is to raise the temperature of the
liquid to the vicinity of its critical temperature, since the surface tension
vanishes at the critical temperature. In fact, it turns out that the temperature
must be about one-half to two-thirds of the way from the boiling point to
the critical point for successful bubble chamber operation.
   Closer estimates of the required degree of superheat can be made only by
assuming specific mechanisms for conversion of ionization energy to bubble
nucleation energy. We must first ask whether macroscopically measured
values of (T) and P(T) apply for bubbles 10 -6 cm in diameter. In the
theory of cloud chamber operation, it is important that the equilibrium
 vapor pressure at a convex liquid surface is much larger than at a flat surface.
Is there a similar effect at concave surfaces? It was several weeks before I


       ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS                                533
could answer this question, because each thermodynamic argument I used led
to the conclusion that the vapor pressure inside a vapor bubble is the same
as that at a flat interface, though I found that nearly all of the thermodynam-
ics textbooks disagreed with me. Finally I found a discussion of this question,
which had apparently been a subject of a serious dispute as late as 1939, in
an excellent book, Kinetik der Phasenbildung, by M. Volmer, in which my
conclusions were supported.
   Little experimental information on the surface tension of highly concave
surfaces was available, but it seemed plausible that there should not be a
large dependence on curvature when the radius of curvature is very much
larger than the average intermolecular distance in the liquid.
   Two detailed mechanisms for bubble formation suggested themselves. In
one, it was supposed that clusters of ions of like sign are produced occasion-
ally along the track, and form bubbles by mutual electrostatic repulsion. In
the second, it was supposed that excited atoms and molecules formed directly
by the primary particle and by ion recombination converted their excitation
energy into local heating of the liquid through superelastic collisions of the
second kind. Both models made bubble formation along the tracks of min-
imum ionizing particles appear to be a very difficult and implausible process.
I was encouraged by the idea that even if the primary ionization energy was
insufficient, secondary delta rays with even a few hundred volts of energy or
 more would form frequently along the track and deposit their energy densely
 in a small volume as they stopped in the liquid. Coulomb scattering would
tend to curl up the stopping electron tracks and increase the volume density
 of their energy deposit.
    For a first experimental test of these ideas, I chose diethyl ether because
 of its relatively low surface tension, critical temperature, and critical pressure,
 and because it was cheap and easy to obtain in pure form. One particular
 calculation using the electrostatic model predicted that diethyl ether would
 be nucleated to boil by ionizing radiation at about 140°C at one atmosphere
 although its boiling point is only 34.6°C. It seemed to me unreasonable that
 such an enormous degree of superheat should be attainable experimentally,
 so I looked in the literature of the physical chemists to see what was known
 about the maximum attainable superheats. Finally I found a remarkable pa-
 per* describing attempts to superheat diethyl ether, a liquid which these
 authors had apparently chosen for the same reasons of convenience that dic-
 tated my choice. Imagine my excitement when I read that they had been
 * F. B. Kenrick, C. S. Gilbert, and K. L. Wismer, J. Phys. Chem., 28 (1924) 1927.


534                           1960 D.A.GLASER




(a) Pressure on enclosed diethyl ether is high due to vapor pressure of the liquid at
160°C. Temperatures shown are maintained by hot oil baths; (b) 160°C bath removed.
Temperature drops quickly in a few seconds to 25°C. Pressure on total system about 1
atmosphere. Diethyl ether in the bulb at 140°C is now highly superheated; (c) Boiling
    is triggered in the superheated diethyl ether by radiation from a 60Co source.


able to maintain diethyl ether superheated for hours at 130°C and one at-
mosphere, but that at 140°C the liquid erupted at erratic time intervals after
being brought rapidly to the high temperature. To demonstrate the « capri-
ciousness » of this phenomenon, they quote a typical series of 30 consecutive
« waiting times ». When I examined these times, I found them to be consist-
ent with a Poisson distribution corresponding to the random occurrence of
a nucleating event which distrupted their small volume of liquid with an
average waiting time of about 60 seconds. From the reported geometry of
the superheating apparatus, I estimated that its total « counting rate » for ion-
izing events in the liquid due to cosmic rays plus radioactive background
at sea level was also about one count every 60 seconds!
   To make a simple test of the hoped-for triggering of superheated diethyl
ether by ionizing events, I did the experiment diagrammed in Fig. 1 . A
heavy-walled capillary tube of the shape shown was evacuated and filled
with pure diethyl ether vapor and liquid. When the pressure on the liquid
is reduced by cooling the bulb containing some vapor, the pressure drops


            ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS                        535
 to about 1 atmosphere, superheating the liquid in the 140oC bulb. When
exposed to gamma radiation from a 60Co source, this hot ether erupts into
violent boiling, instantly as far as the eye can tell.
   It should be remarked parenthetically that before making these detailed
 calculations and experiments, I wanted to be sure not to overlook simple
 experimental possibilities, so I took some bottles of beer, ginger ale, and soda
water into my laboratory, warmed them as much as I dared, and opened
them with and without a radioactive source nearby. There was no apparent
gross difference in the way they foamed. Water, of course, turns out to be
just the wrong substance to use in a bubble chamber because it has a large
 surface tension and a high critical pressure.
   Now that there was experimental proof of the reality of this new physical
 phenomenon on which a bubble chamber technology could be based, it was
 important to find out if minimum ionizing particles could initiate boiling
 and if the bubbles formed accurately along the path of the particle. Unless




              Fig. 2. Some of the first Pyrex-glass bubble chambers.


536                               1960 D.A.GLASER




Fig. 3. High-speed movies taken at 3,000 pictures per second of eruptive boiling
initiated in diethyl ether at 135oC by a penetrating particle. The pictures shown were
taken at o, 4, 22, 71, and 250 milliseconds. The fast two are consecutive pictures.
                      The chamber is about 1 cm inside diameter.


the bubble chamber could make accurate tracks of minimum ionizing par-
ticles, it would be of little use in high-energy physics experiments.
   To look for tracks, I made a number of small Pyrex-glass bubble cham-
bers containing a few cm each of diethyl ether. Some of them are shown
                              3



in Fig. 2. A bath of hot oil maintained the required temperature, and a piston
operated by a hand crank controlled the pressure. Each time the pressure
was reduced by a quick turn of the hand crank, a high-speed movie camera
recorded the onset of boiling after the usual few seconds of waning time
when the ether was in a quiescent superheated state. Sometimes the boiling


          ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS                             537
started along a well defined track as shown in Fig. 3, which is taken using
chamber 3 in Fig.2. From these movies taken at 3,000 pictures/second, one
sees that the bubbles grow to be more than a millimeter in diameter in 300
microseconds. Finer tracks were obtained by constructing an automatic de-
vice for expanding and recompressing the chamber every 10 seconds. Photo-
graphs of the chamber were taken with a xenon flashlamp whenever a
vertical Geiger counter telescope indicated the passage of a penetrating cos-
mic ray particle during the few seconds of sensitive time following each
expansion. These photographs, shown in Figs. 4 (a, b, c) proved that bubble
chambers could yield precision measurements of events involving minimum
ionizing tracks.
   Although this series of experiments established with certainty that bubble
chambers were feasible and had the right characteristics for elementary-par-
ticle studies, engineering development was needed before large chambers for
serious experiments could be built. There were two main questions. What




Fig. 4 (a,b ). Penetrating cosmic ray tracks in 3 cm 3 diethyl-ether bubble chamber.
                (Random expansion and counter-controlled flashlamps. )
(a) 60 microsecond flash duration, 139oC; (b) 10 microsecond flash delay, 20 micro-
                 second flash duration, 140°C. (Fig. 4 (c) on next page.)


538                            1960 D.A.GLASER




Fig. 4 (c). Penetrating cosmic ray tracks in 3 cm3 diethyl-ether bubble chamber.
              (Random expansion and counter-controlled flashlamps.)
(c) 10 microsecond flash delay, 5 microsecond flash duration, 141°C. The track in
                (c) is deflected about 2o in the middle of the chamber.

other liquids could be used in bubble chambers? How could chambers with
hundreds of liters of sensitive volume be constructed? Many laboratories the
world over pursued this development with great vigor and ingenuity.
   Diethyl ether had been used in the first experiments for reasons of exper-
imental convenience. Liquid hydrogen was obviously the physicists’ dream
as a working liquid because the interpretation of events in hydrogen are
so straightforward. Using the electrostatic theory of bubble chamber opera-
tion, I estimated that hydrogen would work at about 27 oK. Although I now
have excellent reasons for believing the thermal or « hot track » theory of
bubble nucleation is correct rather than the original electrostatic mech-
anism, the two theories give nearly the same scaling law for relating the
operation conditions of different liquids. Therefore, the basically wrong
electric theory gave correctly the operating temperatures for hydrogen, deu-
terium, helium, freon, propane, xenon, and a host of other liquids. At the
University of Michigan there were no cryogenic facilities in 1953, so I trav-


       ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS                            539
elled to the University of Chicago and worked on liquid-hydrogen bubble
chambers with Hildebrand and Nagle, who soon showed that superheated
liquid hydrogen was radiation sensitive. Shortly after that, Wood at Berke-
ley photographed the first tracks in liquid hydrogen. Many other liquids
were tested in our laboratory and in other places. No liquid that has been
tested seriously has failed to work as a bubble chamber liquid. The choice
of liquids depends only on the physical objectives of the experiment and on
engineering and economic considerations.
    It did not seem practical to make large chambers out of a single piece of
pyrex glass. We therefore fabricated a small chamber with an aluminum
body and flat glass windows sealed with rubber gaskets. Certainly there was
no hope of maintaining a liquid superheated for any length of time in such
a chamber because boiling begins easily at gaskets and scratches in the metal.
 We hoped that we could expand the chamber fast enough to keep the pres-
 sure in the interior of the chamber low for at least a few milliseconds, even
 though boiling begins instantly at the walls. Fig. 5 shows the 5-cm chamber
 used to test this method. Figs. 6 (a, b, c, d, e) shows a sequence of snapshots
 taken at various times after the beginning of the expansion. These pictures
 proved that a chamber fabricated of ordinary materials could have a sensitive
 time of a few milliseconds, long enough for use with large particle acceler-
 ators. Wood proved the same thing independently with his first small hy-
 drogen chamber a short time before we did. These experiments made pos-
 sible the design and construction of really large chambers containing hun-
 dreds of liters of liquid.
     In Fig. 7 is shown a 15-cm propane chamber we exposed to the Brook-
 haven Cosmotron - the first bubble chamber to be used for experiments in
 high-energy physics. In Figs. 8, 9, 10, and 11 are shown our 30-cm propane
 chamber, 30-cm /21-liter/ xenon chamber, the xenon chamber fully assem-
 bled for an experiment, and finally the largest chamber operating now in
 the world, Alvarez’s 180-cm /500-liter/ hydrogen chamber. Other really
 large chambers are in use or under construction at Brookhaven, Chicago,
 Geneva, Dubna, Saclay, London, and other high-energy physics centers.
 Smaller chambers in large numbers and great varieties are in use all over
 the world.
     Large quantities of data on elementary particles and their interactions are
  being produced by these chambers. A number of new particles and phenom-
  ena have been discovered by their use. Precise information on masses, spins,
  lifetimes, parity violating decays, branching ratios, and polarizations has


1960 D.A. GLASER


      ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS                                    541

been obtained for these particles. Nuclear fusion catalyzed by µ-mesons was
discovered in a hydrogen bubble chamber. Figs. 12 through 14 are pictures
showing some of the elementary-particle phenomena being studied now
with these chambers.
   Because of the high density and rapid cycling rate of bubble chambers,
we now have abundant information on particle production, interaction, and
decay as observed with beams at the large accelerators. It was a disappoint-
ment to discover that bubble chambers are not easy to use for cosmic ray
experiments since they cannot be operated using counter-controlled expan-
sions as can cloud chambers. We have established experimentally that the
lifetime of the « latent bubble-track image » produced by a charged particle
is less than 10-4 seconds and our theoretical estimates indicate that it may
actually be about 10-8 seconds. Since mechanical expansion of a bubble




Fig. 6 (a). Operation of a « dirty » diethyl-ether chamber, 5 cm in diameter and 2.5 cm
deep at 154°C. Photographs are taken with a 5 microsecond flash duration at different
moments after the beginning of the expansion process; 11 milliseconds, no radiation:
violent boiling occurs at the gaskets but no bubbles have formed in the interior of the
         liquid or at the glass windows. (Figs. 6 (b, c, d, e) on the following pages.)


 542                                  1960 D.A.GLASER




Fig. 6 (b). 12.5 milliseconds, no radiation: boiling has progressed further and a jet of
       vapor shoots out of the expansion orifice at the bottom of the chamber.




Fig. 6 (c). 5.4 milliseconds, radium source nearby: some fine and some larger tracks are
visible, the finer ones showing normal bubble density indicating that the chamber is
                                      at full sensitivity.


           ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS




Fig. 6 (d). 7.55 milliseconds, radium source nearby: although the bubbles on the oldest
             tracks have grown quite large, new tracks are still being formed.




Fig. 6 (e). 12.5 milliseconds, weak radium source nearby: vapor jet from the expansion
orifice causes a sudden pressure wave in the chamber. It distorts the tracks and ends the
                                   sensitive time abruptly.


544                              1960 D.A.GLASER




Fig. 7. A 15-cm propane bubble chamber showing stereoscopic camera, expansion
system, and flashlamp. When in use, a small oven with windows fits around the cham-
                 ber to maintain it at a temperature of 55°C to 60°C.




      Fig. 8. The stripped aluminum body of a 30-cm propane bubble chamber.


       ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS                            545




Fig. 9. The stripped aluminum body and test window for 21-liter, 30-cm xenon
                              bubble chamber.




Fig. 10. Xenon bubble chamber assembled ready for use at the Bevatron, except
                         for insulating refrigeration.


 546                              1960 D.A.GLASER




Fig. 11. Alvarez’s 180-cm, 500-liter hydrogen bubble chamber assembled with magnet,
                     ready for doing an experiment at Berkeley.


          ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS                          547




Fig. 12. Associated production,    +p             at about 1 GeV with subsequent
                   decays in Alvarez’s hydrogen bubble chamber.


548                             1960   D .A .G L A S E R




Fig. 13. Associated production,     +p        +     at about 1 GeV seen in xenon
bubble chamber with subsequent decays. The decay tracks of the are very short be-
                     cause of the high density of the xenon.


                         ELEMENTARY PARTICLES AND BUBBLE CHAMBERS                                 549




Fig. 14. The same process, π- + p + Λ° + K° at about 1 GeV followed by Λ° → p + π− and K° → π° + π°
followed by π° → 2 γ in which all four gamma rays make electron showers. Complete processes like
this involving gamma rays are efficiently detected in xenon because of its short radiation length.


550                         1 9 6 0 D. A. G L A S E R

chamber takes much longer than this, it is impossible to make expansions
only when interesting events are detected by counter arrays because the
bubble nuclei will have disappeared by the time the chamber has become
sensitive. By random cycling and various ways of extending the length of
the sensitive time, it may be possible to maintain a bubble chamber in the
sensitive condition for 10% of the time. Beams of artificially produced par-
ticles can be timed to arrive at a bubble chamber just when it reaches full
sensitivity. For use with particle accelerators the bubble chamber is ideal be-
cause it can be made to be sensitive only during the short time of beam
arrival. General background ionization does not then complicate the pictures
very much.
   In its various forms the bubble chamber has solved many of the problems
of obtaining large amounts of precise pictorial information on processes in-
volving energetic elementary particles. At the same time it has created a new
problem by providing each active laboratory with millions of photographs
each year. These photographs require careful, intelligent inspection and meas-
urement with coordinate accuracies of the order of 1 micron on the film.
Measuring projection microscopes to do the last step have been constructed
to be able to follow interesting tracks semi-automatically and punch the
coordinate information onto cards which are later fed into high-speed digital
electronic computers. From these computers come geometric, kinematic,
and dynamical conclusions which identify known particles, measure en-
ergies, and identify known processes. Now we are faced with the problem
of finding and measuring these events as fast as the bubble chamber and
accelerator can produce them. Although we can contemplate staffs of 50
specialists engaged in this work at a single laboratory, or for a single large
bubble chamber, a staff of 500 or 5,000 people seems impossible. Yet we can
ask important questions in basic physics which would be answered if we had
such a huge staff studying photographs. As a result, many bubble chamber
physicists have turned their attention toward developing automatic pattern
recognition, measuring, and computing machines. Some day it is dreamed
that such a machine, armed with a memory filled with full knowledge of
all known processes occurring in high-energy physics, will devour miles of
film each day, duly noting the numbers, characteristics, and types of all the
known processes it recognizes. Only when it cannot « understand » an event
by searching its memory, will it ring a bell to call over a physicist who will
try to understand the new process. A start has been made in this direction
and in three to five years we expect to use the first machines capable of


       ELEMENTARY          PARTICLES        AND    BUBBLE      CHAMBERS          551

recognizing and interpreting a large class of known events. Armed with such
formidable experimental means, the limitations of our imagination (and our
ability to keep all these monstrous machines in operation) define the limits
of the questions we may hope to answer about the experimental behavior
of the elementary particles.




Since this lecture is intended to be a personal and historical description of research
rather than a complete review article, the reader is referred to the following review
sources for further and more detailed information.
D. A. Glaser, « The Bubble Chamber », Handbuch der Physik, S. Flügge (Ed.), Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1958, Vol. 45, p. 314.
H. Slätis, « Survey Article on Bubble Chambers », Nucl. Instr. Methods, 5 (1959) 1 .
D. V. Bugg, « The Bubble Chamber », Progress in Nuclear Physics, O. R. Frisch (Ed.),
Pergamon Press, London, 1959, Vol. 7. p. 1 .
