                                                                                155




Generating High-Intensity
Ultrashort Optical Pulses
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2018 by
Donna Strickland
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada.



this lecture is about how light interacts with matter and how the
interaction changes when the power of the light gets very high. When the
power of the light is low, the interactions are linear. That is, the response
of the interaction varies linearly with the power of the light. If you double
the power of the light impinging on the material, you will absorb twice as
much power. At the time of my PhD thesis, scientists were investigating
nonlinear interactions with media. With nonlinear absorption, when the
incident light power is doubled the absorption rate is more than doubled.
My PhD research project was to study a highly nonlinear experiment and
to do the experiment I needed first to develop a very intense laser. This is
the reason that I developed Chirped Pulse Amplification (CPA) along with
my PhD supervisor, Prof. Gérard Mourou. With the new intense CPA laser
system, we were able to show that the interactions were not the nonlinear
interactions that we were expecting. We had to rethink how intense light
interacted with matter, and the development of CPA helped usher in a
new field of study that was emerging called high intensity laser physics.
   The interaction of light with matter has been studied over the centu-
ries. Scientists wondered if light was made up of particles or whether it
could be a wave. Experimental observations showed evidence of both
explanations of light. The fact that a tree casts a well-defined shadow led
people to think light had to be made of particles travelling in straight


156   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      lines. If the path of a light particle went through the tree, it was simply
      blocked by the tree, resulting in the shadow. On the other hand, wave-like
      phenomena were also observed. When light passes through a small aper-
      ture there are fringes on the edge of the resulting light pattern that can
      only be explained using wave theory.
         In the mid-19th century, theorist James Clerk Maxwell combined the
      equations resulting from various experimental studies on time varying
      electric and magnetic fields. There were four equations in total coupling
      electric and magnetic fields. To make the four equations mathematically
      consistent, Maxwell had to add one more term concerning time varying
      electric fields inducing a magnetic field. This last piece of the puzzle
      could not be experimentally observed with mid-19th century technology.
      By combining the four complete mathematical equations, Maxwell was
      able to show theoretically that time varying electric and magnetic fields
      travelled as waves. These electro-magnetic waves travelled at the speed
      of light. He then theorized that since light travels at the speed of light, it
      must be an electro-magnetic wave. By the end of the 19th century Hein-
      rich Hertz had experimentally confirmed that time varying electric fields
      did indeed travel as waves. Because of the success of Maxwell’s equa-
      tions leading to the wave equation describing the time varying elec-
      tro-magnetic waves, scientists were led to believe that light must be a
      wave.
         By the end of the 19th century, scientists such as Hertz were carrying
      out experiments on ejecting electrons from material by shining light on
      the material. If light was indeed a wave, the brighter the light, the faster
      the electrons should be travelling when they leave the material. These
      experimental observations would be analogous to watching stones be
      being thrown up on a beach by a water wave. A small ripple in the water
      will not move a stone very much, but when the waves get big, the stones
      can move quickly and travel further away from the water. The power of a
      wave is related to the amplitude of the wave.
         The experiments with light ejecting electrons used different colours of
      light. The colour of light is given by the wavelength of the light, which is
      the distance between the crests of the wave. Of the colours that we can
      see with our eyes, red has the longest wavelength of about 0.7 microme-
      ters (one micrometer is one millionth of a meter) and the shortest wave-
      lengths of light that we can see are violet light with wavelength around 0.4
      micrometers. When the scientists shone red light on the material, no elec-
      trons were ejected no matter how powerful the red light was made. With
      green light, electrons came off the material but at low speed. When the
      power was increased, more electrons were ejected but always at the low
      speed. With violet light, the electron speed was higher than with green
      light, but again the speed did not increase with increased light power. The


                                                                 Donna Strickland Lecture     157


number of electrons ejected increased with light power. These experi-
ments flew in the face of the theory that light was a wave.
    In 1905, Albert Einstein was able to explain this effect. Of all the phys-
ics theories that Albert Einstein discovered, it is his work on this phe-
nomenon known as the photo-electric effect that Einstein was awarded
his Nobel Prize for. From these experimental observations of light causing
electrons to be ejected from materials, Einstein figured out that light is
quantized in its energy. There is a minimum energy unit of light that we
now call the photon. A photon is a wave-like particle. Einstein realized
that the energy of a photon is given by the wavelength of the light. The
total energy in a light pulse is then given by the energy of a single photon
multiplied by the number of photons.
    To understand why the photon picture of light explains the experimen-
tal observations, I will use an analogy with gravitational energy because
it’s harder for us to feel the energy of light. We know from everyday expe-
rience that if we drop a ball to the ground, the ball picks up speed as it
falls. The ball would be moving faster when it hits the ground if dropped
from a higher position above the ground. We will imagine playing basket-
ball with a child’s basketball net. The photons will be the basketball play-
ers trying to drop the ball through the net and we will determine the
speed the ball has when it enters the net. The speed of the ball through
the net is analogous to the speed of the electron as it is ejected from the
material by the photons.
    As depicted in Figure 1, a red photon has the longest wavelength and so
has the smallest energy. It is like a child sized basketball player. A red
photon playing basketball, no matter how they try, even on their tip-
py-toes cannot reach the net to drop their electron through. And no mat-
ter how many of these child-sized photons there are, electrons are never
going to get through the basketball net. This is equivalent to no electrons
coming off the material when irradiated by red light at any power.




Figure 1. Energy of photons is depicted as height. Of the visible colours, red photons have
the least energy, violet photons the greatest energy, with green photons in between. The
height of the ball held up by the photon, compared to the height of the basketball net is
equivalent to the comparison of photon energy with the energy that holds the electrons
to the atoms.


158   THE NOBEL PRIZES


          Now if you have a green light, that’s like an adult sized photon, playing
      with a child’s basketball net and they can dunk the electron through the
      net, but only barely. They’re only standing slightly taller than the basket-
      ball net and so when they drop their ball through it has only picked up a
      small speed before reaching the net.
          But the violet photon is like a pro basketball player. They’re the very
      tall photons. Their height is well above the net and when they drop their
      electron through the net, the electron has a lot more speed. But it
      wouldn’t matter how many of these violet photons there were, they would
      all be dropping electrons at the same speed through the net. There would
      be more electrons coming through the net.
          Usually when people study the photoelectric effect, it is about the study
      of quantum mechanics, but that’s not what I want to concentrate on for
      this lecture. What the experiment and theory of the photo-electric effect
      tells us is about how light interacts with matter. It is always one photon
      interacting with one atom at a time. If that photon has enough energy,
      more than the energy that the atom is holding onto its electron, it can
      send that electron on its way. The kinetic energy of the electron is given
      by the difference in the energy of the photon and the energy the atom was
      using to hold onto the electron. As the power of the light is increased, it
      means that there are more photons in the pulse and so more photons are
      available to interact with more atoms, but always one photon meeting one
      atom at a time.
          And that’s how we understood how light interacted with matter
      through the beginning of the 20th century. And then along came Maria
      Goeppert Mayer, the second woman to be awarded a Nobel Prize in phys-
      ics. Her Nobel Prize work was about nuclear shell structure, but I will dis-
      cuss the work she did for her PhD in 1930 and published in 1931[1]. I cited
      that 1931 paper in my own PhD thesis.
          Maria Goeppert Mayer started a whole new area of physics known now
      as multiphoton physics. She worked out the quantum mechanical theory
      of an atom simultaneously absorbing two photons to leave the atom in an
      excited electronic state. In order for light to be linearly absorbed, the
      energy of the photon must match the energy of the atomic energy
      between the ground state and the excited state. For the case of two pho-
      ton absorption that Goeppert Mayer solved, the addition of the energies
      of the two photons must equal the energy difference of the atomic states.
      Of all possible two photon processes, absorption is the most likely
      because it uses a resonant interaction. This is the same idea as pushing a
      child on a swing. To make the swing go higher you only push one time
      each period or in other words only when the swing has reached its maxi-
      mum height. If you pushed at other times, it would disrupt the swinging
      motion rather than increase the swinging motion to greater heights.


                                                     Donna Strickland Lecture   159


   If instead of absorption, we consider the process of multiphoton ioni-
zation, two little red photons would be simultaneously absorbed and the
combined energy of the two red photons would be the same energy as a
violet photon of twice the energy. The two red photons would cause an
electron to be ejected as if it was irradiated by a single violet photon.
   Goeppert Mayer had theoretically predicted multi-photon absorption,
but no one had observed the effect experimentally. In fact, no one would
see a multi-photon effect for another 30 years. It was Peter Franken’s
group at the University of Michigan that were the first to see a multipho-
ton effect. They were not investigating multiphoton absorption but rather
a nonlinear optical process known as second harmonic generation [2]. To
clarify, multiphoton physics refers to the study of the medium undergoing
a multiphoton process and nonlinear optics is the study of the resulting
light from a multiphoton process. Harmonic generation is not a resonant
process, but one where an atom will simultaneously absorb the energy of
two photons but then quickly release the energy. The energy will be
released as a single photon having twice the energy. The photon having
twice the energy of the input photons is known as the second harmonic.
Since the photon energy is doubled, the wavelength is halved. Using an
optical spectrometer that could measure both the red optical signal as
well as the generated violet light, the Franken group measured a very
small signal in the violet when they had a very powerful red light.
   Second harmonic generation was then first observed in 1961, which
begs the question of why it took 30 years to see any type of multiphoton
effect similar to what Maria Goeppert Meyer had predicted in 1931. What
was special about 1961 was that in 1960, the laser was first demonstrated.
   Because this is a Nobel lecture, I want to honour all of the people that
have been awarded Nobel Prizes for developments that led to the inven-
tion of the laser. Nicolay Basov, Alexander Prokhorov and Charles Townes
were honoured for developing the maser. The maser was the precursor of
the laser and the m is for microwave rather than light in lasers. Techno-
logically it was easier to make a maser than a laser. Masers were first
demonstrated in the 1950s. Art Schawlow was then awarded a Nobel
Prize for laser spectroscopy, but he had done a lot of the pioneering work
on converting maser technology to the optical wavelengths.
   But I want to give credit to Theodore Maiman. There was a race on at
the end of the 1950s and into 1960 to see who would be the first person to
demonstrate the laser. Ted Maiman won the race [3]. He was working at
Hughes Aircraft.
   The laser was born in 1960 and that’s why Peter Franken’s group could
see a nonlinear optical effect. Why did laser light lead to observations of
nonlinear optics? Regular light sources such as the sun or a light bulb
emit photons of every colour, which is why the light appears white. The


160   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      photons go off in all directions. They also don’t communicate with each
      other. They emit at random times. Because the photons are emitted at
      random times, the crests of some waves overlap troughs of other waves
      and the waves cancel each other out. The overall amplitude of the com-
      bined waves then is not that high. In other words, the density of photons
      is low. On the other hand, a laser emits a beam of light where all the pho-
      tons travel in one direction. The light from a laser will also only have one
      colour. The photons in the laser communicate with each other so that the
      photons are emitted in a way to have all the crests of the waves of each
      photon line up together. The waves of each of the photons add together,
      making themselves into a giant wave and a giant wave means the density
      of photons is very high.
          So now we need to discuss why the higher density of photons leads to
      the observation of multiphoton interactions. The density of the photons
      is given by the total number of photons in a given volume. For a light
      beam, two dimensions of the volume are given by the area of the beam.
      The beam area can be reduced by focusing the beam with a lens. The
      shorter the focal length of the lens, the smaller the beam diameter. The
      smallest beam diameter is limited to the dimension of the wavelength. For
      light, these wavelengths are on the order of 1 micron. The third dimension
      of the volume of light is given by the length of the pulse. The pulse length
      can be given by a spatial dimension, l, or the temporal length of the pulse
      τ. The two lengths are related by the speed of light, c such that, l = cτ. The
      shortest pulses to date are on the order of two wavelengths although
      pulses this short have yet to be amplified in a laser amplifier.
          In a linear interaction, one photon interacts with one atom at time. The
      rate of interaction is given by the probability of finding a photon in the
      interaction volume of the atom. The interaction volume differs from the
      actual size of the atom. The interaction volume is given by what is known
      as the cross-sectional area of the atom. The easier it is for the atom to
      interact with the light, the larger is this area, but it is about the area of the
      atom, which has dimensions of 0.1nm squared. This area is more than
      one hundred million times smaller than the focused spot area of the light.
      The third dimension of the interaction volume is given by the interaction
      time. The interaction time increases as the photon energy approaches the
      energy of the electronic state of the atom. If the photon is absorbed in the
      interaction, the process is a resonant process and the interaction time can
      be quite long, such as microseconds. This time scale corresponds to a
      length, l, of 300 m so that the interaction volume can be large. With linear
      interactions, the probability of finding a single photon in the interaction
      volume increases linearly with photon density.
          To see a second order nonlinear process such as the Franken group
      observed, there must be a non-negligible probability of finding two pho-


                                                       Donna Strickland Lecture   161


tons in the interaction volume. Unlike two-photon absorption, second
harmonic generation is a non-resonant process and so the time scale of
the process is quite short and the interaction volume is the cross-sec-
tional area of the atom and a length of a few microns. With regular light,
the photon density is too small to have an observable chance to see the
effect. The Franken group used a laser that had 3 J of energy with a 1 ms
time duration pulse. With this 300W of laser power focused into the
medium, the efficiency of the frequency doubling process was 10-7 or one
violet photon for every 10 million red photons [3].
     By the time I was working on my PhD in the 1980s, scientists were
working on higher order nonlinear harmonic generation. The goal of the
work was to generate coherent radiation equivalent to laser radiation,
but out in the ultraviolet and possibly beyond that to the extreme ultra-
violet. My supervisor Gérard Mourou gave me a paper [4] written by
Stephen Harris of Stanford University to read and consider whether I
could experimentally show the type of effects that Harris had consid-
ered theoretically. Harris had determined various transitions in atoms
and ions that would have resonances for high order even harmonics.
There are reasons of symmetry that do not allow even numbers of pho-
tons to be absorbed in isotropic, homogeneous media such as any gas
medium so the even number of photons could not be absorbed with this
multi-photon resonance. The even harmonic would also not be gener-
ated. By finding resonances for high order even harmonics, this would
allow the next higher odd harmonic to have a better chance of being
generated than the lower orders, which would not experience any reso-
nant enhancement.
     I determined that twice ionized nickel would have a resonance with the
8 harmonic of the radiation from a particular type of laser that we had in
  th

our research group, a Nd:YAG laser. My original thesis project was then to
generate the 9th harmonic of the 1-micron radiation from this laser. There
are many reasons that I won’t go into here, but I never did accomplish
these experiments. To try and do a ninth order nonlinear optical experi-
ment, I didn’t just need a pulsed laser. I needed a high intensity laser. This
is why I was the student who worked with Gérard to develop Chirped
Pulse Amplification.
     As discussed previously, nonlinear interactions are dependent not on
the total energy in the laser pulse, but rather the energy density. To gener-
ate the highest order nonlinearities, you want the highest energy density,
which is energy per unit volume. Because we are discussing light waves,
we more often refer to the intensity, which is the energy per unit area per
unit time. The area of the beam is fixed by the focusing element and the
wavelength of the light. The energy per unit time is the power of the light.
To increase this power, you have two choices, increase the energy or


162   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      decrease the time duration. Ideally, to maximize the intensity, you want
      both high energy and short pulses.
         At the time of my PhD project, inside the Laboratory for Laser Ener-
      getics (LLE) at the University of Rochester, where I was working on the
      experiments for my thesis, both high energy lasers and short pulse lasers
      existed. Within Gérard’s research group there were several short pulse
      laser systems. During the 1980s, the shortest pulses were created with
      dye lasers. Dye lasers had very large gain bandwidths that could support
      short pulses. I will discuss later the connection between short pulses and
      large spectral bandwidths. The dye lasers at LLE operated with pulses as
      short as 100 femtoseconds (fs). The 100 fs pulses stretch over a distance
      of only 30 microns. Compare this length to a 1 second pulse of light,
      which would stretch over two thirds of the distance from the earth to the
      moon, 300,000 km. Dye lasers have high gain, which means the lasing
      medium can be quite short to achieve the maximum power stored in the
      lasing medium. It is this characteristic of high gain, that makes dye lasers
      poor energy storage lasers. To store the maximum energy, the gain
      medium must stay in the excited state for a long time. To be a high gain
      medium, the opposite is true. The atoms must want to give up the energy
      in the excited state to allow for gain by stimulated emission. Dye lasers
      are therefore always low energy lasers with a maximum energy of about
      1mJ. The maximum power of the dye laser was then 1 mJ per 100 fs or 10
      GW. On the other hand, there was a high energy laser system known as
      the Omega laser at LLE. The main research goal at LLE is laser fusion,
      which is a process based on the total laser energy that can be applied to
      the fuel target. The Omega laser could deliver one kJ of energy, but the
      laser pulses had to be longer than 1 ns to not damage the laser rods. The
      gain medium of the Omega system was Nd doped glass. The energy of the
      glass laser was a million times greater than the dye system, but the pulse
      duration was 10,000 times longer. The power in the pulses was higher
      and reached a TW or a million MW.
         The gain bandwidth of the Nd:glass laser is large enough to support
      amplifying pulses as short as 1 ps. The pulse duration was limited by the
      nonlinear optical effect of self-focussing. Self-focusing is a different non-
      linearity than already discussed. At low power, the light is transmitted
      through the medium at a lower speed than light travels in vacuum. The
      difference in speed is determined by the index of refraction of the
      medium. At low power, the refractive index is given just by the material
      itself. When the intensity gets sufficiently high, the interaction changes
      such that the index of refraction changes instantaneously with light inten-
      sity. A laser beam is more intense in the centre of the beam compared to
      the edges. At high intensities then, the light in the centre of the beam trav-
      els slower than the light at the edges. This causes the light beam to start


                                                                 Donna Strickland Lecture    163


to focus in on itself, which causes the beam to get smaller and more
intense. This is then a runaway process where the beam finally collapses
to a small enough size that the intensity is large enough to damage the
material.
   Scientists want the high peak power at the output of the laser system
so they can study the various nonlinear processes, but the lasers them-
selves are damaged by the nonlinear processes if the power gets too high
inside the gain medium. This was the problem that had to be overcome.
High intensity laser pulses had to be generated without destroying the
laser medium itself. The solution was CPA.
   The CPA idea is beautiful in its simplicity as depicted in Figure 2. Start
with a short pulse from an oscillator and then stretch it to be long enough
to not allow nonlinear interactions in the lasing medium. Amplify the
stretched pulses. After amplification the long, high energy pulse can be
compressed back to its short pulse duration creating the high-power
pulse at the output of the system.




Figure 2. Schematic of chirped pulse amplification, showing that the power remains low
in the amplifier because of the stretcher, but the power is very high at the output of the
pulse compressor.


    The CPA concept works best for lasing medium that can support short
pulses because of a very large gain bandwidth and also support high
energy because they are a good energy storage medium. The best com-
promise between these two criteria is titanium doped sapphire, which
was being discovered at the same time as CPA was being developed [5].
Most CPA lasers today use Ti:sapphire as the lasing medium both for the
oscillator and the amplifiers. However, in the mid 1980s the short laser
pulses came from dye lasers that had wavelengths of 0.6 µm and the large
energy storage lasers were Nd:glass operating at wavelengths of 1.0 µm,
so it was not possible to simply stretch the short dye laser pulses and
amplify them in the high energy glass amplifiers.


164   THE NOBEL PRIZES


         To demonstrate the CPA concept we used a mode-locked Nd:YAG
      laser, which could generate pulses with durations of about 100 ps at the
      same 1µm wavelength as Nd:glass amplifiers. As we wanted pulse dura-
      tions shorter than 100 ps, we first had to use optical fiber pulse compres-
      sion techniques that were being developed at that time [6]. In order to
      generate short pulses, you need large spectral bandwidths. If you have a
      single wavelength, the wave goes on forever. If you add a wave that has a
      slightly different wavelength to the first wave, such that at one time,
      which we will call t = 0, both waves crest, then at a later time the two
      waves will add up to zero because one will be at a peak when the other is
      at a trough. As shown in Figure 3, if you keep adding waves with different
      wavelengths so that they all peak at t = 0, then when the waves all add
      together, only at t = 0 do they all add constructively. At all other times
      there is some amount of destructive interference, that is, there are peaks
      and troughs adding together to make zero. The more wavelengths you can
      add, the shorter the pulse becomes. This is why there is an inverse rela-
      tionship between spectral bandwidth and minimum possible temporal
      duration. The laser process that ensures all the wavelengths are adding so
      that all the crests add together at one time in order to produce a short
      pulse is known as mode-locking. The Nd:YAG laser used mode-locking to
      produce the ~ 100ps pulses.




      Figure 3. Demonstration of adding different wavelengths in a controlled manner leading
      to shorter pulses.



         Fiber pulse compression uses a nonlinear optical technique known as
      self-phase modulation (SPM) to generate more spectral bandwidth. It is
      the same nonlinearity that leads to self-focusing in the bulk media, but
      rather than the intensity varying spatially across the beam, the intensity
      varies temporally over the pulse duration. In an optical fiber, the beam is
      guided and so the beam continues to travel as a plane wave down the
      fiber. The beam area is very small in the fiber, leading to the intensity of
      the light being high and remaining high over the long lengths of the fiber.
      The laser pulse has a time varying intensity. The index of refraction
      changes with intensity at these high intensities, causing the peak of the
      pulse to move slower than the leading and trailing edges of the pulse.


                                                      Donna Strickland Lecture   165


Because the light at the peak of the pulse moves slower than the leading
edge, as the pulse propagates, the distance between the leading edge and
the peak lengthens. The number of phase fronts remains constant and so
the phase fronts must have greater distance between them. This longer
distance between phase fronts is a longer wavelength than the original
wavelength. At the same time, the peak is getting closer to the trailing
edge of the pulse with propagation, and so the crests of the waves are
being pushed together to create shorter wavelengths. The pulse duration
does not change because of SPM, as the beginning and end of the pulse
both continue to propagate at the low intensity speed. If the newly gener-
ated colours can be timed together rather than the red at the front and the
blue at the back, the extra bandwidth would allow a shorter pulse dura-
tion. This retiming of the colours is known as pulse compression.
    Propagation in the fiber not only creates new colours by the nonlinear
interaction SPM, but these colours disperse along the fiber because the
ordinary refractive index is wavelength dependent. The reddest of the col-
ours travel fastest, leaving the bluest colours to trail at the rear of the
pulse. The dispersion leads to the pulse durations becoming longer with
propagation. By 1984, scientists had shown that the best pulse compres-
sion occurred when the fiber length was sufficient to not only create the
needed extra spectral bandwidth, but that the pulse had stretched suffi-
ciently so that the colours spread out in such a way that the frequency of
the light changed almost linearly with time throughout the pulse [6]. The
frequency sweep through the pulse is known as a chirp, in the same way
that a bird’s chirp has its sound frequency change in time. We could have
called the technique stretched pulse amplification, but chirped pulse
amplification sounded better.
    It was already known by 1969 that a pair of parallel gratings could
compress a linearly chirped pulse back down to its minimum pulse dura-
tion by completely eliminating the chirp [7]. The work on fiber optic pulse
compression then gave us the path forward to demonstrate CPA. We
would generate the needed spectrum and stretch the pulse in an optical
fiber. This stretched pulse was then amplified in a Nd:glass amplifier and
a pair of parallel gratings compressed the pulses to deliver short, ener-
getic pulses at the output [8].
    The Mourou group had a mode-locked Nd:YAG laser to pump a short
pulse dye laser. Dye lasers needed green colour pumps, which was
achieved by generating the second harmonic of the 1µm beam from the
Nd:YAG laser. The beam intensity was sufficient to convert about 10% of
the power to green light, but that left 90% of the infrared beam wasted. It
was this wasted beam that I used for the input to the original CPA laser. It
is lucky that we needed to use a long fiber for the spectral enhancement
and pulse stretching as there was no room in the dye laser lab for me to


166   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      build the CPA system. We were able to string the fiber in the ceiling down
      to another lab at the other end of the building where we had the space to
      build the system.
          We used 1.4 kilometers of specialty optical fiber from Corning Inc. This
      fiber had a 9 µm core and so was single mode for the 1 µm light from the
      Nd:YAG laser. Corning had donated 2.5 km of fiber to us for this project.
      Unfortunately, only one end was available on the spool and so I had to
      unwind and rewind the fiber onto a different spool and I damaged the
      fiber during this process and was left with two pieces of optical fiber. I
      used the longer piece which was 1.4 km in length. The 2 W, Nd:YAG laser
      beam was focused into the fiber. At this power, the spectral bandwidth
      was increased to 4 nm Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM). The pulse
      duration increased to 300 ps at the output of the fiber.
          To amplify the pulses a regenerative amplifier was built. This type of
      amplifier uses a cavity similar to an oscillator, but the focusing is weaker
      in the amplifier compared to an oscillator allowing a larger beam diame-
      ter in the gain medium. The oscillator must start with one spontaneously
      emitted photon. This photon then stimulates another and the then the
      two become four. This is exponential gain and how all lasers start. How-
      ever, the gain must reach the saturation level where the gain becomes lin-
      ear. Otherwise the amplification is very inefficient. As shown in Figure 4,
      if you consider one single pass through an amplifier with low input signal,
      then at the input side of the gain medium, there are insufficient photons
      to de-excite the atoms, leaving most of the energy behind in the gain
      medium. In order to extract that energy, the input to each amplifier stage
      must be at the saturation level. Each type of laser gain medium has its
      own saturation level and it is related to the energy storage. Nd:glass
      amplifiers have a large saturation energy of ~ 5 J/cm2. In oscillators and
      regenerative amplifiers, the pulses make multiple passes through the gain




      Figure 4. Demonstration of low signal gain being energy inefficient. The figure shows the
      output photon number of 8 having started with one photon at the input. The stimulated
      emission has left only 7 of the atoms de-excited and almost all the atoms still in the exci-
      ted state. This energy would be wasted.


                                                      Donna Strickland Lecture   167


medium such that they reach the saturation level by the final pass
through the gain medium. To keep increasing the energy of the pulses, the
size of the beam must keep increasing so that at the output of each ampli-
fication stage, the energy per unit area remains the same. In our case the
pulse energy was increased almost a million times, from a few nJ to about
2 mJ. The repetition rate was decreased from 80 MHz to 10 Hz.
   The self-focusing nonlinearity limits the maximum pulse intensity or
energy density. The saturation energy of the gain medium determines the
maximum energy per unit area. From these two limits, you can determine
the minimum pulse duration that can be amplified without causing
self-focusing. To achieve the maximum possible energy from a Nd:glass
laser, the pulse should be stretched to 1 ns. As we only achieved 300 ps
with our 1.4 km fiber, we did not extract the maximum energy from the
regenerative amplifier.
    The final step in CPA is the pulse compression. We used a pair of par-
allel gratings and a roof top prism. Gratings cause the colours to diffract
at different angles as depicted in Figure 5. If you look at the path of the
red beam, you will see that it has the longest path to the output of the
compressor, whereas the blue wavelength beam has the shortest path.
After diffracting off the pair of gratings, the colours will be along a line
perpendicular to the beam path. Because we want to have a circular beam
at the output of the compressor, this line of colours is reflected by the
roof prism back through the pair of gratings. In this way all the colours
come back together into one circular beam, but the path length difference
between the reddest and bluest colours has been doubled.



   Figure 5. Schematic of a parallel
   grating optical pulse compres-
   sor. The figure demonstrates
   that the path length through
   the compressor is shorter for
   the red colours compared to
   the blue colours. Because of
   this path length difference, the
   blue colours that were lagging
   in the pulse catch up to the red
   colours, yielding the shortest
   possible pulse duration.


168   THE NOBEL PRIZES


          By placing the two gratings a certain distance apart, you can have the
      opposite dispersion than the fiber dispersion. That is, the colours that
      were stretched out over 300 ps can now be compressed to the minimum
      duration allowed by the spectral bandwidth. As I pointed out, even with
      the best fiber pulse compression, the chirp after the fiber is not perfectly
      linear. The opposite dispersion of the pair of gratings is also not perfectly
      linear, and so the pulse duration does not compress completely to the
      bandwidth-imposed limit. The compressor was set up with the stretched
      oscillator pulses, as we had the type of pulse duration measurement
      device, known as an autocorrelator, that could operate at the high repeti-
      tion rate of the oscillator. We compressed the pulses to 1.5 ps.
          To measure the amplified and compressed pulses at the 10 Hz repeti-
      tion rate, I needed to use a streak camera. My colleague Steve Williamson
      had such an instrument and together we measured the pulse duration to
      be 2 ps. This was the limit of temporal resolution of the streak camera,
      but it showed that the amplification process had not changed the chirp, as
      the compressed pulse duration was ~ 2 ps before and after amplification.
         This first CPA laser system delivered 1 GW power pulses, with 2 mJ of
      energy in 2 ps duration. At Rochester, along with Patrick Maine, we con-
      tinued to develop CPA lasers to deliver TW laser power from a laser sys-
      tem that could sit on one optical table, which we referred to as a table top
      terawatt or T-cubed laser [9]. It was with the TW system that I completed
      my PhD research.
          Rather than study high order harmonic generation for my PhD, we
      decided to study multi-photon ionization. This is an extension of the per-
      turbative treatment worked out by Goeppert Mayer for the case of two
      photon absorption. Again, using gravitational energy as an analogy for the
      electromagnetic energy, an electron in an atom sits down in a well. The
      height difference to the top of the well from where the electron sits is
      known as the ionization potential. In order to ionize by a multiphoton
      process, the atom needs to absorb the energy of enough photons so the
      total absorbed energy is greater than the ionization energy. With a mul-
      ti-photon process, the ionization rate would vary with the light intensity
      to the power given by the number of photons required to exceed the ioni-
      zation energy threshold. We used various noble gases, with Xenon being
      the easiest to ionize. With xenon, it would take 11 photons to ionize the
      atoms with 1 µm photons so we expected to see the ionization rate vary
      to the eleventh power of intensity. This was not the case. With our infra-
      red photons and ultrahigh laser intensity of 1015 W/cm2, we were no longer
      in the multi-photon regime. We had such a large photon density that the
      light energy could once again be thought of as a giant wave.
         At high intensities, rather than the electron getting enough kinetic
      energy to jump out of the potential well, the potential well is distorted by


                                                                  Donna Strickland Lecture     169


the interaction with the light wave as demonstrated in Figure 6. The well
is bent over by the wave at the frequency of the light. The well is tipped
one direction for half the period of light and then the other direction for
the second half of the period of the light. The electron then is no longer
contained by the well, for a brief moment of time. The longer the wave-
length, the longer the time duration that the potential well is bent allow-
ing a longer time for the electron to escape. Quantum mechanics also
allows the electron to tunnel through a barrier and so the potential does
not need to be completely tipped, but our work with long wavelengths in
the infrared and the very high intensity showed that the electrons did
simply ionize over the barrier [10]. These ionization studies [11] helped
usher in a new field of study, high intensity laser physics.




Figure 6. On the left panel, the perturbative effect of multi-photon ionization is depicted.
The electron gets sufficient energy from simultaneous absorption of multiple photons
to escape from the potential well. On the right panel, the process of over-the-barrier
ionization is shown. The interaction with the high intensity light wave bends the potential
energy wall over. If the light power is sufficiently strong, the well is bent as low as the
electron energy level and the electron is free to escape for the duration of the half period
of the wave.



   Whereas some physical processes are a result of the total energy that
can be applied, other processes occur because of the force applied per
unit time. A mechanical example is the use of a hammer. If you simply
push on a nail, it is difficult to move the nail, but if you hit the nail quickly
with the hammer, the nail moves easily. This is why I like to say that I
built a laser hammer when I built the CPA. The laser hammer has led to
new types of laser machining. Unlike the thermal machining processes
carried out by long pulse or continuous wave lasers, which depend on the
total energy deposited to the material, short pulse laser machining leads
to very precise cutting and drilling. This is because there is very little heat
delivered to the material. Any heat spreads through the material, melting


170   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      and deforming the material. If you can have a very short pulse, material
      can be cut with very low energy and so very little heat. This short pulse,
      low energy machining results then in very clean cuts and the drilling of
      very small holes. The machining is a result of the material being ablated
      or in other words ripped apart. The ablation is a result of the electrons
      being ripped off the atoms by the high intensity laser ionization process.
      Because this type of machining does not depend on depositing the energy
      in the material, it can machine transparent material such as glass or the
      cornea in the eye. The light is then not absorbed by the material and the
      laser ablation of material occurs only at the focal point. The machining
      can therefore be done inside the transparent material. It is because of this
      machining precision, that CPA lasers have found applications in machin-
      ing and in particular machining the corneal flap for laser eye surgery.
         The laser ushered in a new field of experimental study in nonlinear
      optics and multi-photon atomic processes. The development of CPA fur-
      thered our understanding of the interaction processes, which not only
      include exciting the electrons’ kinetic energy but also the distortion of the
      potential energy. The new field of high intensity laser physics has pushed
      new technologies to be developed that lead to shorter pulse durations or
      higher powers or both. These new technologies continue to lead us to a
      new understanding of how light and matter interact.




      references

      [1]   Goeppert-Mayer M. (1931). “Über Elementarakte mit zwei Quantensprün-
            gen,” Annals of Physics 9 (3): 273–295. Bibcode:1931AnP...401..273G.
            doi:10.1002/andp.19314010303.
      [2]   Franken, P. A., Hill, A. E., Peters, C. W. and Weinreich, G. (1960). “Generation
            of Optical Harmonics,” Phys.Rev.Lett. 7 (4): 118–119.
            Bibcode:1961PhRvL...7..118F. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.7.118
      [3]   Maiman, T. (1960). “Stimulated Optical Radiation in Ruby,” Nature 187
            (4736): 493–94.
            Bibcode:1960Natur.187..493M. doi:10.1038/187493a0.
      [4]   Harris, S. E. (1973). “Generation of Vacuum-Ultraviolet and Soft-X-Ray Radi-
            ation Using High-Order Nonlinear Optical Polarizabilities,” Phys.Rev.Lett. 31
            (6): 341–344. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.31.341
      [5]   Moulton, P. F., (1986). “Spectroscopic and laser characteristics of Ti:Al2O3,”
            J.Opt.Soc.Am. B 3(1): 125–133.
            doi:10.1364/JOSAB.3.000125
      [6]   Tomlinson, W. J., Stolen, R. H. and Shank, C. V., (1984). “Compression of
            optical pulses chirped by self-phase modulation in fibers,” J.Opt.Soc.Am.
            B 1(2): 139–149.
            doi:10.1364/JOSAB.1.000139


                                                              Donna Strickland Lecture   171



[7]    Treacy, E. (1969). “Optical pulse compression with diffraction gratings,”
       IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 5(9): 454–458.
       doi: 10.1109/JQE.1969.1076303
[8]    Strickland, D. and Mourou, G. (1985). “Compression of amplified chirped
       optical pulses,” Opt. Commun. 56(3): 219–221.
       doi: 10.1016/0030-4018(85)90120-8
[9]     Maine P., Strickland D., Bado P., Pessot M., and Mourou G (1988). “Genera-
       tion of ultrahigh peak power pulses by chirped pulse amplification,” IEEE J.
       Quantum Electron. 5(9): 454–458.
       doi: 10.1109/3.137
[10]   Keldysh L.V. (1965). Sov.Phys.JETP 20(5):1307.
[11]   Augst, S., Strickland, D., Meyerhofer, D. D., Chin, S. L. and Eberly, J. H.
       (1989). “Tunneling ionization of noble gases in a high-intensity laser field,”
       Phys.Rev.Lett. 63 (20): 2212–2215. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.63.2212
