                         EDWARD M . PURCELL


                Research in nuclear magnetism
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1952



Professor Bloch has told you how one can detect the precession of the mag-
netic nuclei in a drop of water. Commonplace as such experiments have be-
come in our laboratories, I have not yet lost a feeling of wonder, and of
delight, that thi s delicate motion should reside in all the ordinary things
around us, revealing itself only to him who looks for it. I remember, in the
winter of our first experiments, just seven years ago, looking on snow with
new eyes. There the snow lay around my doorstep - great heaps of protons
quietly precessing in the earth’s magnetic field. To see the world for a mo-
ment as something rich and strange is the private reward of many a discov-
ery. But I am afraid it has little bearing on the sober question we must, as
physicists, ask ourselves: What can we learn from all this about the structure
of matter? It is my privilege to tell you now of some of the things that can
 be learned.
   Let us begin with the most direct application of nuclear induction meth-
ods, the measurement of nuclear magnetic moments. The basis for this is
the resonance condition




in which f is the frequency of precession of the axis of nuclear spin in a mag-
netic field of strength H O, and is the magnetic moment of the nucleus.
The number I is the nuclear spin quantum number, an integer or half-integer,
and h is Planck’s constant. Now HO, except for a certain slight correction,
is simply the field of the magnet in which the substance has been put, and
it can be measured. The frequency of precession, once it is detected, is easily
measured with high accuracy, and thus one can determine the quantity
However, for practical reasons, it is hard to measure the strength of a mag-
netic field very precisely. This difficulty is avoided if one is content to meas-
ure the ratio of the magnetic moments for two different nuclear species. We
could, for example, compare the precession frequencies ƒH and ƒD for protons
and deuterons exposed to the same magnetic field H o. A mixture of light


Fig. 1. Simultaneous display of deuteron and proton resonances in HD. The proton
         trace is inverted. (T. F. Wimett, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)

and heavy water, H2O and D2O, might serve as our sample. Then fD/f H is
the ratio of the magnetic moment of the deuteron to that of the proton,
apart from the simple factor ID/I H, which is the ratio of the spins, in this
case 2. In this way the magnetic moments of many different nuclei have
been measured, relative to the moment of the proton, with great precision.
   To show what accuracy can be achieved, let me describe one example,
a very recent experiment by T. F. Wimett in the laboratory of Professor
Bitter of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The ratio of the deu-
teron moment to the proton moment had been carefully determined before
by Anderson and Smaller at Chicago, and by K. Siegbahn and Lindström
here at the Nobel Institute. Wimett has now refined this measurement still
further using as his sample the gas HD. This substance has a certain advan-
tage: the two different nuclei are not only in the same vessel, but in the same
molecule, so there is no doubt that the magnetic field at each is the same.
Fig. 1 shows simultaneous traces of the proton resonance and the deuteron
resonance in a field of about 15,000 gauss. You will notice at once that the
resonances are not simple. The proton resonance is a triplet line, almost fully
resolved, while the deuteron resonance is a cleanly resolved doublet. This
has an interesting explanation, to which I shall return near the end of my
lecture, but it has no direct bearing on this experiment except to emphasize
the extraordinary resolution. The separation of the deuteron doublet is only
0.07 gauss, 1 part in 200,000 of the applied field. By carefully lining up the
central proton peak with each deuteron peak, in turn, a measurement reliable
to about 1 part in 10 million can be made. The determination of the exact
frequency ratio is accomplished by an elaborate scheme of harmonic mul-


               RESEARCH IN NUCLEAR MAGNETISM                                221

tiplication. Wimett’s result, which he kindly gave to me just a few days be-
fore I left Cambridge, is


                          = 0.307012189      0.000000030


Table 1. Magnetic moments of the neutron (n), deuteron (2H), triton (3H), and
                3
                  He, relative to the moment of the proton (IH).

              -0.685001      3                      = 0.30701225      IO



              1.066636      IO                      = -0.7618150       12


The results of four earlier experiments of this sort are listed in Table 1. Of
course the neutron experiment is a very special one, and Professor Bloch
has already described his elegant method for detecting the neutron precession
frequency. The other values were obtained by various investigators1 in the
way I have just indicated. These numbers provide a very stringent test of
any theory of nuclear structure. A wholly satisfactory theory ought to be
able to predict them. As you know, we are very far from having such a
theory now. But even so, the high accuracy is not all wasted. The moment
of the deuteron is not quite equal to the sum of the moments of its separate
parts, the neutron and proton. Thanks to the extreme precision of the exper-
imental values, this small but significant discrepancy is itself fixed quite ac-
curately.
   As we leave the simplest nuclei and proceed through the Periodic Table,
the situation changes a little. The experimental precision is just as high, but
one must apply to the measured frequency ratios a small correction to take
account of the magnetic shielding effect of the atomic electrons. This correc-
tion increases rapidly with atomic number. Until better atomic wave func-
tions are available, it cannot be calculated reliably enough to support the
six figure accuracy of the resonance measurement. There is one important
exception. For two isotopes of the same element, the correction cancels out.
Accurate moment ratios for isotopic pairs are of considerable interest, espe-
cially if the hyperfine structure interval for the two isotopes can be deter-
mined. A. Bohr and Weisskopf2 have shown that such a comparison can
reveal something about the internal structure of the nucleus.


222                        1952 E.M.PURCELL

   Perhaps the greatest present need, through most of the Periodic Table, is
for spin values and only moderately precise moment values, to help test the
promising shell theories of nuclear structure. Nuclearinduction methods will
surely continue to contribute to this task. Spin determinations in particular,
which depend on careful intensity measurements, are likely to receive more
attention.
   The experimental physicist often needs to measure the intensity of a mag-
netic field. Until recently a precise magnetic field measurement has been a
formidable undertaking, but it is such no longer. At the National Bureau of
Standards in Washington, Hipple and his collaborators3 have measured the
proton precession frequency and, at the same time, have measured in ab-
solute units the intensity of their magnetic field. All the resources of the
Bureau were brought to bear on the latter measurement, and an accuracy of
1 part in 40,000 was achieved. Knowing their result, an experimenter any-
where in the world can determine absolute magnetic intensities to the same
precision, using equipment no more elaborate than an ordinary radio re-
ceiver. He need only determine the proton precession frequency in the field
in question. Few physical quantities are as easy to measure accurately as a
radio frequency, thanks to modern electronic techniques and the availability,
in most countries, of standard-frequency broadcasts.
   Already a number of experiments have been performed in which the
nuclear resonance has served as a standard of reference. Certain ones are of
special interest because they have improved our knowledge of the funda-
mental atomic constants. In each of these experiments two different magnetic
resonance phenomena have been observed at the same time in the same mag-
net. The phenomena involved are indicated in Fig. 2. The precession of the
proton moment (Fig. 2 a) we have already described; it is detected and
measured in a nuclear induction experiment. The electron has an intrinsic
spin and magnetic moment and also precesses in a magnetic field (Fig. 2 b).
 For the same field strength, the electron’s spin-precession frequency is about
 700 times greater than the proton precession frequency. A bare proton, mov-
 ing in a magnetic field, revolves in a circular orbit with a certain frequency
(Fig. 2 c). This is the familiar principle of the cyclotron and we might name
the associated frequency the « proton cyclotron frequency ». A free electron
in a magnetic field likewise revolves in a circular orbit, with a frequency
that we may call the « electron cyclotron frequency ». These « cyclotron fre-
quencies » are governed simply by the particle’s charge-to-mass ratio. If any
pair of these resonance phenomena are compared, in the same magnetic field,


                RESEARCH        IN   NUCLEAR      MAGNETISM                   223


Proton spin
precession




              Fig. 2. Four elementary magnetic resonance phenomena.

the field strength cancels out and we are left with a relation between certain
atomic constants. The experiment is thus reduced to the measurement of a
frequency ratio.
   The ratio of the proton spin-precession frequency to the proton cyclotron
frequency has been determined by Hipple4, and by Bloch5, in ways very
different but equally ingenious. (The direct result of this measurement is the
value of the proton moment in nuclear magnetons.) In my laboratory we
have measured the ratio of the proton precession frequency to the cyclotron
frequency of free electrons 6 . The precession of the spin of a truly free electron
has not been observed, but Kusch and his collaborators at Columbia, by
combining the techniques of atomic beams and nuclear induction, have
determined very precisely the ratio of the proton’s precession frequency to
that of the spinning electron in the hydrogen atom7. The results of these
experiments have in one way or another improved the accuracy of the fol-
lowing constants of atomic physics: the Faraday, F; the specific charge of
the electron, e/mc; the ratio of the mass of the proton to that of the electron,
M/m; the dimensionless fine-structure constant,           They have also helped
to test the new theoretical advances in quantum electrodynamics led by
Schwinger.


224                            1952 E.M.PURCELL




Fig. 3. Line shapes typical of the proton resonance in various substances. The line in
water is not drawn to scale; it is actually much narrower and more intense than indicated.


   We turn now to a very different subject, one whose rapid growth was
surely not anticipated at the beginning of this work. That is the study of
nuclear magnetism for the light it can throw on problems of molecular
structure and molecular motion, problems rather close to physical chemistry.
Indeed certain branches of this work are now being pursued in chemical
laboratories. We are interested not in the mere occurrence of nuclear res-
onance at a particular frequency but in its finer details. The variety that we
find is suggested by Fig. 3. Here are shown several line shapes typical of the
proton magnetic resonance in a few simple substances. One way to record
such a spectrum is to hold the applied magnetic field constant while slowly
varying the frequency of observation. In every case the center of the res-
onance absorption occurs at very nearly the same frequency, in these sub-
stances. The line width, on the other hand, varies from some 50 kilocycles/
second, in the case of ice at low temperature, to less than a few cycles/second,
 in the case of a liquid like water. (The true width of the resonance in water
is too small to be shown properly in the diagram.)
    The effects shown here can all be traced to the action of the nuclear mag-
nets on one another. In ice, each hydrogen nucleus is subjected not only to
 the field of our magnet, which might be several thousand gauss, but to the


                RESEARCH IN NUCLEAR MAGNETISM                                 225
small magnetic field caused by each nearby proton in the crystal. Each near-
est neighbor produces a field of a few gauss, more or less random in direc-
tion, with the result that the resonance absorption for the crystal as a whole
is spread out over a corresponding interval in frequency. These « local mag-
netic fields » are present in water, too, but their effectiveness is destroyed by
the rapid molecular diffusion characteristic of a liquid. Two adjoining mole-
cules remain neighbors so short a time (about 10 seconds) that their mu-
                                                       -11




tual influence is very slight. Thus molecular motion is the key to the striking
difference between crystals and fluids in respect to the width of the nuclear
magnetic resonance.
    In many crystals, atoms or molecules occasionally jump from one position
to another. Although such events are rare by most standards, they may occur
frequently enough to affect the width of the nuclear resonance line. In ice,
for instance, the line is distinctly narrower at -10°C than at a much lower
temperature. The narrowing indicates that each hydrogen atom undergoes
a displacement within the crystal lattice several thousand times per second.
The motion involved here is not the familiar thermal vibration of an atom
in a perfectly elastic crystal, but an abrupt shift to a new site. Nuclear res-
 onance studies have disclosed many unsuspected internal motions in crystals,
 and have helped to reveal the exact nature of motions already suggested by
other physical or chemical evidence8.
    If the magnetic nuclei in a crystal are clustered together in pairs, the action
 of the nuclear magnets on each other causes a doubling of the magnetic res-
 onance line. Further distortion is caused by more remote neighbors, and the
width of the pattern as a whole depends on the orientation of the nuclear
pair with respect to the magnetic field. Rather complicated effects are pos-
 sible, some of which are illustrated in Fig. 3. From a complicated effect that
 is also well understood, one can usually get a good deal of information. These
 magnetic interactions are now rather well understood. I shall mention only
 one recent application of the technique to a chemical problem.
    Groups of three equidistant protons in randomly oriented crystals give,
 characteristically, a line with three humps. The methyl chloroform line, in
 Fig. 3, is an example. We have a complete quantitative theory of this line
 structure 9. Last year Richards and Smith10 at Oxford, and quite independ-
 ently Kakiuchi and others11 in Tokyo, studied the proton resonance in per-
 chloric acid monohydrate (HClO4 . H 2O) and certain related substances.
 This type of line was found. They were able to prove thereby that in those
  crystals the « hydronium » ion, OH+, exists, and to determine its dimensions.


226                          1952 E.M.PURCELL

It is well known that hydrogen atoms are very hard to locate by X-ray
diffraction. Here is an opportunity for nuclear resonance studies to supple-
ment, in special cases, the more general methods of structure analysis.
   Many nuclei have, in addition to an intrinsic magnetic dipole moment, an
electric quadrupole moment. This is a way of saying that the electric charge of
the nucleus is not distributed evenly over a sphere. One may think of the
nucleus as either an elongated or a flattened ellipsoid. If such a nucleus is put
into a non-uniform electric field, it experiences a torque, and precesses. (You
will recall that the slow precession of the earth’s axis is a consequence of the
ellipticity of the earth and the non-uniform gravitational fields of the moon
and sun.) The nuclei in many crystals find themselves in non-uniform electric
fields arising from their immediate atomic surroundings. A nuclear electric
quadrupole moment then manifests itself in a splitting of the magnetic res-
onance line. To put it another way, the energy associated with each of the
possible orientations of the nuclear spin in a magnetic field is somewhat al-
tered by the electric effect. This is illustrated in Fig. 4. The trace in Fig. 4 is
the nuclear resonance spectrum of 23Na in a crystal of sodium nitrate. The
line is widely split into a triplet by the quadrupole interaction. The number
of components is always twice the nuclear spin I, so we have here a way of
determining nuclear spins. This example is due to R. V. Pound who was the
first to investigate these effects in crystals12.
   Another interesting and fruitful branch of nuclear magnetism is the study
of nuclear relaxation, by which I shall mean here the attainment of thermal
equilibrium between the nuclear spins and their environment. Professor
Bloch has already referred to the crucial importance of relaxation in all these
experiments. In the first experiment of Torrey, Pound, and myself this ques-
tion gave us much concern. Our approach was somewhat different from
Bloch’s and was based on a theoretical paper of fundamental importance by
Professor Waller13. Waller, in 1932, was dealing with relaxation in elec-
tronic paramagnetism, but Torrey was able to adapt his results to our case,
with the conclusion that equilibrium should certainly be reached within
several hours. We then designed the experiment so that, even if so long a
time were required, the resonance could still be detected. As it turned out,
the precaution was unnecessary, but that was our introduction to a fas-
cinating problem that has occupied our attention ever since.
   I believe we now have a good understanding of nuclear relaxation in many
- though not all - physical systems. Experimentally, we find that the time to
establish thermal equilibrium ranges widely from hours, in some substances,


                 RESEARCH IN NUCLEAR                 MAGNETISM                     227




Fig. 4. A nucleus with an electric quadrupole moment in a uniform magnetic field (B)
and a non-uniform electric field (E). Lower trace: 23Na resonance in a single crystal of
         NaNO3, showing splitting of magnetic resonance line into a triplet.


down to fractions of a millisecond in others. I show only one example, and
that mainly to clarify the meaning of the term relaxation. Fig. 5 is a plot of
the gradual approach to equilibrium magnetization of an originally unmag-
netized crystal of ammonium bromide. This can be called, quite properly, a
cooling curve. The nuclear spins, in order to align themselves with the mag-
netic field, must give off energy to the crystal lattice. They are coupled so
weakly to the lattice that the transfer of energy takes more than several min-
utes. Actually the approach to equilibrium is exponential, and the corres-
sponding time constant, in this example 32 seconds, is what one calls the
spin-lattice relaxation time.
   It may seem astonishing, at first, that so long a time is associated with an
atomic process. But in fact, if one looks at the problem more closely, it is
hard to understand why the time is not much longer. Moreover this crystal,
at a somewhat higher temperature, has a relaxation time of only 0.01 sec-
onds! The explanation of this, and of similar behavior in a wide class of sub-
stances, lies in internal molecular motions other than mere vibration. It is


228                          1952    E.M.PURCELL




Fig. 5. The gradual approach to equilibrium magnetization. The ordinate is propor-
                   tional to the intensity of nuclear polarization.

closely connected with the cause of line-narrowing, mentioned earlier. The
particular motion occurring in the ammonium halides is a sudden rotation
of the whole tetrahedral ammonium ion inside the cubic unit cell.
                                                             14
   We have now a fairly general theory of nuclear relaxation , a theory that
has proved reliable enough to allow one to draw conclusions about the na-
ture of the internal motion in a substance from the observed nuclear relaxa-
tion. My early collaborator, N. Bloembergen, has made essential contribu-
tions to this subject. Experimental work at Oxford and at Leiden has added
much to our knowledge of other aspects of nuclear relaxation. In many re-
spects this is only a new branch of a somewhat older subject, paramagnetic
relaxation, in the study of which the Dutch laboratories, and especially Pro-
fessor Gorter, have long led. The problem of nuclear relaxation has a special
attraction for the low-temperature physicist, because, as Professor Simon
pointed out many years ago, nuclear magnetization offers a way toward ex-
tremely low temperatures, providing the nuclear spins can exchange heat
with something else.


                RESEARCH IN NUCLEAR MAGNETISM                                229




Fig. 6. The proton resonance in ethyl alcohol, observed with high resolution. The
three lines arise from the CH3 hydrogens, from the CH2 hydrogens, and from the OH
                                hydrogen, respectively.


   There remain several puzzling aspects of nuclear relaxation. In trying to
understand them we find ourselves still returning to some of the ideas ad-
vanced twenty years ago by Professor Waller. While I speak of theoretical
contributions to nuclear magnetism, I must mention also Professor Van Vleck,
who has put the theory of line-width on a rigorous basis, a notable advance.15
   It is an old story in physics that higher resolving power leads to new effects.
We remember that the magnetic moment of the nucleus was itself discov-
ered through the hyperfine structure of lines in the visible spectrum. The
nuclear resonance line in a liquid or gas can be remarkably narrow, as you
have already seen. As soon as the reason for this was recognized, it became
clear that the only practical limit on resolution was the inhomogeneity of
the magnetic field applied to the specimen. Efforts were made in many lab-
oratories to improve the magnets, and to use smaller specimens as well. With
the improved resolution, it was found that identical nuclei, in the same applied
field but in chemically different molecules, do not precess at exactly the
same frequency. The explanation is simple: the magnetic field at an atomic
nucleus differs slightly from the field externally applied because of the shield-
ing effect of the electron cloud around the nucleus. In different molecules
the atom’s electron configuration will differ slightly, reflecting differences in


230                         1952 E.M.PURCELL

the chemical bond. The resulting resonance shifts have been called « chem-
ical shifts ». They are only a nuisance to the experimenter interested in exact
ratios of magnetic moments. But they are interesting to the physical chemist
because they reveal something about the electrons that partake in the chem-
ical bond.
   No laboratory has more assiduously pursued high resolution than Pro-
fessor Bloch’s, where the striking example shown in Fig. 6 was discovered16.
This is the proton resonance in ethyl alcohol, seen under very high resolu-
tion. Each lines comes from a chemically equivalent group of protons in the
molecule, the intensity being proportional to the number of hydrogen atoms
involved, 3 (methyl group), 2 (CH2 group), and 1 (hydroxyl), respectively.
   I can now return to the splitting observed in the proton and deuteron res-
onances in Fig. 1. This splitting does not arise from any effect on the applied
field, but from an indirect coupling of the proton to the deuteron through
the medium of the two electrons in the HD molecule. It is as much an
intrinsic property of the HD molecule as is the optical spectrum of the mole-
cule17. The splitting amounts to 43 cycles per second. I am sure we have only
begun to explore the domain of very weak interactions - the « audio spec-
trum » of molecules, if I may call it that.
   This has been a long story and a complicated one. We are dealing not
merely with a new tool but with a new subject, a subject I have called simply
nuclear magnetism. If you will think of the history of ordinary magnetism
- the electronic kind - you will remember that it has been rich in difficult and
provocative problems, and full of surprises. Nuclear magnetism, so far as we
have gone, is like that too.




 1. B. Smaller, Phys. Rev., 83 (1951) 812; F. Bloch, A. C. Graves, M. Packard, and R.
     W. Spence, Phys. Rev., 71(1947) 551; H. L. Anderson, Phys. Rev., 76 (1949) 1460.
 2. A. Bohr and V. Weisskopf, Phys. Rev., 77 (1950) 94.
 3. H. A. Thomas, R. L. Driscoll, and J. A. Hipple, Phys. Rev, 78 (1950) 787.
 4. H. Sommer, H. A. Thomas, and J. A. Hipple, Phys. Rev., 80 (1950) 487.
 5. F. Bloch and C. D. Jeffries, Phys. Rev., 80 (1950) 305.
 6. J. H. Gardner and E. M. Purcell, Phys. Rev., 76 (1949) 1263.
 7. S. H. Koenig, A. G. Prodell, and P. Kusch, Phys. Rev., 88 (1952) 191.
 8. H. S. Gutowsky, G. B. Kistiakowsky, G. E. Pake, and E. M. Purcell, J. Chem. Phys.,
     17 (1949) 972.
 9. E. R. Andrew and R. Bersohn, J. Chem. Phys., 18 (1950) 159.


                RESEARCH IN NUCLEAR MAGNETISM                                  231
10 . R. E. Richards and J. A. S. Smith, Trans. Faraday Soc., 47 (1951) 1261.
11. Y. Kakiuchi, H. Shono, H. Komatsu, and K. Kigoshi, J. Phys. Soc. Japan, 7 (1952)
     102.
12. R. V. Pound, Phys. Rev., 79 (1950) 685.
13. I. Waller, Z. Physik, 79 (1932) 370.
14. N. Bloembergen, E. M. Purcell, and R. V. Pound, Phys. Rev., 73 (1948) 679.
15. J. H. van Vleck, Phys. Rev., 74 (1948) 1168.
16. J. T. Arnold, S. S. Dharmatti, and M. E. Packard, J. Chem. Phys., 19 (1951) 507.
17. N. F. Ramsey and E. M. Purcell, Phys. Rev., 85 (1952) 143.
