                               ENRICO FERMI

       Artificial radioactivity produced by neutron
                       bombardment
                       Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1938
Although the problem of transmuting chemical elements into each other
is much older than a satisfactory definition of the very concept of chemical
element, it is well known that the first and most important step towards its
solution was made only nineteen years ago by the late Lord Rutherford, who
started the method of the nuclear bombardments. He showed on a few ex-
amples that, when the nucleus of a light element is struck by a fast α-particle,
some disintegration process of the struck nucleus occurs, as a consequence
of which the α-particle remains captured inside the nucleus and a different
particle, in many cases a proton, is emitted in its place. What remains at the
end of the process is a nucleus different from the original one; different in
general both in electric charge and in atomic weight.
   The nucleus that remains as disintegration product coincides sometimes
with one of the stable nuclei, known from the isotopic analysis; very often,
however, this is not the case. The product nucleus is then different from all
"natural" nuclei; the reason being that the product nucleus is not stable. It
disintegrates further, with a mean life characteristic of the nucleus, by emis-
sion of an electric charge (positive or negative), until it finally reaches a stable
form. The emission of electrons that follows with a lag in time the first prac-
tically instantaneous disintegration, is the so-called artificial radioactivity,
and was discovered by Joliot and Irene Curie at the end of the year 1933.
   These authors obtained the first cases of artificial radioactivity by bom-
barding boron, magnesium, and aluminium with α-particles from a polo-
nium source. They produced thus three radioactive isotopes of nitrogen, sili-
con and phosphorus, and succeeded also in separating chemically the activity
from the bulk of the unmodified atoms of the bombarded substance.



                            The neutron bombardment

Immediately after these discoveries, it appeared that α-particles very likely
did not represent the only type of bombarding projectiles for producing


           RADIOACTIVITY BY NEUTRON BOMBARDMENT                            415
artificial radioactivity. I decided therefore to investigate from this point of
view the effects of the bombardment with neutrons.
   Compared with α-particles, the neutrons have the obvious drawback that
the available neutron sources emit only a comparatively small number of
neutrons. Indeed neutrons are emitted as products ofnuclear reactions, whose
yield is only seldom larger than 10-4. This drawback is, however, compen-
sated by the fact that neutrons, having no electric charge, can reach the
nuclei of all atoms, without having to overcome the potential barrier, due to
the Coulomb field that surrounds the nucleus. Furthermore, since neutrons
practically do not interact with electrons, their range is very long, and the
probability of a nuclear collision is correspondingly larger than in the case
of the α-particle or the proton bombardment. As a matter of fact, neutrons
were already known to be an efficient agent for producing some nuclear
disintegrations.
   As source of neutrons in these researches I used a small glass bulb contain-
ing beryllium powder and radon. With amounts of radon up to 800 millicu-
ries such a source emits about 2 x 107 neutrons per second. This number is of
course very small compared to the yield of neutrons that can be obtained
from cyclotrons or from high-voltage tubes. The small dimensions, the per-
fect steadiness and the utmost simplicity are, however, sometimes very use-
ful features of the radon + beryllium sources.



                   Nuclear reactions produced by neutrons

Since the first experiments, I could prove that the majority of the elements
tested became active under the effect of the neutron bombardment. In some
cases the decay of the activity with time corresponded to a single mean life;
in others to the superposition of more than one exponential decay curve.
   A systematic investigation of the behaviour of the elements throughout
the Periodic Table was carried out by myself, with the help of several collab-
orators, namely Amaldi, d’Agostino, Pontecorvo, Rasetti, and Segré. In
most cases we performed also a chemical analysis, in order to identify the
chemical element that was the carrier of the activity. For short living sub-
stances, such an analysis must be performed very quickly, in a time of the
order of one minute.
   The results of this first survey of the radioactivities produced by neutrons
can be summarized as follows: Out of 63 elements investigated, 37 showed


416                                1938 E.FERMI

an easily detectable activity; the percentage of the activatable elements did
not show any marked dependence on the atomic weight of the element.
Chemical analysis and other considerations, mainly based on the distribution
of the isotopes, permitted further to identify the following three types of
nuclear reactions giving rise to artificial radioactivity :

                                      =                                       (1)
                                       =                                      (2)
                                      =                                       (3)

where        is the symbol for an element with atomic number Z and mass
number M; n is the symbol of the neutron.
   The reactions of the types (1) and (2) occur chiefly among the light ele-
ments, while those of the type (3) are found very often also for heavy ele-
ments. In many cases the three processes are found at the same time in a
single element. For instance, neutron bombardment of aluminium that has
a single isotope Al, gives rise to three radioactive products: Na, with a
                   27                                                 24



half-period of 15 hours by process (1); Mg, with a period of IO minutes
                                              27



by process (2); and 28A1 with a period of 2 to 3 minutes by process (3).
   As mentioned before, the heavy elements usually react only according
to process (3) and therefore, but for certain complications to be discussed
later, and for the case in which the original element has more than one stable
isotope, they give rise to an exponentially decaying activity. A very striking
exception to this behaviour is found for the activities induced by neutrons
in the naturally active elements thorium and uranium. For the investigation
of these elements it is necessary to purify first the element as thoroughly as
possible from the daughter substances that emit β-particles. When thus pur-
ified, both thorium and uranium emit spontaneously only α-particles, that
can be immediately distinguished, by absorption, from the β-activity induced
by the neutrons.
   Both elements show a rather strong, induced activity when bombarded
with neutrons; and in both cases the decay curve of the induced activity
shows that several active bodies with different mean lives are produced. We
attempted, since the spring of 1934, to isolate chemically the carriers of these
activities, with the result that the carriers of some of the activities of uranium
are neither isotopes of uranium itself, nor of the elements lighter than ura-
nium down to the atomic number 86. We concluded that the carriers
were one or more elements of atomic number larger than 92 ; we, in Rome,


             RADIOACTIVITY BY NEUTRON BOMBARDMENT                                 417
 use to call the elements 93 and 94 Ausenium and Hesperium respectively.
 It is known that O. Hahn and L. Meitner have investigated very carefully
and extensively the decay products of irradiated uranium, and were able to
 trace among them elements up to the atomic number 96.*
    It should be noticed here, that besides processes (1), (2), and (3) for
 the production of artificial radioactivity with neutrons, neutrons of suffi-
 ciently high energy can react also as follows, as was first shown by Heyn:
 The primary neutron does not remain bound in the nucleus, but knocks off
 instead, one of the nuclear neutrons out of the nucleus; the result is a new
 nucleus, that is isotopic with the original one and has an atomic weight less
 by one unit. The final result is therefore identical with the products obtained
 by means of the nuclear photoeffect (Bothe), or by bombardment with fast
 deuterons. One of the most important results of the comparison of the active
 products obtained by these processes, is the proof, first given by Bothe, of the
 existence of isomeric nuclei, analogous to the isomers UX 2 and UZ, recog-
 nized long since by O. Hahn in his researches on the uranium family. The
 number of well-established cases of isomerism appears to increase rather
 rapidly, as investigation goes on, and represents an attractive field of
 research.



                                 The slow neutrons

 The intensity of the activation as a function of the distance from the neutron
 source shows in some cases anomalies apparently dependent on the objects
 that surround the source. A careful investigation of these effects led to the
 unexpected result that surrounding both source and body to be activated
 with masses of paraffin, increases in some cases the intensity of activation by
 a very large factor (up to 100). A similar effect is produced by water, and
 in general by substances containing a large concentration of hydrogen. Sub-
 stances not containing hydrogen show sometimes similar features, though
 extremely less pronounced.
    The interpretation of these results was the following. The neutron and the

 * The discovery by Hahn and Strassmann of barium among the disintegration products
 of bombarded uranium, as a consequence of a process in which uranium splits into
 two approximately equal parts, makes it necessary to reexamine all the problems of
 the transuranic elements, as many of them might be found to be products of a splitting
 of uranium.


418                                1938   E.FERMI

proton having approximately the same mass, any elastic impact of a fast
neutron against a proton initially at rest, gives rise to a distribution of the
available kinetic energy between neutron and proton; it can be shown that a
neutron having an initial energy of 106 volts, after about 20 impacts against
hydrogen atoms has its energy already reduced to a value close to that cor-
responding to thermal agitation. It follows that, when neutrons of high ener-
gy are shot by a source inside a large mass of paraffin or water, they very
rapidly lose most of their energy and are transformed into "slow neutrons".
Both theory and experiment show that certain types of neutron reactions,
and especially those of type (3), occur with a much larger cross-section for
slow neutrons than for fast neutrons, thus accounting for the larger intensi-
ties of activation observed when irradiation is performed inside a large mass
of paraffin or water.
   It should be remarked furthermore that the mean free path for the elastic
collisions of neutrons against hydrogen atoms in paraffin, decreases rather
pronouncedly with the energy. When therefore, after three or four impacts,
the energy of the neutron is already considerably reduced, its probability
of diffusing outside of the paraffin, before the process of slowing down is
completed, becomes very small.
   To the large cross-section for the capture of slow neutrons by several
atoms, there must obviously correspond a very strong absorption of these
atoms for the slow neutrons. We investigated systematically such absorp-
tions, and found that the behaviour of different elements in this respect is
widely different; the cross-section for the capture of slow neutrons varies,
with no apparent regularity for different elements, from about 10 -24 cm 2
or less, to about a thousand times as much. Before discussing this point, as
well as the dependence of the capture cross-section on the energy of the
neutrons we shall first consider how far down the energy of the primary
neutrons can be reduced by the collisions against the protons.



                            The thermal neutrons

If the neutrons could go on indefinitely diffusing inside the paraffin, their
energy would evidently reach finally a mean value equal to that of thermal
agitation. It is possible, however, that, before the neutrons have reached this
lowest limit of energy, either they escape by diffusion out of the paraffin, or
are captured by some nucleus. If the neutron energy reaches the thermal value,


            RADIOACTIVITY BY NEUTRON BOMBARDMENT                          419
one should expect the intensity of the activation by slow neutrons to depend
upon the temperature of the paraffin.
   Soon after the discovery of the slow neutrons, we attempted to find a tem-
perature dependence of the activation, but, owing to insufficient accuracy,
we did not succeed. That the activation intensities depend upon the tempera-
ture was proved some months later by Moon and Tillman in London; as
they showed, there is a considerable increase in the activation of several de-
tectors, when the paraffin, in which the neutrons are slowed down, is cooled
from room temperature to liquid-air temperature. This experiment defi
nitely proves that a considerable percentage of the neutrons actually reaches
the energy of thermal agitation. Another consequence is that the diffusion
process must go on inside the paraffin for a relatively long time.
   In order to measure, directly at least, the order of magnitude of this time,
an experiment was attempted by myself and my collaborators. The source
of neutrons was fastened at the edge of a rotating wheel, and two identical
detectors were placed on the same edge, at equal distances from the source,
one in front and one behind with respect to the sense of rotation. The wheel
was then spun at a very high speed inside a fissure in a large paraffin block.
We found that, while, with the wheel at rest, the two detectors became equally
active, when the wheel was in motion during the activation, the detector
that was behind the source became considerably more active than the one in
front. From a discussion of this experiment was deduced, that the neutrons
remain inside the paraffin for a time of the order of 10-4 seconds.
  Other mechanical experiments with different arrangements were perform-
ed in several laboratories. For instance Dunning, Fink, Mitchell, Pegram,
and Segré: in New York, built a mechanical velocity selector, and proved
by direct measurement, that a large amount of the neutrons diffusing outside
of a block of paraffin, have actually a velocity corresponding to thermal agi-
tation.
   After their energy is reduced to a value corresponding to thermal agita-
tion, the neutrons go on diffusing without further change of their average
energy. The investigation of this diffusion process, by Amaldi and myself,
showed that thermal neutrons in paraffin or water can diffuse for a number
of paths of the order of 100 before being captured. Since, however, the mean
free path of the thermal neutrons in paraffin is very short (about 0.3 cm) the
total displacement of the thermal neutrons during this diffusion process is
rather small (of the order of 2 or 3 cm). The diffusion ends when the thermal
neutron is captured, generally by one of the protons, with production of a


420                             1938 E.FERMI

deuteron. The order of magnitude for this capture probability can be calcu-
lated, in good agreement with the experimental value, on the assumption
that the transition from a free-neutron state to the state in which the neutron
is bound in the deuteron is due to the magnetic dipole moments of the pro-
ton and the neutron. The binding energy set free in this process, is emitted
in the form of γ-rays, as first observed by Lea.
   All the processes of capture of slow neutrons by any nucleus are generally
accompanied by the emission of γ-rays : Immediately after the capture of the
neutron, the nucleus remains in a state of high excitation and emits one or
more γ -quanta, before reaching the ground state. The γ -rays emitted by
 this process were investigated by Rasetti and by Fleischmann.



                            Absorption anomalies

A theoretical discussion of the probability of capture of a neutron by a
nucleus, under the assumption that the energy of the neutron is small com-
pared with the differences between neighbouring energy levels in the nu-
cleus, leads to the result that the cross-section for the capture process should
be inversely proportional to the velocity of the neutron. While this result
is in qualitative agreement with the high efficiency of the slow-neutron bom-
bardment observed experimentally, it fails on the other hand to account for
several features of the absorption process, that we are now going to discuss.
   If the capture probability of a neutron were inversely proportional to its
velocity, one would expect two different elements to behave in exactly the
same way as absorbers of the slow neutrons, provided the thicknesses of the
two absorbers were conveniently chosen, so as to have equal absorption for
neutrons of a given energy. That the absorption obeys instead more com-
plicated laws, was soon observed by Moon and Tillman and other authors
who showed that the absorption by a given element appears, as a rule, to be
larger when the slow neutrons are detected by means of the activity induced
in the same element. That the simple law of inverse proportionality does not
hold, was also proved by a direct mechanical experiment by Dunning, Peg-
ram, Rasetti, and others in New York.
    In the winter of 1935-1936 a systematic investigation of these phenomena
was carried out by Amaldi and myself The result was, that each absorber of
the slow neutrons has one or more characteristic absorption bands, usually
for energies below 100 volts. Besides this or these absorption bands, the ab-


           RADIOACTIVITY BY NEUTRON BOMBARDMENT                            421
sorption coefficient is always large also for neutrons of thermal energy. Some
elements, especially cadmium, have their characteristic absorption band over-
lapping with the absorption in the thermal region. This element absorbs
therefore very strongly the thermal neutrons, while it is almost transparent
to neutrons of higher energies. A thin cadmium sheet is therefore used for
filtering the thermal neutrons out of the complex radiation that comes out
of a paraffin block containing a neutron source inside.
   Bohr and Breit and Wigner proposed independently to explain the above
anomalies, as due to resonance with a virtual energy level of the compound
nucleus (i.e. the nucleus composed of the bombarded nucleus and the neu-
tron). Bohr went much farther in giving also a qualitative explanation of the
large probability for the existence of at least one such level, within an energy
interval of the order of magnitide of 100 volts corresponding to the energy
band of the slow neutrons. This band corresponds, however, to an excitation
energy of the compound nucleus of many million volts, representing the
binding energy of the neutron. Bohr could show that, since nuclei, and es-
pecially heavy nuclei, are systems with a very large number of degrees of
freedom, the spacing between neighbouring energy levels decreases very
rapidly with increasing excitation energy. An evaluation of this spacing
 shows that whereas for low excitation energies the spacing is of the order
of magnitude of 105 volts, for high excitation energies, of the order of ten
million volts, it is reduced (for elements of mean atomic weight) to less than
one volt. It is therefore a very plausible assumption that one (or more) such
level lies within the slow-neutron band, thus explaining the large frequency
of the cases in which absorption anomalies are observed.
    Before concluding this review of the work on artificial radioactivity pro-
duced by neutrons, I feel it as a duty to thank all those who have contributed
to the success of these researches. I must thank in particular all my collabo-
rators that have already been mentioned; the Istituto di Sanità Pubblica in
Rome and especially Prof. G. C. Trabacchi, for the supply of all the many
radon sources that have been used; the Consiglio Nazionale delle Richerche
for several grants.
