                         E RNEST O. LA W R E N C E

                The evolution of the cyclotron
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1951


The development of the cyclotron was begun more than twenty years ago
and perhaps it is appropriate on this occasion to give something of an histor-
ical account. The story goes back to 1928 when I had the good fortune of
becoming a member of the Faculty of the University of California. At that
time it seemed opportune to review my plans for research, to see whether I
might not profitably go into nuclear research, for the pioneer work of
Rutherford and his school had clearly indicated that the next great frontier
for the experimental physicist was surely the atomic nucleus.
   It seemed equally obvious also at that time that a prerequisite to a success-
ful experimental attack on the nucleus was the development of means of
accelerating charged particles to high velocities - to energies measured in
millions of electron volts, a task which appeared formidable indeed! Ac-
cordingly, I devoted considerable time and thought to the technical problem
of ways and means of reaching millions of electron volts in the laboratory.
The problem seemed to reduce itself to two parts, (a) the production of high
voltages, and (b) the development of accelerating tubes capable of with-
standing such high voltages.
   Since transformers and rectifiers for such high voltages seemed rather out
of the question for various reasons, not the least of which were connected
with financial limitations, I naturally looked for alternative means of pro-
ducing high voltages: the surge generator which was used by Brasch and
Lange; the electrostatic generator which Professor W. F. G. Swarm was
working on when I was a student under him at the University of Minnesota
in 1924 and which was later brought to practical development by Van de
Graaff; and the Tesla coil source of high voltage which Tuve, Breit, and
Hafstad brought to a fruitful stage of development.
   One evening early in 1929 as I was glancing over current periodicals in
the University library, I came across an article in a German electrical en-
gineering journal by Wideröe on the multiple acceleration of positive ions.
Not being able to read German easily, I merely looked at the diagrams and
photographs of Wideröe’s apparatus and from the various figures in the


                      EVOLUTION OF CYCLOTRON                                   431

article was able to determine his general approach to the problem - i.e. the
multiple acceleration of the positive ions by appropriate application of radio-
frequency oscillating voltages to a series of cylindrical electrodes in line. This
new idea immediately impressed me as the real answer which I had been
looking for to the technical problem of accelerating positive ions, and with-
out looking at the article further I then and there made estimates of the gen-
eral features of a linear accelerator for protons in the energy range above one
million volt electrons. Simple calculations showed that the accelerator tube
would be some meters in length which at that time seemed rather awkward-
ly long for laboratory purposes. And accordingly, I asked myself the ques-
tion, instead of using a large number of cylindrical electrodes in line, might
it not be possible to use two electrodes over and over again by sending the
positive ions back and forth through the electrodes by some sort of ap-
propriate magnetic field arrangement. Again a little analysis of the problem
showed that a uniform magnetic field had just the right properties - that the
angular velocity of the ions circulating in the field would be independent of
their energy so that they would circulate back and forth between suitable
hollow electrodes in resonance with an oscillating electrical field of a certain
frequency which now has come to be known as the "cyclotron frequency".

  Now this occasion affords me a felicitous opportunity in some measure to
correct an error and an injustice. For at that time I did not carefully read
Wideröe’s article and note that he had gotten the idea of multiple accelera-




  Fig. 1. Diagram of linear accelerator from Professor G. Ising’s pioneer publication
                (1924) of the principle of multiple acceleration of ions.


432                             1939 E.O.LAWRENCE




      Fig. 2. First crude models of the cyclotron constructed by Edefsen in 1930.

tion of ions from one of your distinguished colleagues, Professor G. Ising,
who in 1924 published this important principle. It was only after several
years had passed that I became aware of Professor Ising’s prime contribution.
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to his work for he surely
is the father of the developments of the methods of multiple acceleration.
   Perhaps you will permit me first of all to show a slide of the diagram of
the linear accelerator in his original publication (Fig. 1).
   I hope I have not belabored excessively these early incidents of history and
now I should like to trace rapidly the evolution of the cyclotron by showing
examples of the apparatus in our laboratory as it was developed in the course
of time. In doing so, I am afraid I shall not be able to mention all those who


                       EVOLUTION OF CYCLOTRON                            433




Fig. 3. Working model of cyclotron constructed by M. Stanley Livingston which
                    pointed the way to later developments.


deserve great credit for the developments - as from the beginning the work
has been a team effort involving many able and devoted co-workers in
many laboratories. As I am sure you will appreciate, a great many diverse
talents are involved in such developments and whatever measure of success
is achieved is dependent on close and effective collaboration.
   Although the cyclotron was, so to speak, invented early in 1929, actual
experimental work on its development was begun in the spring of 1930
when one of my students, Nels Edlefsen, constructed two crude models
shown in Fig. 2. One of the models which gave slight evidence of working
consisted of two copper duants waxed together on a glass plate with a
filament source along the diameter at the center much like later models.


434                           1939 E.O.LAWRENCE

   In the fall, another student, M. Stanley Livingston, continued the devel-
opment and quickly constructed the model shown in Fig. 3 which, as you
see, had all the features of early cyclotrons and which worked very well in-
deed as 80,000 volt protons were produced with less than 1,000 volts on the
semi-circular accelerating electrode - now called the "dee".
   The next milestone in the development was the construction of a larger
model (Figs. 4 and 5) which produced protons of the desired energies - in
the region of one million electron volts. Livingston and I had the remarkable
good fortune of observing that this apparatus was rather more successful
than we had expected. For, as you can well imagine, we were concerned
about how many of the protons would succeed in spiralling around a great
many times without getting lost on the way. We soon recognized that the
focussing actions of the electric and magnetic fields were responsible for the
relatively large currents of protons that reached the periphery of the appara-
tus; but we must acknowledge that here again experiment preceded theory!
   We were busy with further improvements of the apparatus to produce
larger currents at higher voltages when we received word of the discovery
by Cockcroft and Walton, which this year has been recognized by the Nobel
Prize in Physics. We were overjoyed with this news, for it constituted def-
inite assurance that the acceleration of charged particles to high speeds was
a worth-while endeavor. As you can imagine, we went ahead with all speed,
 and it was not long before the disintegration of lithium by protons had been
observed with the apparatus.
   Now we may proceed rapidly with examples of later developments. Figs.
6 and 7 show the first two-dee 27” cyclotron which produced protons and
 deuterons of several million volts and was used extensively in early investiga-
tions of nuclear reactions involving neutrons and artificial radioactivity.
   Again, with this apparatus the discoveries of Chadwick and the Curie-
Joliots were promptly confirmed. Indeed, looking back it is remarkable that
we managed to avoid the discovery of artificial radioactivity prior to their
 epoch-making announcement: for we tried at first to use Geiger counters in
 observing nuclear radiations produced by the cyclotron and observed that
 their background was always variable and large. In those days Geiger coun-
 ters had the reputation of being unreliable and, rather than looking into the
 matter of their apparent misbehavior, we turned to ion chambers and linear
 amplifiers to. observe heavy-particle nuclear reactions. Of course, the Geiger
 counters were simply being faithful to duty and recording the radiations
 from the artificial radioactive substances, and this became immediately ap-


                         EVOLUTION OF CYCLOTRON                                      435




       Fig. 4. General view of first cyclotron used in nuclear transformations.




Fig. 5. Vacuum chamber ofcyclotron (Fig. 4) which produced 1 million volt protons.


436                            1939 E.O.LAWRENCE




Fig. 6. General view of 27” cyclotron built by young physicists including M.S.
Livingston (left) and E. O. Lawrence (right). (The lack of good engineering design is
                                  quite evident!)




            Fig. 7. The chamber of the 27” cyclotron showing two dees.


                        EVOLUTION OF CYCLOTRON                                  437




Fig. 8. Early photograph of 60” cyclotron showing first evidence of good engineering
practice, introduced into our laboratory by W. M. Brobeck (right) and Donald
                                  Cooksey (left).

 parent after the Curie-Joliot announcement. Again, we were overjoyed at
 the richness of the domain in the nucleus accessible to particles of several
 million electron volts energy and there followed a happy period of intensive
 experimental investigations, which indeed through the years has gained ever-
 increasing tempo in laboratories the world over.
    The next milestone in our laboratory was the construction of the 60” cy-
 clotron, and this undertaking was greatly strengthened by the joining of our
 team of William Brobeck, a truly outstanding engineer. Brobeck brought
 to our laboratory sound engineering practice which from the day he
joined us has had a profound effect on developments. To him, more than to
 any other one individual, goes the credit for the success of the 60” cyclotron
 and all subsequent developments. As you can see in Fig. 8, the cyclotron
for the first time began to look like a well-engineered machine. It was with
 this machine that the discoveries of the transuranium elements were made
 which have been rewarded this year by the award of the Nobel Prize in
 Chemistry to McMillan and Seaborg. Perhaps the finest example of a 60”


438                          1939 E.O.LAWRENCE

cyclotron is now in operation at the Nobel Institute here in Stockholm.
   Soon our objective was the production of protons and deuterons of much
higher energies, and Bethe pointed out the difficulty introduced by the
relativistic increase in mass of the particles as they increase in energy in the
course of acceleration which causes them to get out of resonance with an
oscillating electric field in a uniform magnetic field.
   However, Thomas devised a magnetic field that avoided the limitation
discussed by Bethe, and also, of course, it was recognized that one might
modulate the frequency in step with the changing angular frequency of the
accelerated particles. These two solutions of the technical problem of yet
higher energies - the region of 100 million volts - seemed impractical; at
least much less practicable than simply so designing the cyclotron that a
million volts or more could be applied to the dees, so that the particles would
need to circulate around relatively few times in reaching the desired high
energies.
   Accordingly, just before the war, Brobeck and co-workers designed the
great 184” cyclotron shown in Fig. 9.
   As is well known, the war prevented the building of this machine and
immediately afterwards McMillan, and Veksler independently a few months
earlier, came forward with the principle of phase stability which trans-
formed the conventional cyclotron to a much more powerful instrument for
higher energies - the synchrocyclotron. Fig. 10 shows the main features of
the Berkeley 184” synchrocyclotron which produces 340 MeV protons,
while there are later and more modern installations, notably at Columbia
 University and University of Chicago, which produce somewhat higher en-
ergies. As I am sure this audience is well aware, a beautifully engineered
synchrocyclotron is nearing completion at Uppsala.
   On completion of the 184” synchrocyclotron, it was natural that Brobeck
should turn his attention to the engineering problem of applying the syn-
chrotron principle to the acceleration of heavy ions, particularly protons, to
much higher energies - in the range of billions of electron volts. It was not
long before his engineering studies indicated the practicability of producing
protons in the energy range well above one billion electron volts.
   With the extensive developments in the atomic energy field, large funds
 became available for research purposes - much larger than seemed possible
 before the war - and indeed, as soon as all concerned were convinced of the
practicality of building a proton synchrotron for several billion electron volts,
 the construction of two installations was begun, one at Brookhaven for


                        EVOLUTION OF CYCLOTRON                                   439




Fig. 9. Artist’s sketch of 184” cyclotron designed by Brobeck before the war to produce
                            100 million electron volt protons.




 Fig. IO. General view of 184” synchrocyclotron which produces 340 MeV protons.
  (The concrete shielding, partially removed in this photograph, is 15’ in thickness.)


440                            1939 E.O.LAWRENCE




      Fig. 11. One-quarter scale operating model of 6 BeV proton synchrotron.



about 3 billion electron volts and a second at Berkeley for about twice this
energy.
   The first step in these large undertakings was to build a substantial oper-
ating model to test out the theory of the proton synchrotron, as well as the
engineering principles of design. Accordingly, a quarter-scale operating
model was constructed and is shown in Fig. 11. A small cyclotron was
designed to produce large current pulses of I MeV protons which were
injected into the "race track" of the synchrotron by an appropriate magnetic
and electrostatic deflecting system which can be seen in the foreground of
Fig. 11. This model worked as expected and provided a great deal of practical
data giving confidence that the full-scale machines will function successfully
and satisfactorily.
   It is hardly appropriate here to describe either the Brookhaven or Berkeley
proton synchrotrons (the former is called the cosmotron and the latter is called
the bevatron) but perhaps it is of interest to show a number of photographs


                          EVOLUTION OF CYCLOTRON                                  441
 which display the general features of this great machine (Figs. 12, 13, 14,
 15 and 16).
   Now that we shall soon have 5 or 10 BeV particles in the laboratory, what
possibilities are there for going on higher to 50 or 100 BeV? One answer is
that the limitation of the bevatron is largely a financial one. With a cor-
respondingly larger expenditure, higher energies surely can be reached.
   But I should like to close by emphasizing that a more feasible, if not more
interesting, approach to the problem of higher-energy nuclear projectiles is
the acceleration of multiply charged heavier ions such as C 6+, or Ne10+
Already extraordinarily interesting nuclear reactions have been produced by
the acceleration of C6+ ions to 120 MeV in the 60” cyclotron, and such
particles in the Berkeley bevatron would be accelerated to more than 36 BeV
Since in the cosmic radiation such heavy particles play an important role,
they will surely be produced in the bevatron some day, contributing to
further progress in our understanding of Nature.




Fig. 12. General view of "race track" magnet in process of assembly for 6.3 BeV
                         proton synchrotron or "bevatron".


442                  1939 E.O.LAWRENCE




       Fig. 13. Showing coil winding of bevatron magnet.




Fig.


                   EVOLUTION OF CYCLOTRON                                    443




             Fig. 15. Bevatron motor generator equipment.




Fig. 16. Ignitrons and associated switchgear for bevatron motor generator.
