THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
ELECTRON MICROSCOPE AND
OF ELECTRON MICROSCOPY
Nobel lecture, December 8, 1986

by
ERNST RUSKA
Max-Eyth-Strasse 20, D-1000 BERLIN 33




A. Parents’ house, family
A month ago, the Nobel Foundation sent me its yearbook of 1985. From it I
learnt that many Nobel lectures are downright scientific lectures, interspersed
with curves, synoptic tables and quotations. I am somewhat reluctant to give
here such a lecture on something that can be looked up in any modern
schoolbook on physics. I will therefore not so much report here on physical and
technical details and their connections but rather on the human experiences -
some joyful events and many disappointments which had not been spared me
and my colleagues on our way to the final breakthrough. This is not meant to
be a complaint though; I rather feel that such experiences of scientists in quest
of new approaches are absolutely understandable, or even normal.
   In such a representation I must, of course, consider the influence of my
environment, in particular of my family. There have already been some scien-
tists in my family: My father, Julius Ruska, was a historian of sciences in
Heidelberg and Berlin; my uncle, Max Wolf, astronomer in Heidelberg; his
assistant, a former pupil of my father and my godfather, August Kopff, Direc-
tor of the Institute for astronomical calculation of the former Friedrich-Wil-
helm University in Berlin. A cousin of my mother, Alfred Hoche, was Professor
for Psychiatry in Freiburg/Breisgau; my grandfather from my mother’s side,
Adalbert Merx, theologian in             and Heidelberg.
   My parents lived in Heidelberg and had seven children. I was the fifth, my
brother Helmut the sixth. To him I had particularly close and friendly relations
as long as I can remember. Early, optical instruments made a strong impression
on us. Several times Uncle Max had shown us the telescopes at the observatory
on the Königstuhl near Heidelberg headed by him. With the light microscope
as well we soon had impressive, yet contradictory, relations. In the second floor
of our house, my father had two study rooms connected by a broad sliding door
which usually was open. One room he used for his scientific historical studies
relating to classical philology, the other for his scientific interests, in particular
mineralogy, botany and zoology. When our games with neighbours’ kids in
front of the house became too noisy, he would knock at the window panes. This


356                                Physics 1986


usually only having a brief effect, he soon knocked a second time, this time
considerably louder. At the third knock, Helmut and I had to come to his room
and sit still on a low wooden stool, dos à dos, up to one hour at 2 m distance
from his desk. While doing so we would see on a table in the other room the
pretty yellowish wooden box that housed my father’s big Zeiss microscope,
which we were strictly forbidden to touch. He sometimes demonstrated to us
interesting objects under the microscope, it is true; for good reasons, however,
he feared that childrens’ hands would damage the objective or the specimen by
clumsy manipulation of the coarse and line drive. Thus, our first relation to the
value of microscopy was not solely positive.

B. School, vocational choice
Much more positive was, several years later, the excellent biology instruction
my brother had through his teacher Adolf Leiber and the very thorough
teaching I received through my teacher Karl Reinig. To my great pleasure I
recently read an impressive report on Reinig’s personality in the Memoirs of a
two-years-older student at my school, the later theoretical physicist Walter
Elsasser. Even today I remember the profound impression Reinig’s comments
made upon me when he explained that the movement of electrons in an
electrostatic field followed the same laws as the movement of inert mass in
gravitational fields. He even tried to explain to us the limitation of microscopi-
cal resolution due to the wavelength of light. I certainly did not clearly
understand all this then, because soon after that on one of our many walks
through the woods around Heidelberg I had a long discussion on that subject
with my brother Helmut, who already showed an inclination to medicine, and
my classmate Karl             who later studied medicine as well.
   In our College (Humanistisches Gymnasium), we had up to 17 hours of
Latin, Greek and French per week. In contrast to my father, who was extreme-
ly gifted for languages, I produced only very poor results in this field. My
father, at that time teacher at the same school, daily learnt about my minus
efforts from his colleagues and blamed me for being too lazy, so that I had some
sorrowful school years. My Greek teacher, a fellow student of my father, had a
more realistic view of things: He gave me for my confirmation the book “Hinter
Pflug und Schraubstock” (Behind plow and vise) by the Swabian “poet”
engineer Max Eyth (1836-1906). I had always been fascinated by technical
progress; in particular I was later interested in the development of aeronautics,
the construction of airships and air planes. The impressive book of Max Eyth
definitely prompted me to study engineering. My father, having studied sci-
ences at the universities of             Berlin and Heidelberg, obviously regard-
ed study at a Technical High School as not being adequate and offered me one
physics semester at a university. I had, however, the strong feeling that
engineering was more to my liking and refused.

C. The cathode-ray oscillograph and the short coil
After I had studied two years electrotechnical engineering in Munich, my
father received a call to become head of a newly founded Institute for the


                                     E. Ruska                                 357


History of Sciences in Berlin in 1927. Thus, after my pre-examination in
Munich I came to Berlin for the second half of my studies. Here I specialized in
high-voltage techniques and electrical plants and heard, among others, the
lectures of Professor Adolf Matthias. At the end of the summer term in 1928 he
told us about his plan of setting up a small group of people to develop from the
Braun tube an efficient cathode-ray oscillograph for the measurement of very
fast electrical processes in power stations and on open-air high-voltage trans-
mission lines. Perhaps with the memory of my physics school lesson in the back
of my head, I immediately volunteered for this task and became the youngest
collaborator of the group, which was headed by Dr. Ing. Max Knoll. My first
attempts with experimental work had been made in the practical physics
course at the Technical High School in Munich under Professor Jonathan
Zenneck, and now in the group of Max Knoll. As a newcomer I was first
entrusted with some vacuum-technical problems which were important to all of
us. Through the personality of Max Knoll, there was a companionable rela-
tionship in the group, and at our communal afternoon coffee with him the
scientific day-to-day-problems of each member of the group were openly dis-
cussed. As I did not dislike calculations, and our common aim was the
development of cathode-ray oscillographs for a desired measuring capability, I
wanted to devise a suitable method of dimensioning such cathode-ray oscillo-
graphs in my “Studienarbeit” - a prerequisite for being allowed to proceed to
the Diploma examination.
   The most important parameters for accuracy of measurement and writing
speed af cathode-ray oscillographs are the diameter of the writing spot and its
energy density. To produce small and bright writing spots, the electron beams
emerging divergently from the cathode had to be concentrated in a small
writing spot on the fluorescent screen of the cathode-ray oscillograph. For this,
already Rankin in 1905 [1] used a short dc-fed coil, as had been used by earlier
experimentalists with electron beams (formerly called “glow” or “cathode
rays”). Even before that, Hittorf (1869) and Birkeland (1896) used the rota-
tionally symmetric field lying in front of a cylindrical magnet pole for focussing
cathode rays. A more precise idea of the effect of the axially symmetric, i.e.
inhomogeneous magnet field of such poles or coils on the electron bundle
alongside of their axes had long been unclear.
   Therefore, Hans Busch [3] at Jena calculated the electron trajectories in
such an electron ray bundle and found that the magnetic field of the short coil
has the same effect on the electron bundle as has the convex glass lens with a
defined focal length on a light bundle. The focal length of this “magnetic
electron lens” can be changed continuously by means of the coil current. Busch
wanted to check experimentally his theory but for reasons of time he could not
carry out new experiments. He made use of the experimental results he had
already obtained sixteen years previously in Gottingen. These were, however,
in extremely unsatisfactory agreement with the theory. Perhaps this was the
 reason that Busch did not draw at least the practical conclusion from his lens
 theory to image some object with such a coil.


   In order to account more precisely for the properties of the writing spot of a
cathode-ray oscillograph produced by the short coil, I checked Busch’s lens
theory with a simple experimental arrangement under better, yet still inad-
equate, experimental conditions (Fig. 1) and thereby found a better but still not
entirely satisfactory agreement of the imaging scale with Busch’s theoretical




 Fig. 1: Sketch by the author (1929) of the cathode ray tube for testing the imaging properties of the
 non-uniform magnetic field of a short coil [4. 5].


                                      E. Ruska                                  359


expectation. The main reason was that I had used a coil of the dimensions of
Busch’s coil whose field distribution along the axis was much too wide. My
Studienarbeit [4], submitted to the Faculty for Electrotechnical Engineering in
1929, contained numerous sharp images with different magnifications of an
electron-irradiated anode aperture of 0.3 mm diameter which had been taken
by means of the short coil (“magnetic electron lens”) - i. e. the first recorded
electron-optical images.
   Busch’s equation for the focal length of the magnetic field of a short coil
implied that a desired focal length could be produced by the fewer ampere
turns the more the coil field was limited to a short region alongside the axis,
because in that case the field maximum is increased. It was therefore logical for
me as a prospective electrotechnical engineer to suitably envelop the coil with
an iron coating, with a ring-shaped gap in the inner tube. Measurements at
such a coil immediately showed that the same focal length had been reached
with markedly fewer ampere turns [4,5]. Vice versa, in this manner a shorter
focal length can, of course, also be obtained by an equal number of ampere
turns.

D. Why I pursued the magnetic electron lens for the electron microscope
In my Diploma Thesis (1930) I was to search for an electrostatic replacement
for the magnetic concentration of the divergent electron ray bundle, which
would probably be easier and cheaper. To this end, Knoll suggested experi-
mental investigation of an arrangement of hole electrodes with different electri-
cal potential for which he had taken out a patent a year before [6]. We
discussed the shape of the electric field between these electrodes, and I suggest-
ed that because of the mirror-like symmetry of the electrostatic field of the
electrodes on either side of the lens centre, a concentrating effect of the curved
equipotential planes in the hole area could not take place. I only had the field
geometry in mind then. But this conclusion was wrong. I overlooked that as a
consequence of the considerably varying electron velocity on passage through
such a field arrangement, a concentration of the divergent electron bundle
must, in fact, occur. Knoll did not notice this error either. Therefore I pursued
another approach in my Diploma Thesis [7]. I made the electron bundle pass a
bored-out spherical condenser with fine-meshed spherically shaped grids fixed
over each end of the bore. With this arrangement I obtained laterally inverted
images in the correct imaging scale. Somewhat later I found a solution which
was unfortunately only theoretically correct. In analogy to the refraction of the
light rays on their passage through the optical lens at their surfaces (“Grenzflä-
chen), I wanted to use, for the electrical lens, the potential steps at correspond-
ing surfaces, which are shaped like glasses lenses [8]. Thus, the energy of the
electron beams is temporarily changed-just like light beams on passage
through optical lenses. For the realization of this idea, on each side of the lens
two closely neighboured fine-meshed grids of the shape of optical lenses are
required which must be kept on electrical potentials different from each other.
First attempts confirmed the rightness of this idea, but at the same time also the
practical inaptness of such grid lenses because of the too-strong absorption of


360                                Physics 1986


the electron beam at the four grids and due to the field distribution by the
wires.
   As a consequence of my false reasoning and the experimental disappoint-
ment I decided to continue with the magnetic lens. I only report this in so much
detail to show that occasionally it can be more a matter of luck than of superior
intellectual vigor to find a better-or perhaps the only acceptable way. The
approach of the transmission electron microscope with electron lenses of elec-
trostatic hole electrodes was later pursued by outstanding experimentalists in
other places and led to considerable initial success. It had, however, to be
abandoned because the electrostatic lens was for physical reasons inferior to the
magnetic electron lens.

E. The invention of the electron microscope
After obtaining my Degree (early 1931), the economic situation had become
very difficult in Germany and it seemed not possible to find a satisfactory
position at a University or in industry. Therefore I was glad that I could at
least continue my unpaid position as doctorand in the high-voltage institute.
After having shown in my Studienarbeit of 1929 that sharp and magnified
images of electron-irradiated hole apertures could be obtained with the short
coil, I was now interested in finding out if such images - as in light optics -
could be further magnified by arranging a second imaging stage behind the first
stage. Such an apparatus with two short coils was easily put together (Fig. 2)
and in April 1931 I obtained the definite proof that it was possible (Fig. 3).
This apparatus is justifiably regarded today as the first electron microscope
even though its total magnification of 3.6 x 4.8 = 14.4 was extremely modest.
   The first proof had thus been given that-apart from light and glass lenses -
images of irradiated specimens could be obtained also by electron beams and
magnetic fields, and this in even more than one imaging stage. But what was
the use of such images if even grids of platinum or molybdenum were burnt to
cinders at the irradiation level needed for a magnification of only 17.4 X. Not
wishing to be accused of showmanship, Max Knoll and I agreed to avoid the
term electron microscope in the lecture Knoll gave in June 1931 on the progress in
the construction of cathode ray oscillographs where he also, for the first time,
described in detail my electron-optical investigations [9, 10]. But, of course,
our thoughts were circling around a more efficient microscope. The resolution
limit of the light microscope due to the length of the light wave which had been
recognized 50 years before by Ernst Abbe and others could, because of lack of
light, not be important at such magnifications. Knoll and I simply hoped for
extremely low dimensions of the electrons. As engineers we did not know yet
the thesis of the “material wave” of the French physicist de Broglie [11] that
had been put forward several years earlier (1925). Even physicists only reluc-
tantly accepted this new thesis. When I first heard of it in summer 1931, I was
very much disappointed that now even at the electron microscope the resolu-
tion should be limited again by a wavelength (of the "Materiestrahlung"). I
was immediately heartened, though, when with the aid of the de Broglie
equation I became satisfied that these waves must be around five orders of


                                            E. Ruska                                          361




Fig. 2: Sketch by the author (9 March 1931) of the cathode ray tube for testing one-stage and two-
stage electron-optical imaging by means of two magnetic electron lenses (electron microscope) [8].




magnitude shorter in length than light waves. Thus, there was no reason to
abandon the aim of electron microscopy surpassing the resolution of light
microscopy.


362



           a




Fig.    3: First experimental proof (7 April 1931) that speciemens (aperture grids) irradiated by
electrons can be imaged in magnified form not only in one but also in more than one stage by means
of (magnetic) electron lenses.
(U = 50 kV). [8].
a) one-stage image of the platinum grid in front of coil 1 by coil 1; M = 13 x
b) one-stage image of the bronze grid in front of coil 2 by coil 2; M = 4.8 x
c) two-stage image of the platinum grid in front of coil 1 by coil 2; M = 17.4 X together with
      the one-stage image of the bronze grid in front of coil 2 by coil 2; M = 4.8 x
   kk Cold cathode; Pt N Platinum grid; Sp 1 coil 1;
   Br N Bronze grid; Sp 2 coil 2; LS Fluorescent screen




   In 1932 Knoll and I dared to make a prognosis of the resolution limit of the
electron microscope [12]. Assuming that the equation for the resolution limit of
the light microscope is valid also for the material wave of the electrons, we
replaced the wave length of the light by the wave length of electrons at an
accelerating voltage of 75 kV and inserted into the Abbe relation the imaging
aperture of 2 X 10 -2 rad which is what we had used previously. This imaging
aperture is still used today. Thereby, that early we came up with a resolution
limit of 2.2 Å = 2.2 x 10-10m, a value that was in fact obtained 40 years later.
   Of course, at that time our approach was not taken seriously by most of the
experts. They rather regarded it as a pipe-dream. I myself felt that it would be
very hard to overcome the efforts still needed - mainly the problem of specimen
heating. In April 1932, M. Knoll had taken up a position with Telefunken
(Berlin) involving developmental work in the field of television.
   In contrast to many biologists and medical scientists, my brother Helmut,
who had almost completed his medical studies, believed in considerable pro-
gress for these disciplines should we be successful. With his confidence in a
successful outcome he encouraged me to overcome the expected difficulties. In
a next step I had to show that it was possible to obtain sufficiently high
magnifications to prove a better-than-light-microscope resolution. To this ef-
fect a coil shape had to be developed whose magnetic field was compressed to a
length that small of the coil axis to allow short focal lengths as are needed for


                                                E. Ruska                       363




Fig. 4: Cross-section of the first polepiece lens [4, 15].




highly magnified images in not too great a distance behind the coil. The
technical solution for this I had already given in my Studienarbeit of 1929 with
the iron-clad coil. In 1932 I applied-together with my friend and co-doctorand
Bodo v. Borries - for a patent on the optimization of this solution [l3], the
“Polschuhlinse”, which is used in all magnetic electron microscopes today. Its
realization and the measuring of the focal lengths which could be verified with
it were subject of my thesis [14]. It was completed in August 1933, and in my
measurements I obtained focal lengths of 3 mm for electron rays of 75 kV
acceleration (Fig. 4). Of course, now with these lenses I immediately wanted to
design a second electron microscope with much higher resolving power. To
carry out this task I obtained by the good offices of Max v. Laue for the second
half year of 1933 a stipend of Reichsmark 100 per month from the Notgemein-
schaft der Deutschen Wissenschaft to defray running costs and personal ex-
penses. Since I had completed the new instrument by the end of November
(Fig. 5), I felt I ought to return my payment for December. To my great joy,
however, I was allowed to keep the money “as an exception“. Nevertheless,
this certainly was the cheapest electron microscope ever paid for by a German
organization for the promotion of science.
   For reasons explained in the beginning of the next chapter, I accepted a
position in industry on 1 December 1933. Therefore I could only make a few
images with this instrument which magnified 12000 × [15], but I noticed a
decisive fact which gave me hope for the future: Even very thin specimens
yielded sufficient contrast, yet no longer by absorption but solely by diffraction
of the electrons, whereby - as is known - the specimens are heated up consider-
ably less.


364                                      Physics 1986




Fig. 5: First (two-stage) electron microscope magnifying higher than the light microscope. Cross-
section of the microscope column (Re-drawn 1976) [15].




F: How the industrial production of electron microscopes came to be
I also realized, however, that the further development of a practically useful
instrument with better resolution would require a longer period of time and
enormous costs. In view of the results achieved there was little hope of obtain-
ing financial support from any side for the time being. I was prepared for a
longer dry spell and decided to approach the goal of a commercial instrument
later, together with Bodo v. Borries and my brother Helmut. Therefore, I


                                           E. Ruska




Fig. 6: Wing surface of the house fly.
(First internal photography, U = 60 kV, M e1 = 2200)
(Driest, E., and Müller, H.O.: Z. Wiss. Mikroskopie 52, 53-57 (1935)




accepted a position with the Fernseh AG in Berlin-Zehlendorf where I was
engaged in the development of Braun tubes for image pick-up and display
tubes. In order to better coordinate our efforts to obtain financial support for
the production of commercial electron microscopes, I convinced Bodo v. Bor-
ries to give up his position at the Rheinisch-Westfalische Elektrizitatswerke at
Essen and return to Berlin. Here, he found a position at Siemens-Schuckert in
1934. We approached many governmental and industrial research facilities for
financial help.
   During this period, first electron micrographs appeared of biological speci-
mens. Heinz Otto Müller (student in electrotechnical engineering) and
Friedrich Krause (medical student) worked at the instrument I had built in
1933, and they published increasingly better results (Figs. 6 to 9). Unfortunate-
ly these two very gifted young scientists did not survive the II. World War.
   At Brussels Ladislaus Marton had built his first horizontal microscope and
obtained relatively low magnifications of biological specimens [17]. In 1936 he
built a second instrument, this time with a vertical column [18].


366




Fig. 7: Diatoms Amphipleura pellucida.
(U = 53 kV, M eI = 3500,     = 130 nm)
(F. Krause in: Busch, H., and Brüche, E.: Beiträgr zur Elektronenoptik, 55-61, Verl. Joh.
Ambrosius Barth, Leipzig 1937)


                                             E. Ruska                                         367




Fig. 8: Bacteria (culture infusion), fixed with formalin and embedded in a supporting film stained
with a heavy metal salt
(U = 73.5 kV, M el = 2 0 0 0 )
(Krause, F.: Naturwissenschaften 25,817-825 (1937)).




   In spite of these more recent publications, it took us three years to be
successful in our quest for financial support through the professional assess-
ment of Helmut Ruska’s former clinical teacher, Professor Dr. Richard Siebeck,
Director of the I. Medical Clinic of the Berlin Charité. I quote two paragraphs
of his assessment of 2 October 1936 [19]:
“If these things were to be realised it hardly needs to be emphasised that the
advances in the field of research into the causes of disease would be of immedi-
ate practical interest to the doctor. It would deeply affect real problems
concerned to a large extent with diseases of growing clinical significance and
thus of great importance for public health.
   Should the possibilities of microscopical resolution exceed the assumed
values by a factor of a hundred, the scientific consequences would be incalcula-
ble. What seems attainable now, I consider to be so important, and success
seems to me so close, that I am ready and willing to advise on medical research
work and to collaborate by making available the resources of my Institute”.


368                                     Physics 1986




Fig. 9.: Iron Whisker
(U = 79 kW, M el = 3 1 0 0 )
(Beischer, D., and Krause, F.: Naturwissenschaften 25,
825-829   (1937)).



This expertise impressed Siemens in Berlin and Carl Zeiss in Jena, and they
were both ready to further the development of industrial electron microscopes.
We suggested the setting up of a common development facility in order to make
use of the electrotechnical expertise of Siemens and the know-how in precision
engineering of        but unfortunately the suggestion was refused and so we
decided in favour of Siemens. As first collaborators we secured Heinz Otto
Müller for the practical development and Walter Glaser from Prag as theorist.
We started in 1937, and in 1938 we had completed two prototypes with
condenser and polepieces for objective and projective as well as airlocks for
specimens and photoplates. The maximum magnification was 30000 × [20]. One
of these instruments was immediately used for first biological investiga-
tions by Helmut Ruska and several medical collaborators. (H. Ruska was
released from Professor Siebeck for our work at Siemens.) Unfortunately, for
reasons of time I cannot give here a survey of this fruitful publication period.


                                         E. Ruska                                     369




Fig. 10: Bacteriophages. (Ruska, H.: Naturwissenschaften 29, 367-368 (1941) and Arch. Ges.
Virusforsch 2, 345-387 (1942).




  In 1940, upon our proposal Siemens set up a guest laboratory, headed by
Helmut Ruska, with four electron microscopes for visiting scientists. Helmut
Ruska could show first images of bacteriophages in 1940. An image taken
somewhat later (Fig. 10) clearly shows the shape of these tiny hostile bacteria.
This laboratory was destroyed during an air raid in the autumn of 1944.
  Very gradually now interest in electron microscopy was growing. A first sales
success for Siemens has been achieved in 1938 when the chemical industry
which was represented largely by IG Farbenindustrie placed orders for an
instrument in each of their works in Hoechst, Leverkusen, Bitterfield and
Wolfen. The instrument was only planned at the time, however not yet built or
even tested. By the end of 1939 the first serially produced Siemens instrument
[21] had been delivered to Hoechst (Fig. 11). The instrument No 26 was, by
the way, delivered to Professor Arne Tiselius in Uppsala in autumn 1943. By
February 1945 more than 30 electron microscopes had been built in Berlin and
delivered. Thus, now also independent representatives of various medical and
biological disciplines could form their own opinions about the future prospects
of electron microscopy. The choice of specimens was still limited though, since
sufficiently thin sections were not yet available. The end of the war terminated
the close cooperation with my brother and B. v. Borries.


370                                      Physics 1986




Fig. 11: The first serially produced electron microscope, by Siemens. General view [Zl]


                                      E. Ruska                                  371


G. Development of electron microscopy after 1945
Our laboratory had to be reconstructed completely. I could start working with
mainly new coworkers as early as June 1945. In spite of difficult conditions in
Berlin and Germany, newly developed electron microscopes [22] could be
delivered by the end of 1949. In 1954 Siemens had regained its former leading
position with the "Elmiskop" [23] (Fig. 12 and Fig. 13). This instrument had,
for the first time, two condenser lenses allowing thermal protection of the
specimen by irradiating only the small region that is required for the desired final
magnification. Since now, for a final magnification of 100 000 x a speci-
men field of only 1 pm must be irradiated for an image of 10 cm diameter in
contrast to earlier irradiation areas of about 1 mm diameter, the power of the
electron beam converted into heat in the object can be reduced down to the
millionth part. The specimens are heated up just to the extent that the heat
power produced can be radiated into the entire region around the object. If the
heat power is low, a lower temperature rise with respect to the environment
results.
   The new instrument was, however, a big disappointment at first when we
realized that at this “small region radiation” the image of the specimen fields,
which was now no longer hot, became so dark within seconds that all initially
visible details disappeared. Investigations then showed that minor residual
gases in the evacuated instrument, particularly hydrocarbons, condensed on
the cold inner planes of the instrument, i.e. they now even condensed on the
specimen itself. The image of the resulting C layer in the irradiated specimen
field becomes darker with increasing thickness of the layer. Happily, also this
hurdle could, after some time, be surmounted by relatively simple means: The
entire environment of the specimen was cooled by liquid air so that the
specimen was still markedly warmer than its environment, even without being
heated up by the beam. Thus, the residual gases of hydrocarbons condensed on
the low-cooled planes and no longer on the specimen.
   Along with the successful solution of this problem, another difficulty, that of
specimen thickness, had also surprisingly been overcome by newly developed
“ultramicrotomes”. Instead of the ground steel knives whose blades were not
sufficiently smooth due to crystallization, glass fracture edges were used which
had no crystalline unevenness. The usual mechanical translation of the materi-
al perpendicular to the knife is - because of mechanical backlash or even oil
layers - not sufficiently precise for the desired very small displacements of
~10 -5 mm. Smallest displacements free of flaws were obtained by thermal
extension of a rod at whose ends the specimen to be cut was fastened. In order
to keep the extremely thin sections smooth, they were dropped into an alcoholic
solution immediately after being cut so that they remained entirely flat. More-
over, more suitable fixing agents had been found for the new cutting tech-
niques. The development of these new ultramicrotomes considerably reduced
the limitation in the choice of specimens for electron microscopy. For 25 years
now, almost all disciplines furthered by light microscopy have also been able to
benefit from electron microscopy.
   During the last decades, electron microscopy has been advanced in many


372                                      Physics 1986




Fig. 12: The first serially produced 100 kV-Electron microscope with two condenser lenses for
“small region radiation” by Siemens. (cross-section) [23].




countries by numerous leading scientists and engineers through new ideas and
procedures. I can here only give a few examples: Fig. 14 shows a cross-section
through an electron microscope with single-field condenser objective, the speci-
men being in the field maximum of a magnetic polepiece lens [24]. Thereby,
the region of increasing magnetic field in front of the specimen behaves like a
condenser of short focal length and the decreasing field region behind the


                                                             373
                                         E. Ruska




Fig. 13: Same instrument as in Fig. 12 (general view) [23]


374                                      Physics 1986




Fig. 14: Electron microscope with single-field condenser objective.


specimen as an objective of equal focal length. With this arrangement both
lenses have a particularly small spherical aberration. Fig. 15 gives a view of the
same instrument. Fig. 16 shows an image obtained with this instrument of a
platelet of a gold crystal. One can clearly see lattice planes separated by a
distance of 1.4 Å. Two such instruments have been further developed in the
Institute for Electron Microscopy, which had been set up for me in 1957 by the
Max-Planck-Gesellschaft after I had left Siemens. Fig. 17 shows a 3 MV high-
voltage instrument developed by J ap an Electron Optics Laboratory Co. Ltd.
With such instruments whose development was mainly promoted by Gaston


                                            E. Ruska




Fig. 15: Same instrument as in Fig. 14 (general view) [24].


Dupouy (1900- 1985), apart from extremely high costs, special problems occur
in the stabilization of the acceleration voltage and with the protection of the
operators against X rays. The aim of the development of these instruments was
the investigation of thicker specimens, but now that the problem of stabilizing
the high voltages has been overcome, also theresolution has been improved by
the shorter material wave length of particularly highly accelerated electrons, so
that thinner specimens can also be investigated.
   For quite some time now, the cryotechnique - put forward mainly by Fernan-
dez-Moran in the USA - has been of increasing importance. With this tech-
nique specimens cooled down to very low temperatures can be studied, because
they are more resistant to higher electron doses, i.e. the mobility inside the
specimen is very much reduced compared to room temperature. Thus, even
after unavoidable ionization, the molecules keep their structure for a long time.
In the last years it has been possible to image very beam-sensitive crystals in a
cryomicroscope with a resolution of 3.5 Å [25, 26] (Fig. 18) [27].


                                          Physics 1986




Fig. 16: Plate-like gold crystal, lattice planes with a separation of 0.14 nm, taken with axial
illumination.
( U = 1 0 0 k V , Me l = 800000); taken (1976) by K. Weiss and F. Zemlin with the 100 kV
transmission electron microscope with single-field condenser objective at the Fritz-Haber-Institut
of the Max-Planck-Gesellschaft.




   The specimens were cooled down to -269°C. Direct imaging with sufficient
contrast is not possible because the specimen is destroyed at the beam dose
needed for normal exposure. Therefore, many very low-dose images are record-
ed and averaged. Such a single image is very noisy but still contains sufficient
periodical information. The evaluation procedure is the following: First, the
microgram is digitized using the densitometer so that each image point is given
a number which describes the optical density. The underexposed image of the
whole crystal is divided like a checkerboard by the computer and then a large
number - in our case 400 - of these image sub-regions is cross-correlated and
summed up by the computer. The resulting image corresponds to a sufficiently
exposed micrograph. On the left part in Fig. 18, the initial noisy image of a
paraffin crystal is seen; the right side shows the averaged image. Each white
point is the image of a paraffin molecule. The long paraffin molecules C 44H 90
are vertical to the image plane. With this procedure electron micrographical
images can be processed by the computer. It is even possible to image three-
dimensional protein crystals with very high resolution [27]. The computer is a
powerful tool in modern electron microscopy.
   I cannot go into detail concerning the transmission electron microscopes with
electrostatic lenses, the scanning electron microscopes which are widely used
mainly for the study of surfaces as well as transparent specimens, the great


                                         E. Ruska




Fig. 17: 1 MV Electron Microscope (Japan Electron Optics Laboratory Co. Ltd.)




importance of various image processing methods carried out partly by the
computer, the field-electron microscope and the ion microscope.
  The development of the electron microscopy of today was mainly a battle
against the undesired consequences of the same properties of electron rays
which paved the way for sub-light-microscopical resolution. Thus, for instance,
the short material wavelength-prerequisite for good resolution - is coupled
with the undesired high electron energy which causes specimen damage. The


                                          Physics 1986




Fig. 18: Paraffin crystal (left: image taken with minimum dose, right: superposition of 400 sub-
regions of the left image by means of the computer. [25].




deflectability in the magnetic field, a precondition for lens imaging, can also
limit the resolution if the alternating magnetic fields in the environment of the
microscope are not sufficiently shielded by the electron microscopy. We should
not, therefore, blame those scientists today who did not believe in electron
microscopy at its beginning. It is a miracle that by now the difficulties have
been solved to an extent that so many scientific disciplines today can reap its
benefits.


                                        R. Ruska                                      379


REFERENCES
 1. Rankin, R.: The cathode ray oscillograph. The Electric Club J, II, 620-631 (1905).
 2. Hittorf, W.: Uber die Elektrizitatsleitung der Gase, I. und II. (On the electrical
    conductivity ofgases.) Ann Physik. Chemie, 16, 1-31 und 197-234 (1869), Mün-
    ster, 9 Oct. 1868.
 3. Busch, H.: Über die Wirkungsweise der Konzentrierungsspule bei der Braunschen
    Röhre. (On the mode of action of the concentrating coil in the Braun tube.) A r c h .
    Elektrotechnik 18, 583-594 (1927), Jena, Physikalisches Institut, März 1927.
 4. Ruska, E.: Uber eine Berechnungsmethode des Kathodenstrahloszillographen auf
    Grund der experimentell gefundenen Abhängigkeit des Schreibfleckdurchmessers
    von der Stellung der Konzentrierspule. (On a method of designing a cathode ray
    oscillograph on the basis of the experimentally found dependence of the writing spot
    diameter on the position of the concentrating coil.) Carried out from 1 November
    1928 in the High Voltage Laboratory of the Technische Hochschule Berlin (Direc-
    tor Prof. A. Matthias). Student Project thesis (117 pp.) submitted 10 May 1929.
 5. Ruska, E., and Knoll, M.: Die magnetische Sammelspule für schnelle Elektronen-
    strahlen. (The magnetic concentrating coil for fast electron beams.) Z. techn.
    Physik 12,389-400 and 448 (1931), submitted 18 April 1931.
 6. Knoll, M.: Vorrichtung zur Konzentrierung des Elektronenstrahls eines Kathoden-
    strahloszillographen. (Devise for concentrating the electron beam of a cathode ray
    oscillograph.) German Patent NO. 690809, patented on 10 November 1929, granted
    on 11 April 1940.
 7. Ruska, E.: Untersuchung elektrostatischer Sammelvorrichtungen als Ersatz der
    magnetischen Konzentrierspulen bei Kathodenstrahl-Oszillographen. (Investiga-
    tion of electrostatic concentrating devices as a substitute for the magnetic concen-
    trating coils in cathode ray oscillographs.) Begun on 18 July 1930 in the High
    Voltage Laboratory of the Technological University of Berlin (Direktor Prof. Dr. A.
    Matthias) and submitted on 23 December 1930 as a Diploma Project (pp. l-90).
 8. Knoll, M. and Ruska, E.: Beitrag zur geometrischen Elektronenoptik I und II.
    (Contribution to geometrical electron optics.) Ann. Physik 12, 607-640 and 641-
    661 (1932), submitted 10 September 1931.
 9. Knoll, M.: Berechnungsgrundlagen und neuere Ausführungsformen des Kathoden-
    strahloszillographen. (The basis of design and new forms of construction of the
    cathode ray oscillograph.) Manuscript of a lecture in the Cranz-Colloquium at the
    Technological University of Berlin on 4 June 1931, pp. l-26.
10. Ernst Ruska: “The Early Development of Electron Lenses and Electron Micro-
    scopy”, S. Hirzel Verlag Stuttgart (1980), see pp. 113-116.
11. De Broglie, L.: Recherches sur la théorie des quanta. (Researches on the theory of
    quanta.) These, Paris: Masson & Cie. 1924. Ann. de Physiques 3, 22- 128 (1925).
12. Knoll, M., and Ruska, E.: Das Elektronenmikroskop. (The electron microscope.) Z.
    Physik 78, 318-339 (1932), submitted 16 June 1932.
13. v. Borries, B., and Ruska, E.: Magnetische Sammellinse kurzer Feldlänge. (Mag-
    netic converging lens of short field length.) German Patent No. 680284, patented on
    17 March 1932; Patent granted on 3 August 1939.
14. Ruska, E.: Über ein magnetisches Objektiv fir das Elektronenmikroskop. (On a
    magnetic objective lens for the electron microscope.) Dissertation of the Technologi-
    cal University of Berlin, submitted 31 August 1933. Z. Physik 89, 90-128 (1934),
    submitted 5 March 1934.
15. Ruska, E.: Über Fortschritte im Bau und in der Leistung des magnetischen Elek-
    tronenmikroskops. (On progress in the construction and performance of the mag-
    netic electron microscope.) Z. Physik 87, 580-602 (1934), submitted 12 Dec. 1933.
16. see 10), pp. 120-122.
17. Marton, L.: La microscope électronique des objects biologiques. (Electron micro-
    scopy of biological objects.) Acad. roy. de Belg. Bull de la Cl. des Sci., Ser. 5, 20,
    439-446 (1934), Université libre de Bruxells, Mai 1934.


380                                  Physics 1986


18. Marton, L.: Le microscope électronique. (The electron microscope.) Rev. de Micro-
    biol. appl. 2, 117-124 (1936).
19. see 10), pp. 123-124.
20. Borries, B.v., and Ruska, E.: Vorläufige Mitteilung über Fortschritte im Bau und in
    der Leistung des Übermikroskops. (Preliminary communication on advances in the
    construction and performance of the Ultramicroscope.) Wiss. Veröff. a.d. Siemens-
    Werken 17, 99-106 (1938), submitted 29 Feb. 1938.
21. Borries, B.v., and Ruska, E.: Ein Ubermikroskop für Forschungsindustrie. (An
    Ultramicroscope for industrial research.) Naturwissenschaften 27, 577-582 (1939),
    submitted 24 June 1939.
22. Ruska, E.: Über neue magnetische Durchstrahlungs-Elektronenmikroskope im
    Strahlspannungsbereich von 40...220 kV, Teil I. ( 0 n new magnetic transmission-
    electron microscopes for beam voltages between 40 and 200 kV.) Kolloid-Zeitschrift
     116, 103- 120 (1950), submitted 15 Dec. 1949.
23. Ruska, E., and O. Wolff: Ein hochauflösendes 100-kV-Elektronenmikroskop mit
    Kleinfelddurchstrahlung (A high-resolution transmission electron microscope (100
    kV) with small-area illumination.) Zeitschrift für wissenschaftl. Mikroskopie und
    mikroskopische Technik 62, 466-509 (1956), submitted 19 July 1955.
24. Riecke, W.D., and Ruska, E.: A 100 kV transmission electron microscope with
    single-field condenser objective. VI. Int. Congress for Electron Microscopy, Kyoto,
    Japan, I, 19-20 (1966).
25. Zemlin, F., Reuber, E., Beckmann, E., Zeitler, E. and Dorset, D.L.: Molecular
    Resolution Electron Micrographs of Monolamellar Paraffin Crystals. Science 229,
    461-462 (1985).
26. Dietrich, I., Fox, F., Knapek, E., Lefranc, G., Nachtrieb, K., Weyl, R. and Zerbst,
    H.: Improvements in electron microscopy by application of superconductivity,
    Ultramicroscopy 2, 241-249 (197 1).
27. Henderson, R., and Unwin, P.N.T.: Three-dimensional model of purple membrane
    obtained by electron microscopy, Nature 257, 28-32 (1975).
