                               F ELIX B L O C H


              The principle of nuclear induction
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1952



It is a tribute to the inherent harmony and the organic growth of our branch
of science that every advance in physics is largely due to the developments
that preceded it. The discovery for which Purcell and I have received the
honor of the Nobel Prize award for the year 1952 is a typical example of
this situation, and before describing the principle I shall therefore present
an outline of its long and distinguished background.
    Both the method and the object go back ultimately to spectroscopy, a
field to which modern physics owes so much in other respects. Among the
various aspects of this field there are two which are of particular importance
here: the Zeeman effect for introducing magnetic fields as an essential el-
ement of spectroscopy, and the hyperfine structure of spectral lines for re-
vealing the existence of nuclear moments. The correct interpretation of
hyperfine structures was first given in 1924 by Pauli 1, who proposed that
 atomic nuclei may possess an intrinsic angular momentum (spin) and, par-
 allel to its orientation, a magnetic moment. The energy of interaction of this
magnetic moment with the magnetic field H(o), produced by the atomic elec-
 trons at the position of the nucleus, depends upon the angle between them
 and leads thus to the observed small splitting of the energy levels. Converse-
 ly, it is possible under suitable conditions to determine from this splitting
 both the spin and the magnetic moment of the nucleus, and these two impor-
 tant quantities have indeed been determined in a great number of cases from
 the observation of hyperfine structures. The magnetic moments of the nuclei
 have been found, in all observed cases, to be of the order of the « nuclear
 magneton » which one obtains by substituting in the formula for the atomic
 Bohr magneton the mass of the proton in place of that of the electron.
 Nuclear moments are thus about a thousand times smaller than atomic mo-
 ments, and this is plausible in view of the fact that one deals here with pro-
 tons instead of electrons as elementary charged constituents. There are, how-
  ever, distinct disadvantages in the optical determination of nuclear moments.
 In the first place the accuracy is seriously limited due to the fact that the
 effect consists only in such a small splitting of spectral lines that one has to


204                             1952 F.BLOCH

be concerned with their finite width. In the second place it is necessary for
the determination of the nuclear magnetic moment from the observed hyper-
fine structure to have a knowledge of the field H(o) which is usually rather
inaccurate since it involves complex electron configurations. In view of these
limitations one is led to values of nuclear magnetic moments with an accu-
racy of a few percent at best. Finally, one is faced with the fact that hyperfine
splittings tend to decrease with decreasing atomic number with the result
that it is not possible, by optical means, to observe them in the case of the
greatest fundamental importance, that of hydrogen.
    A decisive step forward was made in 1933 by Stern 2, who applied his
method of molecular beams to the determination of the magnetic moments
 of the proton and the deuteron in hydrogen molecules. Instead of the emitted
 light, it is here the deflection of the molecule in an inhomogeneous mag-
 netic field which is affected by the nuclear moments. Although the observed
 effect was close to the limit of observability it yielded the proton moment
 to within ten percent with the most important result that instead of having
 the expected value of one nuclear magneton it is about 2.5 times larger. Of
 similar importance was the result that the magnetic moment of the deuteron
 was between 0.5 and 1 nuclear magneton, since it indicated from the simplest
 plausible considerations of the structure of this nucleus that one should as-
cribe a moment of about 2 nuclear magnetons to the neutron. I shall come
 back later to this point; it represents the start from which my own exper-
 imental work has followed in an almost continuous line.
    Subsequent to Stern’s work a number of far-reaching further develop-
 ments have been achieved by Rabi in the application of atomic and molecular
 beams to the measurement of nuclear moments and hyperfine structures.
 Without attempting completeness I want to mention some aspects of meth-
 od in the brilliant series of investigations which he carried out with his collab-
 orators. One of them is based upon a paper by Breit and Rabi 3, which treats
 the variation of the magnetic moment of an atom for the different Zeeman
 levels of hyperfine structure under the influence of an external magnetic field
 and which was applied to atomic beams where the deflection gives a direct
 measure of the magnetic moment. Another important aspect lies in the pas-
 sage of the beam through two and later three separate field regions which
  can be adjusted to give zero deflection so that one deals with a null method.
 These innovations, besides giving many other interesting results, allowed the
 measurement of the hyperfine structure in the ground state of light and
 heavy hydrogen atoms; since the previously mentioned field H(o), produced


                     PRINCIPLE OF NUCLEAR INDUCTION                                  205




Fig. 1. The «head» of the crossed-coil arrangement with the cover plate removed. The
bottom tube to the right contains the leads to the transmitter coil, which is wound in
two sections visible in black in the head. The black cable leads from the receiver coil
to the amplifier; the receiver coil is wound with a vertical axis inside the hollow lucite
piece between the two sections of the transmitter coil. The sample test tubes are placed
      in its interior through the circular hole at the top of the supporting frame.


by the electron at the place of the nucleus, was given here, through a formula
of Fermi4, from the well-known theory of the hydrogen atom, this meas-
urement resulted in the determination of the magnetic moments of the pro-
ton and the deuteron with an accuracy of a few percent.
   However, the most significant improvement in molecular and atomic
beam techniques was the introduction of the magnetic resonance method.
The beam here passes through a region where the magnetic field is homoge-
neous and constant with a weak alternating magnetic field superimposed at
right angles to the strong constant field. Analogous to the resonance absorp-
tion of visible light, transitions occur here from one Zeeman level to another
if the alternating field satisfies Bohr’s frequency condition for the energy


206                                 1952 F.BLOCH




Fig. 2. The same head as in Fig. 1, about to be inserted in the gap of an electromagnet
and containing a sample test tube. The two protruding lucite rods between the leads
reach into the interior of the head and carry small copper disks; a fine adjustment of
               the coupling is achieved by rotation of these «paddles».


difference between the two levels. However, instead of optical frequencies
one deals here normally with frequencies in the radio range so that this ap-
plication of the magnetic resonance method, like our own, is properly la-
belled as belonging to the new field of radiofrequency spectroscopy. In the
beam technique it has the great advantage of dispensing with a knowledge
of the deflecting inhomogeneous fields, since the deflection is merely used
now as an indicator for the occurrence of transitions in the homogeneous field
region. A very much greater accuracy can thus be obtained; it led, for ex-


                     PRINCIPLE OF NUCLEAR INDUCTION                                  207




Fig. 3. A resonance line of protons in water, containing MnSO 4 as a paramagnetic
catalyst and obtained from the phase component of the nuclear induction signal which
corresponds to absorption. The photograph is that of the trace on a cathode-ray
oscillograph with the vertical deflection arising from the rectified and amplified signal,
 and the horizontal deflection corresponding to different values of the constant field.

ample, to the knowledge of the magnetic moments of the proton and the
deuteron with an accuracy of about one part in a thousand and to the impor-
tant discovery of a small but finite electrical quadrupole moment of the
deuteron5 in 1939.
   The first use of the magnetic resonance method was suggested in 1936
by Gorter6 in an attempt to detect the resonance absorption of radio quanta
through the heating of a crystal. While the results of this experiment were
negative, Rabi7 in 1937 has treated the transitions in a rotating field and has
pointed out their use in atomic and molecular beams.
   Coming from quite a different direction, I was led at that time to similar
ideas. They originated from my preceding work which dealt with the mag-
netic moment of the neutron and which had been stimulated by Stern’s
previously mentioned measurement of the magnetic moment of the deu-
teron 2. The idea that a neutral elementary particle should possess an intrinsic
magnetic moment had a particular fascination to me, since it was in such
striking contrast to the then only existing theory of an intrinsic moment


208                                   1952 F.BLOCH




Fig. 4. The only difference between this line and that of Fig. 3 lies in the adjustment of
         the observed phase which is here that corresponding to dispersion.

which had been given by Dirac8 for the electron. Combining relativistic and
quantum effects, he had shown that the magnetic moment of the electron
was a direct consequence of its charge and it was clear that the magnetic
moment of the neutron would have to have an entirely different origin. It
seemed important to furnish a direct experimental proof for the existence
of a magnetic moment of the free neutron, and I pointed out in 1936 9 that
such a proof could be obtained by observing the scattering of slow neutrons
in iron. The very strongly inhomogeneous magnetic field in the neighbor-
hood of each iron atom was shown to affect a passing neutron through its
magnetic moment and thus to lead to an appreciable magnetic scattering
effect; it was shown at the same time, that magnetic scattering would lead
to the polarization of neutron beams. The existence of this effect was first
clearly demonstrated in 1937 by a group of investigators at Columbia
University 10, and it opened up the possibility of further work with polarized
neutron beams.
   The most desirable goal to be reached here was that of accurately meas-
uring the magnetic moment of the neutron. It occurred to me that resonance
 depolarization could be achieved by passing a polarized neutron beam


               PRINCIPLE      OF   NUCLEAR     INDUCTION                  209
through a region where a weak oscillating field is superimposed on a strong
constant field, provided that the frequency of the former is equal to the
frequency with which the neutron moment carries out a precessional motion
around the direction of the constant field. A knowledge of this field and of
the corresponding resonance frequency directly determines the magnetic
moment under the safe assumption that the spin of the neutron is 1/2, and
the magnetic scattering effect enters in this arrangement merely as an in-
dicator for the occurrence of resonance depolarization. The application to
polarized neutron beams was also noted by Rabi 7 in his previously men-
tioned original paper on the magnetic resonance method. It was first
achieved in 1939 by Alvarez and myself11 with the use of the Berkeley cyclo-
tron, and yielded a value for the magnetic moment of the neutron which was
consistent with that of the deuteron if one assumed the latter to be additively
composed of the moments of the proton and the neutron. The accuracy of
this measurement amounted to about one percent and was partly limited
by that with which the strength of the constant field could be determined.
Another limit of accuracy arose from the smallness of the observed polariza-
tion effect, but a subsequent systematic investigation of neutron polariza-
tion12, carried out with the Stanford cyclotron, showed how this effect could
be greatly increased.
   It was of considerable importance to improve the accuracy of the deter-
mination of the neutron moment to at least one part in a thousand in order
to test small deviations from the additivity of the moments of the proton
and the neutron, which could be expected in connection with the finite elec-
tric quadrupole moment of the deuteron, according to the theoretical work
of Rarita and Schwinger . The fact that higher accuracy hinged essentially
                           13



upon that of a field calibration and the search for a suitable and convenient
standard led me to new ideas when, toward the end of the last War, my
thoughts turned back to the continuation of my previous work.
   The essential fact of the magnetic resonance consists in the change of ori-
entation of nuclear moments, and the methods to be employed in molecular
and atomic beams as well as in neutron beams are primarily indicated by
the different ways to detect this change. The acquaintance with radio tech-
niques during the War suggested to me still another and much simpler way,
that of detecting the reorientation of nuclear moments through the normal
methods of radio reception. The signals to be detected would be due to the
electromagnetic induction caused by nuclear reorientation and should appear
as a voltage difference between the terminals of an external electric circuit.


210                             1952 F.BLOCH

I believe that this is the most general and distinctive feature of our discovery,
and it is for this reason that I chose for it the name of « nuclear induction ».
Purcell, whose independent approach was largely based on considerations
of energy relations, has chosen to call it « nuclear magnetic resonance absorp-
tion », but soon after our respective initial work and despite its apparent dif-
ference, it became clear that it was based upon the same principle.
    In order to understand this principle, one can start from macroscopic
quantities and describe the underlying phenomenon in classical terms. Con-
sider for this purpose, as a typical example, about one cubic centimeter of
water with the protons contained in it as the nuclei under investigation.
Their magnetic moments are oriented in a completely random manner in
the absence of an external magnetic field; after the sample has been brought
into such a field, however, there will be established a new thermal equilib-
rium in which the magnetic moments are distributed with a slight surplus
parallel to the field. Even in relatively strong fields of the order of 10,000
 gauss this surplus will at room temperature amount to no more than about
 one part in a million. While its direct observation would be difficult, there
 thus exists a « nuclear paramagnetism » in the sense that one deals with a finite
macroscopic nuclear polarization which is both parallel and proportional to
the applied external field. The establishment of thermal equilibrium demands
the transfer of the energy released by the partial orientation of the nuclear
moments into heat, and it can take place only through interaction of these
moments with their molecular surroundings. The strength of this interaction
determines the time interval required for the nuclear moments to adjust
themselves to the equilibrium conditions; it is measured by the « relaxation
time », as in the analogous case of atomic paramagnetism. The role of the
relaxation time is of basic significance for our experiments, and I shall soon
come back to its discussion.
    For the moment, we shall return to the equilibrium state, once it is estab-
lished, and to the description of the nuclear polarization under the conditions
 of magnetic resonance. A simple mechanical consideration of the gyroscope
shows that an alternating field at right angles to the constant field has the
effect of tilting the direction of the polarization with respect to the constant
 field and that the polarization will thereupon continue to perform a preces-
 sional rotation around this field. The angular frequency of precession is pro-
 portional to the field with a constant of proportionality which is called the
« gyromagnetic ratio » of the nuclei and which is equal to the ratio of their
 magnetic moment and their intrinsic angular momentum. From a perfectly


                PRINCIPLE      OF   NUCLEAR      INDUCTION                  211

macroscopic point of view, one thus deals with a situation in which the pro-
tons in our cubic centimeter of water have the effect of an invisible compass
needle rotating in its interior. The « invisibility » refers actually only to ob-
servation of optical frequencies; the rotation occurs in the range of radio-
frequencies, and it can very well be observed by using Faraday’s law of
induction. Indeed, the rotation of our compass needle is accompanied by
that of a magnetic field which possesses an alternating component per-
pendicular to the axis of rotation, and hence by an electromotive force, in-
duced in a suitably wound coil of wire around the sample. From here on it is
merely a matter of the standard techniques of radio reception to rectify and
amplify this electromotive force so that it can be recorded on a volt-meter,
displayed on a cathode-ray oscillograph, or made audible in a loudspeaker.
   What amazed me most in my first calculations on this effect was the mag-
nitude of the signals which one could expect from nuclear induction. In our
example of a cubic centimeter of water in a normal field of a few thousand
gauss they turned out to amount to the order of a millivolt. This magnitude
is well above the noise which accompanies any radio receiver and which
sets the ultimate limit of signal detection. It should be observed here that,
being a phenomenon of fluctuations, the noise can always be reduced by
averaging over sufficiently long times. This procedure was used later to very
greatly increase the sensitivity of the method; it is characteristic of the pres-
ent possibilities that my collaborators have succeeded in the last few years
in detecting in natural water signals arising from deuterium and from the
isotope of oxygen with atomic mass 17, despite their low abundances of 0.02
and 0.04 percent, respectively.
   The existence and detection of a precessing nuclear polarization in a sample
represents to my mind the basis of nuclear induction. It is, however, nec-
essary to consider also the features which produce and counteract the tilt
of the polarization with respect to the constant field. Magnetic resonance
enters here as the most important means of producing the tilt, since it allows
its achievement under the application of relatively weak oscillating fields.
In fact, it is a common feature of every resonance phenomenon that rel-
atively weak external forces can produce large effects if their frequency is
equal to the natural frequency of the system to which they are applied. The
natural frequency in question is, in our case, that with which the nuclear
polarization precesses by itself around the constant field and the practical way
to determine this frequency is to vary either that of the applied alternating
field or the magnitude of the constant field until resonance conditions are


212                             1952 F.BLOCH

established and detected by a maximum of the observed nuclear induction
signal. The simultaneous knowledge of resonance field and frequency then
directly yields, as in the use of magnetic resonance in molecular beams, the
gyromagnetic ratio and, with a knowledge of the spin, the magnetic mo-
ment of the nucleus. Actually, it is also possible to determine the spin sep-
arately by using the additional piece of information contained in the intensity
of the observed signal.
   To follow the analogue of mechanical resonance we must now come back
to relaxation, which can be seen to act like a friction, and which counteracts
the tilt produced by the alternating field. If the friction is large, i.e., if the
relaxation time is short, it will either reduce the effect for a given amplitude
or require a correspondingly larger amplitude of the alternating field. It will,
in either case, result in a relatively broad resonance line, thus diminishing
the accuracy of the measurement. While from this point of view it is un-
desirable to have too short a relaxation time, it is equally undesirable to have
it too long, since the very circumstance of producing its tilt diminishes the
magnitude of the polarization so that it requires the refreshing influence of
the relaxation mechanism to bring it back to its equilibrium value.
   There was not much known about the magnitude of nuclear relaxation
 times when Purcell and I started our first experiments on nuclear induction,
 and the main doubt about their success arose from the possibility of insuffi-
cient relaxation. In fact, it seems, in retrospect, that the failure of Gorter’s
first attempt6, as well as of a second one, undertaken in 1942 14, was primarily
 due to this circumstance. While E. M. Purcell, H. C. Torrey and R. V.
Pound 15, toward the end of 1945, obtained their first positive results from
 protons in paraffin, the late W. W. Hansen, M. E. Packard, and I 16 found
 ours a few weeks later in water without either of the groups knowing any-
 thing about the work of the other. The relaxation time of paraffin has the
 convenient value of about          second, while pure water has a somewhat
 unfavorably long relaxation time of about 2 seconds. Neither of these two
 values had been foreseen, and I was fully prepared to find the relaxation time
 of pure water considerably longer and in fact too long for our method of
 observation. It was known, however, that the conversion of ortho- and para-
 hydrogen was accelerated by the presence of paramagnetic atoms and mole-
 cules; this mechanism has the common feature, with the attainment of the
 equilibrium polarization of protons, that it requires a random process of nu-
 clear reorientation, and it had been understood to take place through the
 magnetic field of the paramagnetic catalyst acting upon the magnetic mo-


                PRINCIPLE OF NUCLEAR INDUCTION                                213
ment of the proton. An estimate showed that, depending upon the concentra-
tion of a paramagnetic salt dissolved in water, a wide range of relaxation
times, going down to values of the order of 10 -5 second, could be obtained.
Before starting our observations we therefore had prepared solutions of the
paramagnetic iron nitrate in water, and although the first weak signals were
received from pure water we found, shortly afterward, considerably stronger
signals from a solution with about one-half molar concentration of iron
nitrate. The signals appeared as rather broad lines on the cathode-ray oscillo-
graph because of insufficient homogeneity of the constant magnetic field.
    Since the width of the resonance line determines the accuracy with which
magnetic moments can be determined, we shall briefly consider the condi-
tions necessary for obtaining sharp lines. In the first place, it is necessary that
the constant field have the same value in all parts of the sample; in the second
place, one must not choose an excessive amplitude of the alternating field,
since this too would cause an excessive broadening. The ultimate limit is
given by the natural width of the line and it is closely related to the relaxation
time; it can be seen, in fact, that the relative accuracy of a measurement by
nuclear induction, due to the natural line width, is limited to the order of
the number of cycles which the nuclear polarization carries out in its preces-
sion around the constant field during the relaxation time. As an example,
we shall again consider protons in pure water and in a field of 10,000 gauss;
the frequency of precession is here 42.5 megacycles per second, so that about
    8
 10 cycles are performed during the relaxation time of approximately 2
seconds. This means that an accuracy of about 1 part in 100 millions could
be, in principle, achieved here, provided that one had a sufficiently homoge-
neous field available. While this limit has not yet been reached, it is note-
worthy that in water, alcohol, and other liquids, resolutions of one part in
 10 millions have actually been achieved. It is indeed the possibility of coher-
 ent observation over a large number of cycles which allows the use of nu-
clear induction as a method of high precision measurements. In fulfillment
of my original plans, it was applied by H. H. Staub, D. B. Nicodemus and
me to the magnetic moments of the proton, the neutron and the deuteron17,
and it resulted not only in the verification of the previously mentioned devia-
 tion from additivity in the deuteron 1 3, but in its measurement with an ac-
 curacy which is beyond the present scope of the theory of nuclear forces.
 It was particularly gratifying to me to obtain these results from experiments
combining the polarization and magnetic resonance depolarization of neu-
trons with nuclear induction.


214                                  1952 F.BLOCH

    The description of nuclear induction which I have presented follows
closely my own original thoughts on the subject but it can equally well be
approached from other angles. The simplest one is probably that of Gorter6
in his first attempt to detect nuclear magnetic resonance. We have seen be-
fore that the alternating field tilts the nuclear polarization against the con-
stant field. This process requires a certain amount of work which, through
relaxation, will reappear in the form of heat produced in the sample. The
 effect in fact does not involve induction but represents pure nuclear resonance
absorption; however, it would be very slight and has not yet been established.
A second attempt of Gorter14, carried out later, is based upon the fact that
the nuclear paramagnetic susceptibility has a maximum for radiofrequencies,
 corresponding to magnetic resonance conditions; it would manifest itself in
 the frequency of an electric oscillator of which a coil, surrounding the sam-
 ple, forms the self-inductance. This scheme is actually one of the many
 others which can be devised for the observation of nuclear induction and,
 if successful, would have represented the first demonstration of the effect.
 Purcell’s first successful experiment involved the electrodynamical aspect of
 absorption insofar as its occurrence under resonance conditions was mani-
 fested through the increased loss of a cavity resonator; the cavity was re-
 placed in his succeeding arrangements by more conventional circuit el-
ements. A particularly suitable and convenient arrangement consists of a
 radiofrequency bridge, which contains in one arm a coil, surrounding the
 sample. As a consequence of nuclear induction there occurs, under resonance
 conditions, a change of the impedance of this coil and thereby a readily
  detectable change in the balance of the bridge. It should be remarked that
  the change of impedance is complex, with its real part corresponding to
  absorption, its imaginary part to dispersion. This fact can be traced back to
  the phase relation between the nuclear induction signal and the applied radio-
  frequency field, and the phase sensitivity of the bridge allows the observation
  of the effect either as absorption or as dispersion or as a combination of both.
     Finally, I shall give a brief description of our own original arrangement
  which we still use in its principal features. The essential balance which Pur-
  cell has obtained by a bridge method is here to a large extent achieved geo-
  metrically by using two radiofrequency coils with their axes oriented at
  right angles to each other and to the constant field. One of them, the « trans-
  mitter coil » produces the alternating field, while the other, the « receiver
  coil », serves for detection of the nuclear induction signal (see Figs. 1 and 2).
  A small amount of coupling between the two coils is admitted to produce


               PRINCIPLE OF NUCLEAR INDUCTION                                 215
a voltage across the receiver coil, and its phase with respect to the super-
imposed voltage induced by the nuclei can be adjusted for the observation
of either absorption or dispersion in similarity to the bridge method (see
Figs. 3 and 4).
    A considerable variety of other circuits has been introduced by different
investigators. Except for the greater or lesser ease of avoiding instrumental
difficulties, they lead to the same ultimate sensitivity and accuracy of the
method, since they all observe the same basic phenomenon.
    There is, however, one distinctive feature in the crossed-coil arrangement,
which automatically yields another significant piece of information. The two
coils imply a sense of rotation around the constant field; depending upon
whether the nuclear polarization precesses in the same or the opposite sense
 of rotation there results a phase difference of 180 degrees between the voltage
 in the receiver coil due to coupling with the transmitter coil and the super-
 imposed voltage due to nuclear induction. The action of the rectifier trans-
 lates this phase difference into an inversion of the signal, which is directly
 displayed on the oscillograph or on the recording instrument. One obtains
 in this simple manner information about the sign of the magnetic moment
 of the nucleus, defined by its relative orientation to the angular momentum,
 since it is this sign which determines the sense of rotation of the nuclear
 polarization in a given field. The sign of nuclear moments represents an
 important clue to their interpretation in terms of nuclear structures; usually
 it is referred to the sign of the proton moment, which has been known for
 a considerable time to be positive. It has been determined in this manner for
 a number of nuclei where it was not previously known.




 1. W. Pauli, Naturwiss., 12 (1924) 741.
 2. R. Frisch and O. Stern, Z. Physik, 85 (1933) 4.
    I. Estermann and O. Stern, Z. Physik, 85 (1933) 17.
    I. Estermann and O. Stern, Phys. Rev., 46 (1934) 665.
 3. G. Breit and I. I. Rabi, Phys. Rev., 38 (1931) 2082.
 4. E. Fermi, Z. Physik, 60 (1930) 320.
 5. J. M. B. Kellogg, I. I. Rabi, N. F. Ramsey, and J. R. Zacharias, Phys. Rev., 55
    (1939) 318; 57 (1940) 677.
 6. C. J. Gorter, Physica, 3 (1936) 995.
 7. I. I. Rabi, Phys. Rev., 51 (1937) 652.
 8. P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, 117 (1928) 610.


216                                 1952 F.BLOCH

 9.  F. Bloch, Phys. Rev., 50 (1936) 259; 51 (1937) 994.
10.  P. N. Powers, H. G. Beyer, and J. R. Dunning, Phys. Rev., 51 (1937) 371.
11. L. W. Alvarez and F. Bloch, Phys. Rev., 57 (1940) III.
12.  F. Bloch, M. Hamermesh, and H. Staub, Phys. Rev., 64 (1943) 47.
13. W. Rarita and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev., 59 (1941) 436.
14.  C. J. Gorter and L. J. F. Broer, Physica, 9 (1942) 591.
15.  E. M. Purcell, H. C. Torrey, and R. V. Pound, Phys. Rev., 69 (1946) 37.
    N. Bloembergen, E. M. Purcell, and R. V. Pound, Phys. Rev., 73 (1948) 679.
16. F. Bloch, W. W. Hansen, and M. Packard, Phys. Rev., 69 (1946) 127.
    F. Bloch, Phys. Rev., 70 (1946) 460.
17. F. Bloch, D. Nicodemus, and H. Staub, Phys. Rev., 74 (1948) 1025.
