ASYMPTOTIC FREEDOM: FROM PARADOX TO
PARADIGM

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2004
by
Frank A. Wilczek
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, USA.




1 A PAIR OF PARADOXES
In theoretical physics, paradoxes are good. That’s paradoxical, since a paradox
appears to be a contradiction, and contradictions imply serious error. But Nature
cannot realize contradictions. When our physical theories lead to paradox we
must find a way out. Paradoxes focus our attention, and we think harder.
   When David Gross and I began the work that led to this Nobel Prize [1, 2,
3, 4], in 1972, we were driven by paradoxes. In resolving the paradoxes we
were led to discover a new dynamical principle, asymptotic freedom. This
principle in turn has led to an expanded conception of fundamental particles,
a new understanding of how matter gets its mass, a new and much clearer
picture of the early universe, and new ideas about the unity of Nature’s forces.
Today I’d like to share with you the story of these ideas.



1.1 Paradox 1: Quarks are Born Free, but Everywhere They are in Chains
The first paradox was phenomenological.
   Near the beginning of the twentieth century, after pioneering experiments
by Rutherford, Geiger and Marsden, physicists discovered that most of the
mass and all of the positive charge inside an atom is concentrated in a tiny
central nucleus. In 1932, Chadwick discovered neutrons, which together with
protons could be considered as the ingredients out of which atomic nuclei
could be constructed. But the known forces, gravity and electromagnetism,
were insufficient to bind protons and neutrons tightly together into objects as
small as the observed nuclei. Physicists were confronted with a new force, the
most powerful in Nature. It became a major challenge in fundamental physics,
to understand this new force.
   For many years physicists gathered data to address that challenge, basically
by bashing protons and neutrons together and studying what came out. The
results that emerged from these studies, however, were complicated and hard
to interpret.

100


    What you would expect, if the particles were really fundamental
(indestructible), would be the same particles you started with, coming out with
just their trajectories changed. Instead, the outcome of the collisions was often
many particles. The final state might contain several copies of the originals,
or different particles altogether. A plethora of new particles was discovered in
this way. Although these particles, generically called hadrons, are unstable,
they otherwise behave in ways that broadly resemble the way protons and
neutrons behave. So the character of the subject changed. It was no longer
natural to think of it as simply as the study of a new force that binds protons
and neutrons into atomic nuclei. Rather, a new world of phenomena had come
into view. This world contained many unexpected new particles, that could
transform into one another in a bewildering variety of ways. Reflecting this
change in perspective, there was a change in terminology. Instead of the
nuclear force, physicists came to speak of the strong interaction.
    In the early 1960s, Murray Gell-Mann and George Zweig made a great
advance in the theory of the strong interaction, by proposing the concept of
quarks. If you imagined that hadrons were not fundamental particles, but rather
that they were assembled from a few more basic types, the quarks, patterns
clicked into place. The dozens of observed hadrons could be understood, at
least roughly, as different ways of putting together just three kinds (“flavors”)
of quarks. You can have a given set of quarks in different spatial orbits, or with
their spins aligned in different ways. The energy of the configuration will
depend on these things, and so there will be a number of states with different
energies, giving rise to particles with different masses, according to m = E/c 2.
It is analogous to the way we understand the spectrum of excited states of an
atom, as arising from different orbits and spin alignments of electrons. (For
electrons in atoms the interaction energies are relatively small, however, and
the effect of these energies on the overall mass of the atoms is insignificant.)
    The rules for using quarks to model reality seemed quite weird, however.
    Quarks were supposed to hardly notice one another when they were close
together, but if you tried to isolate one, you found that you could not. People
looked very hard for individual quarks, but without success. Only bound states of
a quark and an antiquark – mesons – or bound states of three quarks – baryons
– are observed. This experimental regularity was elevated into The Principle of
Confinement. But giving it a dignified name didn’t make it less weird.
    There were other peculiar things about quarks. They were supposed to
have electric charges whose magnitudes are fractions ( or ) of what
appears to be the basic unit, namely the magnitude of charge carried by an
electron or proton. All other observed electric charges are known, with great
accuracy, to be whole-number multiples of this unit. Also, identical quarks did
not appear to obey the normal rules of quantum statistics. These rules would
require that, as spin particles, quarks should be fermions, with antisymmetric
wave functions. The pattern of observed baryons cannot be understood using
antisymmetric wave functions; it requires symmetric wave functions.
    The atmosphere of weirdness and peculiarity surrounding quarks thickened
into paradox when J. Friedman, H. Kendall, R. Taylor and their collaborators

                                                                              101


at the Stanford Linear Accelerator (SLAC) used energetic photons to poke
into the inside of protons [5]. They discovered that there are indeed entities
that look like quarks inside protons. Surprisingly, though, they found that
when quarks are hit hard they seem to move (more accurately: to transport
energy and momentum) as if they were free particles. Before the experiment,
most physicists had expected that whatever caused the strong interaction of
quarks would also cause quarks to radiate energy abundantly, and thus rapidly
to dissipate their motion, when they got violently accelerated.
   At a certain level of sophistication, that association of radiation with forces
appears inevitable, and profound. Indeed, the connection between forces
and radiation is associated with some of the most glorious episodes in the
history of physics. In 1864, Maxwell predicted the existence of electromagnetic
radiation – including, but not limited to, ordinary light – as a consequence of
his consistent and comprehensive formulation of electric and magnetic forces.
Maxwell’s new radiation was subsequently generated and detected by Hertz,
in 1883 (and over the twentieth century its development has revolutionized
the way we manipulate matter and communicate with one another). Much later,
in 1935, Yukawa predicted the existence of pions based on his analysis of nuclear
forces, and they were subsequently discovered in the late 1940s; the existences
of many other hadrons were predicted successfully using a generalization of
these ideas. (For experts: I have in mind the many resonances that were first
seen in partial wave analyses, and then later in production.) More recently the
existence of W and Z bosons, and of color gluons, and their properties, was
inferred before their experimental discovery. Those discoveries were, in
1972, still ahead of us, but they serve to confirm, retroactively, that our
concerns were worthy ones. Powerful interactions ought to be associated with
powerful radiation. When the most powerful interaction in nature, the
strong interaction, did not obey this rule, it posed a sharp paradox.


1.2 Paradox 2: Special Relativity and Quantum Mechanics Both Work
The second paradox is more conceptual. Quantum mechanics and special
relativity are two great theories of twentieth-century physics. Both are very
successful. But these two theories are based on entirely different ideas, which
are not easy to reconcile. In particular, special relativity puts space and time
on the same footing, but quantum mechanics treats them very differently.
This leads to a creative tension, whose resolution has led to three previous
Nobel Prizes (and ours is another).
   The first of these prizes went to P. A. M. Dirac (1933). Imagine a particle
moving on average at very nearly the speed of light, but with an uncertainty
in position, as required by quantum theory. Evidently it there will be some
probability for observing this particle to move a little faster than average, and
therefore faster than light, which special relativity won’t permit. The only
known way to resolve this tension involves introducing the idea of antiparticles.
Very roughly speaking, the required uncertainty in position is accommodated
by allowing for the possibility that the act of measurement can involve the

102


creation of several particles, each indistinguishable from the original, with
different positions. To maintain the balance of conserved quantum numbers,
the extra particles must be accompanied by an equal number of antiparticles.
(Dirac was led to predict the existence of antiparticles through a sequence of
ingenious interpretations and re-interpretations of the elegant relativistic
wave equation he invented, rather than by heuristic reasoning of the sort I’ve
presented. The inevitability and generality of his conclusions, and their direct
relationship to basic principles of quantum mechanics and special relativity,
are only clear in retrospect).
   The second and third of these prizes were to R. Feynman, J. Schwinger, and
S.-I. Tomonaga (1965) and to G. ’t Hooft and M. Veltman (1999) respectively.
The main problem that all these authors in one way or another addressed is
the problem of ultraviolet divergences.
   When special relativity is taken into account, quantum theory must allow
for fluctuations in energy over brief intervals of time. This is a generalization
of the complementarity between momentum and position that is fundamen-
tal for ordinary, non-relativistic quantum mechanics. Loosely speaking, ener-
gy can be borrowed to make evanescent virtual particles, including particle-
antiparticle pairs. Each pair passes away soon after it comes into being, but
new pairs are constantly boiling up, to establish an equilibrium distribution.
In this way the wave function of (superficially) empty space becomes densely
populated with virtual particles, and empty space comes to behave as a dyna-
mical medium.
   The virtual particles with very high energy create special problems. If you
calculate how much the properties of real particles and their interactions are
changed by their interaction with virtual particles, you tend to get divergent
answers, due to the contributions from virtual particles of very high energy.
   This problem is a direct descendant of the problem that triggered the in-
troduction of quantum theory in the first place, i.e. the “ultraviolet catastrophe”
of black body radiation theory, addressed by Planck. There the problem was
that high-energy modes of the electromagnetic field are predicted, classically,
to occur as thermal fluctuations, to such an extent that equilibrium at any
finite temperature requires that there is an infinite amount of energy in these
modes. The difficulty came from the possibility of small-amplitude fluctuations
with rapid variations in space and time. The element of discreteness introduced
by quantum theory eliminates the possibility of very small-amplitude fluctua-
tions, because it imposes a lower bound on their size. The (relatively) large-
amplitude fluctuations that remain are predicted to occur very rarely in ther-
mal equilibrium, and cause no problem. But quantum fluctuations are much
more efficient than are thermal fluctuations at exciting the high-energy modes,
in the form of virtual particles, and so those modes come back to haunt us.
For example, they give a divergent contribution to the energy of empty space,
the so-called zero-point energy.
   Renormalization theory was developed to deal with this sort of difficulty.
The central observation that is exploited in renormalization theory is that
although interactions with high-energy virtual particles appear to produce

                                                                               103


divergent corrections, they do so in a very structured way. That is, the same
corrections appear over and over again in the calculations of many different
physical processes. For example in quantum electrodynamics (QED) exactly
two independent divergent expressions appear, one of which occurs when
we calculate the correction to the mass of the electron, the other of which
occurs when we calculate the correction to its charge. To make the calculation
mathematically well-defined, we must artificially exclude the highest energy
modes, or dampen their interactions, a procedure called applying a cut-off, or
regularization. In the end we want to remove the cut-off, but at intermediate
stages we need to leave it in, so as to have well-defined (finite) mathematical
expressions. If we are willing to take the mass and charge of the electron from
experiment, we can identify the formal expressions for these quantities, in-
cluding the potentially divergent corrections, with their measured values.
Having made this identification, we can remove the cutoff. We thereby obtain
well-defined answers, in terms of the measured mass and charge, for everything
else of interest in QED.
   Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonoga developed the technique for writing
down the corrections due to interactions with any finite number of virtual
particles in QED, and showed that renormalization theory worked in the sim-
plest cases. (I’m being a little sloppy in my terminology; instead of saying the
number of virtual particles, it would be more proper to speak of the number
of internal loops in a Feynman graph.) Freeman Dyson supplied a general
proof. This was intricate work, that required new mathematical techniques.
’t Hooft and Veltman showed that renormalization theory applied to a much
wider class of theories, including the sort of spontaneously broken gauge
theories that had been used by Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg to construct
the (now) standard model of electroweak interactions. Again, this was intricate
and highly innovative work.
   This brilliant work, however, still did not eliminate all the difficulties. A very
profound problem was identified by Landau [6]. Landau argued that virtual
particles would tend to accumulate around a real particle as long as there was
any uncancelled influence. This is called screening. The only way for this
screening process to terminate is for the source plus its cloud of virtual partic-
les to cease to be of interest to additional virtual particles. But then, in the
end, no uncancelled influence would remain – and no interaction!
   Thus all the brilliant work in QED and more general field theories repre-
sented, according to Landau, no more than a temporary fix. You could get
finite results for the effect of any particular number of virtual particles, but
when you tried to sum the whole thing up, to allow for the possibility of an
arbitrary number of virtual particles, you would get nonsense – either infinite
answers, or no interaction at all.
   Landau and his school backed up this intuition with calculations in many
different quantum field theories. They showed, in all the cases they calculated,
that screening in fact occurred, and that it doomed any straightforward
attempt to perform a complete, consistent calculation by adding up the
contributions of more and more virtual particles. We can sweep this problem

104


under the rug in QED or in electroweak theory, because the answers includ-
ing only a small finite number of virtual particles provide an excellent fit to
experiment, and we make a virtue of necessity by stopping there. But for the
strong interaction that pragmatic approach seemed highly questionable,
because there is no reason to expect that lots of virtual particles won’t come
into play, when they interact strongly.
    Landau thought that he had destroyed quantum field theory as a way of
reconciling quantum mechanics and special relativity. Something would have
to give. Either quantum mechanics or special relativity might ultimately fail,
or else essentially new methods would have to be invented, beyond quantum
field theory, to reconcile them. Landau was not displeased with this conclusion,
because in practice quantum field theory had not been very helpful in under-
standing the strong interaction, even though a lot of effort had been put into
it. But neither he, nor anyone else, proposed a useful alternative.
    So we had the paradox, that combining quantum mechanics and special
relativity seemed to lead inevitably to quantum field theory; but quantum field
theory, despite substantial pragmatic success, self-destructed logically due to
catastrophic screening.


2 PARADOX LOST: ANTISCREENING, OR ASYMPTOTIC FREEDOM
These paradoxes were resolved by our discovery of asymptotic freedom.
   We found that some very special quantum field theories actually have anti-
screening. We called this property asymptotic freedom, for reasons that will
soon be clear. Before describing the specifics of the theories, I’d like to indicate
in a rough, general way how the phenomenon of antiscreening allows us to
resolve our paradoxes.
   Antiscreening turns Landau’s problem on its head. In the case of screening,
a source of influence – let us call it charge, understanding that it can represent
something quite different from electric charge – induces a canceling cloud of
virtual particles. From a large charge, at the center, you get a small observable
influence far away. Antiscreening, or asymptotic freedom, implies instead
that a charge of intrinsically small magnitude catalyzes a cloud of virtual
particles that enhances its power. I like to think of it as a thundercloud that
grows thicker and thicker as you move away from the source.
   Since the virtual particles themselves carry charge, this growth is a self-rein-
forcing, runaway process. The situation appears to be out of control. In par-
ticular, energy is required to build up the thundercloud, and the required
energy threatens to diverge to infinity. If that is the case, then the source
could never be produced in the first place. We’ve discovered a way to avoid
Landau’s disease – by banishing the patients!
   At this point our first paradox, the confinement of quarks, makes a virtue
of theoretical necessity. For it suggests that there are in fact sources – specifi-
cally, quarks – that cannot exist on their own. Nevertheless, Nature teaches
us, these confined particles can play a role as building-blocks. If we have,
nearby to a source particle, its antiparticle (for example, quark and anti-

                                                                                105


quark), then the catastrophic growth of the antiscreening thundercloud is no
longer inevitable. For where they overlap, the cloud of the source can be
canceled by the anticloud of the antisource. Quarks and antiquarks, bound
together, can be accommodated with finite energy, though either in isolation
would cause an infinite disturbance.
    Because it was closely tied to detailed, quantitative experiments, the sharpest
problem we needed to address was the paradoxical failure of quarks to radiate
when Friedman, Kendall, and Taylor subjected them to violent acceleration.
This too can be understood from the physics of antiscreening. According to
this mechanism, the color charge of a quark, viewed up close, is small. It builds
up its power to drive the strong interaction by accumulating a growing cloud
at larger distances. Since the power of its intrinsic color charge is small, the
quark is actually only loosely attached to its cloud. We can jerk it away from its
cloud, and it will – for a short while – behave almost as if it had no color charge,
and no strong interaction. As the virtual particles in space respond to the
altered situation they rebuild a new cloud, moving along with the quark, but
this process does not involve significant radiation of energy and momentum.
That, according to us, was why you could analyze the most salient aspects of
the SLAC experiments – the inclusive cross-sections, which only keep track of
overall energy-momentum flow – as if the quarks were free particles, though
in fact they are strongly interacting and ultimately confined.
    Thus both our paradoxes, nicely dovetailed, get resolved together through
antiscreening.
    The theories that we found to display asymptotic freedom are called nona-
belian gauge theories, or Yang-Mills theories [7]. They form a vast generalization
of electrodynamics. They postulate the existence of several different kinds
of charge, with complete symmetry among them. So instead of one entity,
“charge”, we have several “colors”. Also, instead of one photon, we have a
family of color gluons.
    The color gluons themselves carry color charges. In this respect the nona-
belian theories differ from electrodynamics, where the photon is electrically
neutral. Thus gluons in nonabelian theories play a much more active role in
the dynamics of these theories than do photons in electrodynamics. Indeed,
it is the effect of virtual gluons that is responsible for antiscreening, which does
not occur in QED.
    It became evident to us very early on that one particular asymptotically free
theory was uniquely suited as a candidate to provide the theory of the strong
interaction. On phenomenological grounds, we wanted to have the possibility
to accommodate baryons, based on three quarks, as well as mesons, based on
quark and antiquark. In light of the preceding discussion, this requires that
the color charges of three different quarks can cancel, when you add them
up. That can oocur if the three colors exhaust all possibilities; so we arrived at
the gauge group SU(3), with three colors, and eight gluons. To be fair, several
physicists had, with various motivations, suggested the existence of a three-
valued internal color label for quarks years before [8]. It did not require a


106


great leap of imagination to see how we could adapt those ideas to our tight
requirements.
    By using elaborate technical machinery of quantum field theory (inclu-
ding the renormalization group, operator product expansions, and appropri-
ate dispersion relations) we were able to be much more specific and quantita-
tive about the implications our theory than my loose pictorial language
suggests. In particular, the strong interaction does not simply turn off abrupt-
ly, and there is a non-zero probability that quarks will radiate when poked. It
is only asymptotically, as energies involved go to infinity, that the probability
for radiation vanishes. We could calculate in great detail the observable effects
of the radiation at finite energy, and make experimental predictions based on
these calculations. At the time, and for several years later, the data was not
accurate enough to test these particular predictions, but by the end of the
1970s they began to look good, and by now they’re beautiful.
    Our discovery of asymptotic freedom, and its essentially unique realization
in quantum field theory, led us to a new attitude towards the problem of the
strong interaction. In place of the broad research programs and fragmentary
insights that had characterized earlier work, we now had a single, specific
candidate theory – a theory that could be tested, and perhaps falsified, but
which could not be fudged. Even now, when I re-read our declaration [3]

  Finally let us recall that the proposed theories appear to be uniquely
  singled out by nature, if one takes both the SLAC results and the
  renormalization-group approach to quantum field theory at face value.

  I re-live the mixture of exhilaration and anxiety that I felt at the time.

3 A FOURSOME OF PARADIGMS
Our resolution of the paradoxes that drove us had ramifications in unantici-
pated directions, and extending far beyond their initial scope.

3.1 Paradigm 1: The Hard Reality of Quarks and Gluons
Because, in order to fit the facts, you had to ascribe several bizarre properties to
quarks – paradoxical dynamics, peculiar charge, and anomalous statistics –
their “reality” was, in 1972, still very much in question. This despite the fact
that they were helpful in organizing the hadrons, and even though Friedman,
Kendall, and Taylor had “observed” them! The experimental facts wouldn’t
go away, of course, but their ultimate significance remained doubtful. Were
quarks basic particles, with simple properties, that could be used to in formu-
lating a profound theory – or just a curious intermediate device, that would
need to be replaced by deeper conceptions?
   Now we know how the story played out, and it requires an act of imagination
to conceive how it might have been different. But Nature is imaginative, as
are theoretical physicists, and so it’s not impossible to fantasize alternative


                                                                                107


Figure 1: A photograph from the L3 collaboration, showing three jets emerging from electron-
positron annihilation at high energy [9]. These jets are the materialization of a quark, antiquark,
and gluon.




histories. For example, the quasiparticles of the fractional quantum Hall
effect, which are not basic but rather emerge as collective excitations involving
ordinary electrons, also cannot exist in isolation, and they have fractional
charge and anomalous statistics! Related things happen in the Skyrme model,
where nucleons emerge as collective excitations of pions. One might have
fantasized that quarks would follow a similar script, emerging somehow as
collective excitations of hadrons, or of more fundamental preons, or of strings.
   Together with the new attitude toward the strong interaction problem,
that I just mentioned, came a new attitude toward quarks and gluons. These
words were no longer just names attached to empirical patterns, or to notio-
nal building blocks within rough phenomenological models. Quarks and (es-
pecially) gluons had become ideally simple entities, whose properties are fully
defined by mathematically precise algorithms.
   You can even see them! Here’s a picture, which I’ll now explain.
   Asymptotic freedom is a great boon for experimental physics, because it
leads to the beautiful phenomenon of jets. As I remarked before, an important
part of the atmosphere of mystery surrounding quarks arose from the fact
that they could not be isolated. But if we change our focus, to follow flows of
energy and momentum rather than individual hadrons, then quarks and gluons
come into view, as I’ll now explain.
   There is a contrast between two different kinds of radiation, which expresses
the essence of asymptotic freedom. Hard radiation, capable of significantly
re-directing the flow of energy and momentum, is rare. But soft radiation,
that produces additional particles moving in the same direction, without
deflecting the overall flow, is common. Indeed, soft radiation is associated

108


Figure 2: These Feynman graphs are schematic representations of the fundamental processes in
electron-positron annihilation, as they take place in space and time. They show the origin of two-
jet and three-jet events.




with the build-up of the clouds I discussed before, as it occurs in time. Let’s
consider what it means for experiments, say to be concrete the sort of experi-
ment done at the Large Electron Positron collider (LEP) at CERN during the
1990s, and contemplated for the International Linear Collider (ILC) in the
future. At these facilities, one studies what emerges from the annihilation of
electrons and positrons that collide at high energies. By well-understood
processes that belong to QED or electroweak theory, the annihilation proceeds
through a virtual photon or Z boson into a quark and an antiquark. Conservation
and energy and momentum dictate that the quark and antiquark will be mov-
ing at high speed in opposite directions. If there is no hard radiation, then
the effect of soft radiation will be to convert the quark into a spray of hadrons
moving in a common direction: a jet. Similarly, the antiquark becomes a jet
moving in the opposite direction. The observed result is then a 2-jet event.
Occasionally (about 10% of the time, at LEP) there will be hard radiation,
with the quark (or antiquark) emitting a gluon in a significantly new direction.
From that point on the same logic applies, and we have a 3-jet event, like the
one shown in Figure 1. The theory of the underlying space-time process is
depicted in Figure 2. And roughly 1% of the time 4 jets will occur, and so forth.
The relative probability of different numbers of jets, how it varies with the overall
energy, the relative frequency of different angles at which the jets emerge and
the total energy in each – all these detailed aspects of the “antenna pattern”
can be predicted quantitatively. These predictions reflect the basic couplings
among quarks and gluons, which define QCD, quite directly.
   The predictions agree well with very comprehensive experimental meas-
urements. So we can conclude with confidence that QCD is right, and that what

                                                                                             109


Figure 3: Many quite different experiments, performed at different energies, have been success-
fully analyzed using QCD. Each fits a large quantity of data to a single parameter, the strong
coupling  s. By comparing the values they report, we obtain direct confirmation that the coup-
ling evolves as predicted [10].




you are seeing, in Figure 1, is a quark, an antiquark, and a gluon – although,
since the predictions are statistical, we can’t say for sure which is which!
   By exploiting the idea that hard radiation processes, reflecting fundamental
quark and gluon interactions, control the overall flow of energy and momen-
tum in high-energy processes, one can analyze and predict the behavior of
many different kinds of experiments. In most of these applications, including
the original one to deep inelastic scattering, the analysis necessary to separate
out hard and soft radiation is much more involved and harder to visualize
than in the case of electron-positron annihilation. A lot of ingenuity has gone,
and continues to go, into this subject, known as perturbative QCD. The results
have been quite successful and gratifying. Figure 3 shows one aspect of the
success. Many different kinds of experiments, performed at many different
energies, have been successfully described by QCD predictions, each in terms
of the one relevant parameter of the theory, the overall coupling strength.
Not only must each experiment, which may involve hundreds of independent
measurements, be fit consistently, but one can then check whether the values
of the coupling change with the energy scale in the way we predicted. As you
can see, it does. A remarkable tribute to the success of the theory, which I’ve
been amused to watch evolve, is that a lot of the same activity that used to be
called testing QCD is now called calculating backgrounds.
   As a result of all this success, a new paradigm has emerged for the opera-
tional meaning of the concept of a fundamental particle. Physicists designing


110


and interpreting high-energy experiments now routinely describe their results
in terms of producing and detecting quarks and gluons: what they mean, of
course, is the corresponding jets.


3.2 Paradigm 2: Mass Comes from Energy
My friend and mentor Sam Treiman liked to relate his experience of how,
during World War II, the U.S. Army responded to the challenge of training a
large number of radio engineers starting with very different levels of prepara-
tion, ranging down to near zero. They designed a crash course for it, which
Sam took. In the training manual, the first chapter was devoted to Ohm’s
three laws. Ohm’s first law is V = IR. Ohm’s second law is I = V/R. I’ll leave it
to you to reconstruct Ohm’s third law.
   Similarly, as a companion to Einstein’s famous equation E = mc 2 we have
his second law, m = E/c 2.
   All this isn’t quite as silly as it may seem, because different forms of the
same equation can suggest very different things. The usual way of writing the
equation, E = mc 2, suggests the possibility of obtaining large amounts of ener-
gy by converting small amounts of mass. It brings to mind the possibilities of
nuclear reactors, or bombs. Stated as m = E/c 2, Einstein’s law suggests the
possibility of explaining mass in terms of energy. That is a good thing to do,
because in modern physics energy is a more basic concept than mass.
Actually, Einstein’s original paper does not contain the equation E = mc 2, but
rather m = E/c 2. In fact, the title is a question: “Does the Inertia of a Body
Depend Upon its Energy Content?” From the beginning, Einstein was thinking
about the origin of mass, not about making bombs.
   Modern QCD answers Einstein’s question with a resounding “Yes!” Indeed,
the mass of ordinary matter derives almost entirely from energy – the energy
of massless gluons and nearly massless quarks, which are the ingredients from
which protons, neutrons, and atomic nuclei are made.
   The runaway build-up of antiscreening clouds, which I described before,
cannot continue indefinitely. The resulting color fields would carry infinite
energy, which is not available. The color charge that threatens to induce this
runaway must be cancelled. The color charge of a quark can be cancelled either
with an antiquark of the opposite color (making a meson), or with two quarks
of the complementary colors (making a baryon). In either case, perfect
cancellation would occur only if the particles doing the canceling were located
right on top of the original quark – then there would be no uncanceled source
of color charge anywhere in space, and hence no color field. Quantum
mechanics does not permit this perfect cancellation, however. The quarks
and antiquarks are described by wave functions, and spatial gradients in these
wave function cost energy, and so there is a high price to pay for localizing
the wave function within a small region of space. Thus, in seeking to minimize
the energy, there are two conflicting considerations: to minimize the field
energy, you want to cancel the sources accurately; but to minimize the wave-


                                                                             111


Figure 4: Comparison of observed hadron masses to the energy spectrum predicted by QCD, upon
direct numerical integration of the equations, exploiting immense computer power [11]. The
small remaining discrepancies are consistent with what is expected given the approximations
that were necessary to make the calculation practical.




function localization energy, you want to keep the sources fuzzy. The stable
configurations will be based on different ways of compromising between
those two considerations. In each such configuration, there will be both field
energy and localization energy. This gives rise to mass, according to m = E/c 2,
even if the gluons and quarks started out without any non-zero mass of their
own. So the different stable compromises will be associated with particles that
we can observe, with different masses; and metastable compromises will be
associated with observable particles that have finite lifetimes.
    To determine the stable compromises concretely, and so to predict the
masses of mesons and baryons, is hard work. It requires difficult calculations
that continue to push the frontiers of massively parallel processing. I find it
quite ironical that if we want to compute the mass of a proton, we need to
deploy something like 1030 protons and neutrons, doing trillions of multipli-
cations per second, working for months, to do what one proton does in 10–24
seconds, namely figure out its mass. Maybe it qualifies as a paradox. At the least,
it suggests that there may be much more efficient ways to calculate than the
ones we’re using.
    In any case, the results that emerge from these calculations are very grati-
fying. They are displayed in Figure 4. The observed masses of prominent
mesons and baryons are reproduced quite well, stating from an extremely
tight and rigid theory. Now is the time to notice also that one of the data
points in Figure 3, the one labeled “Lattice”, is of a quite different character
from the others. It is based not on the perturbative physics of hard radiation,
but rather on the comparison of a direct integration of the full equations of
QCD with experiment, using the techniques of lattice gauge theory.

112


  The success of these calculations represents the ultimate triumph over our
two paradoxes:
  • The calculated spectrum does not contain anything with the charges or
     other quantum numbers of quarks; nor of course does it contain massless
     gluons. The observed particles do not map in a straightforward way to
     the primary fields from which they ultimately arise.
  • Lattice discretization of the quantum field theory provides a cutoff
     procedure that is independent of any expansion in the number of virtual
     particle loops. The renormalization procedure must be, and is, carried
     out without reference to perturbation theory, as one takes the lattice
     spacing to zero. Asymptotic freedom is crucial for this, as I discussed – it
     saves us from Landau’s catastrophe.

   By fitting some fine details of the pattern of masses, one can get an estimate
of what the quark masses are, and how much their masses are contributing to
the mass of the proton and neutron. It turns out that what I call QCD Lite –
the version in which you put the u and d quark masses to zero, and ignore the
other quarks entirely – provides a remarkably good approximation to reality.
Since QCD Lite is a theory whose basic building-blocks have zero mass, this
result quantifies and makes precise the idea that most of the mass of ordina-
ry matter – 90 % or more – arises from pure energy, via m = E/c 2.
   The calculations make beautiful images, if we work to put them in eye-
friendly form. Derek Leinweber has made some striking animations of QCD
fields as they fluctuate in empty space. Figure 5 is a snapshot from one of his
animations. Figure 6 from Greg Kilcup, displays the (average) color fields,
over and above the fluctuations, that are associated with a very simple
hadron, the pion, moving through space-time. Insertion of a quark-antiquark
pair, which we subsequently remove, produces this disturbance in the fields.
   These pictures make it clear and tangible that the quantum vacuum is a
dynamic medium, whose properties and responses largely determine the
behavior of matter. In quantum mechanics, energies are associated with
frequencies, according to the Planck relation E = h. The masses of hadrons,
then, are uniquely associated to tones emitted by the dynamic medium of
space when it is disturbed in various ways, according to

                                = mc 2/h                                   (1)

We thereby discover, in the reality of masses, an algorithmic, precise Music of
the Void. It is a modern embodiment of the ancients’ elusive, mystical “Music
of the Spheres”.

3.3 Paradigm 3: The Early Universe was Simple
In 1972 the early universe seemed hopelessly opaque. In conditions of ultra-
high temperatures, as occurred close to the Big Bang singularity, one would
have lots of hadrons and antihadrons, each one an extended entity that inter-

                                                                             113


Figure 5: A snapshot of spontaneous quantum           Figure 6: The calculated net distribution of field
fluctuations in the gluon fields [12]. For experts:   energy caused by injecting and removing a
what is shown is the topological charge density       quark-antiquark pair [13]. By calculating the
in a typical contribution to the functional inte-     energy in these fields, and the energy in analo-
gral, with high frequency modes filtered out.         gous fields produced by other disturbances, we
                                                      predict the masses of hadrons. In a profound
                                                      sense, these fields are the hadrons.




acts strongly and in complicated ways with its neighbors. They’d start to over-
lap with one another, and thereby produce a theoretically intractable mess.
    But asymptotic freedom renders ultra-high temperatures friendly to theorists.
It says that if we switch from a description based on hadrons to a description
based on quark and gluon variables, and focus on quantities like total energy,
that are not sensitive to soft radiation, then the treatment of the strong inter-
action, which was the great difficulty, becomes simple. We can calculate to a
first approximate by pretending that the quarks, antiquarks and gluons behave
as free particles, then add in the effects of rare hard interactions. This makes
it quite practical to formulate a precise description of the properties of ultra-
high temperature matter that are relevant to cosmology.
    We can even, over an extremely limited volume of space and time, repro-
duce Big Bang conditions in terrestrial laboratories. When heavy ions are
caused to collide at high energy, they produce a fireball that briefly attains
temperatures as high as 200 MeV. “Simple” may not be the word that occurs
to you in describing the explosive outcome of this event, as displayed in
Figure 7, but in fact detailed study does permit us to reconstruct aspects of
the initial fireball, and to check that it was a plasma of quarks and gluons.

3.4 Paradigm 4: Symmetry Rules
Over the course of the twentieth century, symmetry has been immensely fruitful
as a source of insight into Nature’s basic operating principles. QCD, in particular,
is constructed as the unique embodiment of a huge symmetry group, local
SU(3) color gauge symmetry (working together with special relativity, in the

114


Figure 7: A picture of particle tracks emerging from the collision of two gold ions at high energy.
The resulting fireball and its subsequent expansion recreate, on a small scale and briefly, physical
conditions that last occurred during the Big Bang [14].




context of quantum field theory). As we try to discover new laws, that improve
on what we know, it seems good strategy to continue to use symmetry as our
guide. This strategy has led physicists to several compelling suggestions, which
I’m sure you’ll be hearing more about in future years! QCD plays an important
role in all of them – either directly, as their inspiration, or as an essential tool in
devising strategies for experimental exploration.
   I will discuss one of these suggestions schematically, and mention three
others telegraphically.


3.4.1 Unified Field Theories
Both QCD and the standard electroweak standard model are founded on
gauge symmetries. This combination of theories gives a wonderfully econo-
mical and powerful account of an astonishing range of phenomena. Just be-
cause it is so concrete and so successful, this rendering of Nature can and
should be closely scrutinized for its aesthetic flaws and possibilities. Indeed,
the structure of the gauge system gives powerful suggestions for its further
fruitful development. Its product structure SU(3)SU(2)U(1), the reduci-
bility of the fermion representation (that is, the fact that the symmetry does
not make connections linking all the fermions), and the peculiar values of
the quantum number hypercharge assigned to the known particles all suggest
the desirability of a larger symmetry.
   The devil is in the details, and it is not at all automatic that the superficial-
ly complex and messy observed pattern of matter will fit neatly into a simple
mathematical structure. But, to a remarkable extent, it does.

                                                                                               115


                                        mixed, not unified




Figure 8: A schematic representation of the             Figure 9: The hypothetical enlarged symmetry
symmetry structure of the standard model.               SO(10) [15] accommodates all the symmetries
There are three independent symmetry trans-             of the standard model, and more, into a unified
formations, under which the known fermions              mathematical structure. The fermions, inclu-
fall into five independent units (or fifteen, after     ding a right-handed neutrino that plays an im-
threefold family repetition). The color gauge           portant role in understanding observed neutri-
group SU(3) of QCD acts horizontally, the weak          no phenomena, now form an irreducible unit
interaction gauge group SU(2) acts vertically,          (neglecting family repetition). The allowed color
and the hypercharge U(1) acts with the relative         charges, both strong and weak, form a perfect
strengths indicated by the subscripts. Right-           match to what is observed. The phenomenologi-
handed neutrinos do not participate in any of           cally required hypercharges, which appear so
these symmetries.                                       peculiar in the standard model, are now the-
                                                        oretically determined by the color and weak
                                                        charges, according to the formula displayed.




    Most of what we know about the strong, electromagnetic, and weak inter-
actions is summarized (rather schematically!) in Figure 8. QCD connects
particles horizontally in groups of 3 (SU(3)), the weak interaction connects
particles vertically in groups of 2 (SU(2)) in the horizontal direction and
hypercharge (U(1)) senses the little subscript numbers. Neither the different
interactions, nor the different particles, are unified. There are three different
interaction symmetries, and five disconnected sets of particles (actually
fifteen sets, taking into account the threefold repetition of families).
    We can do much better by having more symmetry, implemented by addi-
tional gluons that also change strong into weak colors. Then everything clicks
into place quite beautifully, as displayed in Figure 9.
    There seems to be a problem, however. The different interactions, as ob-
served, do not have the same overall strength, as would be required by the ex-

116


Figure 10: We can test the hypothesis that the disparate coupling strengths of the different gauge
interactions derive a common value at short distances, by doing calculations to take into account
the effect of virtual particle clouds [16]. These are the same sort of calculations that go into
Figure 3, but extrapolated to much higher energies, or equivalently shorter distances. Top panel:
using known virtual particles. Bottom panel: including also the virtual particles required by low-
energy supersymmetry [17].




tended symmetry. Fortunately, asymptotic freedom informs us that the observed
interaction strengths at a large distance can be different from the basic
strengths of the seed couplings viewed at short distance. To see if the basic
theory might have the full symmetry, we have to look inside the clouds of
virtual particles, and to track the evolution of the couplings. We can do this,
using the same sort of calculations that underlie Figure 3, extended to include
the electroweak interactions, and extrapolated to much shorter distances (or
equivalently, larger energy scales). It is convenient to display inverse couplings
and work on a logarithmic scale, for then the evolution is (approximately) linear.
When we do the calculation using only the virtual particles for which we have
convincing evidence, we find that the couplings do approach each other in a
promising way, though ultimately they don’t quite meet. This is shown in the
top panel of Figure 10.

                                                                                             117


    Interpreting things optimistically, we might surmise from this near-success
that the general idea of unification is on the right track, as is our continued
reliance on quantum field theory to calculate the evolution of couplings.
After all, it is hardly shocking that extrapolation of the equations for evolution
of the couplings beyond their observational foundation by many orders of
magnitude is missing some quantitatively significant ingredient. In a moment
I’ll mention an attractive hypothesis for what’s missing.
    A very general consequence of this line of thought is that an enormously
large energy scale, of order 1015 GeV or more, emerges naturally as the scale
of unification. This is a profound and welcome result. It is profound, because
the large energy scale – which is far beyond any energy we can access directly
– emerges from careful consideration of experimental realities at energies
more than ten orders of magnitude smaller! The underlying logic that gives
us such leverage is a synergy of unification and asymptotic freedom, as
follows. If evolution of couplings is to be responsible for their observed gross
inequality then, since this evolution is only logarithmic in energy, it must act
over a very wide range.
    The emergence of a large mass scale for unification is welcome, first,
because many effects we might expect to be associated with unification are
observed to be highly suppressed. Symmetries that unify SU(3)  SU(2)  U(1)
will almost inevitably involve wide possibilities for transformation among quarks,
leptons, and their antiparticles. These extended possibilities of transformation,
mediated by the corresponding gauge bosons, undermine conservation laws
including lepton and baryon number conservation. Violation of lepton number
is closely associated with neutrino oscillations. Violation of baryon number is
closely associated with proton instability. In recent years neutrino oscillations
have been observed; they correspond to miniscule neutrino masses, indicating a
very feeble violation of lepton number. Proton instability has not yet been obser-
ved, despite heroic efforts to do so. In order to keep these processes sufficiently
small, so as to be consistent with observation, a high scale for unification, which
suppresses the occurrence of the transformative gauge bosons as virtual particles,
is most welcome. In fact, the unification scale we infer from the evolution of
couplings is broadly consistent with the observed value of neutrino masses, and
that encourages further vigorous pursuit of the quest to observe proton decay.
    The emergence of a large mass scale for unification is welcome, secondly,
because it opens up possibilities for making quantitative connections to the
remaining fundamental interaction in Nature: gravity. It is notorious that gra-
vity is absurdly feebler than the other interactions, when they are compared
acting between fundamental particles at accessible energies. The gravitatio-
nal force between proton and electron, at any macroscopic distance, is about
Gmemp /  10–40 of the electric force. On the face of it, this fact poses a severe
challenge to the idea that these forces are different manifestations of a
common source – and an even more severe challenge to the idea that gravity,
because of its deep connection to space-time dynamics, is the primary force.
    By extending our consideration of the evolution of couplings to include
gravity, we can begin to meet these challenges.

118


  • Whereas the evolution of gauge theory couplings with energy is a subtle
    quantum mechanical effect, the gravitational coupling evolves even
    classically, and much more rapidly. For gravity responds directly to
    energy-momentum, and so it appears stronger when viewed with high-
    energy probes. In moving from the small energies where we ordinarily
    measure to unification energy scales, the ratio GE 2/ ascends to values
    that are no longer absurdly small.
  • If gravity is the primary force, and special relativity and quantum mecha-
    nics frame the discussion, then Planck’s system of physical units, based
    on Newton’s constant G, the speed of light c, and Planck’s quantum of
    action h, is privileged. Dimensional analysis then suggests that the value
    of naturally defined quantities, measured in these units, should be of order
    unity. But when we measure the proton mass in Planck units, we discover

                                              
                                        −18       hc
                              mp ∼ 10                                           (2)
                                                  G
     On this hypothesis, it makes no sense to ask “Why is gravity so feeble?”.
     Gravity, as the primary force, just is what it is. The right question is the one
     we confront here: “Why is the proton so light?”. Given our new, profound
     understanding of the origin of the proton’s mass, which I’ve sketched for
     you today, we can formulate a tentative answer. The proton’s mass is set by
     the scale at which the strong coupling, evolved down from its primary
     value at the Planck energy, comes to be of order unity. It is then that it
     becomes worthwhile to cancel off the growing color fields of quarks, absorb-
     ing the cost of quantum localization energy. In this way, we find, quantita-
     tively, that the tiny value of the proton mass in Planck units arises from the
     fact that the basic unit of color coupling strength, g, is of order at the
     Planck scale! Thus dimensional reasoning is no longer mocked. The
     apparent feebleness of gravity results from our partiality toward the
     perspective supplied by matter made from protons and neutrons.


3.4.2 Supersymmetry
As I mentioned a moment ago, the approach of couplings to a unified value
is suggested, but not accurately realized, if we infer their evolution by including
the effect of known virtual particles. There is one particular proposal to
expand the world of virtual particles, which is well motivated on several inde-
pendent grounds. It is known as low-energy supersymmetry [18].
    As the name suggests, supersymmetry involves expanding the symmetry of
the basic equations of physics. This proposed expansion of symmetry goes in a
different direction from the enlargement of gauge symmetry. Supersymmetry
makes transformations between particles having the same color charges and
different spins, whereas expanded gauge symmetry changes the color charges
while leaving spin untouched. Supersymmetry expands the space-time
symmetry of special relativity.

                                                                                119


    In order to implement low-energy supersymmetry, we must postulate the
existence of a whole new world of heavy particles, none of which has yet been
observed directly. There is, however, a most intriguing indirect hint that this
idea may be on the right track: If we include the particles needed for
low-energy supersymmetry, in their virtual form, in the calculation of how
couplings evolve with energy, then accurate unification is achieved! This is
shown in the bottom panel of Figure 10.
    By ascending a tower of speculation, involving now both extended gauge
symmetry and extended space-time symmetry, we seem to break though the
clouds, into clarity and breathtaking vision. Is it an illusion, or reality? This
question creates a most exciting situation for the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC), due to begin operating at CERN in 2007, for this great accelerator
will achieve the energies necessary to access the new world of of heavy particles,
if it exists. How the story will play out, only time will tell. But in any case I
think it is fair to say that the pursuit of unified field theories, which in past
(and many present) incarnations has been vague and not fruitful of testable
consequences, has in the circle of ideas I’ve been describing here attained
entirely new levels of concreteness and fecundity.


3.4.3 Axions [19]
As I have emphasized repeatedly, QCD is in a profound and literal sense con-
structed as the embodiment of symmetry. There is an almost perfect match
between the observed properties of quarks and gluons and the most general
properties allowed by color gauge symmetry, in the framework of special rela-
tivity and quantum mechanics. The exception is that the established symme-
tries of QCD fail to forbid one sort of behavior that is not observed to occur.
The established symmetries permit a sort of interaction among gluons – the
so-called  term – that violates the invariance of the equations of QCD under
a change in the direction of time. Experiments provide extremely severe
limits on the strength of this interaction, much more severe than might be
expected to arise accidentally.
   By postulating a new symmetry, we can explain the absence of the undesired
interaction. The required symmetry is called Peccei-Quinn symmetry after
the physicists who first proposed it. If it is present, this symmetry has remarkable
consequences. It leads us to predict the existence of new very light, very weakly
interacting particles, axions. (I named them after a laundry detergent, since
they clean up a problem with an axial current.) In principle axions might be
observed in a variety of ways, though none is easy. They have interesting
implications for cosmology, and they are a leading candidate to provide
cosmological dark matter.


3.4.4 In Search of Symmetry Lost [20]
It has been almost four decades since our current, wonderfully successful theory
of the electroweak interaction was formulated. Central to that theory is the

120


concept of spontaneously broken gauge symmetry. According to this concept,
the fundamental equations of physics have more symmetry than the actual
physical world does. Although its specific use in electroweak theory involves
exotic hypothetical substances and some sophisticated mathematics, the
underlying theme of broken symmetry is quite old. It goes back at least to the
dawn of modern physics, when Newton postulated that the basic laws of
mechanics exhibit full symmetry in three dimensions of space despite the fact
that everyday experience clearly distinguishes ‘up and down’ from ‘sideways’
directions in our local environment. Newton, of course, traced that asymmetry
to the influence of Earth’s gravity. In the framework of electroweak theory,
modern physicists similarly postulate that the physical world is described by a
solution wherein all space, throughout the currently observed Universe, is
permeated by one or more (quantum) fields that spoil the full symmetry of
the primary equations.
   Fortunately this hypothesis, which might at first hearing sound quite extra-
vagant, has testable implications. The symmetry-breaking fields, when suitably
excited, must bring forth characteristic particles: their quanta. Using the
most economical implementation of the required symmetry breaking, one
predicts the existence of a remarkable new particle, the so-called Higgs particle.
More ambitious speculations suggest that there should be not just a single
Higgs particle, but rather a complex of related particles. Low-energy super-
symmetry, for example, requires at least five “Higgs particles”.
   Elucidation of the Higgs complex will be another major task for the LHC.
In planning this endeavor, QCD and asymptotic freedom play a vital support-
ing role. The strong interaction will be responsible for most of what occurs in
collisions at the LHC. To discern the new effects, which will be manifest only
in a small proportion of the events, we must understand the dominant
backgrounds very well. Also, the production and decay of the Higgs particles
themselves usually involves quarks and gluons. To anticipate their signatures,
and eventually to interpret the observations, we must use our understanding
of how protons – the projectiles at LHC – are assembled from quarks and gluons,
and how quarks and gluons show themselves as jets.

4 THE GREATEST LESSON
Evidently asymptotic freedom, besides resolving the paradoxes that originally
concerned us, provides a conceptual foundation for several major insights into
Nature’s fundamental workings, and a versatile instrument for further investi-
gation.
   The greatest lesson, however, is a moral and philosophical one. It is truly
awesome to discover, by example, that we humans can come to comprehend
Nature’s deepest principles, even when they are hidden in remote and alien
realms. Our minds were not created for this task, nor were appropriate tools
ready at hand. Understanding was achieved through a vast international
effort involving thousands of people working hard for decades, competing
in the small but cooperating in the large, abiding by rules of openness and

                                                                              121


honesty. Using these methods – which do not come to us effortlessly, but
require nurture and vigilance – we can accomplish wonders.

5 POSTCRIPT: REFLECTIONS
That was the conclusion of the lecture as I gave it. I’d like to add, in this written
version, a few personal reflections.

5.1 Thanks
Before concluding I’d like to distribute thanks.
   First I’d like to thank my parents, who cared for my human needs and
encouraged my curiosity from the beginning. They were children of immi-
grants from Poland and Italy, and grew up in difficult circumstances during
the Great Depression, but managed to emerge as generous souls with an
inspiring admiration for science and learning. I’d like to thank the people of
New York, for supporting a public school system that served me extremely
well. I also got a superb undergraduate education, at the University of
Chicago. In this connection I’d especially like to mention the inspiring influ-
ence of Peter Freund, whose tremendous enthusiasm and clarity in teaching
a course on group theory in physics was a major influence in nudging me
from pure mathematics toward physics.
   Next I’d like to thank the people around Princeton who contributed in
crucial ways to the circumstances that made my development and major work
in the 1970s possible. On the personal side, this includes especially my wife
Betsy Devine. I don’t think it’s any coincidence that the beginning of my
scientific maturity, and a special surge of energy, happened at the same time
as I was falling in love with her. Also Robert Shrock and Bill Caswell, my fellow
graduate students, from whom I learned a lot, and who made our extremely
intense life-style seem natural and even fun. On the scientific side, I must of
course thank David Gross above all. He swept me up in his drive to know and
to calculate, and through both his generous guidance and his personal ex-
ample started and inspired my whole career in physics. The environment for
theoretical physics in Princeton in the 1970s was superb. There was an atmos-
phere of passion for understanding, intellectual toughness, and inner confi-
dence whose creation was a great achievement. Murph Goldberger, Sam
Treiman, and Curt Callan especially deserve enormous credit for this. Also
Sidney Coleman, who was visiting Princeton at the time, was very actively
interested in our work. Such interest from a physicist I regarded as uniquely
brilliant was inspiring in itself; Sidney also asked many challenging specific
questions that helped us come to grips with our results as they developed.
Ken Wilson had visited and lectured a little earlier, and his renormalization
group ideas were reverberating in our heads.
   Fundamental understanding of the strong interaction was the outcome of
decades of research involving thousands of talented people. I’d like to thank
my fellow physicists more generally. My theoretical efforts have been inspired


122


by, and of course informed by, the ingenious persistence of my experimental
colleagues. Thanks, and congratulations, to all. Beyond that generic thanks
I’d like to mention specifically a trio of physicists whose work was particularly
important in leading to ours, and who have not (yet?) received a Nobel Prize
for it. These are Yoichiro Nambu, Stephen Adler, and James Bjorken. Those
heroes advanced the cause of trying to understand hadronic physics by taking
the concepts of quantum field theory seriously, and embodying them in spe-
cific mechanistic models, when doing so was difficult and unfashionable. I’d
like to thank Murray Gell-Mann and Gerard ’t Hooft for not quite inventing
everything, and so leaving us something to do. And finally I’d like to thank
Mother Nature for her extraordinarily good taste, which gave us such a beau-
tiful and powerful theory to discover.
   This work is supported in part by funds provided by the U.S. Department
of Energy (D.O.E.) under cooperative research agreement DE-FC02-
94ER40818.

5.2 A Note to Historians
I have not, here, given an extensive account of my personal experiences in
discovery. In general, I don’t believe that such accounts, composed well after
the fact, are reliable as history. I urge historians of science instead to focus on
the contemporary documents; and especially the original papers, which by
definition accurately reflect the understanding that the authors had at the
time, as they could best articulate it. From this literature, it is I think not diffi-
cult to identify where the watershed changes in attitude I mentioned earlier
occurred, and where the outstanding paradoxes of strong interaction physics
and quantum field theory were resolved into modern paradigms for our
understanding of Nature.

REFERENCES
[1] In view of the nature and scope of this write-up, its footnoting will be light. Our major
     original papers [2, 3, 4] are carefully referenced.
[2] D. Gross and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 1343 (1973).
[3] D. Gross and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D8, 3633 (1973).
[4] D. Gross and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D9, 980 (1974).
[5] J. Friedman, H. Kendall, and R. Taylor received the Nobel Prize for this
     work in 1990.
[6] L. Landau, in Niels Bohr and the Development of Physics, ed. W. Pauli
     (McGraw-Hill, New York 1955).
[7] C.-N. Yang and R. Mills, Phys. Rev. 96, 191 (1954).
[8] An especially clear and insightful early paper, in which a dynamical role for color
     was proposed, is Y. Nambu, in Preludes in Theoretical Physics ed. A. De-Shalit, H.
     Feshbach, L. van Hove (North-Holland, Amsterdam 1966).
[9] Figure courtesy L3 collaboration, CERN.
[10] Figure courtesy S. Bethke, hep-ex/0211012.
[11] Figure courtesy Center for Computational Physics, University of Tsukuba.
[12] Figure courtesy D. Leinweber,
     http://www.physics.adelaide.edu.au/theory/staff/leinweber/VisualQCD/Nobel/.


                                                                                        123


[13] Figure courtesy G. Kilcup, http://www.physics.ohio-state.edu/kilcup.
[14] Figure courtesy STAR collaboration, Brookhaven National Laboratory.
[15] Unification based on SO(10) symmetry was first outlined in H. Georgi, in Particles
     and Fields - 1974, ed. C. Carlson (AIP, New York, 1975).
[16] H. Georgi, H. Quinn, and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 451 (1974).
[17] S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D24, 1681 (1981).
[18] A standard review is H. P. Nilles, Phys. Rep. 110, 1 (1984).
[19] A standard review is J. Kim, Phys. Rep. 150, 1 (1987). I also recommend F. Wilczek,
     hep-ph/0408167.
[20] I treat this topic more amply in F. Wilczek, Nature 433, 239 (2005).




124
