            The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson
            Nobel Lecture, 8 December 2013

            by François Englert
            Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium




            1 Introduction: Short and long range interactions

            Physics, as it is conceived today, attempts to interpret diverse phenomena as
            particular manifestations of testable general laws. Since its inception in the
            Renaissance, mainly through Galileo’s revolutionary concepts, this has been
            an extraordinarily successful adventure—to the point where after impressive
            developments in the first half of the twentieth century, one might have even
            conceived that all phenomena, from the atomic scale to the edge of the visible
            universe, are governed solely by two fundamental laws, and two known laws.
            Namely classical general relativity, Einstein’s generalisation of Newtonian grav-
            ity, and quantum electrodynamics, the quantum version of Maxwell’s electro-
            magnetic theory.
                 Gravitational and electromagnetic interactions are long range interactions,
            meaning they act on objects no matter how far they are separated from each
            other. The progress in the understanding of such physics applicable to large
            scales is certainly attributable to the fact they can be perceived without the me-
            diation of highly sophisticated technical devices. But the discovery of subatomic
            structures had revealed the existence of other fundamental interactions that are
            short range, that is, negligible at larger distance scales. In the early 1960s, there
            was no consistent theoretical interpretation of short range fundamental interac-
            tions, nor of the “weak interactions” responsible for radioactive decay, nor of the
            “strong interactions” responsible for the formation of nuclear structures.
                 Robert Brout and I [1], and independently Peter Higgs [2], constructed a
            mechanism to describe short range fundamental interactions. Robert Brout

                                                                                               7




ok.indb 7                                                                                           11/4/14 2:24 PM


      8                                                              The Nobel Prizes


      passed away in 2011 and left me alone to tell our story. I will explain how we
      were led to propose the mechanism, and how it allows for consistent funda-
      mental theories of short range interactions and for building elementary particle
      masses. It became a cornerstone of the Standard Model and was recently con-
      firmed by the magnificent discovery at CERN of its predicted scalar boson.
          We became convinced that a consistent formulation of short range interac-
      tions would require a common origin for both short and long range interactions.
          While both classical general relativity and quantum electrodynamics de-
      scribe long range interactions and are both built upon very large symmetries, la-
      belled “local symmetries,” they have very different structures: in contradistinc-
      tion to general relativity, long range quantum electrodynamics is fully consistent
      at the quantum level and was experimentally verified at that level, in particular
      by the successful inclusion of chemistry in the realm of known physics. As a
      valid theory of short range interactions clearly required quantum consistency,
      we were naturally driven to take, as a model of the corresponding long range
      interactions, the generalisation of quantum electrodynamics, known as Yang-
      Mills theory.
          The quantum constituents of electromagnetic waves are “photons,” massless
      neutral particles travelling with the velocity of light. Their massless character
      implies that the corresponding waves are polarised only in directions perpen-
      dicular to their propagation. These features are apparently protected by local
      symmetry, as the latter does not survive the explicit inclusion of a mass term in
      the theory. Yang-Mills theory is built upon similar local symmetries, enlarged to
      include several massless interacting quantum constituents, neutral and charged
      ones. These massless objects are labelled gauge vector bosons (or often simply
      gauge bosons).
          To transmute long range interactions into short range ones in the context of
      Yang-Mills theory it would suffice to give these generalised photons a mass, a
      feature that, as we just indicated, is apparently forbidden by local symmetries.
      Momentarily leaving aside this feature, let us first recall why massive particles
      transmit in general short-range interactions.
          Figure 1 is a Feynman diagram whose intuitive appearance hides a precise
      mathematical content. Viewing time as running from bottom to top, it describes
      the scattering of two electrons resulting from the exchange of a massive particle
      labeled Z of mass mZ. Classically such process could not occur, as the presence
      of the Z particle would violate energy conservation. Quantum mechanically it is
      allowed if the violation takes place within a time span of the order ħ/mc2. This
      process then describes in lowest order perturbation theory a short-range inter-
      action cut-off at a range ~ ħ/mc.




ok.indb 8                                                                                  11/4/14 2:24 PM


            The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson9



                      e                                          e




                                      Z     (m )
                                              Z




                                                           e
                e


            Figure 1. Massive particle mediating short-range interactions.



                 As local symmetries apparently prevent the introduction of massive gauge
            bosons in the theory, we turn our attention to a class of theories where the state
            of a system is asymmetric with respect to the symmetry principles that govern
            its dynamics. This is often the case in the statistical physics of phase transitions
            [3]. This is not surprising, since more often than not energetic considerations
            dictate that the ground state or low lying excited states of a many body system
            become ordered. A collective variable such as magnetisation picks up expecta-
            tion value, which defines an order parameter that otherwise would vanish by
            virtue of the symmetry encoded in the formulation of the theory (isotropy in
            the aforementioned example). This is an example of Spontaneous Symmetry
            Breaking (SSB) which frequently occurs in the statistical theory of second or-
            der phase transitions. Could mass of gauge bosons arise through a similar SSB?
            This question arises naturally from the seminal work of Yoichiro Nambu, who
            showed that SSB could be transferred from the statistical theory of phase transi-
            tions to the realm of relativistic quantum field theory [4–6], the mathematical
            framework designed to analyse the world of elementary particles.
                 This raises a deeper question: could SSB be the agent of the transmutation of
            long range interactions mediated by massless gauge fields to short range interac-
            tions mediated by massive ones, without impairing the validity of the quantum
            behaviour that characterise the simplest Yang-Mills theory, namely quantum
            electrodynamics?
                 As we shall see, the answer is yes to both questions provided that the notion
            of SSB is traded for a more subtle one: the BEH mechanism [1, 2]. To prepare for
            the discussion of the mechanism, I will first review how SSB can be transferred
            from the theory of phase transitions to relativistic quantum field theory.




ok.indb 9                                                                                          11/4/14 2:24 PM


      10                                                                 The Nobel Prizes


      2 Spontaneous symmetry breaking

      2.1 Spontaneous symmetry breaking in phase transitions
      Consider a condensed matter system, whose dynamics is invariant under a con-
      tinuous symmetry. As the temperature is lowered below a critical one, the sym-
      metry may be reduced by the appearance of an ordered phase. The breakdown
      of the original symmetry is always a discontinuous event at the phase transi-
      tion point, but the order parameters may set in continuously as a function of
      temperature. In the latter case the phase transition is second order. Symmetry
      breaking by a second order phase transition occurs in particular in ferromagne-
      tism, superfluidity and superconductivity.
          I will first discuss the ferromagnetic phase transition, which illustrates three
      general features of the SSB which set in at the transition point in the low tem-
      perature phase: ground state degeneracy, the appearance of a “massless mode”
      when the dynamics is invariant under a continuous symmetry, and the occur-
      rence of a “massive mode” characterising the rigidity of the order parameter.
          In the absence of external magnetic fields and of surface effects, a ferro-
      magnetic substance below the Curie point displays a global orientation of the
      magnetisation, while the dynamics of the system is clearly rotation invariant;
      namely, the Hamiltonian of the system is invariant under the full rotation group.
      This is SSB.
          A ferromagnetic system is composed of microscopic atomic magnets (in
      simplified models such as the Heisenberg Model these are spin 1/2 objects)
      whose interactions tend to orient neighbouring ones parallel to each other.
      No global orientation appears at high temperature where the disordering ther-
      mal motion dominates. Below a critical “Curie temperature” energy consider-
      ations dominate and the system picks up a global magnetisation. The parallel




      Figure 2. Classical representation of a ferromagnet ground state.




ok.indb 10                                                                                   11/4/14 2:24 PM


             The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson11


             orientation of neighbouring magnets propagates, ending up in a macroscopic
             magnetisation. This selects a direction, which for an infinite isolated ferromag-
             net is arbitrary. It is easily proven that for an infinite system any pair of possible
             orientations defines orthogonal ground states and any local excitations on top of
             these ground states are also orthogonal to each other. Thus the full Hilbert space
             of the system becomes split into an infinity of disjointed Hilbert spaces. This is
             ground state degeneracy (Figure 2).
                  The effective thermodynamical potential V, whose minimum yields mag-
             netisation in the absence of an external magnetic field, is depicted in Figure 3.
                                                                
             Above the Curie point TC the magnetisation M vanishes. Below the Curie point
             the potential develops in a plane V Mz a double minimum which generate a val-
             ley in the Mx, My directions. Each point of the valley defines one of the degener-
                                                   
             ate ground states with the same M .
                                                        
                  At a given minimum, say, M = M Z 1z , the curvature of the effective poten-
             tial measures the inverse susceptibility which determines the energy for infi-
             nite wavelength fluctuations. This is the analogue of mass in relativistic particle
             physics. The inverse susceptibility is zero in directions transverse to the order
             parameter and positive in the longitudinal direction. One thus obtains from the
             transverse susceptibility a “massless” transverse mode characteristic of broken
             continuous symmetry: these are the “spin-waves” whose quantum constituents
             are interacting bosons called “magnons.” The longitudinal susceptibility yields a
             (possibly unstable) “massive” longitudinal mode which corresponds to fluctua-
             tions of the order parameter. In contradistinction to the massless mode which
             exists only in continuous SSB for which there is a valley, the massive mode is
             present in any SSB, continuous or discrete, and measures the rigidity of the or-
             dered structure.
                  The structure of Figure 3 is common to many second order phase transi-
             tions and leads to similar consequences. However, in superconductivity a new




             Figure 3. Effective thermodynamical potential of a ferromagnet above and below the
             Curie point.




ok.indb 11                                                                                            11/4/14 2:24 PM


      12                                                              The Nobel Prizes


      phenomenon occurs. The quantum phase symmetry is broken by a condensa-
      tion of electron pairs bounded by an attractive force due to phonon exchange
      in the vicinity of the Fermi surface. The condensation leads to an energy gap at
      the Fermi surface. For neutral superconductors, this gap would host a massless
      mode and one would recover the general features of SSB. But the presence of
      the long-range Coulomb interactions modifies the picture. The massless mode
      disappears: it is absorbed in electron density oscillations, namely in the “mas-
      sive” plasma mode. As will be apparent later, this is a precursor of the BEH
      mechanism [7, 4, 8].

      2.2 Spontaneous symmetry breaking in field theory
      Spontaneous symmetry breaking was introduced in relativistic quantum field
      theory by Nambu in analogy with the BCS theory of superconductivity [4]. The
      problem studied by Nambu [5] and Nambu and Jona-Lasinio [6] is the sponta-
      neous breaking of the U(1) symmetry of massless fermions resulting from the
      arbitrary relative (chiral) phase between their decoupled right and left constitu-
      ent neutrinos. Chiral invariant interactions cannot generate a fermion mass in
      perturbation theory but may do so from a (non-perturbative) fermion con-
      densate: the condensate breaks the chiral symmetry spontaneously. Nambu [5]
      showed that such spontaneous symmetry breaking is accompanied by a massless
      pseudoscalar. This is interpreted as the chiral limit of the (tiny on the hadron
      scale) pion mass. Such an interpretation of the pion constituted a breakthrough
      in our understanding of strong interaction physics. The massless pseudoscalar
      is the field-theoretic counterpart of the “massless” spin-wave mode in ferro-
      magnetism. In the model of reference [6], it is shown that SSB also generates a
      massive scalar boson which is the counterpart of the “massive mode” measuring
      in phase transitions the rigidity of the order parameter in the spontaneously
      broken phase.
           The significance of the massless boson and of the massive scalar boson oc-
      curring in SSB is well illustrated in a simple model devised by Jeffrey Goldstone
      [9]. The potential V(ϕ1, ϕ2) depicted in Figure 4 has a rotational symmetry in the
      plane of the real fields (ϕ1,ϕ2), or equivalently is invariant under the U(1) phase
      of the complex field ϕ = (ϕ1 + iϕ2)/√2. This symmetry is spontaneously broken
      by the expectation value ⟨ϕ⟩ of the ϕ-field acquired at a minimum of the poten-
      tial in some direction of the (ϕ1, ϕ2) plane, say ⟨ϕ1⟩. Writing ϕ = ⟨ϕ⟩ + φ

                                        ϕ1 = ⟨ϕ1⟩ + φ1,                             (2.1)

                                           ϕ2 = φ2.                                 (2.2)




ok.indb 12                                                                                  11/4/14 2:24 PM


             The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson13

                                                     q1

                            V




                                           φ1                                                  x


                                                q2
                     φ2


             Figure 4. Spontaneous symmetry breaking in the Goldstone model



                 For small φ1 and φ2 we may identify the quantum fluctuation φ1 climbing
             the potential as the massive mode measuring the rigidity of the SSB ground state
             selected by ⟨ϕ1⟩, and the quantum fluctuation φ2 in the orthogonal valley direc-
             tion as the massless mode characteristic of a continuous SSB.
                 Their significance is illustrated in Figure 5 and Figure 6 depicting respec-
             tively classical φ2 and φ1 wave modes, on the classical background ⟨ϕ1⟩. The
             corresponding massless and massive bosons are the quantum constituents of
             these waves.
                 Figure 5 (a) represents schematically a lowest energy state (a “vacuum”) of
             the system: a constant non-zero value of the field ϕ1 = ⟨ϕ1⟩ pervades space-time.
             Figure 5 (b) depicts the excitation resulting from the rotation of half the fields in
             the (ϕ1,ϕ2) plane. This costs only an energy localised near the surface separating



                 q
                   


                                                                           (a)



                                                                           (b)




                                                                           (c)

                                                                                 x
               q
                 


             Figure 5. Massless Nambu-Goldstone mode φ2.




ok.indb 13                                                                                           11/4/14 2:24 PM


      14                                                              The Nobel Prizes


      the rotated fields from the chosen vacuum. SSB indeed implies that rotating all
      the fields would cost no energy at all: one would merely trade the initial chosen
      vacuum for an equivalent one with the same energy. This is the characteristic
      vacuum degeneracy of SSB. Figure 5 (c) mimics a wave of φ2. Comparing 5 (c)
      with 5 (b), we see that as the wavelength of the wave increases indefinitely, its
      energy tends to zero, and may be viewed as generating in that limit a motion
      along the valley of Figure 4. Quantum excitations carried by the wave reach thus
      zero energy at zero momentum and the mass mφ2 is zero. Figure 5 can easily
      be generalised to more complex spontaneous symmetry breaking of continu-
      ous symmetries. Massless bosons are thus a general feature of such SSB already
      revealed by Nambu’s discovery of the massless pion resulting from spontaneous
      chiral symmetry breaking [5]. They will be labelled massless Nambu-Goldstone
      (NG) bosons. Formal proofs corroborating the above simple analysis can be
      found in the literature [10].
          Figure 6 depicts similarly a classical wave corresponding to a stretching of
      the vacuum fields. These excitations in the φ1 direction describe fluctuations
      of the order parameter ⟨φ1⟩. They are volume effects and their energy does not
      vanish when the wavelength becomes increasingly large. They correspond in
      Figure 4 to a climbing of the potential. The quantum excitations φ1 are thus now
      massive. These considerations can be again extended to more general SSB (even
      to discrete ones) to account for order parameter fluctuations. Lorentz invariance
      imposes that such massive excitations are necessarily scalar particles. They were
      also already present in reference [6] and will be denoted in general as massive
      scalar bosons.



             q
               


                                                                 (a)



                                                                 (b)




                                                                 (c)

                                                                       x
        q
          


      Figure 6. Massive scalar mode φ1.




ok.indb 14                                                                                11/4/14 2:24 PM


             The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson15


                 To summarise, φ2 describes massless bosons, φ1 massive ones, and the “or-
             der parameter” ⟨ϕ1⟩ may be viewed as a condensate of φ1 bosons.



             3 The BEH mechanism

             The above considerations are restricted to spontaneous symmetry breaking of
             global continuous symmetries. Global means that the symmetry operations are
             independent of the space-time point x. For instance in the Goldstone model, the
             global rotations of the fields in Figure 5 (a) in the (ϕ1,ϕ2) plane by angles inde-
             pendent of the space-time point x are symmetries of the theory (they describes
             motion in the valley of Figure 4): these rotations cost no energy and simply span
             the degenerate vacua. We will now discuss the fate of SSB when the global sym-
             metry is extended to a local one.

             3.1 The fate of the Nambu-Goldstone boson and vector boson masses
             We extend the U(1) symmetry of the Goldstone model from global to local. Thus
             the rotation angle in the (ϕ1,ϕ2) plane in Figure 5, or equivalently the rotation
             in the valley of Figure 4, can now be chosen independently at each space-time
             point (x) with no cost of energy and no physical effect. To allow such feature,
             one has to invent a new field whose transformation would cancel the energy that
             such motion would generate in its absence. This is a “gauge vector field” Aμ. It
             has to be a vector field to compensate energy in all space directions and it has to
             transform in a definite way under a rotation in the (ϕ1,ϕ2) plane: this is called a
             gauge transformation and results in a large arbitrariness in the choice of the Aμ
             field corresponding to arbitrary “internal” rotations at different points of space.
             The consequence of this gauge symmetry is that the waves are polarised in di-
             rections perpendicular to their direction of propagation and that their quantum
             constituents have to be introduced as massless objects.
                  Local U(1) symmetry is the simplest gauge field theory and is the symmetry
             group of quantum electrodynamics. In the local generalisation (the gauging) of
             the Goldstone model, the introduction of the potential of Figure 4 will deeply
             affect the “electromagnetic potential” Aμ.
                  As in the Goldstone model of Section 1.2, the SSB Yang-Mills phase is re-
             alised by a non vanishing expectation value for ϕ = (ϕ1 + iϕ2)/√2, which we
             choose to be in the ϕ1-direction. Thus


                                                ϕ = ⟨ϕ⟩ + φ,                               (3.1)




ok.indb 15                                                                                         11/4/14 2:24 PM


      16                                                              The Nobel Prizes


      with ϕ1 = ⟨ϕ1⟩ + φ1 and ϕ2 = φ2. As previously φ2 and φ1 appear to describe a NG
      massless boson and a massive scalar boson.
          However a glance on Figure 5 depicting the NG mode immediately shows
      that Figure 5 (b) and Figure 5 (c) differ from Figure 5 (a) only by local rotations
      and hence in the local Goldstone model they are just symmetry (or equiva-
      lently gauge) transformations. They cost no energy and therefore the NG boson
      has disappeared: the corresponding fluctuations in the valley are redundant
      (gauge transformed) descriptions of the same gauge invariant vacuum. It is
      easy to see that this argument remains valid for any local symmetry and hence
      Nambu-Goldstone bosons do not survive the gauging of a global SSB to a local
      symmetry. The vacuum is no longer degenerate and strictly speaking there is
      no spontaneous symmetry breaking of a local symmetry. The reason why the
      phase with non vanishing scalar expectation value is often labelled SSB is that
      one uses perturbation theory to select at zero gauge field coupling a scalar field
      configuration from global SSB; but this preferred choice is only a convenient
      one.
          The disappearance of the NG boson is thus an immediate consequence of
      local symmetry. The above argument [11] was formalised much later [12] but
      formal proofs not directly based on the gauge invariance of the vacuum were
      already presented in 1964 [13, 14].
          One may now understand in qualitative terms the consequence of the dis-
      appearance of the NG boson. Clearly, one does not expect that the degrees of
      freedom carried by the NG ϕ2 field could vanish. As the NG boson disappears
      because of its coupling to the gauge field, one expects that these degrees of free-
      dom should be transferred to it. This can only occur by adding to the transverse
      polarisation of the gauge field a longitudinal one. But such polarisation is for-
      bidden as mentioned earlier, for a massless field. Therefore the coupling of the
      would-be NG boson to the gauge field must render the latter massive! This is the
      essence of the BEH mechanism.




      Figure 7. Interaction of the gauge field with the condensate.




ok.indb 16                                                                                  11/4/14 2:24 PM


             The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson17


                  These qualitative considerations can be made quantitative [1] by consider-
             ing the Feynman graphs (time runs horizontally) describing the propagation
             of the Aμ gauge field in the vacuum with non vanishing scalar field expectation
             value, say ⟨ϕ1⟩ ≠ 0. This propagation is depicted in lowest order in Figure 7 (time
             runs horizontally) and the interaction of Aμ with the condensate ⟨ϕ1⟩ amounts
             to a “polarisation” of the vacuum. The first graph shows the local interaction
             of the gauge field with the condensate while the second one gives a non-local
             interaction due to the propagation of a NG boson. Here e is the coupling of the
                                                                              
             gauge vector to matter, qμ is a four-momentum (q0 = energy; q = momentum),
                          
              q 2 = q02 − q 2 and gμv has only non-zero values if μ ≠ ν : 1,−1,−1,−1. The two
             graphs add up to

                                          Πμv = (gμv – qμqv/q2)Π(q2),                        (3.2)

             where
                                                Π(q2) = e2⟨ϕ1⟩2.                             (3.3)

                The second factor of Equation (3.2) does not vanish when q2 = 0. In field
             theory this means that the gauge field has acquired a mass
                                                               2
                                               (M V2 ) = e 2 φ1 .                            (3.4)


                 The first factor describes the projection at q 2 = mV2 of gμv on a three-dimen-
             sional space of polarisations, which, as explained in qualitative terms above, is
             required for a massive vector. Its transversality (i.e. its vanishing under multipli-
             cation by qμ) is characteristic of a “Ward Identity” which expresses the fact that
             the local gauge symmetry has not been broken and is identical to the analogous
             factor in quantum electrodynamics, a important fact that will be commented on
             in the following section.
                 The generalisation of these results to more complicated symmetries yields
             (for real fields) a mass matrix

                                      (M V2 )ab = −e 2 φ B T aBCT bCA φ A ,                  (3.5)


             where TaBC is a real anti-symmetric generator coupled to a gauge field Aµa and
             ⟨ϕA⟩ designates a non vanishing expectation value.
                 In these cases, some gauge fields may remain massless. Consider for instance
             instead of the invariance of the Goldstone model on a circle in the plane (ϕ1, ϕ2),
             an invariance on a sphere in a 3-dimensional space (ϕ1, ϕ2, ϕ3) broken by ⟨ϕ1⟩ ≠




ok.indb 17                                                                                           11/4/14 2:24 PM


      18                                                                  The Nobel Prizes


      0. There are now three gauge fields associated to the rotations on the sphere, and
      while Aµ2 and Aµ3 acquire mass Aµ1 remains massless. This can be understood
      in the following way: rotation generators around the directions 2 and 3 would
      move ⟨ϕ1⟩ if the symmetry were global and would thus give rise, as in Figure
      5, to NG bosons; their degrees of freedom are transferred in local symmetries
      to the massive gauge vector fields Aµ2 and Aµ3 , providing their third degree of
      polarisation. The expectation value ⟨ϕ1⟩ is not affected by rotation generators
      around the direction 1 and does not generate NG bosons in the global symme-
      try case and hence the corresponding Aµ1 remains massless.
          Thus the BEH mechanism can unify long and short range interactions in
      the same theory by leaving unbroken a subgroup of symmetry transformation
      (e.g. rotation around the direction 1) whose corresponding gauge fields remain
      massless.

      3.2 The fate of the massive scalar boson
      A glance at Figure 5 shows that the stretching of (classical) scalar fields is inde-
      pendent of local rotations of the ϕ-field in the (ϕ1, ϕ2) plane. This translates the
      fact that the modulus of the φ-field is gauge invariant. Hence the scalar bosons
      survive the gauging and their classical analysis is identical to the one given for
      the Goldstone model in Section 1.2. The coupling of the scalar boson φ1 to the
      massive gauge bosons follows from the Figure 7, by viewing the Feynman dia-
      grams with time going from top to bottom and using Equation (3.1). One gets
      the two vertices of Figure 8 where the heavy wiggly lines on the right hand
      side represent the massive gauge propagators. The vertex couplings follow from
      Equation (3.4).

      3.3 Fermion masses
      Let us couple the Yang-Mills fields to massless fermions in a way that respects
      Yang-Mills symmetry. This coupling preserves the chiral symmetry of the



                 hφ1 i hφ1 i                                          '1
                                                 '1
      ....+   hφ1 i      hφ1 i   + ....                   e MV                   e2
                                                 hφ1 i                '1

      Figure 8. Coupling of the scalar boson φ1 to massive gauge bosons.




ok.indb 18                                                                                    11/4/14 2:24 PM


             The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson19


                         hφi
             f       ›         ›
                         λf
             Figure 9. Mass generation mf = λf⟨ϕ⟩ from a coupling λf of fermions to the scalar field ϕ.



             massless fermions and fermion mass requires SSB. In the Nambu theory of
             spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry, this gives rise to NG bosons which
             are eaten up here by massive gauge fields. This can be done by suitable couplings
             of the scalar fields whose expectation value breaks the symmetry. Mass genera-
             tion for fermions is depicted in Figure 9.

             3.4 Why is the mechanism needed?
             Equation (3.2) expresses the fact that the mass generation from the BEH mech-
             anism does not destroy local symmetry, in contradistinction to a mass term
             introduced by hand ab initio. This equation remains valid at higher orders in
             perturbation theory and has the same form as the polarisation in quantum elec-
             trodynamics. As in the latter case, it implies that in covariant gauges, the gauge
             vector boson propagator tames the quantum fluctuations, and therefore sug-
             gests that the theory is renormalisable [15]. However it is a highly non trivial
             matter to prove that it does not introduce contributions from unphysical parti-
             cles, and it is therefore a very difficult problem to prove quantum consistency to
             all orders. That this is indeed the case has been proven by ’t Hooft and Veltman
             [16] (see also Ref. [17])
                  The quantum consistency of the BEH mechanism is the basic reason for
             its success. Precision experiments can be predicted and were indeed verified.
             Quantum consistency played a critical role in the analysis of the production of
             the scalar boson at the LHC and of its decay products, leading to the confirma-
             tion of the detailed validity of the mechanism.

             3.5 Dynamical symmetry breaking
             The symmetry breaking giving mass to gauge vector bosons may also arise from
             a fermion condensate. This is labelled dynamical symmetry breaking. If a spon-
             taneously broken global symmetry is extended to a local one by introducing
             gauge fields, the massless NG bosons disappear as previously from the physical
             spectrum and their absorption by gauge fields renders these massive. In con-
             tradistinction with breaking by scalar field condensate, it is very difficult in this




ok.indb 19                                                                                                11/4/14 2:24 PM


      20                                                              The Nobel Prizes


      way to give mass in a renormalisable theory simultaneously to both gauge vector
      fields and fermions.

      3.6 The electroweak theory and the Standard Model
      The most impressive success of the BEH mechanism is the electroweak theory
      for weak and electromagnetic interactions [18] applied to all particles of the
      Standard Model. These encompass all known particles. These are a) the fermi-
      ons which are listed in Figure 10, b) γ and W+, W–, Z, the gauge vector bosons
      transmitting the electromagnetic and the weak interactions, c) eight “gluons,”
      the gauge vectors bosons of the “colour group” SU(3) mediating the strong in-
      teractions, and d) last but not least, one massive scalar boson which was recently
      discovered and identified as the scalar predicted by the BEH mechanism.
           The first row in Figure 10 contains the basic constituents of the atom, namely
      the electron, the three up and down coloured quarks building the proton and
      neutron bonded by the gluons, to which is added the electron neutrino. The
      second [19] and third row [20] were completed as predictions in the 1970s and
      verified afterwards. Colour was also introduced in the 60s. The particles in the
      first and the second row are called leptons. To all fermions of the table, one must
      of course also add their antiparticles.
           All the fermions are chiral and their chiral components have different group
      quantum numbers. Hence they are, as the gauge vector bosons, massless in ab-
      sence of the BEH mechanism, i.e. in absence of the scalar condensate. The con-
      densate ⟨ϕ⟩ ≠ 0 gives mass to the W+, W–, Z bosons and to all fermions except




      Figure 10. Fermion constituents of the Standard Model.




ok.indb 20                                                                                  11/4/14 2:24 PM


             The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson21



                      hφi hφi
                                                      '          Z             '     › W+
                                       (a)               hφi      Z            hφi    ‹ W−
                  hφi            hφi
                                                      '                        '
                                                                 Z                   › W+
                                                     '            Z            '     ‹ W−



                       hφi                                                f
              f                        (b)                '       ›
                  ›          ›
                                                                      ‹   f¯

             Figure 11. Coupling of the scalar boson φ to massive gauge bosons and to elementary
             fermions.



             the three chiral neutrinos which have no opposite chirality counterpart in the
             conventional Standard Model. The photons and the gluons remain massless but
             the latter become short range due in the conventional description to a highly
             non-perturbative vacuum (resulting from a mechanism somehow dual to the
             BEH mechanism).
                 The discovery of the Z and W bosons in 1983 and the precision experiments
             testing the quantum consistency of the Standard Model established the validity
             of the mechanism, but it was still unclear whether this was the result of a dy-
             namical symmetry breaking or of a particle identifiable as an elementary boson
             at the energy scale considered.


             4 The discovery

             In the Standard Model, there is one real massive scalar boson φ (also labelled
             H). It couples to the massive W and Z bosons. This follows from Figure 8 and
             the couplings are depicted in Figure 11 (a). Its coupling to elementary fermions
             similarly follows from the couplings in Figure 9 as shown in Figure 11 (b). The
             coupling to the massless photons is a genuine quantum effect involving loops,
             even in the lowest order, as indicated in Figure 12.
                 The LHC site circling under the French-Swiss border is schematically in-
             dicated in the picture of Figure 13. The 27 km circular tunnel containing two




ok.indb 21                                                                                         11/4/14 2:24 PM


      22                                                              The Nobel Prizes



                                                       γ                       γ
               W    ›       γ                W                     f
         '                         '    ›                    '   ›
                                                                     
             hφi            γ       hφi ‹                          ‹
                                                       γ                       γ


      Figure 12. Coupling of the scalar boson φ to photons.




      opposite beams of protons surrounded by guiding superconducting electromag-
      nets cooled by superfluid helium is pictured in Figure 14. Figures 15 and 16 are
      pictures of the ATLAS and CMS detectors at diametrical opposite sites of the
      tunnel. There collisions occur and were used primarily to detect and identify
      the scalar boson of the Standard Model (and possibly other ones). At the end
      of 2012 proton-proton collisions occurred at the rate of nearly 109s–1 and the
      proton energy reached 8 TeV. At these energies, all quarks of Figure 10 and the
      gluons connecting them may contribute to the production of the scalar boson.
      The leading production processes are represented in Figure 17.
          As an example of the data gathered by CMS and ATLAS, Figure 18 presents
      the data obtained by the CMS group of observed decays into 4 leptons at the end




      Figure 13. Schematic location of the LHC.




ok.indb 22                                                                                11/4/14 2:24 PM


             The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson23




             Figure 14. The LHC dipole magnets.




             Figure 15. The Atlas detector.




ok.indb 23                                               11/4/14 2:24 PM


      24                                                                        The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 16. The CMS detector.
                                   IV. Discovery of the BEH boson
      Production of the scalar boson at the LHC
                                                               ›         ›
                           ‹
                       
                               ›
                                                               ›         ›
               gluon fusion                              vector boson fusion

                                                                             ‹
               ‹                                                     

                   ›                                                 
                                                                             ›

        associated vector boson production                      tt̄ fusion

                                          ›    quark

                                               W or Z vector boson

                                               gluon
                                               scalar boson

      Figure 17. Production of the Standard Model scalar.




ok.indb 24                                                                                          11/4/14 2:24 PM


             The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson25




             Figure 18. Decay of the scalar boson into 4 leptons from two Z,s.



             the 2012 run. The blue area is the expected background, namely those decays
             which would follow from the Standard Model if, at given total mass, there would
             be no contribution from the scalar boson. The red curve measures the contribu-
             tion that could be due to the scalar decaying into two Z vector bosons which
             further decay into leptons, as was confirmed by further analysis. Note that one
             of the Z is real but the other is “virtual,” meaning that this decay is forbidden by
             energy conservation but may contribute in the quantum theory. Consideration
             of other decay channels and spin analysis show that the particle detected is con-
             sistent with the Standard Model scalar with a mass mH ≃ 125 GeV. The absence
             of new particles at comparable energies, as well as the success of Feynman graph
             analysis including loops, points towards an elementary particle, at least up to
             the energy range considered. This is the first elementary spin zero particle ever
             detected. It raises the interesting possibility of supersymmetry broken at attain-
             able energies, although there is no indication of it so far.
                 The elementary character of the scalar already eliminates many dynamical
             models of symmetry breaking and raises interesting possibilities for extrapola-
             tion beyond presently known energies, up to those close to the Planck scale
             where quantum gravity effects might play a dominant role. The analysis of these
             speculations is beyond the scope of this talk.




ok.indb 25                                                                                          11/4/14 2:24 PM


      26                                                                   The Nobel Prizes


      References
        1. F. Englert and R. Brout, “Broken symmetry and the mass of gauge vector mesons,”
           Phys. Rev. Letters 13 (1964) 321.
        2. P.W. Higgs, “Broken symmetries and the masses of gauge bosons,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
           13 (1964) 508.
        3. L.D. Landau, “On the theory of phase transitions I,” Phys. Z. Sowjet. 11 (1937) 26
           [JETP 7 (1937) 19].
        4. Y. Nambu, “Quasi-particles and gauge invariance in the theory of superconductiv-
           ity,” Phys. Rev. 117 (1960) 648.
        5. Y. Nambu, “Axial vector current conservation in weak interactions,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
           4 (1960) 380.
        6. Y. Nambu and G. Jona-Lasinio, “Dynamical model of elementary particles based on
           an analogy with superconductivity I, II,” Phys. Rev. 122 (1961) 345; 124 (1961) 246.
        7. P.W. Anderson, “Random-phase approximation in the theory of superconductivity,”
           Phys. Rev. 112 (1958) 1900.
        8. P.W. Anderson, “Plasmons, gauge invariance, and mass,” Phys. Rev. 130 (1963) 439.
        9. J. Goldstone, “Field theories with ‘superconductor’ solutions,” Il Nuovo Cimento 19
           (1961) 154.
      10. J. Goldstone, A. Salam and S. Weinberg, “Broken symmetries,” Phys. Rev. 127 (1962)
          965.
      11. F. Englert, “Broken symmetry and Yang-Mills theory,” in 50 years of Yang-Mills The-
          ory, ed. by G.’t Hooft, World Scientific (2005), pp. 65–95, hep-th/0406162.
      12. S. Elitzur, “Impossibility of spontaneously breaking local symmetries,” Phys. Rev.
          D12 (1975) 3978.
      13. P.W. Higgs, “Broken symmetries, massless particles and gauge fields,” Phys. Lett. 12
          (1964) 132.
      14. G.S. Guralnik, C.R. Hagen and T.W.B. Kibble, “Global conservation laws and mass-
          less particles,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 (1964) 585.
      15. F. Englert, R. Brout and M. Thiry, “Vector mesons in presence of broken symmetry,”
          Il Nuovo Cimento 43A (1966) 244; F. Englert, Proceedings of the 1997 Solvay Confer-
          ence, Fundamental Problems in Elementary Particle Physics, Interscience Publishers
          J. Wiley and Sons, p. 18.
      16. G. ’t Hooft, “Renormalizable lagrangians for massive Yang-Mills fields,” Nucl. Phys.
          B35 (1971) 167; G. ’t Hooft and M. Veltman, Regularization and renormalization of
          gauge fields, Nucl. Phys. B44 (1972) 189.
      17. B.W. Lee and J. Zinn-Justin, “Spontaneously broken gauge symmetries,” Phys. Rev.
          D5 (1972) 3121; 3137; 3155.
      18. S.L. Glashow, “Partial-symmetries of weak interactions,” Nucl. Phys. 22 (1961)
          579; S. Weinberg, A model of leptons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19 (1967) 1264; A. Salam,




ok.indb 26                                                                                        11/4/14 2:24 PM


             The BEH Mechanism and its Scalar Boson27


                 Proceedings of the 8th Nobel Symposium, Elementary Particle Physics, ed. by N. Svar-
                 tholm, (Almqvist and Wiksell, Stockholm) p. 367.
             19. S.L. Glashow, J. Iliopoulos and L. Maiani, “Weak interactions with lepton-hadron
                 symmetry,” Phys. Rev. D2 (1970) 1285.
             20. M. Kobayashi and T. Maskawa, “CP Violation in the renormalizable theory of weak
                 interaction,” Prog. Theor. Phys. 49 (1973) 652.

             Portrait photo of François Englert by photographer Alexander Mahmoud.




ok.indb 27                                                                                              11/4/14 2:24 PM
