THE NEUTRINO: FROM POLTERGEIST
TO PARTICLE
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1995



FR E D E R I C K RE I N E S

Physics Department, University of California, Irvine, California 92717, USA




The Second World War had a great influence on the lives and careers of very
many of us for whom those were formative years. I was involved during, and
then subsequent to, the war in the testing of nuclear bombs, and several of
us wondered whether this man-made star could be used to advance our
knowledge of physics. For one thing this unusual object certainly had lots of
fissions in it, and hence, was a very intense neutrino source. I mulled this
over somewhat but took no action.
   Then in 1951, following the tests at Eniwetok Atoll in the Pacific, I decided
I really would like to do some fundamental physics. Accordingly, I ap-
proached my boss, Los Alamos Theoretical Division Leader, J. Carson Mark,
and asked him for a leave in residence so that I could ponder. He agreed, and
I moved to a stark empty office, staring at a blank pad for several months search-
ing for a meaningful question worthy of a life’s work. It was a very difficult
time. The months passed and all I could dredge up out of the subconscious
was the possible utility of a bomb for the direct detection of neutrinos. After
all, such a device produced an extraordinarily intense pulse of neutrinos and
thus the signals produced by neutrinos might be distinguishable from back-
ground. Some handwaving and rough calculations led me to conclude that
the bomb was the best source. All that was needed was a detector measuring
a cubic meter or so. I thought, well, I must check this with a real expert.
   It happened during the summer of 1951 that Enrico Fermi was at Los
Alamos, and so I went down the hall, knocked timidly on the door and said,
“I’d like to talk to you a few minutes about the possibility of neutrino detec-
tion.” He was very pleasant, and said, “Well, tell me what’s on your mind?”
I said, “First off as to the source, I think that the bomb is best.” After a
moment’s thought he said, “Yes, the bomb is the best source.” So far, so
good! Then I said, “But one needs a detector which is so big. I don’t know
how to make such a detector.” He thought about it some and said he didn’t
either. Coming from the Master that was very crushing. I put it on the back
burner until a chance conversation with Clyde Cowan. We were on our way
to Princeton to talk with Lyman Spitzer about controlled fusion when the air-
plane was grounded in Kansas City because of engine trouble. At loose ends


                                                                                               203


we wandered around the place, and started to discuss what to do that’s inter-
esting in physics. “Let’s do a real challenging problem,” I said. He said,
“Let’s work on positronium.” I said, “No, positronium is a very good thing
but Martin Deutsch has that sewed-up. So let’s not work on positronium.”
Then I said, “Clyde let’s work on the neutrino.” His immediate response was,
“GREAT IDEA.” He knew as little about the neutrino as I did but he was a
good experimentalist with a sense of derring do. So we shook hands and got
off to working on neutrinos.


Need for Direct Detection

Before continuing with this narrative it is perhaps appropriate to recall the
evidence for the existence of the neutrino at the time Clyde and I started on
our quest. The neutrino of Wolfgang Pauli[l] was postulated in order to
account for an apparent loss of energy-momentum in the process of nuclear
beta decay. In his famous 1930 letter to the Tübingen congress, he stated: “I
admit that my expedient may seem rather improbable from the first, becau-
se if neutrons 1 existed they would have been discovered long since.
Nevertheless, nothing ventured nothing gained... We should therefore be
seriously discussing every path to salvation.”
   All the evidence up to 1951 was obtained “at the scene of the crime” so to
speak since the neutrino once produced was not observed to interact further.
No less an authority than Niels Bohr pointed out in 1930[2] that no eviden-
ce “either empirical or theoretical” existed that supported the conservation
of energy in this case. He was, in fact, willing to entertain the possibility that
energy conservation must be abandoned in the nuclear realm.
   However attractive the neutrino was as an explanation for beta decay, the
proof of its existence had to be derived from an observation at a location
other than that at which the decay process occurred - the neutrino had to be
observed in its free state to interact with matter at a remote point.
   It must be recognized, however, that, independently of the observation of
a free neutrino interaction with matter, the theory was so attractive in its
explanation of beta decay that belief in the neutrino as a “real” entity was
general. Despite this widespread belief, the free neutrino’s apparent unde-
tectability led it to be described as “elusive, a poltergeist.”
   So why did we want to detect the free neutrino? Because everybody said,
you couldn’t do it. Not very sensible, but we were attracted by the challenge.
After all, we had a bomb which constituted an excellent intense neutrino
source. So, maybe we had an edge on others. Well, once again being brash,
but nevertheless having a certain respect for certain authorities, I comment-
ed in this vein to Fermi, who agreed. A formal way to make some of these
comments is to say that, if you demonstrate the existence of the neutrino in
the free state, i.e. by an observation at a remote location, you extend the
range of applicability of these fundamental conservation laws to the nuclear
realm. On the other hand, if you didn’t see this particle in the predicted


‘When the neutron was discovered by Chadwick, Fermi renamed Pauli’s particle the “neutrino”.


204                                Physics 1995

range then you have a very real problem.
   As Bohr is reputed to have said, “A deep question is one where either a yes
or no answer is interesting.” So I guess this question of the existence of the
“free” neutrino might be construed to be deep. Alright, what about the pro-
blem of detection? We fumbled around a great deal before we got to it.
Finally, we chose to look for the reaction                    If the free neutri-
no exists, this inverse beta decay reaction has to be there, as Hans Bethe and
Rudolf Peierls recognized, and as I’m sure did Fermi, but they had no occa-
sion to write it down in the early days. Further, it was not known at the time
whether and were different. We chose to consider this reaction becau-
se if you believe in what we today call “crossing symmetry” and use the mea-
sured value of the neutron half life then you know what the cross section has
to be - a nice clean result. (In fact, as we learned some years later from Lee
and Yang, the cross section is a factor of two greater because of parity non-
conservation and the handedness of the neutrino.) Well, we set about to
assess the problem of neutrino detection. How big a detector is required?
How many counts do we expect? What features of the interaction do we use
for signals? Bethe and Peierls in 1934 [3], almost immediately after the Fermi
paper on beta decay[4], estimated that if you are in the few MeV range the
cross section with which you have to deal would be ~ l0-44 cm2. To apprecia-
te how minuscule this interaction is we note that the mean free path is ~ 1000
light years of liquid hydrogen. Pauli put his concern succinctly during a visit
to Caltech when he remarked: “I have done a terrible thing. I have postulat-
ed a particle that cannot be detected.” No wonder that Bethe and Peierls
concluded in 1934 “there is no practically possible way of observing the neu-
trino.” [3] I confronted Bethe with this pronouncement some 20 years later
and with his characteristic good humor he said, “Well, you shouldn’t believe
everything you read in the papers.”


Detection Technique
According to the Pauli-Fermi theory (1930-1934), the neutrino should be
able to invert the process of beta decay as shown in Equation (1):

                                                                             (1)

  We chose to focus on the particular reaction
                                                                             (2)

because of its simplicity and our recognition of the possibility that the scin-
tillation of organic liquids newly discovered by Kallmann et al. [5] might be
employed on the large (~1 m3) scale appropriate to our needs. [At the time
Cowan and I got into the act, a “big” detector was only a liter or so in volu-
me. Despite the large (> 3 orders of magnitude) extrapolation in detector
size we were envisioning, it seemed to us an interesting approach worth pur-


                                     Frederick Reines                               205


suing.] The initial idea was to view a large pot of liquid scintillator with many
photomultiplier tubes located on its boundary. The neutrinos would then
produce positrons which would ionize causing light flashes which could be
sensed by the photomultipliers and converted to electrical pulses for display
and analysis.
   The idea that such a sensitive detector could be operated in the close prox-
imity (within a hundred meters) of the most violent explosion produced by
man was somewhat bizarre, but we had worked with bombs and felt we could
design an appropriate system. In our bomb proposal a detector would be sus-
pended in a vertical vacuum tank in the near vicinity of a nuclear explosion
and allowed to fall freely for a few seconds until the shock wave had passed
(Fig. 1). It would then gather data until the fireball carrying the fission frag-
ment neutrino source ascended skyward. We anticipated a signal consisting
of a few counts assuming the predicted (~ 10-43 c m2/proton) cross section,
but background estimates suggested that our sensitivity could not be guar-
anteed for cross sections < l0-39 cm 2/proton, four orders of magnitude short!
It is a tribute to the wisdom of Los Alamos Director, Norris Bradbury, that he
approved the attempt on the grounds that it would nevertheless be            1000
times as sensitive as the then existing limits.
   I recall a conversation with Bethe in which he asked how we proposed to
distinguish a neutrino event from other bomb associated signals. I described
how, in addition to the use of bulk shielding which would screen out gamma



                                        NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE



                                          -FIREBALL




                                   --               I




Figure 1. Sketch of the originally proposed experimental setup to detect the neutrino
using a nuclear bomb. This experiment was approved by the authorities at Los Alamos but
was superceded by the approach which used a fission reactor.


206                                  Physics 1995


rays and neutrons, we could use the delayed coincidence between the pro-
duct positron and neutron to identify the neutrino interaction. It was not
until some months later that Clyde and I recognized this signature would
drastically reduce other backgrounds so that we were able to use a steady fis-
sion reactor as a source instead of a bomb. I have wondered since why it took
so long for us to come to this now obvious conclusion and how it escaped
others, despite what amounted to a description of its essence as we talked to
those around us. But of one thing I am certain: the open, free communica-
tion of our ideas was most stimulating to us and played a significant role in
our eventual success. We were not inhibited in our communication by the
concern that someone would scoop us. Neutrino detection was not a popu-
lar activity in 1952.
   We sent the following letter to Fermi relating our plan to use a nuclear
pile.

      October 4. 1952



      Dear Enrico.

      We thought that you might be interested in the latest version of our
      experiment to detect the free neutrino, hence this letter. As you recall,
      we planned to use a nuclear explosion for the source because of back-
      ground difficulties. Only last week it occurred to us that background pro-
      blems could be reduced to the point where a Hanford pile would suffi-
      ce by counting only delayed coincidences between the positron pulse
      and neutron capture pulse. You will remember that the reaction we plan
      to use is p t      + β + . Boron loading a liquid scintillator makes it pos-
      sible to adjust the mean time T between these two events and we are
      considering T     l0µsec. Our detector is a 10 cubic foot fluor filled cylin-
      der surrounded by about 90 5819’s operating as two large tubes of 45
      5819’s each. These two banks of ganged tubes isotropically distributed
      about the curved cylindrical wall are in coincidence to cut tube noise.
      The inner wall of the chamber will be coated with a diffuse reflector and
      in all we expect the system to be energy sensitive, and not particularly
      sensitive to the position of the event in the fluor. This energy sensitivity
      will be used to discriminate further against background. Cosmic ray anti-
      coincidence will be used in addition to mercury and low background
      lead for shielding against natural radioactivity. We plan to immerse the
      entire detector in a large borax water solution for further necessary
      reduction of pile background below that provided by the Hanford
      shield.
         Fortunately, the fast reactor here at Los Alamos provides the same leak-
      age flux as Hanford so that we can check our gear before going to
      Hanford. Further, if we allow enough fast neutrons from the fast reactor


                                      Frederick Reines                                 207


    to leak into our detector we can simulate double pulses because of the
    proton recoil pulse followed by the neutron capture which occurs in this
    case. We expect a counting rate at Hanford in our detector about six feet
    from the pile face of ~ 15/min. with a background somewhat lower than
    this.
       As you can imagine, we are quite excited about the whole business,
    have canceled preparations for use of a bomb, and are working like mad
    to carry out the ideas sketched above. Because of the enormous simpli-
    fication in the experiment, we have already made rapid progress with the
    electronic gear and associated equipment and expect that in the next
    few months we shall be at Hanford reaching for the slippery particle.
       We would of course appreciate any comments you might care to make.

                            Sincerely,

                            Fred Reines, Clyde Cowan

  That letter elicited the response from Fermi dated Oct. 8, 1952 (Fig. 2):




Figure 2. Letter from Fermi in response to our Oct. 4th letter to him describing our inten-
tion to use a nuclear pile rather than a bomb for the experiment.


208                                Physics 1995


      Dear Fred:

      Thank you for your letter of October 4th by Clyde Cowan and yourself.
      I was very much interested in your new plan for the detection of the neu-
      trino. Certainly your new method should be much simpler to carry out
      and have the great advantage that the measurement can be repeated any
      number of times. I shall be very interested in seeing how your 10 cubic
      foot scintillation counter is going to work, but I do not know of any rea-
      son why it should not.
         Good Luck.
                             Sincerely yours,

                           Enrico Fermi

Reflecting on the trail that took us from bomb to reactor, it is evident that it
was our persistence which led us from a virtually impossible experiment to
one that showed considerable promise. The stage had been set for the detec-
tion of neutrinos by the discovery of fission and organic scintillators - the
most important barrier was the generally held belief that the neutrino was
undetectable.


The Hanford Experiment

Our first attempt was made at one of the Hanford Engineering Works reac-
tors in Hanford, Washington built during the Second World War to produce
plutonium for the atomic bomb.
   Viewed from the perspective of today’s computer-controlled kiloton detec-
tors, sodium iodide crystal palaces, giant accelerators, and several hundred-
person groups, our efforts to detect the neutrino appear quite modest. In the
early 1950’s however, our work was thought to be large scale. The idea of
using 90 photomultiplier tubes and detectors large enough to enclose a
human was considered to be most unusual. We faced a host of unanswered
questions. Was the scintillator sufficiently transparent to transmit its light for
the necessary few meters? How reflective was the paint? Could one add a
neutron capturer without poisoning the scintillator? Would the tube noise
and afterpulses from such a vast number of photomultiplier tubes mask the
signal? And besides, were we not monopolizing the market on photomulti-
plier tubes?
   It soon became clear that this new detector designed for neutrinos had
unusual properties with regard to other particles as well - for instance, neu-
tron and gamma-ray detection efficiencies near 100 percent. We recognized
that detectors of this type could be used to study such diverse quantities as
neutron multiplicities in fission, muon capture, muon decay lifetimes, and
the natural radioactivity of humans. Incidentally, the detector we designed
turned out to be big enough so that a person, bent up, could fit in an insert


                                   Frederick Reines                              209


placed in it. Intrigued, we proceeded to measure the total K40 radioactivity in
a couple of humans. Prior to this detector development, if you wanted to
measure the K40 in a human being you had to ash the specimen or reduce
backgrounds by putting geiger counters deep underground. Incidentally,
even though it was an excellent neutron as well as gamma ray detector, we
resisted the temptation to be sidetracked and harvest these characteristics
for anything other than the neutrino search.
   Our entourage arrived at Hanford in the spring of 1953. Figure 3 shows
Clyde and me sitting in front of some of our equipment. What results did we




Figure 3. Photograph of Clyde Cowan (right) and me (left) with some of the equipment
we used in the Hanford experiment.


210                                Physics I995


get from this particular reactor experiment? We had a 300 liter liquid scin-
tillator viewed by 90, 2 inch photomultiplier tubes. Backgrounds were very
troublesome and we found it necessary to pile and unpile hundreds of tons
of lead to optimize the shielding. We worked around the clock as we strug-
gled with dirty scintillator pipes, white reflecting paint that fell from the walls
under the action of toluene based scintillator and cadmium propionate neu-
tron capturer, etc., etc. We took the data with reactor on and off and labored
until we were absolutely exhausted.
    But despite our efforts, background rates due to cosmic rays and electrical
noise during reactor off periods frustrated our attempts to achieve the requir-
ed sensitivity.
    After a few months of operation we concluded that we had done all we
could in the face of an enormous reactor-independent background. We tur-
ned off the equipment and took the train back to Los Alamos.
    On the way home we analyzed the data. We had checked by means of neu-
tron sources and shielding tests that the trace of a signal, 0.4 ± 0.2
events/min., wasn’t just due to reactor neutrons leaking into the detector.
These marginal results merely served to whet our appetites - we figured that
we had to do better than that.
    Back home we puzzled over the origin of the reactor-independent signal.
Was it due to “natural” neutrinos? Could it be due to fast neutrons from the
nuclear capture of cosmic-ray muons? The easiest way to find out was to put
the detector underground. So back at Los Alamos we performed an under-
ground test that showed that the background was in fact from cosmic rays.
While we were engaged in this background test, some theorists were ru-
mored to be constructing a world made predominantly of neutrinos!




The Savannah River Experiment

Encouraged by the Hanford results, we considered how it might be possible
to build a detector which would be even more discriminating in its rejection
of background. We were guided by the fact that neutrons and positrons were
highly distinctive particles and that we could make better use of their char-
acteristics.
    Figure 4 is a schematic of the detection technique used in the new expe-
riment. An antineutrino from fission products in the reactor is incident on a
water target containing cadmium chloride. As previously noted, the         +p
reaction produces a positron and a neutron. The positron slows down and is
annihilated with an electron, producing two 0.5 MeV gamma rays, which
penetrate the water target and are detected in coincidence by two large scin-
tillation detectors on opposite sides of the target. The neutron is slowed
down by the water and captured by the cadmium, producing multiple
gamma rays, which are also observed in coincidence by the two scintillation
detectors. The antineutrino signature is therefore a delayed coincidence be-


                                       Fredrick Reines                                   211




                                                         scintillation
                                                           detector


Figure 4. Schematic of the detection scheme used in the Savannah River experiment. An
antineutrino from the reactor interacts with a proton in the target, creating a positron
and a neutron. The positron annihilates on an electron in the target and creates two
gamma rays which are detected by the liquid scintillators. The neutron slows down (in
about 10 microseconds) and is captured by a cadmium nucleus in the target; the resulting
gamma rays are detected in the liquid scintillators.

tween the prompt pulses produced by e + annihilation and those produced
microseconds later by the neutron capture in cadmium.
   These ideas were translated into hardware and associated electronics with
the help of various support groups at Los Alamos. Figure 5 is a sketch of the
equipment. It shows the target chamber in the center, sandwiched between




Figure 5. A sketch of the equipment used at Savannah River. The tanks marked I, II, and
III contained 1400 liters of liquid scintillator solution, and were viewed on each end by 55
photomultiplier tubes. The thin tanks marked A and B were polystyrene and contained
200 liters of water, which provided the target protons and contained as much as 40 kilo
grams of dissolved CdC12 to capture the product neutrons.


212                                  Physics 1995


the two scintillation chambers. Figure 6 shows one of the banks of 55 phot-
omultiplier tubes that was used to view the scintillation chambers. Then, in
the Fall of 1955 at the suggestion and with the moral support of John A.
Wheeler, the detector was taken to a new, powerful (700 MW at that time),
compact heavy water moderated reactor at the Savannah River Plant in
Aiken, South Carolina.




Figure 6. A photograph of one of the banks of phototubes which viewed a liquid scintil-
lator box. (See Fig. 5)

   The Savannah River reactor was well suited for neutrino studies because of
the availability of a well shielded location 11 meters from the reactor center
and some 12 meters underground in a massive building. The high            flux,
1.2 x l0 /cm sec, and reduced cosmic ray background were essential to the
        13    2



success of the experiment which even under those favorable conditions
involved a running time of 100 days over the period of approximately one
year.


Observation of the Neutrino

  At Savannah River we carried out a series of measurements to show
that: [6]
  a) The reactor-associated delayed coincidence signal was consistent with
theoretical expectation.
  b) The first pulse of the delayed coincidence signal was due to positron
annihilation.


                                        Frederick Reines                     213

   c) The second pulse of the delayed coincidence signal was due to neutron
capture.
   d) The signal was a function of the number of target protons.
   e) Radiation other than neutrinos was ruled out as the cause of the signal
by means of an absorption experiment.
   Our standard of proof was that every test must yield the anticipated result
for us to conclude that we were observing the Pauli-Fermi neutrino. An
unanticipated result would imply either experimental error or the need to
modify our view of the neutrino.



Signal Rate
A reactor-associated correlated signal rate of 3.0 0.2 events per hour was
observed. This represented a very favorable set of signal to background
ratios: signal to total accidental background of 4/l, signal to correlated (as
in neutron capture) reactor-independent background 5/l, and signal to
reactor-associated accidental background > 25/1. Determining the positron
and the neutron detection efficiencies with radioactive sources and using the
crudely known            we found the cross-section for fission     protons to
be




First and Second Pulses
The first pulse of the delayed coincidence pair was shown to be due to a posi-
tron by varying the thickness of a lead sheet interposed between the water
target and one of the liquid scintillators, so reducing the positron detection
efficiency in one of the detector triads but not in the others. The signal dimi-
nished as expected in the leaded triad but remained unchanged in the triad
without lead. A further check provided by the spectrum of first pulses sho-
wed better agreement with that from a positron test source than with the
background.
   The second pulse was shown to be due to a neutron by varying the cad-
mium concentration in the target water. As expected for neutrinos, removal
of the cadmium totally removed the correlated count rate, giving a rate
above accidentals of 0.2 0.7/hour. The spectrum of time intervals between
the first and second pulses agreed with that expected for neutron capture
gamma rays. A false pulse sequence in which neutrons also produced the first
pulse was ruled out by use of a neutron source which showed that fast neu-
trons cause primarily an increase in accidental rather than correlated rates,
a fact incompatible with the observed reactor-associated rates noted above.

2
    This was the preparity prediction


214                                  Physics 1995


Signal as a Function of Target Protons

The number of target protons was changed without drastically altering the
detection efficiency of the system for both background and for          events.
This was accomplished by mixing light and heavy water in approximately
equal parts. The measured rate for the diluted target was 0.4 ± 0.1 of that for
100% H 20, a number to be compared with the expected value of 0.5.


Absorption Test

The only known particles, other than          produced by the fission process,
were discriminated against by means of a gamma-ray and neutron shield.
When a bulk shield measured to attenuate gamma rays and neutrons by at
least an order of magnitude was added, the signal was observed to remain
constant; that is the reactor-associated signal was 1.74 ± O.12/hour with, and
1.69 ± 0.17/hour without the shield.


Telegram to Pauli

The tests were completed and we were convinced[7]. It was a glorious feeling
to have participated so intimately in learning a new thing, and in June of
1956 we thought it was time to tell the man who had started it all when, as a
young fellow, he wrote his famous letter in which he postulated the neutrino,
saying something to the effect that he couldn’t come to a meeting and tell
them about it in person because he had to go out to a dance!
   The message, Fig. 7, was forwarded to him at CERN, where he interrupted
the meeting he was attending to read the telegram to the conferees and then




Figure 7. The telegram to Pauli which told of our detection of the neutrino at Savannah
River. The contents of this message is quoted in the text.


                                      Frederick Reines                              215


made some impromptu remarks regarding the discovery. That message
reads, “We are happy to inform you that we have definitely detected neutri-
nos from fission fragments by observing inverse beta decay of protons.
Observed cross section agrees well with expected six times ten to minus forty
four square centimeters.” We learned later that Pauli and some friends con-
sumed a case of champagne in celebration!
   Many years later (~ 1986) C.P. Enz, a student of Pauli’s, sent us a copy of a
night letter Pauli wrote us in 1956, but which never arrived. It is shown in Fig.
8 and says, “Thanks for the message. Everything comes to him who knows
how to wait. Pauli"




Figure 8. The night letter Pauli sent in response to our message shown in Fig. 7.

   The quest was completed, the challenge met. There was, however, some-
thing missing-independent verification by other workers. As it turned out we
were, in fact, correct but it took some eight years for this check to occur as a
by-product of neutrino experiments at accelerators[B]. I suspect that the
unseemly delay was largely due to the fact that our result was not unex-
pected.
   Some twenty years later stimulated by the possibility of neutrino oscilla-
tions other groups also observed       + p at reactors[9].


What Next?

Having detected the neutrino the question arose, what next? What, as Luis
Alvarez wrote me at the time, did we propose to do as an encore? A survey of
the old notebooks indicated a variety of possibilities ranging from a study of
the neutrino itself to its use as a tool in probing the weak interaction.


216                                    Physics 1995

Neutrino-electron elastic scattering
One question I found particularly fascinating was: Did the neutrino possess
a direct elastic scattering interaction with electrons

                                                                                (3)

e.g. via a magnetic moment? This question had great appeal for a variety of
reasons which were not entirely sensible. First, there was no theoretical guide
to suggest that such a reaction between two of nature’s “simplest” particles
occurred and second, reminiscent of the earlier conversation with Fermi
regarding bomb neutrinos, I had no idea how to construct a suitable detec-
tor. Despite these excellent reasons for choosing a more sensible problem I
decided to work on it.
   The essence of the detection problem was to distinguish an electron pro-
duced by the imagined elastic scattering process from an electron produced
by gamma rays or beta emitters. This sorting out of such a non-descript pro-
cess occupied me, and a succession of colleagues, for some twenty years [10].
The key to the solution was the recognition (1959) that if one chose a low Z
medium most of the gamma ray background would arise from Compton
recoil electrons, whereas a scattering would occur only once. It was there-
fore possible, in principle, to construct a detector in which spatial anticoin-
cidences of the sequential Compton electrons would be discriminated
against, thus reducing this source of background. While this idea was being
translated to experimental reality and then eventual detection, various theo-
retical developments took place in weak interaction physics. As the theorists
labored they made predictions ranging from vague qualitative guesses about
magnetic moments (1934) to statements that the interaction was zero[ll]
 (1957), that it was given by VA (1958) [12] and that it is undefined. The situ-
ation had finally settled down by 1976 to a specific prediction with the advent
of the Weinberg, Salam, Glashow theory.
   That same year marked the end of our intense 20 year effort [13]. The neu-
trino-electron elastic scattering process has the smallest cross section of any
process ever measured. The measurement also provided one of the earliest
determinations of the weak mixing, or Weinberg, angle; it was only 1.2 stan-
dard deviations from the current world average.
   Once again, as in the case of the inverse beta decay process, even prior to
experimental verification of the elastic scattering reaction, theorists, in particu-
lar astrophysicists, assumed its existence and used it in building stellar models.
   I find it interesting to contemplate the possible consequences of a closer
coupling between theory and experiment in this case. If I had required a the-
ory in the first place I would not have started to consider the scattering expe-
riment when I did. If I had followed the theorists peregrinations I would have
sacrificed the steadfastness of purpose which eventually led to the solution.
This is not to say that experimentalists should proceed independently of the-
ory, but it does suggest that the coupling should not be too tight.


                                      Frederick Reines                        217

Neutrino interactions with deuterons
In 1956 we also began another lengthy search; this one was for the interac-
tions of reactor neutrinos with deuterons. In 1969 we finally observed[l4]
the so-called “charged-current” reaction         + d     +         and in
1979[15] the “neutral-current” reaction        d              The neutral-
current reaction had been previously discovered at an accelerator at CERN
in 1973 with muon neutrinos, but it was nevertheless most gratifying to see
that     exhibited the expected behaviour.

Detection of atmospheric neutrinos
In the early 1960’s many authors[16] had calculated the flux of high-energy
neutrinos expected to arise from the decay of K and mesons and muons
produced in the earth’s atmosphere by the interaction of primary cosmic
 rays. A major experimental question was, How does one detect these atmos-
 pheric neutrinos? The only practical method seemed to be to detect the
 muons produced by the neutrinos in one of their rare interactions with mat-
 ter. But this meant that one would have to place a detector deep under-
 ground to reduce the major background, the flux of muons produced direct-
 ly in the atmosphere.
    So in 1963 we started construction of a detector some 2 miles under-
 ground in the East Rand Proprietary gold mine near Johannesburg, South
Africa. The design and construction of what was then the world’s largest par-
 ticle detector - a 180 ft. long, 20 ton segmented scintillation detector
 array - took a surprisingly short time, about one year. This experiment was a
 collaboration between Case Institute of Technology, Cleveland, Ohio (now
 Case-Western Reserve University) and the University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg.
    On February 23, 1965, the first “natural” (meaning it did not arise from
 a man-made nuclear reactor) neutrino was discovered. In all, 167 such events
were recorded.

Neutrino stability and oscillations
When we first turned on our detector at Savannah River in the Fall of 1955
no signals were observed. As we checked our apparatus, a desperate thought
crossed our minds: the neutrino might be emitted from fission but did not
survive the 11 meter journey from the reactor to our detector. Perhaps the
neutrino was unstable! A moment of excitement ensued until we made some
adjustments in our apparatus and neutrino-like signals began to appear. The
consequence of these errors resulted in a notebook entry which suggested
making a check of the inverse square law dependence of the neutrino signals
on the distance from reactor to detector. But in any event we had no the-
oretical basis at that time for questioning the stability of the neutrino and were
reminded once again that experiment was the final arbiter in these matters.


    I found the idea of neutrino instability to be a “repulsive” thought but
 nevertheless proceeded to imagine what sorts of decay products there might
 be if the neutrino was, in fact, unstable. In 1974 we measured a         lifetime
 limit[17]. That experiment looked for the radiative decay of the neutrino at
 a nuclear reactor.
    Early on it had been suggested by Pontecorvo and by Nakagawa et al. [18]
 that the neutrino may oscillate from one flavor to another as it travels from
 its place of origin. A graphic analogy is the change of character from dog to
 cat: Imagine at time zero a dog leaving his house to walk down the street to
 another dog house at the end of the block. As he progresses down the street
 a transformation takes place - his appearance gradually changes (à la Escher)
 from that of a dog to that of a cat! Halfway down the block the transforma-
 tion is complete and the erstwhile dog - now a cat - continues on its feline
journey. But the transformation goes on and, mirabile dictu, upon arrival at
 the dog house the erstwhile dog turned cat is once again a dog. If such bizar-
 re behaviour is observed to occur in neutrinos it would provide evidence of
 the neutrino’s structure. Neutrinos of all types would be construed to be
 built out of common building blocks whose rearrangements en route would
 give rise to observably different combinations.
    There have been many searches for neutrino oscillations. The first expe-
 riment to report on neutrino oscillations was performed in 1979, but it was
 in no sense definitive; it was the same experiment in which we reported the
 first measurement of the neutrino-deuteron neutral current cross sec-
 tion [15]. Since the neutral-current reaction may be initiated by neutrinos of
 any flavor, whereas the charged-current reaction may be initiated only
 by v ’s, taking the ratio of the charged- to neutral-current cross sections is a
    e


 sensitive test for neutrino oscillations where the oscillations occur with a
 wavelength short enough that the oscillation process has reached equilibri-
 um before reaching the detector location. The results of that 1979 experi-
 ment suggested that such oscillations might occur.


Other Neutrino Physics Experiments

It must be emphasized that this grand endeavor, which we now call Neutrino
Physics, is being carried out by many groups. Even in 1970 there were
several such groups around the world, some using nuclear reactors, some
high-energy accelerators, and others cosmic rays.
   We list here only a few of the salient results that they have obtained:
   In 1961 the muon-neutrino was identified in an experiment at the
Brookhaven AGS [19], and this marked the beginning of the fruitful use of
high-energy neutrino beams at accelerators.
   In 1973, at CERN, vµ-e elastic scattering was observed[20], and with it the
landmark discovery of weak neutral currents.
   Since the late 70’s great progress has been made in studying nucleon
structure functions by looking at the deep inelastic scattering of neutrinos


                                   Frederick Reines                            219


and antineutrinos on nucleons. These studies are complementary to the
deep inelastic electron and muon studies because the neutrinos couple to
the nuclear constituents in a different manner and, due to parity noncon-
servation, they can distinguish quarks from antiquarks.
   Searches for vacuum oscillations have been performed at reactors and
accelerators, and since the mid 80’s matter oscillations have been looked for
in solar neutrinos and atmospheric neutrinos. To date there is no definitive
evidence for neutrino oscillations.
   Supernova 1987A was a windfall for neutrino physics[21]. Conventional
supernova theory predicts that a supernova such as 1987A yields 3 x l0 53 ergs
(99% of its gravitational binding energy) in a burst of l058 neutrinos in a
few seconds. On earth 19 low-energy neutrino events were observed in two
large               detectors each containing several kilotons of water. All of the
events were recorded within about 10 seconds; the background event rate
was only a few per day [22] !
   Many determinations of neutrino properties were extracted from the
supernova data. These include neutrino mass, charge, lifetime, magnetic
moment, number of flavors, etc. In addition some of the most basic elements
of supernova dynamics were studied and found to be in surprisingly good
agreement with predictions. One interesting consequence was the testing of
the Einstein Equivalence Principle. The fact that the fermions (neutrinos)
and bosons (photons) reached the Earth within 3 hours of each other pro-
vides a unique test of the equivalence principle of general relativity. The
observation proved that the neutrinos and the first recorded photons are
affected by the same gravitationally-induced time delay within 0.5% [23].
   And while describing neutrinos arriving at the earth from the cosmos, we
want to recall the intriguing history of the study of solar neutrinos. After 20
years of observation by Ray Davis and others, and now with four detectors
reporting, it appears that the number of neutrinos arriving at the earth from
the sun is significantly less than that expected from the standard solar model
 [24]. We are not yet sure whether this is telling us something about the sun
or something about the properties of the neutrino.
   During the latter part of the 1980’s several determinations of the number
of light neutrino flavors were made. The values were derived from many
sources including: cosmological limits, supernova 1987A neutrinos, pp col-
liders, and e + e - colliders. By the end of the decade it was clear that there
are only three families of light neutrinos[25].
   Surely the longest series of experiments in neutrino physics concerns the
attempt to measure the mass of the neutrino. These studies started in 1930
with Pauli’s initial estimate that: “The mass of the neutron (neutrino) should
be of the same order of magnitude as that of the electron and in any event
no greater than 0.01 of the proton mass.” Since then many techniques have
been used: nuclear beta decay (especially tritium), Supernova 1987A, cos-
mological constraints, radiative nucleon capture of electrons and, for the
mu- and tau-neutrinos, particle decays.


220                                    Physics 1995


The Future of Neutrino Physics

The formative years of neutrino physics have been extraordinarily fruitful.
But with all of the important accomplishments, are there any things left for
the future? Most definitely yes.
   We will continue to see more precise measurements of all of the neutri-
no’s intrinsic properties, of course. In addition, from searches for neutrino-
less double-beta decay[26] we may soon have an answer to a most funda-
mental question: is the neutrino Majorana or Dirac?
   Also we are all anxiously awaiting the discovery of the tau neutrino, as sig-
naled by its detection at a point remote from its origin.
   There are also several outstanding issues having to do with astrophysics
and cosmology. For instance: Are neutrinos an important component of the
Dark Matter? And wouldn’t it be exciting if someone could figure out how
to observe the relic neutrinos left over from the Big Bang!
   As large neutrino telescopes are constructed over the next few years, we
may finally see neutrinos coming from cosmic sources such as other stars
and active galactic nuclei.
   I don’t think it is too much to hope that we will see a resolution to the
solar neutrino puzzle in the next few years. And, if we are lucky, those same
detectors which will be looking for solar neutrinos may see a supernova or
two.
   I am confident that the future of neutrino physics will be as exciting and
fruitful as the past has been.


Acknowledgements

My activities over the past 40 years could not possibly have been accomplish-
ed by myself alone. They have required the dedicated and tireless support
of many talented coworkers. One in particular I must mention - my very
good friend and colleague Clyde Cowan, who was an equal partner in the
experiments to discover the neutrino. I regret that he did not live long
enough to share in this honor with me. I also wish to thank the personnel at
the Savannah River Site, and their managers, first the DuPont Corp. and
later Westinghouse Corp., for their continued hospitality, interest, and good-
natured tolerance over 35 years. The hospitality of Morton-Thiokol in their
Fairport Mine for about 30 years is also gratefully acknowledged. The sup-
port of the U.S. Department of Energy, and its predecessors beginning with
the U.S. Atomic Energy Agency, are most gratefully acknowledged.


R EF E R E N C E S

  [l] Pauli, W., Jr. Address to Group on Radioactivity (Tübingen, December 4, 1930) (un-
      published); Rappts. Septiems Conseil Phys. Solvay, Bruxelles, 1933 (Gautier-Villars,
      Paris 1934).
  [2] N. Bohr, J. Chem. Soc. 349 (1932).
  [3] Bethe, H.A. and Peierls, R.E., Nature 133, 532 (1934).


                                        Frederick Reines                                    221


 [4] Fermi, E., Z. Physik, 88, 161 (1934).
  [5] Kallmann, H. Phys. Rev. 78, 62 (1950). Agena, M., Chiozotto, M., Querzoli, R., Atti
      Acad. Naz. Lincei Cl. Sri. Fis. Mat. Nat. Rend. 6, 626 (1949); Reynolds, G.T.,
      Harrison, F.B., Salvini, G., Phys. Rev. 79 720 (1950).
 [6] Reines, F. et al., Phys. Rev. 117, 159-173 (1960).
  [7] Cowan, CL. Jr., Reines, F., Harrison, F.B., Kruse, H.W., McGuire, A.D., Science 124,
      103 (1956).
  [8] Block, M.M., Burmeister, H., Cundy, D.C., Eben, B., Franzinetti, E., Keren, J.,
      Mollerud, R., Myatt, G., Nikolic, M., Lecourtois, A.O., Paty, M., Perkins, D.H., Ramm,
      C., Schultze, K., Sletten, H., Soop, K., Stump, R., Venus, W., Yoshiki, H., Phys. Lett.
      12, 281 (1964); Bienlein, ,J.K., Bohm, A., Von Dardel, G., Faissner, H., Ferrero, F.,
      Gaillard, J.M., Gerber, HJ., Helm, B., Kaftanov, V., Krienen, F., Reinharz, R.A., Seiler,
      P.G., Staude, A., Stein, J., Steiner, H.J., Phys. Lett. 13, 80 (1964).
  [9] Reines, F., Sobel, H.W. and Pasierb, E., Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 1307 (1980); Boehm, F.,
      Cavaignac, J.F., Feilitzsch, F.V., Hahn, A., Henrikson, H.E., Koang, D.H., Kwon, H.,
      Mossbauer, R.L., Vignon, B., Vuilleumeir, J.L., Physics Letters, 97B, 310 (1980).
[10] Reines, F., Ann. Rev. Nucl. Sci. 10, 1 (1960).
[11] Salam, A. Nuovo Cimento, 5, 299 (1957).
[12] Feynman, R.P. and Gell-Mann, M. Phys. Rev. 109, 193 (1958); Marshak, R.E. and
      Sudarshan, G. ibid 109 1860 (1958).
[13] Reines, F., Gurr, H.S., Sobel, H.W., Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 315 (1976).
[14] Jenkins, T.L., Kinard, F.E., and Reines, F. Phys. Rev. 185, 1599 (1969).
[15] Pasierb, E., Gurr, H.S., Lathrop, J., Reines, F., and Sobel, H.W., Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 96
      (1979)
[16] K. Greisen, Proceedings of the International Conference on Instrumentation for High Energy
      Physics, Berkely, California, September 1960     (Interscience Publishers, Inc., New York,
      1961), p. 209; M. A. Markov and I. M. Zheleznykh, Nucl. Phys. 27, 385 (1961); G. T.
      Zatsepin and V. A. Kuzmin, Zh. Eksperim. i Theor. Fiz. 41, 1919 (1961) [translation:
      Soviet Physics.-JETP 14, 1294 (1962)]; R. Cowsic, Proceedings of the Eighth
      Internat.. Conf. on Cosmic Rays, Jaipur, India, December 1963, edited by R. R.
      Daniels, et al.
[17] Reines, F., Sobel, H.W., and Gurr, H.S., Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 180 (1974).
[18] Pontecorvo, B., Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz 53, 1717 (1967) (Sov. Phys. J.E.T.P. 26, 984
      (1968)); Nakagawa, M., Okonogi, H., Sakata, S., Toyoda, A. Prog. Theor. Phys. 30,
      727 (1963).
[19] Danby, G., Gaillard, J.M., Goulianios, K., Lederman, L.M., Mistry, N., Schwartz, M.,
      Steinberger, J., Phys. Rev. Lett. 9, 36 (1961);
[2O] Hasert, FJ. et al., Phys. Lett. 46B 121 (1973).
[21] Kielczewska, D., Int. Jour. of Mod. Phys. D, 3, 331 (1994).
[22] Bionta, R.M. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1494 (1987); Hirata, K. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
      58, 1490 (1987).
[23] Longo, M.J., Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 173 (1988); Krauss, L.M. and Tremaine, S., Phys. Rev.
      Lett. 60, 176 (1988).
[24] Bahcall, J.N., Lande, K., Lanou, R.E., Learned, .J.G., Robertson, R.G.H., and
      Wolfenstein, L., Nature 375, 29 (4 May 1995).
[25] See for example: Denegri, D. and Martinelli, G., in Neutrino physics, K. Winter (ed.),
      Cambridge Monographs on Particle Physics, Nuclear Physics, and Cosmology,
      Cambridge University Press (1991).
[26] Moe, M. and Vogel, P., Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 44, 247 (1994).
