                              FRITS ZE R N I K E


               How I discovered phase contrast
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1953



« Phase contrast » was not discovered while working with a microscope, but
in a different part of optics. It started from my interest in diffraction gratings,
about from 1920 on. Such a (reflecting) grating consists of a plane or concave
mirror with a large number of equidistant grooves ruled on its surface. Small
nearly unavoidable imperfections in the location of the grooves show clearly
in the optical behaviour of the grating. The most conspicuous error is a
periodic one which repeats itself after each revolution of the screw of the
ruling engine. The regularly recurring displacement of the grooves causes
corresponding changes of the optical path, just as if the mirror surface were
wavy. Consequently the instrument behaves as if a coarse grating, with a
constant of about 2 millimeters, were superimposed on it, so that each strong
spectral line is accompanied to right and left by a number of weak spurious
lines, the so-called « Rowland ghosts ». These have a remarkable effect if one
looks down at the surface of the grating, placing the eye at the position of a
spectral line. A perfect grating would in this case show an evenly illuminated
surface, in the colour of the spectral line. In reality, however, one sees a
strongly striped surface. At the end of a 1902 paper, H. S. Allen remarked
that these stripes were nothing real, but simply the effect of the interference
between the principal line and its ghosts. Indeed the stripes disappear when
the ghosts are covered up. I remember strongly objecting against his conclu-
sion of unreality. On the contrary I was convinced that the striped surface
gave more information about the periodic ruling errors than that obtainable
by photographing the ghosts, because in the first case the relative phases of
the ghosts come into play, whereas these are lost in the second case. I kept the
question in mind, planning to look further into it as soon as an opportunity
would arrive.
   About 1930 our laboratory had obtained a large concave grating and set
it up in a Runge-Paschen mounting. The striped appearance of the surface
was soon found, but as the grating was 6 meters from the eye, I tried a small
telescope pointed at the grating. Then the unexpected happened. The stripes
were seen very clearly, but disappeared as the telescope was exactly focussed


240                           1 9 5 3 F. ZERNIKE

on the surface of the grating! By a succession of experiments and calculations
I soon succeeded in explaining this. On looking back to this event, I am im-
pressed by the great limitations of the human mind. How quick are we to
learn, that is, to imitate what others have done or thought before. And how
slow to understand, that is, to see the deeper connections. Slowest of all, how-
ever, are we in inventing new connections or even in applying old ideas in a
new field. In my case the really new point was that the ghosts differed in
phase from the principal line. Now it is common knowledge that in all in-
 terference phenomena differences of phase are all-important. Why then had
phases never been considered before in this case, nor in the corresponding
 one in the microscope? Some excuse may be found in the difficulty to define
 them exactly. Let me explain this for a more simple case, the diffraction
 image of a slit. The way to observe this may be as follows. A telescope is
 pointed at a vertical line-source of light, such as the filament of an incandes-
 cent lamp. A vertical slit of say 2 mm width is placed closely behind the
 objective of the telescope. This causes the image of the source to be broad-
 ened out into a diffraction pattern: a bright central stripe (order zero) is
 accompanied on both sides by weaker and weaker secondary maxima (or-
 ders one, two, etc.). The formula for this diffraction pattern is given in the
 textbooks, the amplitude being determined by the function sin x/x. In the
 few cases where the phases are mentioned in the literature, on the other hand,
 there is no consensus of opinion. Some say the phases are equal over the
 whole pattern - except for the obvious reversal of the odd orders, whereas
 others make them change proportional to x 2. I find that it all depends on the,
 often tacitly assumed, surface to which the phases are referred. If this ref-
 erence surface is the focal plane of the telescope objective, one comes to the
 second statement, if it is a cylindrical surface with the centre line of the slit
 as axis, the equality of phases results.
    You may want to ask whether these phases can be observed. I find they
 can. All one has to do is to throw the diffraction image on a               coherent
 background, obtained in the following way. The slit is covered by a
 glass plate with a thin metallic layer which transmits a few percent of the
 light. A fine scratch is made in this layer, forming a narrow slit which is
 adjusted so as to lie in the centre of the broad slit. The light through the
 scratch is broadened out by diffraction and thus forms the desired back-
 ground, which interferes with the diffraction pattern. The phases of this
 pattern are thus compared with those of the auxiliary wave forming the
 background. In the experiment the auxiliary wavefront therefore plays


               HOW I    DISCOVERED         PHASE     C O N T R A ST           241

the role of the cylindrical reference surface in the theoretical treatment.
   It is only by the introduction of an adequate reference surface that a def-
inite statement about the phase differences involved can be made. In the case
of the Rowland ghosts the result was: their phases differ by ninety degrees
from the principal line. Now I happened to know of a simple method to
change this. Lord Rayleigh described in 1900 how to make very shallow
etchings in glass surfaces without spoiling their optical quality, by the slow
action of very dilute hydrofluoric acid. By this process I made what I called
phase-strips: glass plates with a straight groove, a millimeter or less wide and
of a uniform depth of half a wavelength. Such a phase-plate was placed in
the spectrum so that a bright spectral line fell on the strip, whereas its ghosts
passed through the glass beside it. In a telescope behind the phase-plate the
stripes on the grating surface then stood out clearly.
    For a physicist interested in optics it was not a great step to change over
from this subject to the microscope. Remember that in Abbe’s remarkable
theory of the microscope image the transparent object under the microscope
is compared with a grating. To be precise, a transmission grating is consid-
 ered as the test-object and the diffraction by this grating as the primary
 phenomenon. At first sight this has nothing to do with the magnified image
of the object formed by the microscope objective. Instead, the objective
 forms an image of the light source, practically in its back focal plane, consist-
ing of a central direct image accompanied by diffracted images on both sides.
This, although on a very much smaller scale, is the analogue of the grating
line with its ghosts. The light issuing from these images overlaps in the eye-
piece of the microscope and by interference gives rise to stripes which,
curiously enough, resemble a magnified image of the object! Abbe’s the-
 ory has been summarized in this sentence: « The microscope image is the
interference effect of a diffraction phenomenon. »
    You will now readily understand that, acquainted with this theory, I soon
 tried my phase-strip in a microscope, throwing the direct image of a linear
 light-source on the strip placed closely above a low-power objective.
    I must now explain why the unexpected discovery of the 90° phase shift
 applies to the microscope image as well. It all depends on the nature of the
 object under the microscope. In his theory Abbe and his followers always
 considered an object of alternate opaque and transparent strips. The diffrac-
 tion images for such a grating calculated in the well-known way are in phase
 with the central image. On the other hand, if the object consists of alternate
 thicker and thinner strips, then the phase difference of 90° is found. In the


242                           1953 F.ZERNIKE

first case, the diffraction is caused by the unequal amplitudes of the light
passing the strips, in the second case by the unequal light paths, i.e. by the
unequal phases. I therefore distinguish the two by calling the first kind
an amplitude grating, the second a phase grating. Or in the general case of an
irregular structure, an « amplitude object », resp. a « phase object ». Nearly all
objects of biological or medical interest belong naturally in the second group.
The highly developed staining techiques evidently aim at changing them,
or their special details one wants to see, into amplitude objects.
   It will now be seen that for a phase object my phase-strip in the focal plane
of the microscope objective brought the direct image of the light-source in
phase with the diffracted images, making the whole comparable to the im-
ages caused by an amplitude object. Therefore the image in the eyepiece
appears as that of an absorbing object, that is with black-and-white contrast
as if the object had been stained. The full name of the new method of mi-
croscopy might be something like: « phase-strip method for observing phase
objects in good contrast ». I shortened this into phase-contrast method. Before
going into further details about the development of the method, a few gen-
eral remarks should be made.
   In a treatise on the Abbe theory, Lummer comes to the conclusion that « in
the ideal case the microscope image is exactly similar to the object in struc-
ture and phase ». Now the absolutely transparent details of a phase object
leave the intensity of the passing light unchanged. All they do is to impress
phase differences on it. According to Lummer, then, the image will show
the same phase differences - which however are invisible - and an equal inten-
sity everywhere. In other words, the phase object is absolutely invisible « in
the ideal case ». Of course the practical microscopist has never been content
with this; as a matter of fact, he never found it out! Without realizing it, he
had always turned the fine adjustment, that is, put the object a little out of
 focus, in order to see the tricky transparent details. Only a somewhat diffuse
 and watery image is obtained in this way. This will be explained further on.
    With the phase-contrast method still in the first somewhat primitive stage,
 I went in 1932 to the Zeiss Works in Jena to demonstrate. It was not received
 with such enthusiasm as I had expected. Worst of all was one of the oldest
 scientific associates, who said: « If this had any practical value, we would
ourselves have invented it long ago ». Long ago, indeed! The great achieve-
 ments of the firm in practical and theoretical microscopy were all due to
their famous leader Ernst Abbe and dated from before 1890, the year in
which Abbe became sole proprietor of the Zeiss Works. From then on he


                HOW    I DISCOVERED PHASE CONTRAS T                               243
had been absorbed in administrative and social problems, partly also in other
fields of optics. Indeed his last work on microscopy dates from that same
year. In it he gave a simple reason for certain difficulties with transparent
objects, but this was of no account. His increasing staff of scientific collab-
orators evidently under the impression of his inspiring personality, formed
the tradition that everything worth knowing or trying in microscopy had
been achieved already. For more than twenty-five years after Abbe’s death
in 1906, his great authority thus barred the way to further progress.
   Here is one more remarkable historic point. Whereas all the other achieve-
ments of Abbe’s were greatly appreciated by all practical microscope users,
his theory of image formation was firmly rejected by most of them. To the
physicist this may seem incredible, especially when he remembers Abbe’s
experiments which in his opinion confirm the theory in a convincing way.
The opposing microscopists, however, said these experiments only showed
how the microscope may be used, or rather misused, by the physicist for
interference experiments which have nothing to do with the ordinary proper
use of the instrument. A long story could be told about the violent con-
troversies of this kind which occurred time and again through half a century.
 We can say now that Abbe and his followers were as much to blame as the
other party. For one thing, their theory was too abstract, it only applied to
the oversimplified cases of a point source of light and an object of regular
structure. However, it could very well have been extended to meet the
practical cases. But then it was also incomplete, it did not explain the pecu-
liarities in the imaging of transparent objects, and what is worse, its defenders
never recognized this incompleteness. Small wonder therefore that the mi-
croscopist rejected the theory as useless in practice.
   Returning now to the phase-contrast method, I will first give an account
of its working principle. Let the incident light for simplicity be a plane wave.
Without an object, that is if there is only a clear glass-plate under the micro-
scope, this wave passes unchanged, is brought to a focus closely above the
 objective (in its back focal plane), and spreads out again to an evenly illu-
 minated field in the eyepiece. If there is a real object, every small detail of it
will give rise to a slight perturbation of the wave. One may always consider
this as resulting from a perturbed wave to be superimposed - in amplitude,
not in energy - on the unchanged wave. This last one shall be called the         direct
light, it will clearly give the even background. The perturbed wave will
spread out from the detail in all directions, will fill the whole aperture of the
objective and will reunite in the corresponding image point in the eyepiece.


244                          1953   F. ZERNIKE

The perturbed waves from all the object points together will be called the
diffracted light. The microscope image in the eyepiece now results from the
interference of the diffracted light with the direct light. In order to obtain
phase contrast the two must be treated differently, so as to change their rel-
ative phases. This is possible, because they are spatially separated in the back
focal plane of the objective. The interplay of phases in this decomposing and
reuniting of vibrations can best be visualized in a vector diagram (Fig. 1a).
As is well known, a harmonic vibration is obtained from a vector MV ro-
tating uniformly round M. The projection P on the horizontal axis performs
the vibration. The vector MP‘, projection of MV’ which remains always
perpendicular to MV, performs a similar vibration, one quarter period in
advance of P. In accordance with general usage the projecting is understood,
We speak of the vibrations MV, MV’, etc.




                                     Fig. 1.


   Now consider a microscopic object with slightly absorbing details on a
transparent background (stained preparation). The vibration emerging from
the background may be represented by MA (Fig. 1b). An absorbing detail
weakens the light, it gets a smaller amplitude, such as MD. The vector MD
results also from compounding MA with MD’, so that MD’ represents the
change caused by the details, i.e. the perturbed vibration. Now according to
a well-known theorem the optical paths along all rays from an object point
to its image are equal. Therefore the direct and the diffracted vibrations
arrive at the image point in the same relative phases they had in the object,
and the same Fig. 1b may thus serve for the reuniting of these vibrations. As
a result the absorbing detail is seen darker than the background. Now com-
pare this with the case of a transparent object (unstained preparation, Fig.
1c). Its details will ordinarily be somewhat stronger refracting than the em-
bedding medium. This means that the light is propagated with less speed so
that the emerging vibration MD will be retarded in phase compared to MA,


               HOW    I DISCOVERED PHASE CONTRAS T                            245
but equal in amplitude. The change caused by the detail is now represented
by MD’, nearly perpendicular to MA. The compounding of these in the
image gives again MD, equal in intensity to the background MA, the detail
remains invisible. It will appear, however, on slightly defocussing, as the
light-paths are no longer equal in that case, resulting in some change of
respective phases. At the same time the image becomes blurred, so that the
observer has to find a compromise between its disappearance from the first
cause, exact focus, and from the other, fading out by lack of focus. In the
phase-contrast method however, the direct light has to pass the phase-strip,
which is thinner than its surround through which the diffracted light passes.
The direct light is thus advanced by 90°, being then represented by MPh.
This causes the detail to be represented by the vector-sum of MPh and MD’,
making it darker than the background. Clearly the relations are about the
same as in Fig. 1b, the transparent detail may be said to be « optically stained ».
   Two further improvements of phase contrast, which I made in the first
years can now be explained. One is the absorbing phase-strip. Details in the
object that are very thin will cause only very small phase differences, and in
Fig. 1c this corresponds to a very short vector MD’, to be compounded with
MPh. The thin detail therefore appears only very little darker than its sur-
round, i.e. with very little contrast. Now there is no simple way of increasing
the amplitude MD’ of the diffracted light, but the same result, increased con-
trast, may be attained by diminishing the amplitude of the direct light MPh.
To this end the phase-strip must not only accelerate the direct light but also
partly absorb it. This is for instance obtained by a thin metallic deposit on
the strip. An absorption of 75 % is often used; the strip then transmits 25 % of
the energy, or one half of the amplitude of the direct light. The contrast is
thus doubled, a quite marked effect. In my own experiments I could go down
to 4% transmission, i.e. a five times enhanced contrast, the limit being set by
the unavoidable stray light. It is only under specially favourable circum-
stances that a higher increase has been attained by the French astronomer
Lyot. In his study of the minute ripples of polished lens surfaces he had in-
dependently rediscovered phase contrast and could use strips that diminished
the amplitude to one thirtieth, so that ripples only one thousandth of a wave-
length high showed in good contrast.
   A last point to explain is the halo that is always observed surrounding
objects which show great contrast. This must be ascribed to the action of
the phase-strip on the diffracted light. As we saw before, the phase-strip is
meant to act on the direct light only. However, the diffracted light, which


246                           1953   F.ZERNIKE

fills the whole aperture of the objective, will for a small part be intercepted
by the phase-strip and this part remains inactive. To find the effect of this
missing part, we consider the reverse case, that it would be the only active
part. Because of the narrow strip, it would form an image of much less
resolving power, i.e. blurred by diffraction. As this part is missing, the «strip
image» must be subtracted, in amplitude, from the full image formed by
the whole aperture. The interference with the direct light then results in a
very diffuse and weak negative image, appearing as a bright halo round dark
details, as a dark halo round bright details.
   With the straight phase-strips used in the beginning, the halo may be dis-
turbing because the strip image of a small detail is by diffraction only spread
out in one direction, namely perpendicular to the strip. This makes small
bright spots in the image appear as if marked by short crossing pencil streaks.
To remedy this I soon introduced annular strips, which make the halo spread
in all direction, so that it is much fainter and indeed quite harmless.
    Zeiss in Jena, who had started with so little enthusiasm, slowly continued
with the method. After some more of my visits, after some years of devel-
oping too complicated instruments and after further delay by the War, they
brought out phase-contrast objectives and accessories in 1941.
    I will end by showing some slides of photomicrographs, some I made with
my own phase-strips, others from the Zeiss prospectus.
