THE INVENTION AND EARLY HISTORY OF THE
CCD

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2009
by
GEORGE E. SMITH
Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ, U.S.A. (retired)




To try to indicate how the invention of Charge Coupled Devices in 1969
by W. S. Boyle and myself came about, it is first necessary to describe three
important technologies being pursued at the time. Magnetic bubbles, the
silicon diode array vidicon for the Picturephone, and MOS semiconductor
technology were all contributing factors to the invention of the device.




Figure 1. Magnetic Bubble serial shift register.

Magnetic bubbles were formed by placing a special magnetic material, typi-
cally garnet, in a magnetic field so that circular magnetic domains could be
formed as shown in Figure 1. A permalloy pattern was deposited on the sur-
face which could capture the domain, and when a rotating magnetic field
was applied in the plane of the slice, the bubble would be shifted along from
one site to the next. With an input device to inject the presence or absence
of bubbles representing 0s or 1s and a detection device at the end, one had
a serial memory device.

92


Figure 2. The Picturephone
set and silicon diode array
camera tube.


The second driving technology being worked on, which just happened to be
in my department, was the silicon diode array camera tube, shown in Figure
2. This was being developed for the Picturephone, which AT&T − Bell Labs’
parent and the major telephone provider at the time − thought would be
a huge market once people discovered they could see as well as hear one
another over the existing twisted pair phone lines. The initial imaging device
considered was the standard commercial vidicon with an antimony trisulfide
coating on glass accessed by an electron beam as the photosensitive element.
This device was notorious for its lack of robustness and longevity. Instead, we
were working on a tube with a silicon slice with millions of diodes placed on
the surface, which were accessed by an electron beam in a similar manner.
The silicon was an improvement; however, we strongly hoped to find an all
solid state device to eliminate the electron beam.
   The third field being vigorously pursued was MOS transistor technology.
This was the technology which finally became the basis of all modern inte-
grated circuits. The Metal Oxide Semiconductor capacitor which forms the
gate of the MOS transistor is shown in Figure 3. Basic studies of this structure
were also being carried out in my department.
   To understand the atmosphere at the time, one must look at the structure
of the Electronics Division at Bell Labs, which was under Vice President Jack
Morton. This was split into two divisions, one for semiconductor devices and
one for all others. Bill Boyle was Executive Director of the semiconductor
part and I was a Department Head under him. Jack Morton was anxious
to speed up the development of magnetic bubbles as a major memory

                                                                             93


technology and there was talk of transferring resources from Bill’s division
to the other where the bubble work was being done. For this not to happen,
Morton demanded that Bill’s division come up with a semiconductor device
to compete with bubbles. To address this demand, on October 17, 1969, Bill
and I got together in his office. In a discussion lasting not much more than
an hour, the basic structure of the CCD was sketched out on the blackboard,
the principles of operation defined, and some preliminary ideas concerning
applications were developed. The train of thought evolved as follows.




Figure 3. The basic MOS structure.


First, the semiconductor analogy of the magnetic bubble is needed. The elec-
tric dual is a packet of charge. The next problem is how to store this charge
in a confined region. The structure which came to mind, of course, was the
simple MOS capacitor shown in Figure 3. Charge can be introduced into this
depletion region with the amount of charge stored being the magnitude of
the signal. To understand this better, a plot of electron energy vs. distance in-
to the structure is shown in Figure 4. As charge is introduced into the deple-
tion region, the potential at the surface rises until the maximum allowable
charge is reached. Any further charge added will flow into the substrate.




94


             Figure 4. A plot of electron energy vs. distance through the MOS capacitor.

The last problem was to shift the charge from one site to another, thereby
allowing manipulation of the information. This is solved by simply placing
the MOS capacitors very close together as shown in Figure 5, one with charge
and the second empty. In order to pass the charge from one to the next, one
simply applies a more attractive voltage to the second, causing its depletion
region to overlap the first and the charge to flow along the surface to the
silicon-silicon dioxide interface of the second capacitor.




                    Figure 5. Two closely spaced MOS capacitors.


                                                                                     95


The original structure using this mechanism to make a shift register is shown
in Figure 6. Many MOS capacitors are placed closely together in a row and
connected to a three phase voltage source. The top figure shows the storage
phase with Va applied to one set of electrodes and a smaller rest voltage Vb
applied to the other two. One site has charge and the other has none. The
second figure shows the transfer phase where a larger voltage, Vp, is applied
to the adjacent plates to transfer charge from one to the next. The last two
show resetting the voltages to the initial state with the charge information
shifted by one site. This is continued to an output device at the end of the
row in order to read the stored information. Many other storage and transfer
schemes are possible. The charge can be injected into the device electrically
at the beginning of the row making a shift register or supplied by light inci-
dent on a structure with empty cells. Then the amount of charge which ac-
cumulates by the absorption of photons is determined by the intensity of the
light, and the resulting charge pattern can then be read out in shift register
fashion after a suitable integration time.




                        Figure 6. The basic CCD structure.


96


This completed the basic invention. It should be stressed that the basic unit
of information in the device was a discrete packet of charge and not the volt-
ages and currents of circuit based devices. The CCD is indeed a functional
device and not a collection of individual devices connected by wires.




          Figure 7. The first CCD device.

Finally, it was decided to go ahead and fabricate a device to show experi-
mental feasibility. In less than a week, masks were made and devices were
fabricated and tested. This first simple structure is shown in Figure 7. Charge
was introduced in the first MOS capacitor by thermal generation and then
transferred to the output by applying voltages to the plates where it was de-
tected by pushing the charge into the substrate and measuring the substrate
current.




                                                                            97


      Figure 8. The first integrated device.


The first device was very crude but charge transfer was successfully demon-
strated and this was followed by the first integrated structure, which is shown
in Figure 8. This device had a three-phase metallization and diffused input
and output successfully demonstrating that it could be operated as a serial
memory, the first driving force of the invention. It is no surprise that we tried
to use the eight bit CCD as a linear scanning imaging device and the first
rather crude image is shown in Figure 9.




      Figure 9. Oscilloscope display of the output of the 8-bit device used as an imager.


98


Figure 10. Traps at the Si-SiO2 interface.

Following the initial experiments, it was evident that the main problem with
the device was charge transfer inefficiency, the inability to transfer all of the
charge from one element to the next. The main reason for this was the trap-
ping of charge in traps at the silicon-silicon dioxide interface, see Figure 10.
The trapped electrons would emit at a later time causing smearing of the im-
age. So Bill and I got together again and invented the buried channel CCD,
which placed the stored charge in the interior of the semiconductor where
there was relatively little trapping. The structure is shown in Figure 11 where
a lightly doped n layer has been added to the original structure. Once the
layer has been depleted by transferring the electrons to the output diode,
the resulting potential is shown. Electrons in the channel region will now
accumulate in the valley created in the interior of the silicon and kept away
from the surface traps.

                                                                              99


Figure 11. The buried channel CCD.




100


Figure 12. An area imaging CCD geometry.


A period of rapid development followed both at Bell Labs and other com-
panies. One major activity was to make an area imaging device for video
applications. Many different schemes were devised. The one we chose for
the Picturephone application is shown schematically in Figure 12. Linear
CCDs are formed side by side and split into an imaging and storage area.
During a frame time, the image is taken in the upper region and then trans-
ferred rapidly to the lower where it is read out a line at a time by the serial
readout while the next frame is being taken. The chip that we made for the
Picturephone is shown in Figure 13 along with a self-contained experimental
camera. Successful testing of the device is shown in Figure 14.

                                                                           101


Figure 13. The CCD Picturephone imaging chip and a self-contained camera.




Figure 14. W. S. Boyle and G. E. Smith, 1970.




102


Figure 15. An early linear imaging CCD.


Another device that we developed in the early days was a linear scanning
device shown in Figure 15 for possible use in facsimile type applications.
Many other companies initiated strong development efforts after the initial
announcement of the invention was made in early 1970 and the field rapidly
became very active. An aerial photo taken with a linear scanning device made
by Fairchild is shown in Figure16.




                                                                        103


       Figure 16. An aerial photograph taken with a Fairchild linear CCD.

Table 1. Advantages over photographic film
 90% Quantum Efficiency (Film is 5%)
 Long integration times (at 160°K) 20 electrons/hr/pixel)
 Large dynamic range105 electrons/pixel
 Repeatability eliminates systematic errors

Perhaps the most impressive scientific applications were in astronomy, where
the impressive advantages over using photographic film listed in Table 1 led
to many new discoveries. An early four mega pixel CCD for use in an astro-

104


nomical telescope is shown in Figure 17. A comparison between a state of the
art photographic image, Figure 18, compared to an image taken by a CCD,
Figure 19 of the same region, exemplifies this. Such improvements led to
such things as experimental verification of dark matter in the universe.




   Figure 17. An early four 1 Megabit CCD camera for an astronomical telescope.




                 Figure 18. A film photograph of the sky.


                                                                              105


      Figure 19. A CCD image of the same portion of the sky.

In summary, CCDs were born in the Si-SiO2 revolution and, because of their
unique properties, created their own revolution in widespread imaging
device applications listed in Table 2.


Table 2. Imaging device applications of CCD.
 Digital cameras
 TV cameras
 Scanners
 Medical devices
 Fax machines
 Bar code readers
 Satellite surveillance
 Earthly surveillance
 Astronomy




106


References
1.   W. S. Boyle and G. E. Smith, “Charge Coupled Semiconductor Devices,” Bell Sys. Tech. J.,
     49, 587, (1970).
2.   G. F. Amelio, M. F. Tompsett, and G. E. Smith, “Experimental Verification of the
     Charge Coupled Device Concept,” Bell Sys. Tech. J., 49, 593, (1970).
3.   W. S. Boyle & G. E. Smith, US Patent 3,792,322 – Buried Channel Charge Coupled Devices,
     issued February 12, 1974.
Portrait photo of Dr. Smith by photographer Ulla Montan.




                                                                                        107
