                           GU G L I E L M O M A R C O N I

            Wireless telegraphic communication
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1909



The discoveries connected with the propagation of electric waves over long
distances and the practical applications of telegraphy through space, which
have gained for me the high honour of sharing the Nobel Prize for Physics,
have been to a great extent the results of one another.
   The application of electric waves to the purposes of wireless telegraphic
communication between distant parts of the earth, and the experiments
which I have been fortunate enough to be able to carry out on a larger scale
than is attainable in ordinary laboratories, have made it possible to investigate
phenomena and note results often novel and unexpected.
   In my opinion many facts connected with the transmission of electric
waves over great distances still await a satisfactory explanation, and I hope to
be able in this lecture to refer to some observations, which appear to require
the attention of physicists.
    In sketching the history of my association with radiotelegraphy, I might
mention that I never studied physics or electrotechnics in the regular man-
ner, although as a boy I was deeply interested in those subjects.
    I did, however, attend one course of lectures on physics under the late
Professor Rosa at Livorno, and I was, I think I might say, fairly well ac-
quainted with the publications of that time dealing with scientific subjects
including the works of Hertz, Branly, and Righi.
    At my home near Bologna, in Italy, I commenced early in 1895 to carry
out tests and experiments with the object of determining whether it would
be possible by means of Hertzian waves to transmit to a distance telegraphic
signs and symbols without the aid of connecting wires.
    After a few preliminary experiments with Hertzian waves I became very
soon convinced, that if these waves or similar waves could be reliably trans-
 mitted and received over considerable distances a new system of communica-
 tion would become available possessing enormous advantages over flash-
lights and optical methods, which are so much dependent for their success on
 the clearness of the atmosphere.
     My first tests were carried out with an ordinary Hertz oscillator and a


                WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                           197
Branly coherer as detector, but I soon found out that the Branly coherer was
far too erratic and unreliable for practical work.
   After some experiments I found that a coherer constructed as shown in
Fig. 1, and consisting of nickel and silver filings placed in a small gap be-
tween two silver plugs in a tube, was remarkably sensitive and reliable. This
improvement together with the inclusion of the coherer in a circuit tuned
to the wavelength of the transmitted radiation, allowed me to gradually
extend up to about a mile the distance at which I could affect the receiver.




                                     Fig. 1.

   Another, now well-known, arrangement which I adopted was to place
the coherer in a circuit containing a voltaic cell and a sensitive telegraph relay
actuating another circuit, which worked a tapper or trembler and a record-
ing instrument. By means of a Morse telegraphic key placed in one of the
circuits of the oscillator or transmitter it was possible to emit long or short
successions of electric waves, which would affect the receiver at a distance
and accurately reproduce the telegraphic signs transmitted through space by
the oscillator.
   With such apparatus I was able to telegraph up to a distance of about half
a mile.
    Some further improvements were obtained by using reflectors with both
the transmitters and receivers, the transmitter being in this case a Righi os-
cillator.
   This arrangement made it possible to send signals in one definite direction,
but was inoperative if hills or any large obstacle happened to intervene be-
tween the transmitter and receiver.
   In August 1895 I discovered a new arrangement which not only greatly
increased the distance over which I could communicate, but also seemed to
make the transmission independent from the effects of intervening obstacles.


198                              1909 G.MARCONI

  This arrangement (Figs. 2 and 3) consisted in connecting one terminal of
the Hertzian oscillator, or spark producer, to earth and the other terminal to
a wire or capacity area placed at a height above the ground, and in also con-
necting at the receiving end one terminal of the coherer to earth and the
other to an elevated conductor.




                    Fig. 2.                             Fig. 3.

   I then began to examine the relation between the distance at which the
transmitter could affect the receiver and the elevation of the capacity areas
above the earth, and I very soon definitely ascertained that the higher the
wires or capacity areas, the greater the distance over which it was possible to
telegraph.
   Thus I found that when using cubes of tin of about 30 cm side as elevated
conductors or capacities, placed at the top of poles 2 meters high, I could
receive signals at 30 meters distance, and when placed on poles 4 meters high,
at 100 meters, and at 8 meters high at 400 meters. With larger cubes 100 cm
side, fixed at a height of 8 meters, signals could be transmitted 2,400 meters
            1
all round.
   These experiments were continued in England, where in September 1896
a distance of 1 3/4 miles was obtained in tests carried out for the British Gov-
ernment at Salisbury. The distance of communication was extended to 4
miles in March 1897, and in May of the same year to 9 miles. Tape messages
obtained during these tests, signed by the British Government Officers who
were present, are exhibited.2
   In all these experiments a very small amount of electrical power was used,


                  WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                        199
the high tension current being produced by an ordinary Rhumkorff coil.
    The results obtained attracted a good deal of public attention at the time,
such distances of communication being considered remarkable.
    As I have explained, the main feature in my system consisted in the use of
elevated capacity areas or antennae attached to one pole of the high frequency
oscillators and receivers, the other pole of which was earthed.
    The practical value of this innovation was not understood by many physi-
cists 3 for quite a considerable period, and the results which I obtained were
by many erroneously considered simply due to efficiency in details of con-
struction of the receiver, and to the employment of a large amount of en-
ergy.
    Others did not overlook the fact that a radical change had been introduced
by making these elevated capacities and the earth form part of the high fre-
quency oscillators and receivers.
    Prof. Ascoli of Rome gave a very interesting theory of the mode of opera-
tion of my transmitters and receivers in the Elettricista (Rome) issue of August
 1897, in which he correctly attributed the results obtained to the use of ele-
 vated wires or antennae.
    Prof. A. Slaby of Charlottenburg, after witnessing my tests in England in
                                                 4
 1897, came to somewhat similar conclusions.
    Many technical writers have stated that an elevated capacity at the top of
 the vertical wire is unnecessary.
    This is true if the length or height of the wire is made sufficiently great,
 but as this height may be much smaller for a given distance if a capacity area
 is used, it is more economical to use such capacities, which now usually con-
 sist of a number of wires spreading out from the top of the vertical con-
 ductor.
    The necessity or utility of the earth connection has been sometimes ques-
 tioned, but in my opinion no practical system of wireless telegraphy exists
 where the instruments are not connected to earth.
    By "connected to earth" I do not necessarily mean an ordinary metallic
 connection as used for ordinary wire telegraphs.
    The earth wire may have a condenser in series with it, or it may be con-
 nected to what is really equivalent, a capacity area placed close to the surface
 of the ground (Fig. 4).
     It is now perfectly well known that a condenser, if large enough, does not
 prevent the passage of high frequency oscillations, and therefore in these cases
  the earth is for all practical purposes connected to the antennae.


200                             1909 G.MARCONI




                                    Fig. 4.

After numerous tests and demonstrations in Italy and England over distances
varying up to 40 miles, communication was established for the first time across
the English Channel between England and France5 in March 1899 (Fig. 5).




                                    Fig. 5.


                 WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                          201

   From the beginning of 1898 I had practically abandoned the system of
connection shown in Fig. 2, and instead of joining the coherer or detector
directly to the aerial and earth, I connected it between the ends of the sec-
ondary of a suitable oscillation transformer containing a condenser and tuned
to the period of the electrical waves received. The primary of this oscillation
transformer was connected to the elevated wire and to earth (See Fig. 6.)



                        A




                                     Fig. 6.

   This arrangement allowed of a certain degree of syntony, as by varying
the period of oscillation of the transmitting antennae, it was possible to send
messages to a tuned receiver without interfering with others differently
syntonized. 6
   As is now well known, a transmitter consisting of a vertical wire dis-
charging through a spark gap is not a very persistent oscillator, the radiation
it produces being considerably damped. Its electrical capacity is compara-
tively so small and its capability of radiating energy so large, that the oscilla-
tions decrease or die off with rapidity. In this case receivers or resonators of a
considerably different period or pitch are likely to be affected by it.
   Early in 1899 I was able to improve the resonance effects obtainable by
increasing the capacity of the elevated wires by placing adjacently to them
earthed conductors, and inserting in series with the aerials suitable inductance
      7
coils.
   By these means the energy-storing capacity of the aerial was increased,


202                           1909 G.MARCONI

whilst its capability to radiate was decreased, with the result that the energy
set in motion by the discharge formed a train or succession of feebly damped
oscillations.
   A modification of this arrangement, by which excellent results were ob-
tained, is shown in Fig. 7.




                                    Fig. 7.

   In 1900 I constructed and patented a complete system of transmitters and
receivers8 which consisted of the usual kind of elevated capacity area and
earth connection, but these were inductively coupled to an oscillation circuit
containing a condenser, an inductance, and a spark gap or detector, the con-
ditions which I found essential for efficiency being that the periods of elec-
trical oscillation of the elevated wire or conductor should be in tune or
resonance with that of the condenser circuit, and that the two circuits of
the receiver should be in electrical resonance with those of the transmitter
(Fig. 8).
   The circuits consisting of the oscillating circuit and the radiating circuit
were more or less closely "coupled" by varying the distance between them.


                    WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                      203




                         d




                                     Fig. 8.


By the adjustment of the inductance inserted in the elevated conductor and
by the variation of capacity of the condenser circuit, the two circuits were
brought into resonance, a condition which, as I have said, I found essential in
order to obtain efficient radiation.
   Part of my work regarding the utilization of condenser circuits in associa-
tion with the radiating antennae was carried out simultaneously to that of
Prof. Braun, without, however, either of us knowing at the time anything of
the contemporary work of the other.
   A syntonic receiver has already been shown in Fig. 6, and consists of a
vertical conductor or aerial connected to earth through the primary of an
oscillation transformer, the secondary circuit of which included a condenser
and a detector, it being necessary that the circuit containing the aerial and the
circuit containing the detector should be in electrical resonance with each
other, and also in tune with the periodicity of the electric waves transmitted
from the sending station.
   In this manner it was possible to utilize electric waves of low decrement
and cause the receiver to integrate the effect of comparatively feeble but
properly timed elec t rical oscillations in the same way as in acoustics two
tuning forks can be made to affect each other at short distances if tuned to the
same period of vibration.


204                             1909 G.MARCONI

  It is also possible to couple to one sending conductor several differently
tuned transmitters and to a receiving wire a number of corresponding re-
ceivers, as is shown in Figs. 9 and 10, each individual receiver responding




                                   Fig. 9.




                                   Fig. 10.


                WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                           205
only to the radiations of the transmitter with which it is in resonance. 9
    At the time (twelve years ago) when communication was first established
by means of radiotelegraphy between England and France, much discussion
and speculation took place as to whether or not wireless telegraphy would be
practicable for much longer distances than those then covered, and a some-
what general opinion prevailed that the curvature of the Earth would be an
insurmountable obstacle to long distance transmission, in the same way as it
was, and is, an obstacle to signalling over considerable distances by means of
light flashes.
    Difficulties were also anticipated as to the possibility of being able to con-
trol the large amount of energy which it appeared would be necessary to
cover long distances.
    What often happens in pioneer work repeated itself in the case of radio-
telegraphy, the anticipated obstacles or difficulties were either purely imagi-
nary or else easily surmountable, but in their place unexpected barriers mani-
fested themselves, and recent work has been mainly directed to the solution
of problems presented by difficulties which were certainly neither expected
nor anticipated when long distances were first attempted.
    With regard to the presumed obstacle of the curvature of the Earth, I am
 of opinion that those who anticipated difficulties in consequence of the shape
 of our planet had not taken sufficient account of the particular effect of the
 earth connection to both transmitter and receiver, which earth connection
introduced effects of conduction which were generally at that time over-
looked.
    Physicists seemed to consider for a long time that wireless telegraphy was
 solely dependent on the effects of free Hertzian radiation through space, and
 it was years before the probable effect of the conductivity of the Earth be-
 tween the stations was satisfactorily considered or discussed.
    Lord Rayleigh, in referring to transatlantic telegraphy, stated in May
 1903 : "The remarkable success of Marconi in signalling across the Atlantic




                                     Fig. 11.


206                                1909 G.MARCONI

suggests a more decided bending or diffraction of the waves round the per-
turberant Earth than had been expected, and it imparts a great interest to the
theoretical problem10.
   Prof. J. A. Fleming, in his book on The Principles of Electric Wave Telegraphy11,
gives diagrams showing what is now believed to be the diagrammatic rep-
resentation of the detachment of semi-loops of electric strain from a simple
vertical wire (Fig. 11). As will be seen, these waves do not propagate in the
same manner as free radiation from a classical Hertzian oscillator, but glide
along the surface of the Earth.
   Prof. Fleming further states in the above quoted work:
   "The view we here take is that the ends of the semi-loops of electric force,
which terminate perpendicularly on the Earth, cannot move along unless
there are movements of electrons in the Earth corresponding to the wave-
motions above it. From the point of view of the electronic theory of electrici-
ty, every line of electric force in the ether must be either a closed line or its
ends must terminate on electrons of opposite sign. If the end of a line of
strain abuts on the Earth and moves, there must be atom-to-atom exchange
of electrons, or movements of electrons in it. We have many reasons for
concluding that the substances we call conductors are those in which free
movements of electrons can take place. Hence the movements of the semi-
loops of electric force outwards from an earthed oscillator or Marconi aerial
is hindered by bad conductivity on the surface of the Earth and facilitated
over the surface of a fairly good electrolyte, such as sea-water."
   Prof. Zenneck12 has carefully examined the effect of earthed transmitting
and receiving aerials, and has endeavoured to show mathematically that
when the lines of electrical force, constituting a wave front, pass along a
surface of low specific inductive capacity, such as the Earth, they become
inclined forward, their lower ends being retarded by the resistance of the
conductor to which they are attached.
    It therefore seems well established that wireless telegraphy, as practised at
 the present day, is dependent for its operation over long distances on the
conductivity of the Earth, and that the difference in conductivity between the
surface of the sea and land is sufficient to explain the increased distance ob-
 tainable with the same amount of energy in communicating over sea as com-
pared to over land.
    I carried out some tests between a shore station and a ship at Poole, in
 England, in 1902, for the purpose of obtaining some data on this point, and I
noticed that at equal distances a perceptible diminution in the energy of the


                   WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                      207
received waves always occurred when the ship was in such a position as to
allow a low spit of sand about 1 kilometer broad to intervene between it and
the land station.
   I therefore believe that there was some foundation for the statement so
often criticized which I made in my first English Patent of June 2, 1896 to
the effect that when transmitting through the earth or water I connected one
end of the transmitter and one end of the receiver to earth.
                                                 13
   In January 1901 some successful experiments were carried out between
two points on the South Coast of England 186 miles apart, i.e. St. Catherines'
Point (Isle of Wight) and The Lizard in Cornwall (Fig. 12).




                                    Fig. 12.


   The total height of these stations above sea level did not exceed 100 meters,
whereas to clear the curvature of the Earth a height of more than 1,600 me-
ters at each end would have been necessary.
   The results obtained from these tests, which at the time constituted a rec-
ord distance, seemed to indicate that electric waves produced in the manner
I had adopted would most probably be able to make their way round the
curvature of the Earth, and that therefore even at great distances, such as
those dividing America from Europe, the factor of the Earth’s curvature
would not constitute an insurmountable barrier to the extension of tele-
graphy through space.
   The belief that the curvature of the Earth would not stop the propagation
of the waves, and the success obtained by syntonic methods in preventing
mutual interference, led me in 1900 to decide to attempt the experiment of
testing whether or not it would be possible to detect electric waves over a


208                            1909 G.MARCONI

distance of 4,000 kilometers, which, if successful, would immediately prove
the possibility of telegraphing without wires between Europe and America.
   The experiment was in my opinion of great importance from a scientific
point of view, and I was convinced that the discovery of the possibility to
transmit electric waves across the Atlantic Ocean, and the exact knowledge
of the real conditions under which telegraphy over such distances could be
carried out, would do much to improve our understanding of the phenom-
ena connected with wireless transmission.
   The transmitter erected at Poldhu, on the coast of Cornwall, was similar
in principle to the one I have already referred to, but on a very much larger
scale than anything previously attempted.14
   The power of the generating plant was about 25 kilowatts.
   Numerous difficulties were encountered in producing and controlling for
the first time electrical oscillations of such power. In much of the work I
obtained valuable assistance from Prof. J. A. Fleming, Mr. R. N. Vyvyan, and
Mr. W. S. Entwistle.
   My previous tests had convinced me that when endeavouring to extend
the distance of communication, it was not merely sufficient to augment the
power of the electrical energy of the sender, but that it was also necessary to
increase the area or height of the transmitting and receiving elevated con-
ductors.
   As it would have been too expensive to employ vertical wires of great
height, I decided to increase their number and capacity, which seemed likely
 to make possible the efficient utilization of large amounts of energy.




                                    Fig. 13.


                WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                           209
   The arrangement of transmitting antennae which was used at Poldhu is
shown in Fig. 13, and consisted of a fan-like arrangement of wires supported
by an insulated stay between masts only 48 meters high and 60 meters apart.
These wires converged together at the lower end and were connected to the
transmitting apparatus contained in a building.
   For the purpose of the test a powerful station had been erected at Cape
Cod, near New York, but the completion of the arrangements at that station
were delayed in consequence of a storm which destroyed the masts and
antennae.
   I therefore decided to try the experiments by means of a temporary re-
ceiving station erected in Newfoundland, to which country I proceeded with
two assistants about the end of November 1901.
   The tests were commenced early in December 1901 and on the 12th of
that month the signals transmitted from England were clearly and distinctly
received at the temporary station at St. John’s in Newfoundland.
   Confirmatory tests were carried out in February 1902 between Poldhu
and a receiving station on the S.S. "Philadelphia" of the American Line. On
board this ship readable messages were received by means of a recording
instrument up to a distance of 1,551 miles and test letters as far as 2,099 miles
from Poldhu (Fig. 14).
   The tape records obtained on the "Philadelphia" at the various distances
were exceedingly clear and distinct, as can be seen by the specimens exhib-
ited.
    These results, although achieved with imperfect apparatus, were sufficient
 to convince me and my co-workers that by means of permanent stations and
 the employment of sufficient power it would be possible to transmit mes-
 sages across the Atlantic Ocean in the same way as they were sent over much
 shorter distances.
    The tests could not be continued in Newfoundland owing to the hostility
 of a cable company, which claimed all rights for telegraphy, whether wireless
 or otherwise, in that colony.
    A result of scientific interest which I first noticed during the tests on S.S.
 "Philadelphia" and which is a most important factor in long distance radio-
 telegraphy, was the very marked and detrimental effect of daylight on the
      propagation of electric waves at great distances, the range by night being
                                                               15
 usually more than double that attainable during daytime.
    I do not think that this effect has yet been satisfactorily investigated or
 explained. At the time I carried out the tests I was of opinion that it might be


210                            1909 G.MARCONI




 due to the loss of energy at the transmitter, caused by the dis-electrification
 of the highly charged transmitting elevated conductor under the influence
 of sunlight.


                  WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                       211

   I am now inclined to believe that the absorption of electric waves during
the daytime is due to the electrons propagated into space by the sun, and that
if these are continually falling like a shower upon the earth, in accordance
with the hypothesis of Prof. Arrhenius, then that portion of the Earth’s at-
mosphere which is facing the sun will have in it more electrons than the part
which is not facing the sun, and therefore it may be less transparent to electric
waves.
   Sir J. J. Thomson has shown in an interesting paper in the Philosophical Maga-
zine that if electrons are distributed in a space traversed by electric waves,
these will tend to move the electrons in the direction of the wave, and will
therefore absorb some of the energy of the wave. Hence, as Prof. Fleming
has pointed out in his Cantor Lectures delivered at the Society of Arts, a
medium through which electrons or ions are distributed acts as a slightly
                                         16
turbid medium to long electric waves.
   Apparently the length of wave and amplitude of the electrical oscillations
have much to do with this interesting phenomenon, long waves and small
amplitudes being subject to the effect of daylight to a much lesser degree
than short waves and large amplitudes.
   According to Prof. Fleming the daylight effect should be more marked
                                 17



on long waves, but this has not been my experience. Indeed, in some very
recent experiments in which waves of about 8,000 meters long were used,
the energy received by day was usually greater than at night.
   The fact remains, however, that for comparatively short waves, such as
are used for ship communication, clear sunlight and blue skies, though trans-
parent to light, act as a kind of fog to these waves. Hence the weather con-
ditions prevailing in England, and perhaps in this country, are usually suit-
able for wireless telegraphy.
   During the year 1902 I carried out some further tests between the station
at Poldhu and a receiving installation erected on the Italian Cruiser "Carlo
Alberto", kindly placed at my disposal by H.M. The King of Italy. (See
 Fig. 15.18)
   During these experiments the interesting fact was observed that, even
when using waves as short as 1,000 feet, intervening ranges of mountains,
such as the Alps or Pyrenees, did not, during the night time, bring about any
considerable reduction in the distance over which it was possible to communi-
cate. During daytime, unless much longer waves and more power were used,
intervening mountains greatly reduced the apparent range of the transmitter.
   Messages and press despatches of considerable length were received from


212                            1909 G.MARCONI




                                   Fig. 15.
Poldhu at the positions marked on the map, which map is a copy, on a re-
duced scale, of the one accompanying the official report of the experiments
(Fig. 16).
   With the active encouragement and financial assistance of the Canadian
Government, a high power station was constructed at Glace Bay, Nova
Scotia, in order that I should be able to continue my long-distance tests with
a view to establishing radiotelegraphic communication on a commercial ba-
sis between England and America.19
   On December 16, 1902 the first official messages were exchanged at
night across the Atlantic, between the stations at Poldhu and Glace Bay
(Figs. 17 and 18).
   Further tests were shortly afterwards carried out with another long-dis-
tance station at Cape Cod in the United States of America, and under fa-
vourable circumstances it was found possible to transmit messages to Poldhu
3,000 miles away with an expenditure of electrical energy of only about 10
kilowatts.
   In the spring of 1903 the transmission of press messages by radiotelegraphy
from America to Europe was attempted, and for a time the London Times
published, during the latter part of March and the early part of April of that
year, news messages from its New York correspondent sent across the
Atlantic without the aid of cables.


                  WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                       213
   A breakdown in the insulation of the apparatus at Glace Bay made it
necessary, however, to suspend the service and unfortunately further acci-
dents made the transmission of messages uncertain and unreliable.
   As a result of the data and experience gained by these and other tests which
I carried out for the British Government, between England and Gibraltar, I
was able to erect a new station at Clifden in Ireland, and enlarge the one at
Glace Bay in Canada, so as to enable me to initiate, in October 1907, com-
munication for commercial purposes across the Atlantic between England
and Canada.
   Although the stations at Clifden and Glace Bay had to be put into opera-
tion before they were altogether complete, nevertheless communication
across the Atlantic by radiotelegraphy never suffered any serious interrup-
tion during nearly two years, until, in consequence of a fire at Glace Bay this
autumn, it has had to be suspended for three or four months.
   This suspension has not, however, been altogether an unmitigated evil, as




                                    Fig. 16.


214                             1909 G.MARCONI




                                   Fig. 17.

it has given me the opportunity of installing more efficient and up-to-date
machinery.
   The arrangements of elevated conductors or aerials which I have tried20
during my long-distance tests, are shown in Figs. 19, 20 and 21.
   The aerial shown in Fig. 21 consisted of a nearly vertical portion in the
middle, 220 feet high, supported by four towers, and attached at the top to
nearly horizontal wires, 200 in number and each 1,000 feet long, extending
radially all round and supported at a height of 180 feet from the ground by
an inner circle of 8, and an outer circle of 16 masts.
   The natural period of oscillation of this aerial system gave a wavelength of
12,000 feet. Experiments were made with this arrangement in 1905 and with


                  WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                        215
a wavelength of 12,000 feet, signals, although very weak, could be received
across the Atlantic by day as well as by night.
   The system of aerial I finally adopted for the long-distance stations in
England and Canada is shown in Fig. 22. This arrangement not only makes
it possible to efficiently radiate and receive waves of any desired length, but
it also tends to confine the main portion of the radiation to a given direction.
The limitation of transmission to one direction is not very sharply defined,
but the results obtained with this type of aerial are nevertheless exceedingly
useful.
   Many suggestions respecting methods for limiting the direction of ra-
diating have been made by various workers, notable by Prof. F. Braun, Prof.
Artom, and Messrs. Belhni and Tosi.
   In a paper read before the Royal Society of London21 in March 1906 I
showed how it was possible by means of horizontal aerials to confine the
emitted radiations mainly to the direction of their vertical plane, pointing
away from their earthed end.
   In a similar manner it is possible to locate the bearing or direction of a
sending station.
   The transmitting circuits at the long-distance stations are arranged in ac-




                                    Fig. 18.


216                             1909 G.MARCONI




               Fig. 19.                                   Fig. 20.




                                    Fig. 21.




                                    Fig. 22.
cordance with a comparatively recent system for producing continuous or
slightly damped oscillations, which I referred to in a lecture before the Royal
Institution of Great Britain on March 13, 1908.
   An insulated metal disc A (see Fig. 23) is caused to rotate at a high rate of
speed by means of an electric motor or steam turbine. Adjacent to this disc,
which I will call the middle disc, are placed two other discs C’ and C” which
may be called polar discs, and which are also revolved. These polar discs
have their peripheries very close to the surface or edges of the middle disc.
The two polar discs are connected by rubbing contacts to the outer ends of
two condensers K, joined in series, and these condensers are also connected
through suitable brushes to the terminals of a generator which should be a
high-tension continuous-current generator.
   On the middle disc a suitable brush or rubbing contact is provided and
between this contact and the middle point of the two condensers an oscil-
lating circuit is inserted, consisting of a condenser E in series with an in-


                WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                        217

ductance, which last is inductively connected with the radiating antennae.
  The apparatus works probably in the following manner:
  The generator charges the double condenser, making the potential of the
discs, say C’ positive and C” negative. The potential, if high enough will
cause a discharge to pass across one of the gaps, say between C’ and A. This
charges the condenser E through the inductance F, and starts oscillations in
the circuit. The charge of F in swinging back will jump from A to C”, the
potential of which is of opposite sign to A, the dielectric strength between C’
and A having meanwhile been restored by the rapid motion of the disc,
driving away the ionized air.




                                    Fig. 23.

  The condenser E therefore discharges and recharges alternatively in re-
verse directions, the same process going on so long as energy is supplied to
the condensers K by the generator H.
  It is clear that the discharges between C’ and C” and A are never simul-
taneous as otherwise the centre electrode would not be alternatively positive
and negative.
  The best results have, however, been obtained by an arrangement as
shown in Fig. 24, in which the active surface of the middle disc is not smooth,
but consists of a number of regularly spaced copper knobs or pegs, at the
ends of which the discharges take place at regular intervals. I have found that
with this arrangement each tram of oscillations may have a decrement as
low as 0.02.


218                               1909 G.MARCONI




                                     Fig. 24.


   In this way it is also possible to cause the groups of oscillations radiated to
reproduce a high and clear musical note in a receiver, thereby making it easy
to differentiate between the signals emanating from the sending station and
noises caused by atmospheric electrical discharges. By this method very effi-
cient resonance can be also obtained in appropriately designed receivers.
   With regard to the receivers employed, important changes have taken
place. By far the larger portion of electric wave telegraphy was, until a few
years ago, conducted by means of some form or other of coherer, or variable
contact either requiring tapping or else self-restoring.
   At the present day, however, I may say that at all the stations controlled by
                                                                               22
my Company my magnetic receiver (Fig. 25) is almost exclusively employed.
   This receiver is based on the decrease of magnetic hysteresis which occurs




                                     Fig. 25.


                 WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                        219
in iron when under certain conditions this metal is subjected to the effects of
electrical waves of high frequency.
   It has recently been found possible to increase the sensitiveness of these
receivers, and to employ them in connection with a high-speed relay, so as to
record messages at great speed.
   A remarkable fact, not generally known, in regard to transmitters is, that
none of the arrangements employing condensers exceed in efficiency the
plain elevated aerial or vertical wire discharging to Earth through a spark
gap, as used in my first experiments (see Figs. 2 and 3).
   I have also recently been able to confirm the statement made by Prof.
Fleming in his book The Principles of Electric Wave Telegraphy, 1906, page
555, that with a power of 8 watts in the aerial it is possible to communicate
to distances of over 100 miles.
   I have also found that by this method, when using large aerials, it is pos-
sible to send signals 2,000 miles across the Atlantic, with a smaller expen-
diture of energy than by any other method known to myself.
    The only drawback to this arrangement is, that unless very large aerials
are used, the amount of energy which can be efficiently employed is limited
by the potential beyond which brush discharges and the resistance of the
 spark gap begin to dissipate a large proportion of the energy.
    By means of spark gaps in compressed air and the addition of inductance
 coils placed between the aerial and earth, the system can be made to radiate
 very pure and slightly damped waves, eminently suitable for sharp tuning.
    In regard to the general working of wireless telegraphy, the widespread
 application of the system and the multiplicity of the stations have greatly
 facilitated the observation of facts not easily explainable.
    Thus it has been observed that an ordinary ship station, utilizing about 1/2
 kilowatt of electrical energy, the normal range of which is not greater than
 200 miles, will occasionally transmit messages across a distance of over 1,200
 miles. It often occurs that a ship fails to communicate with a nearby station,
 but can correspond with perfect ease with a distant one.
    On many occasions last winter, the S.S. "Caronia" of the Cunard Line,
 carrying a station utilizing about 1/2 kilowatt, when in the Mediterranean, off
 the coast of Sicily, failed to obtain communication with the Italian stations,
 but had no difficulty whatsoever in transmitting and receiving messages to
 and from the coasts of England and Holland, although these latter stations
 were considerably more than 1,000 miles away, and a large part of the con-
 tinent of Europe and the Alps lay between them and the ship.


220                              1909 G.MARCONI

   Although high power stations are now used for communicating across the
Atlantic, and messages can be sent by day as well as by night, there still exist
short periods of daily occurrence, during which transmission from England
to America, or vice versa, is difficult. Thus in the morning and evening,
when in consequence of the difference in longitude, daylight or darkness ex-
tends only part of the way across the ocean, the received signals are weak and
sometimes cease altogether. It would almost appear as if electric waves in
passing from dark space to illuminated space, and vice versa, were reflected
in such a manner as to be deviated from their normal path.
   It is probable that these difficulties would not be experienced in tele-
graphing over equal distances north and south, on about the same meridian,
as in this case the passage from daylight to darkness would occur almost
simultaneously over the whole distance between the two points.
   Another curious result, on which hundreds of observations continued for
years leave no further doubt, is that regularly, for short periods, at sunrise
and sunset, and occasionally at other times, a shorter wave can be detected
across the Atlantic in preference to the longer wave normally employed.
   Thus at Clifden and Glace Bay when sending on an ordinary coupled cir-
cuit arranged so as to simultaneously radiate two waves, one 12,500 feet and
the other 14,700 feet, although the longer wave is the one usually received
at the other side of the ocean, regularly, about three hours after sunset at
Clifden, and three hours before sunrise at Glace Bay, the shorter wave alone
was received with remarkable strength, for a period of about one hour.
   This effect occurred so regularly that the operators tuned their receivers
to the shorter wave at the times mentioned, as a matter of ordinary routine.
   With regard to the utility of wireless telegraphy there is no doubt that its
use has become a necessity for the safety of shipping, all the principal liners
and warships being already equipped, its extension to less important ships
being only a matter of time, in view of the assistance it has provided in cases
of danger.
   Its application is also increasing as a means of communicating between
outlying islands, and also for the ordinary purposes of telegraphic communi-
cation between villages and towns, especially in the colonies and in newly
 developed countries.
    However great may be the importance of wireless telegraphy to ships and
 shipping, I believe it is destined to an equal position of importance in furnish-
ing efficient and economical communication between distant parts of the
 world and in connecting European countries with their colonies and with


                     WIRELESS TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION                                     221

America. As a matter of fact, I am at the present time erecting a very large
power station for the Italian Government at Coltano, for the purpose of com-
municating with the Italian colonies in East Africa, and with South America.
  Whatever may be its present shortcomings and defects, there can be no
doubt that wireless telegraphy - even over great distances - has come to stay,
and will not only stay, but continue to advance.
  If it should become possible to transmit waves right round the world, it
may be found that the electrical energy travelling round all parts of the globe
may be made to concentrate at the antipodes of the sending station. In this
way it may some day be possible for messages to be sent to such distant lands
by means of a very small amount of electrical energy, and therefore at a
correspondingly small expense.
   But I am leaving the regions of fact, and entering the regions of specu-
lation, which, however, with the knowledge we have gradually gained on
the subject, promise results both useful and instructive.

Not having the fortune of being conversant with the Swedish language, I
have thought it best, although an Italian, to use the medium of the English
language in delivering this address, as I know that English is more generally
understood here than Italian.




 1. G. Marconi, Brit. Patent No. 12,039, June 2, 1896.
 2. J. Inst. Elec. Engrs. (London), 28 (1899) 278.
 3. See letter of Dr. Lodge in The Times (London), June 22, 1897.
 4. A. Slaby, Die Funkentelegraphie, Verlag von Leonhardt Simion, Berlin, 1897; see
     also A. Slaby, "The New Telegraphy", The Century Magazine, 55 (1898) 867.
 5. J. Inst. Elec. Engrs. (London), 28 (1899) 291.
 6. Brit. Patent No. 12,326, June 1, 1898; Brit. Patent No. 6,982, April 1, 1899.
 7. A. Blondel and G. Ferrie, "État actuel et Progrès de la Télégraphie sans Fil", read
     at the Congrès International d’Électricité, Paris, 1900; see also J. Soc. Arts, 49 (1901) 509.
 8. Brit. Patent No. 7,777, April 26, 1900; see also J. Soc. Arts, 49 (1901) 510-11.
 9. See Letter of Prof. J. A. Fleming in The Times (London), October 4, 1900.
 10. PrOC. Roy. Soc. (London), 72 (May 28, 1903).
 11. J.A. Fleming, The Principles of Electric Wave Telegraphy, Longmans, Green & CO.,
     London, 1906, p. 348.
12. J. Zenneck, Ann. Physik, [4], 23 (Sept. 1908) 846; Physik. Z., 9 (1908) 50, 553.
13. J. Soc. Arts, 49 (1901) 512.
14. G. Marconi, lecture before the Royal Institution of Great Britain, June 13, 1902.


222                               1909 G.MARCONI

15. G. Marconi, "A Note on the Effect of Daylight upon the Propagation of Electro-
    magnetic Impulses", Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), 70 (June 12, 1902).
16. See also J. J. Thomson, "On Some Consequences, etc.", Phil. Mag., [6] 4 (1902)
    253.
17. See Ref. 11, p. 618.
18. Riv. Marittima (Rome), October 1902.
19. G. Marconi, Paper read before the Royal Institution of Great Britain, March 3,
    1905.
20. See also G. Marconi, Lecture before the Royal Institution of Great Britain, March
    13, 1908.
21. G. Marconi, "On Methods whereby the Radiation of Electric Waves may be
    mainly confined, etc.", Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), A 77 (1906).
22. G. Marconi, "Note on a Magnetic Detector of Electric Waves", Proc. Roy. Soc.
     (London), 70 (1902) 341.
