                             H   ANNES   ALFVÉN


           Plasma physics, space research and the
                 origin of the solar system
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1970


                          1. Science and instruments

The center of gravity of the physical sciences is always moving. Every new
discovery displaces the interest and the emphasis. Equally important is that
new technological developments open new fields for scientific investigation.
To a considerable extent the way science takes depends on the construction
of new instruments as is evident from the history of science. For example after
the development of classical mechanics and electromagnetism during the 19th
century, a new era was started by the construction of highly developed spec-
trographs in the beginning of this century. For its time those were very com-
plicated and expensive instruments. They made possible the exploration of
the outer regions of the atom. Similarly, in the thirties the cyclotron - for its
time a very complicated and expensive instrument - was of major importance
in the exploration of the nucleus. Finally, the last decade has witnessed the
construction of still more complicated and expensive instruments, the space
vehicles, which are launched by a highly developed rocket technology and
instrumented with the most sophisticated electronic devices. We may then ask
the question: What new fields of research - if any - do these open for scien-
tific investigation ? Is it true, also in this case, that the center of gravity of
physics moves with the big instruments?



                       2. Scientific aims of space research

The first decade of space research mainly concentrated on the exploration of
space near the Earth: the magnetosphere and interplanetary space. These
regions earlier were supposed to be void and structureless but we now know
that they are filled with plasmas, intersected by sheathlike discontinuities, and
permeated by a complicated pattern of electric currents and electric and
magnetic fields. The knowledge gained in this way is fundamental to our


                 PLASMA PHYSICS, SPACE RESEARCH                             307
general understanding of plasmas, especially cosmic plasmas. Indirectly it will
hence be important to thermonuclear research, to the study of the structure
of the galaxy and the metagalaxy, and to cosmological problems. Our ad-
vancing knowledge in cosmical electrodynamics will make it possible to
approach these fields in a less speculative way than hitherto. The knowledge
of plasmas is also fundamental to our understanding of the origin and evolu-
tion of the Solar System, because there are good reasons to believe that the
matter which now forms the celestial bodies once was dispersed in a plasma
state.
   The second decade of space research seems to display a different character,
at least to some extent. As several of the basic problems of the magnetosphere
and interplanetary space are still unsolved, one can be sure that these regions
will still command much interest. However, the lunar landings and also the
deep-space probes to Venus and Mars have supplied us with so many new
scientific facts that the emphasis in space research is moving towards the
exploration of the Moon, the planets, and other celestial bodies in the Solar
 System.
    The first phase of this exploration is necessarily of a character somewhat
similar to the exploration of the polar regions and other regions of the earth
 which have been difficult to reach: a detailed mapping-out combined with
 geological, seismic, magnetic, and gravity surveys and an exploration of the
 atmospheric conditions. However, when applying this research pattern to
 the Moon and the planets one is confronted with another problem, viz. how
 these bodies were originally formed. In fact many of the recent space research
 reports end with speculations about the formation and evolution of the solar
 system. It seems that this will necessarily be one of the main problems - per-
 haps the main problem - on which space research will center in the near future.
 Already at an early data NASA stated that the main scientific goal of space
 research should be to clarify how the solar system was formed. This is indeed
 one of the fundamental problems of science. We are trying to write the scien-
 tific version of how our Earth and its neighbors once were created. From
 a - shall we say - philosophical point of view, this is just as important as the
 structure of matter, which has absorbed most of the interest during the first
 two thirds of this century.


308                      1970 HANNES ALFVÉN

                    3. Plasma physics and its applications

Before we concentrate on our main topic: how the solar system originated,
we should make a brief summary of the state of plasma physics. As you know,
plasma physics has started along two parallel lines. The first one was the
hundred years old investigations in what was called electrical discharges in
gases. This approach was to a high degree experimental and phenomenologi-
cal, and only very slowly reached some degree of theoretical sophistication.
Most theoretical physicists locked down on this field, which was complicated
and awkward. The plasma exhibited striations and double-layers, the electron
distribution was non-Maxwellian, there were all sorts of oscillations and in-
stabilities. In short, it was a field which was not at all suited for mathemati-
cally elegant theories.
   The other approach came from the highly developed kinetic theory of
ordinary gases. It was thought that with a limited amount of work this field
could be extended to include also ionized gases. The theories were mathemati-
cally elegant and when drawing the consequences of them it was found that
it should be possible to produce a very hot plasma and confine it magnetically.
This was the starting point of thermonuclear research.
   However, these theories had initially very little contact with experimental
plasma physics, and all the awkward and complicated phenomena which had
been treated in the study of discharges in gases were simply neglected. The
result of this was what has been called the thermonuclear crisis some 10 years
ago. It taught us that plasma physics is a very difficult field, which can only
be developed by a close cooperation between theory and experiments. As
H.S.W. Massey once said (in a somewhat different context): « The human
brain alone is not able to work out the details and understanding of the inner
workings of natural processes. Without laboratory experiment there would
be no physical science today. »
    The cosmical plasma physics of today is far less advanced than the thermo-
nuclear research physics. It is to some extent the playground of theoreticians
who have never seen a plasma in a laboratory. Many of them still believe in
formulae which we know from laboratory experiments to be wrong. The
astrophysical correspondence to the thermonuclear crisis has not yet come.
    I think it is evident now that in certain respects the first approach to the
physics of cosmical plasmas has been a failure. It turns out that in several
important cases this approach has not given even a first approximation to
 truth but led into dead-end streets from which we now have to turn back.


                   PLASMA PHYSICS, SPACE RESEARCH                                   309
The reason for this is that several of the basic concepts on which the theories
are founded, are not applicable to the condition prevailing in cosmos. They
are « generally accepted » by most theoreticians, they are developed with the
most sophisticated mathematical methods and it is only the plasma itself
which does not « understand », how beautiful the theories are and absolutely
refuses to obey them. It is now obvious that we have to start a second approach
from widely different starting points.



    4. Characteristics of first and second approach to cosmic plasma physics

The two different approaches can be summarized in Table 1.
  If you ask where the border goes between the first approach and the second
approach today, an approximate answer is that it is given by the reach of
spacecrafts. This means that in every region where it is possible to explore
the state of the plasma by magnetometers, electric field probes and particle
analyzers, we find that in spite of all their elegance, the first approach theories
have very little to do with reality. It seems that the change from the first
approach to the second approach is the astrophysical correspondence to the
thermonuclear crisis.

                                         Table 1
                               CosmicaI electrodynamics

First approach                                Second approach

Homogeneous models                            Space plasmas have often a complicated
                                              inhomogeneous structure
Conductivity     = co                           depends on current and often suddenly
Electric         =o                           becomes o, E,, often o
Magnetic field lines are « frozen in » and    Frozen-in picture often completely mis-
« move » with the plasma.                     leading.
Electromagnetic conditions illustrated by     It is equally important to draw the current
magnetic field line picture.                  lines and discuss the electric circuit.
Electrostatic double layers neglected.        Electrostatic double layers are of decisive
                                              importance in low density plasmas.
Filamentary structures and current sheets     Currents produce filaments or flow in thin
neglected or treated inadequately.            sheets.
Theories mathematically elegant and very      Theories still not very well developed and
well developed.                               partly phenomenological.


310                        1970 HANNES ALFVÉN

                        5. The origin of the solar system

From what has been said it is obvious that astrophysics runs the risk of getting
too speculative, unless it tries very hard to keep contact with laboratory
physics. Indeed it is essential to stress that astrophysics is essentially an appli-
cation to cosmic phenomena of the laws of nature found in the laboratory.
From this follows that a particular field of astrophysics is not ripe for a scien-
tific approach before experimental physics has reached a certain state of de-
velopment. As a well-known historic example, before the advance of nuclear
physics the attempts to understand how the stars generated their energy could
not possibly be more than speculations without very much permanent value.
   The problem of how the solar system originated has been the subject of a
large number of highly divergent hypotheses. The reason for this has been
that there was not enough basic knowledge of physics in the fields essential
for the understanding of the phenomena and for a decision about which
processes were possible.
   However before we discuss any details of a theory of the origin and evolu-
tion of the solar system, it is essential to define what general character such
a theory should have. In the past too much attention has been concentrated
on the formation of planets around the sun. One of the unfortunate results
of this is that many theories of the origin of the solar system have been based
on theories of the early history of the sun. This is a very shaky basis because
the formation of the sun (and other stars) is a highly controversial subject.
Recognizing that the satellite systems of Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus are very
similar to the planetary system, and at least as regular as this system, it seems
now more appropriate to aim at a general theory of the formation of second-
ary bodies around a central body, regarding the formation of the planetary
system as only one of the applications of such a general theory.
    The study of the sequence of processes by which the solar system originated
has often been called cosmogony, a term which, however, is used in many oth-
er connections. As the origin of the solar system is essentially a question of
the repeated formation of secondary bodies around a primary body, the term
 hetegony (from Greek hetairos or hetes = companion) has been suggested.
    It seems likely (and is fairly generally agreed) that the sequence of events
leading to the formation of the solar system is likely to have been as shown
 in Fig. 1 (we are here following what has been called the « planetesimal »
 approach). A primeval plasma was concentrated in certain regions around a
 central body, and condensed to small solid grains. (Even the primeval plasma


                 PLASMA PHYSICS, SPACE RESEARCH                                311



              Present state                 Asteroids   Satellites




may have contained grains.) The grains accreted to what have been called
embryos and by further accretion larger bodies were formed: planets if the
central body was the sun, and satellites if it was a planet. The place of the
asteroids in the hetegonic diagram is controversial. They have formerly been
generally considered to be fragments of a broken-up planet, but there are now
an increasing number of arguments for the view that they represent - or at
least are similar to - an intermediate state in the formation of planets. A clarifi-
cation of these two alternatives is important.
   Even if the diagram of Fig. 1 is fairly generally accepted as it stands, this
does not mean that the different processes are clarified. To a high degree they
are still of a hypothetical character. Up to rather recently this has necessarily
been the case because the basic processes have not been known very well. To
some extent we have been in the same situation as the astrophysicists trying to
clarify the energy generation in stars before the advent of nuclear physics.
However, the situation seems now to be changing so that there is a good hope
to bring the whole field of research from the state of a discussion of more or
less bright hypotheses to a systematic scientific analysis.



      6. Basic knowledge for the reconstruction of the hetegonic processes

Besides plasma physics, which we have already discussed, there are a number
of other fields of research which are basic for the reconstruction of the hete-
gonic processes.


312                         1970 HANNES ALFVÉN

(I ) Plasma chemistry means the field of research concerned with chemical re-
actions in a plasma. These are basically different from the reactions in non-
ionized gases. It should also be considered to include the separation of different
elements which takes place in an inhomogeneous plasma due to, e.g. tempera-
ture gradients and electric currents. Furthermore, the interaction between a
plasma and a solid grain condensing from it is highly dependent on the state of
ionization. The laboratory results and their application to cosmic conditions
are relevant for the understanding of the different chemical composition of
the celestial bodies.
    For the next process in our evolutionary diagram, viz. the accretion of
larger bodies from the initial condensation, the following fields of research
are essential.
( 2 ) S o l i d - b o d y collisions. The grains which are the primary result of the con-
densation will move in Kepler orbits around the central body, but their mo-
tion will be disturbed by several effects. One of them is due to the mutual
collisions. The relative velocities at these collisions may have any value from
zero up to some 10 km/sec. This means that in many cases we are in the region
of « hypervelocity » collisions. This is a field which is not yet understood very
well. Available laboratory results seem to be scarce, and their application to
cosmic conditions is uncertain because we know very little about the structure
of the grains. Collisions between bodies with fluffy shock-absorbing surface
layers are likely to differ from collisions between hard « marbles ». Meteorite
studies are supplying us with some information. The Apollo results about
meteoroid impact on the lunar surface are another important source of knowl-
edge. In these cases, however, we do not gain very much information about
the structure of the grains in space, because the particles we recover have
either passed the terrestrial atmosphere or been destroyed by impact on the
lunar surface.
(3) The study Kepler motion in a viscous medium is essential for our under-
standing of the evolution of the orbits of the grains and the embryos. From
a formal point of view this problem is similar to some basic problems in
plasma physics, which are also concerned with a large number of interacting
particles. It turns out that in the neighborhood of a central body the con-
densed grains have a tendency to move in similar orbits, thus forming what
have been called « jet streams » in space.
(4) Celestial mechanics serves of course as a general background for the whole
hetegonic process. This field has been rejuvenated by the application of com-
puter analysis to many of the problems which were formerly impossible to


                 PLASMA PHYSICS, SPACE RESEARCH                              313
handle. Connected with this is the discovery of the importance of resonance
phenomena in the present structure of the solar system. It seems likely that at
hetegonic times also resonances played a decisive role.
(5) The hetegonic processes took place 4 to 5 billion years ago. The evolution
of the primary product of these processes into our present-day solar system
has consisted of a number of relatively slow changes: geological forces have
transformed the structure of the planets, tidal effects have braked the spins of
some of the bodies (especially of the satellites), collisions have taken place in
the asteroidal belt, and there have been meteor impacts on the planetary sur-
faces, etc. All these effects are important for the reconstruction of the state of
the system immediately after the hetegonic processes ended. It is only after
« correcting » for them that the solar system data we observe today are of value
for the reconstruction of the hetegonic processes.



           7. Space observations relevant to the hetegonic problem

From the analysis we have made it is evident that the background knowledge
necessary for the understanding of the hetegonic processes is rapidly increasing
through advances in several different fields of research. We shall now discuss
the question of what sort of space missions are of special value for the study
of the hetegonic problem.
   Let us first state that many of the space missions which are carried out today
or planned for the future give valuable contributions. Increased knowledge
of the behavior of cosmic plasmas is gained by spacecraft carrying out plasma
and particle measurements in the magnetosphere and interplanetary space.
Further, meteor impacts on spacecraft supply us with information of the very
small bodies in our environment, which are probably related to those small
bodies out of which our present planets once accreted. Particularly important
is the study of meteor impacts on the Moon (and on Mars). Hence these and
other investigations « automatically » contribute to the background knowl-
edge necessary for the solution of the hetegonic problem. But although this
is satisfactory there are a number of crucial problems which cannot be solved
unless space research is purposely directed towards solving them. We shall
now discuss how this could be done.


314                       1970 H A N N E S A L F V É N

                        8. Big bodies versus small bodies

It is usually thought that after the lunar landings the most important missions
will be those to Venus, Mars, and the other planets. This is not necessarily true,
because missions to asteroids and comets would be at least as interesting from
a scientific point of view. As some asteroids are the closest neighbours of the
Earth-Moon system, this would also be the easiest from a technical point of
view.
    Our analysis has indicated which fields of research will contribute to the
clarification of different phases of the hetegonic processes. Plasma physics and
plasma chemistry are important for the first phase, including the condensation
of small grains. The study of meteorite and asteroid sized bodies will have
bearing on the accretion. We can state as a general rule that the smaller the
body the further will the study of it bring us back in time. Thus small bodies
will be relevant to earlier periods more than large bodies. This means that it is
essentially through studying the properties of small bodies in space that we
can hope to understand the crucial phase in the formation of the solar system
when most of the matter, which later formed the planets and satellites, was
still dispersed.
    There is evidence that during the formation of the planets and satellites a
great deal of information about the formation processes was stored in them.
However, to a large extent this information is either obliterated or inacces-
sible. The planets are likely to have accreted from « planetesimals ». The earliest
 phase of this accretion produced a small body, the matter of which may today
be in the core of the planet, which means that it is inaccessible even if a manned
 spacecraft should land on the surface of the planet. There is also a possibility
 that, for example, convection in the interior of the planet has more or less
 completely obliterated the information once stored there. Concerning the
 surface layers, geological processes, including atmospheric effects, have most-
 ly wiped out the surface traces of the hetegonic processes in Earth and proba-
 bly also in Venus. In other bodies like the Moon and Mars, and probably also
 Mercury, there seems to be considerable information left, but only referring
 to the very last phase of the hetegonic processes.
    Hence our conclusion is that studies of large bodies like the planets has only
 a limited value for the study of the origin of the solar system.
    Asteroids, comets and meteoroids are different in this respect. Even if some
 of these bodies are fragments produced at collisions in space it is very likely
 that also these fragments contain considerable information about the conden-


                 PLASMA PHYSICS, SPACE RESEARCH                             315
sation and the accretion processes. Because of the smallness of the bodies there
is no heating or convection in their interior which can obliterate the informa-
tion stored from the time when they were produced, and at least in the very
small bodies and by the fragmented bodies their « interior » is accessible. Fur-
thermore, a study of them will give us knowledge of the behavior of small
bodies in space which will be valuable for the clarification of the hetegonic
processes in general. We study in them intermediate products in the manu-
facturing of planets. They give us, so-to-say, snapshots showing the sequence
of events when a planet like the Earth once was created.



                       9. Old and new fields of science

We shall now return from our odyssey in both space and time to our starting
point - how new technologies displace the center of gravity of the physical
sciences. The great revolution in physics which took place in the beginning of
this century meant that classical mechanics and classical electrodynamics were
considered to be more or less obsolete as fields of research. The new fields
which attracted the interest were the theory of relativity and quantum me-
chanics and the experimental work was largely concentrated on the explora-
tion of the electron shells of the atom. The advance of nuclear physics marked
another step in a similar direction.
   The new trend which is introduced by the rise of plasma physics and space
research is to some extent opposite. In these fields quantum mechanics and the
theory of relativity are not very important. Instead, classical mechanics has
become rejuvenated and is essential not only for calculating the trajectories of
spacecraft but also for the study of the motion of the natural celestial bodies
during their evolutionary history. Also classical electromagnetism is of deci-
sive importance to the theory of magnetized plasmas, which is basic both for
thermonuclear research and for astrophysics in general. This does not mean
that we should make the mistake - similar to what was made 50 years ago - of
declaring the atomic and nuclear physics to be obsolete. They are not. They
have an enormous inertia which will keep them moving, and they will pro-
duce many new and interesting results. But they have got very serious com-
petitors, and remarkably enough these are the fields which earlier were
declared dead that are now being resurrected.
   It is possible that this new era also means a partial return to more under-
standable physics. For the non-specialists four-dimensional relativity theory,


316                        1970 HANNES          ALFVÉN


and the indeterminism of atom structure have always been mystic and difficult
to understand. I believe that it is easier to explain the 33 instabilities in plasma
physics or the resonance structure of the solar system. The increased emphasis
on the new fields mean a certain demystification of physics. In the spiral or
trochoidal motion which science makes during the centuries, its guiding cen-
ter has returned to those regions from where it started. It was the wonders of
the night sky, observed by Indians, Sumerians or Egyptians, that started
science several thousand years ago. It was the question why the wanderers - the
planets - moved as they did that triggered off the scientific avalanche several
hundred years ago. The same objects are now again in the center of science -
only the questions we ask are different. We now ask how to go there, and we
also ask how these bodies once were formed. And if the night sky on which
we observe them is at a high latitude, outside this lecture hall - perhaps over
a small island in the archipelago of Stockholm - we may also see in the sky an
aurora, which is a cosmic plasma, reminding us of the time when our world
was born out of plasma. Because in the beginning was the plasma.
