                       HE I K E K A M E R L I N G H O N N E S


  Investigations into the properties of substances at
  low temperatures, which have led, amongst other
     things, to the preparation of liquid helium
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1913


Since you have done me the honour of describing to you my investigations
into the properties of substances at low temperatures, which have also led
me, amongst other things, to the preparation of liquid helium, I must first of
all express my deepest thanks to your old and famous Academy for distin-
guishing me in this manner. This has happened at a time when the continua-
tion of my work will make great demands upon me. Nothing could make
me more able than your good will does to meet new problems with the same
hopeful confidence with which, 30 years ago, I met difficulties now over-
come.
   The main aim in investigations at low temperatures has greatly changed
since then. When I first turned to this field of work the aim was still to lique-
fy statically the gases which up to then had not been mastered and to pour
into open containers those gases which it is most difficult to liquefy.
    What has given a character of its own to the Leyden work from the very
beginning is that I allowed myself to be led by Van der Waals’ theories,
particularly by the law of corresponding states which at that time had just
been deduced by Van der Waals.
    This law had a particular attraction for me because I thought to find the
basis for it in the stationary mechanical similarity of substances and from this
point of view the study of deviations in substances of simple chemical struc-
ture with low critical temperatures seemed particularly important.
    I was greatly drawn to making the necessary precision measurements at
low temperatures. To this end large measuring instruments had to be main-
tained at constant temperatures, and one had also to construct suitable tem-
perature baths - which would also be very useful for other investigations - to
cover the whole field of low temperatures.
   Just as I was thinking about how to do this, the basic classic work of
Wroblewski and Olszewski appeared on the static liquefaction of oxygen.
This meant that the determination of isotherms of hydrogen in a bath of


             LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM                         307
liquid oxygen was of great value, particularly with regard to liquefaction of
hydrogen. These determinations were not carried out until the second ten-
year period of the cryogenic institute and the results could not be published
until many years after Dewar had already liquefied hydrogen. The first
great stage in the development of the cryogenic laboratory, which made
measurements in a bath of liquid oxygen possible, was likewise not reached
until after ten years. Olszewski and Dewar had by then already solved the
problem of pouring oxygen into open containers.
   The Leyden process differed from the others as follows : in order to have a
permanent bath available, the evaporated oxygen was liquefied again and
conducted through a closed circulation system. When the apparatus in the
Leyden laboratory was further developed the production of circulation sys-
tems of the same type was considered, although the investigations to be car-
ried out were directed towards still lower temperatures. Earlier experience
could thus be used in attacking a later problem and this was decisive for the
liquefaction of helium. Thus the whole cryogenic laboratory still bears the
marks left on it by its early problems.
   The range of low temperatures now available to us far exceeds what I ever
dreamt of at the beginning, for helium was not discovered until later and this
allows us to get five to ten times nearer to absolute zero than is possible with
hydrogen.
   At the same time the aim of the cryogenic laboratory, which had originally
been a limited one, became much more diverse.
   This was the case as early as ten years ago, when I discussed in my rectorial
address the programme of the laboratory at that time. Besides thermody-
namic questions, questions relating to other fields were dealt with.
   Thermodynamic problems were then in the forefront as far as the cryo-
genic section of the laboratory was concerned, because it was particularly
work on the equation of state which was concentrated on low temperatures.
But questions of other types, which demanded investigations at low tem-
peratures, had become so numerous and important that I had felt it indicated
that I should continue the other groups of work also exclusively at low tem-
peratures, and dedicate the Leyden institute entirely to a study of the general
character of the influence of low temperatures.
   It is due to having specialized in this way that I was able to co-operate
with a number of learned men who accepted the hospitality of the labor-
atory. The decision to make the Leyden institute an institute which co-ope-
rated with other larger ones, being a special institute for the more difficult


308                      1913 H. KAMERLINGH ONNES

work in the field of low temperatures, has been found to be well worth as the
scientific basis of this collaboration.
   During the specialization in the Leyden institute, which is now completed,
I was of course convinced that the investigations into the properties of sub-
stances at low temperatures would provide explanations for many of these
properties. But my expectations were far surpassed by the reality. Not only
has it been generally desirable - and to a far greater extent than was foreseen
- to simplify as far as possible the conditions under which the phenomena
occur, via extensive suppression of thermal motion, but it has also been shown
that with liquid helium one can take an unexpectedly long step in this direc-
tion, as it permits temperatures to be reached which, for certain phenomena,
represent practically absolute zero. Further discoveries in another field have
made necessary, in an unexpected connection, the examination of many
properties in the neighbourhood of absolute zero. The Nernst heat theorem
and, especially, Planck’s quantum theory and zero-point energy theory
have made measurements at low temperatures of prime interest to physicists.
   It is true that Faraday’s problem as to whether all gases can be liquefied
has been solved step by step in the sense of Van der Waals’ words "matter
will always show attraction", and thus a fundamental problem has been re-
moved. At the same time, however, the question asked by Planck introduces
a problem which is probably no less fundamental, to the solution of which
investigations into the properties of substances at low temperatures can con-
tribute.

I would now ask you to follow me into the Leyden laboratory.
   As I have already briefly explained, the measurements are made in baths of
liquid gases, which are maintained as long as is required in cryostats (equip-
ment for maintaining constant low temperatures), the evaporated gas being
allowed to circulate - it is sucked up and liquefied again.
   The cycles for the various gases, as in Pictet’s famous experiment, are joined
in cascades, so that the cold bath, which can be maintained by a previous
cycle, also serves to liquefy at a lower temperature the gas which circulates in
the following cycle. In Fig. 1 is shown diagrammatically the various cycles
with the exception of that for helium. They are shown by various sorts of lines.
   The first cycle contains methyl chloride. The liquid methyl chloride is in a
condenser cooled by water. From the condenser it passes into a refrigerator,
where it evaporates under a pressure corresponding to the temperature nec-
essary to liquefy ethylene. The vapour is sucked up by a large vacuum pump


LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM   309




                Fig. 1.


310                        1913 H.KAMERLINGH ONNES

 through a regenerator (in which, according to the counter-current principle,
 it flows past the ethylene which is being cooled), and is led by a conjugated
 compressor back to the condenser where it is liquefied.
    In the second cycle is the ethylene. Circulation proceeds in the same way
 as in the first cycle.
    In the third cycle the oxygen circulates in the same way. The liquefied
 oxygen can also serve to produce liquid air in the oxygen refrigerator.
    The cryostat with the bath of liquid oxygen, of which I spoke before, was
 erected without using vacuum glass vessels. It was connected to the lique-
 fying apparatus and the measurements could thus only be made in the im-
 mediate neighbourhood of this apparatus. Dewar revolutionized working at
 low temperatures by introducing his silvered vacuum glass vessels. The liq-
 uid oxygen could be stored in these vessels and transported in them from
 the liquefying apparatus to the point where one wished to use it. When
 working the cycles and in my subsequent work I found Dewar’s ingenious
idea very useful.
     The liquid air is prepared in the fourth cycle. The other cycles are closed
 but this can be broken into. Air is sucked up from the room and a supply of
 liquid air can be stored in open vacuum glass vessels.
     Shortly after success had been achieved in making available a permanent
 bath of liquid oxygen, the great master of refrigeration technique, Linde,
 discovered the process by means of which he created the liquid-air industry.
 This ingenious discovery permits the air, starting from normal temperature,
 to be liquefied without intermediate stages. You will see that the prepara-
 tion of liquid hydrogen and liquid helium in the following cycles, which
 demands each time a similarly large temperature drop without an interme-
 diate stage, is based on the principles of the Linde process. We, however, still
 always prepare the liquid air by means of cycles joined in cascade, as already
 described. When considering this arrangement, which is also very econom-
 ical and supplies about 14 litres per hour, it must be borne in mind that all the
 relevant cycles here must be ready for continuous work so that during exper-
 iments in the laboratory the whole temperature range down to -217oC is
 always freely available.
     Fig. 2 shows a view of the four first cycles of the Leyden cascade. The con-
jugated pumps for the methyl chloride and ethylene circulation systems and
 the Brotherhood compressor for the oxygen cycle can clearly be seen. (Many
 pieces of equipment can also be seen which are used for taking various meas-
 urements; the figure does not show either the Brotherhood air compressor


LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM   311




                Fig. 2.


312   1913 H. KAMERLINGH ONNES




             Fig. 3.


            LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM                         313
or the vacuum pumps which are so important to the working of the appara-
tus and which make evaporation possible under very low pressure. These
are particularly important to the measurements because it is with their help
that a wide temperature range can be covered with the same liquid gas.)
   Let us now consider the hydrogen cycle. When I began to consider lique-
fying hydrogen, I started from the principle of mechanical similarity, al-
ready mentioned. From this and the critical data determined in such a mas-
terly way by Olszewski it could be concluded that if one were successful
in constructing an apparatus suitable as a model, which liquefies oxygen
starting from a normal temperature, it would also be possible, with apparatus
based on this model, to liquefy hydrogen starting from the temperature of the
liquid oxygen. Long before I had the opportunity of using this principle, hy-
drogen had already been liquefied by Dewar. I have already discussed the
great importance of Dewar’s brilliant triumph for physics measurements in
the rectorial address referred to above. In the liquid hydrogen we have at our
disposal a freezing agent which leads us five times nearer to absolute zero
than does liquid air. In Leyden a cycle which worked continuously was set
 up to make use of this. (Owing to the great demands made by the precision
 measurements which were envisaged at hydrogen temperatures, this did not
 come into being until many years later.) The circulation system is shown
 diagrammatically in Fig. 1.
    The compressed hydrogen comes out of the refrigerator in which air is
 evaporating at the air pump, into a regenerator spiral with a throttle valve,
 which, following Dewar’s example, is placed in a silvered vacuum glass. The
 spiral itself is modelled on the extremely practical Hampson apparatus for
 air liquefaction.
    The liquid hydrogen collects in a Dewar glass and (as indicated by a float)
 is siphoned over into transportable, silvered vacuum glass vessels, which are
 connected to the container for pure hydrogen. The liquid hydrogen is si-
 phoned out of the vacuum glass vessels in a similar way into the cryostats.
 It is clear that very pure hydrogen, a carefully closed cycle and special pumps
                                     3
 must be used to circulate 40 m per hour continuously, since only a little
 admixture of air will block up the fine ducts and valves through which the
 hydrogen has to flow.
     The circulation is shown in the accompanying Fig. 3. The compressors,
  the liquefying apparatus and the vacuum pump for evaporating the liquid
  air in the refrigerator can easily be recognized. Much more apparatus is nec-
  essary to ensure the regular supply of 10 litres of liquid hydrogen per hour


314                      1913 H. KAMERLINGH ONNES

which we now obtain and to enable the larger supplies, necessary when work-
ing with liquid helium, to be collected.
  Tubing to suck the gas out of the cryostats connects the cycles described
with all the working rooms. Thus, by means of liquefied gases, which evap-
orate under suitable pressure and which are, so to speak, as freely available as
water, it is possible to maintain constant temperatures down to the freezing
point of hydrogen in all parts of the laboratory.

Let us now turn to the experiments which have been carried out by this
method.
   Generally speaking the first task was to suit the measuring apparatuses to
the method of working chosen. They had to be enclosed in an air-tight
chamber, which was not always easy. It was, however, often important. For,
once a cryostat of this type suitable for the experiments had been constructed,
there was the advantage that one could pour the various gases one after an-
other into the same cryostat and thus run through the whole range of low
temperatures without the measuring apparatus having to be altered at all.
   I cannot spend much time over this equipment (nor can I linger over that
for the handling of baths, although this was often decisive for the success of
difficult measurements, since it permitted the observer to concentrate all his
attention on the measurements). I would prefer to put forward that the in-
vestigations in which they were used have led to a knowledge of the tem-
perature dependence of properties of very different type. In mentioning some
of these I will limit myself to those investigations which went down as far as
the freezing point of hydrogen. May I first mention a few people who have
collaborated with me.
   Mr. J. Becquerel came to examine the absorption spectra of rare earths with
and without magnetic field (Zeeman phenomenon), Messrs. Becquerel, fa-
ther and son, to examine the phosphorescence of the uranyl compounds, Mr.
Lenard and Mr. Pauli to examine the long-lasting phosphorescence of the
alkaline earth sulphides, Mme. Curie to examine the penetrating radiation of
radium, Mr. Weber to determine the viscosity of gaseous hydrogen and he-
lium. I am particularly glad to mention that the deserving Swedish research
worker Mr. Bengt Beckman and his wife came to Leyden to work on a num-
ber of problems mainly connected with his Uppsala experiments, from
amongst which I name the Hall effect of alloys and the increase in resistance
brought about by pressure in lead. I would like to show here (in Fig. 4) a
diagram taken from a work by Dr. Beckman, in which baths of ethylene,


        LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM                          315




                                   Fig. 4.


oxygen and hydrogen were used. The diagram shows to what high values
the magnetic increase in resistance of bismuth rises at hydrogen temper-
atures.
   A group particularly closely connected with the experiments last mention-
ed is made up of those concerned with magnetism.
   Mr. Weiss came to determine the magnetic moment of the molecular mag-
nets of ferromagnetic substances by means of saturation measurements at the
melting point of hydrogen. Later, when Weiss discovered the magneton,


316                      1913 H.KAMERLINGH ONNES

the results contributed to the determination of its value, which is prob-
ably fundamental to the magnetic moments of all atoms. The experiment
undertaken by Mr. Perrier and myself on liquid and solid oxygen led to
deviations from the Curie law, which we then found also with paramagnetic
salts. During the continuation of the work with Mr. Oosterhuis it was found
that one class of these deviations can be explained by assuming a Weiss molec-
ular field with a negative sign, which then - according to investigations by
Mr. Perrier and myself into the susceptibility of liquid mixtures of oxygen
and nitrogen and following up Weiss’ theory - could be conceived as a func-
tion of the spacing of the molecules.
   The continuation of measurements on paramagnetism at helium temper-
atures, which has been in course of preparation for some time, is also impor-
tant in connection with the theory of zero-point energy. The fact is that at-
 tempts have been made to explain deviations from the Curie law without
assuming a negative field. This was on the part of Oosterhuis, in that he
introduces into the Langevin theory of rotational energy, which Langevin
puts as proportional to the temperature, the expression of Einstein and Stern
which contains zero-point energy. If the unchanged theory of Langevin is
right, however, this would be shown very clearly at helium temperatures.
Also the influence of the external field on the susceptibility, which is accord-
ing to the Langevin theory inversely proportional to temperature, would be-
come clearly visible at helium temperatures in attainable fields, whilst at hy-
drogen temperatures it cannot be expected to the same extent until fields are
reached which are ten times greater and thus far exceeding what it is possible
to expect. (See Addendum 1.)
   The study of the equation of state related to the monumental theories of
Van der Waals has always been a main item of research in the Leyden labor-
atory. In particular, the exact study of the equation of state of simply con-
structed gases belongs to the low temperature field. Here also belong the
determination of the absolute scale of temperatures below the freezing point
of water. For help with the extensive precision measurements which are dealt
with here I must thank my many talented co-workers. In recent times par-
ticularly Messrs. Braak, Clay, Crommelin and Dorsman, Mr. and Mrs. de
Haas-Lorentz, and Messrs. Holst and Keesom have supported me and of these
I have been indebted to Mr. Crommelin also for the technical running of the
laboratory.
   I owe much to the distinguished theoretical knowledge of Mr. Keesom
and to the thorough and ingenious way in which he has worked on the the-


            LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM                         317
oretical problems connected with the equation of state, the study of which
also fell mostly to his lot.
   As far as the experimental work is concerned, various conditions needed
to be fulfilled, each with great precision. (The law of corresponding states is
roughly valid and thus only those observations are of real value the accuracy
of which makes it possible to determine deviations from this law.) The pres-
sure under which the gas is compressed, the volume which it occupies and
the temperature at which the experiment takes place must be known with
suitable accuracy. The volume which had to be assigned to the measuring ap-
paratus demanded that the baths in the cryostats should sometimes have a
capacity of up to 1 1/2 litres, even when working with liquid hydrogen. The
temperature also had to be held evenly and constantly to within 1/100 degree
in such cases.
   (The layout of a piezometer for high pressures is shown diagramatically in




                                    Fig. 5.


318                       1913 H. KAMERLINGH ONNES

Fig. 5. The large reservoir filled with the gas to be examined is dipped into a
Cailletet block and connected by a steel capillary tube to the small reservoir.
The latter is in the cryostat in which the bath is maintained by one of the
cycles. The gas in the piezometer is pressed by the mercury into the small
reservoir. The amount of gas which is transferred is measured by the mer-
cury rising in the calibrated column.)
   In order to have a basis for pressure measurement, which would guarantee
the necessary accuracy, the pressure was transferred from one to the next and
so on in a series of mercury differential manometers, as shown in Fig. 6, by
suitably compressed gas, so that a height of 45 metres of mercury column
can be accommodated in the working room, and pressures up to 60 atmos-
pheres measured to the nearest millimetre. (The apparatus was later extended
to 90 atmospheres.)
   As far as thermometry is concerned I must limit myself to mentioning that
its standard was a hydrogen thermometer to which more recently a helium
thermometer was also added. From the simultaneous study of all types of
auxiliary thermometers down to the melting point of hydrogen it seems
certain that in the absolute determination of temperatures an accuracy of
1/50 degrees is reached.
   The volume gauge which was used amongst other things in the investiga-
tions into rectilinear diameter for which Mr. Mathias came to Leyden, be-
longs to the apparatus which serves to determine the equation of state. I must
pass this by, along with much other auxiliary equipment, although I should
have liked to give a better picture than is possible in this short report of the
work which had to be done to determine an equation of state. Still less can I
linger over the evaluation of observations. I should like, however, to men-
tion that I obtained the virial coefficients for hydrogen with the help of Mr.
Braak and Mr. de Haas, and those for argon with the help of Mr. Cromme-
lin. Using these coefficients Mr. Keesom then did some fine work in testing
various theoretical conceptions and found, amongst other things, that, as far
as deviations from Boyle’s law at low pressures are concerned, hydrogen
behaves at low temperatures in a similar way to monatomic argon, just as was
found for specific heat by Eucken.

Determination of the isotherms of helium was of the greatest importance in
the liquefaction of this gas. From them information could be obtained as to
whether helium, like other substances, follows the law of corresponding
states, and if so what the critical data of helium are. With this information it


LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES;   LIQUID HELIUM   319




                Fig. 6.


320                         1913 H. KAMERLINGH ONNES

would be possible to judge whether the gas, starting from the freezing point
of hydrogen, the lowest temperature to which it could be cooled, could be
liquefied by means of Linde’s process. If so then the principle of similarity
could again be applied to the setting up of a helium cycle, just as the hy-
drogen liquefier had been built according to Hampson’s model for an air
liquefier. It became clear that it had to be found out whether the temperature
at which the initial compression of the helium follows Boyle’s law - the
Boyle point - lies above the melting point of hydrogen. In this case one
could hope for static liquefaction, if a closed helium cycle on the model of
the hydrogen cycle were set up and operated in a suitable way. The question
was answered in the affirmative by isotherm determination. Moreover, the
compression pressure, the time the experiment would take, the cooling ac-
 tion to be brought about by the hydrogen cycle and also the quantity of
helium necessary, were assessed as being not beyond what might be attained.
 As far as the helium was concerned, my brother Mr. O. Kamerlingh Onnes,
 the Director of the Department of Foreign Trade Relations in Amsterdam,
 was able to help me to obtain the necessary monazite. I am glad to be able to
 thank him here also.
     Carrying out the experiment in the manner stated meant that the usual
 intermediate stage in the liquefaction of a gas would have to be by-passed by
 one great effort, although this bordered on the impossible. This seemed,
 however, the only thing to do since helium, then still such a mystery, had
 already so greatly disappointed me.
     The accompanying Fig. 7 gives a diagram of the equipment for the exper-
 iment. The compressed helium comes, after suitable pre-cooling, into the
 refrigerator, where hydrogen is evaporating at the air pump, runs through
 the regenerator spiral and expands at the throttle valve. The liquid formed
 according to the Linde process gathers in the lower portion of the vacuum
  glass vessel. In order to be able to observe the liquid helium this portion is
  transparent and is surrounded by a vacuum glass vessel which is kept filled
  with liquid hydrogen, which is again protected by a transparent vacuum
  glass vessel containing liquid air, and this again by a vessel in which heated
  alcohol circulates.
     The helium cycle, as set up, is shown again in Fig. 8 in more detail, but
  still in diagrammatic form, and here we find again the liquefaction appara-
  tus; the compressors, storage flasks and regulating gas bells floating on oil are
  also shown. The liquefier itself is shown in more detail in Fig. 9, where the
  liquefying spiral built on the Hampson model can again easily be recognized.


           LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM                       321




                                                                  - - 2 5 8




                                   Fig. 7.



  The refrigerator is supplied with liquid hydrogen from a transparent inter-
mediate reservoir, into which the liquid hydrogen is siphoned from the
storage flasks. The helium, before being cooled in the hydrogen refrigerator,
runs through a tube cooled in liquid air, with carbon to free it from traces
of air which might have contaminated it during circulation. We owe the
application of this property of carbon to Dewar. I have already stressed the
great importance of his work, but would like to emphasize here that it has
been of greatest use to me in the liquefaction of helium.
   The temperature of the helium is measured with a helium gas thermom-
eter, the reservoir of which is in the liquefying chamber and is connected
by a steel capillary tube to the manometer portion.
   The accompanying Fig. 10 gives a view of the whole apparatus. The trans-


Fig. 8.


          323




Fig. 9.


324   1913 H. KAMERLINCH ONNES




             Fig. 10.


            LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM                          325
parent liquefying chamber, with three-fold protection, can be easily recog-
nized.
   As had been foreseen when the experiments were planned, their execution
bordered on the impossible. By the time the experiment, which began at half
past five in the morning, had ended at half past nine at night, the first helium
having been seen at half past six, everyone had done everything that could
possibly be demanded of him. This is particularly true of my loyal co-worker
G. J. Flim, the mechanic, to whom I am also deeply grateful for help in set-
ting up the other experiments and apparatuses discussed here.
   It was a wonderful sight when the liquid, which looked almost unreal, was
seen for the first time. It was not noticed when it flowed in. Its presence
could not be confirmed until it had already filled up the vessel. Its surface
stood sharply against the vessel like the edge of a knife.
   How happy I was to be able to show condensed helium to my distin-
guished friend Van der Waals, whose theory had guided me to the end of
my work on the liquefaction of gases.
   The boiling temperature of the helium was found at 4.25 oK, the critical
temperature assessed as 5oK. The low critical pressure to which we had to
conclude and which fell between 2 and 3 atmospheres was remarkably small.

Now that we had arrived at this elucidation of the properties of helium the
next target was already indicated.
   Using our knowledge, we had to make measurements and to this end, on
the basis of the information obtained, to decide on arrangements which
would simplify the preparation of liquid helium and make it available in a
cryostat. This problem I also solved step by step. I will indicate these steps by
mentioning some of the investigations already carried out with liquid he-
lium. In these I was supported by Mr. Dorsman in the thermodynamic work
and by Mr. Holst in the electrical work. I am most grateful to them.
   First of all somewhat difficult conditions were encountered in the lique-
fying chamber. In the experiments shown in Fig. 11 considerable progress
had already been made in various directions.
   The experimental chamber also for these experiments is still closed off at
the top by the liquefying spiral and the experiments are thus made difficult
(since it is only possible to penetrate into the experimental chamber with the
help of steel capillary tubes or insulated wires led past the liquefying spiral),
yet a whole collection of instruments is already placed in the liquid helium.
                                                                    o
We see here a helium thermometer, the pressure of which (at 0 C 145 mm)


326   1913 H. KAMERLINGH ONNES




              Fig. 11.


             LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM                         327
amounts to only 3 mm at the boiling point of helium, so that temperatures
down to 1.5oK approximately could be measured with it. Here the accuracy
of the measurement was suited to the smallness of the pressure.
   The simultaneous measurement of the pressure in the chamber in which
the liquid helium evaporates yielded the law of vapour pressure. To measure
how the density of the liquid helium changes with the temperature there was
also in the helium bath a differential dilatometer (into which volumetrically
measured quantities of helium were brought through two identical steel cap-
illary tubes).
   It is very noticeable that the experiments indicate that the density of the
helium, which at first quickly drops with the temperature, reaches a maxi-
mum at 2.2oK approximately, and if one goes down further even drops
again. Such an extreme could possibly be connected with the quantum the-
ory. At any rate, closer examination of the equation of state of the helium in
relation to deviations from the law of corresponding states is very promising,
as it is the critical temperature precisely of this gas which approaches absolute
zero so closely.
   Naturally the question arose as to whether helium can also be converted
into the solid state. An experiment aimed at lowering the temperature of
helium sufficiently by evaporating it without supply of heat was not suc-
cessful, and only served to reach the lowest temperature recorded up to that
time. The helium (see Fig. 12) evaporating in a vacuum glass vessel was pro-
tected against heat supply, the vessel itself being dipped in a bath of liquid
helium. The bath was obtained, as the figure shows, by the liquid helium
flowing out of the liquefying apparatus into a cryostatic vessel.
   The evaporation of even a very small quantity, when the pressure of the
vapour is small, demands the continuous carrying away of colossal volumes
of vapour. With vacuum pumps of very large capacity we succeeded in
lowering the pressure to 0.2 millimetre. The temperature then reached was
     o
1.15 K according to the law of vapour pressure found. (Of course we can only
make an estimate here. The working out of the thermometry of these low
temperatures with, amongst other things, the aid of the Knudsen hot wire
manometer is still in its initial stages.) Since it would have needed new equip-
ment, I deferred the question as to whether helium can be made to freeze in
favour of other, more urgent problems, which could be tackled with the
equipment available.
   The handling of these questions was very considerably facilitated when we
succeeded in getting the cryostat shown in Fig. 13 to work. The liquid he-


328                    1913 H . K A M E R L I N G H O N N E S




                                     Fig. 12.

lium is siphoned over from the liquefier into a cryostatic vessel open at the
top (through a vacuum tube cooled with liquid air). The liquefier can be
shut off from the cryostat by a valve. In this way continuous working of the
liquefier was possible. The bath is stirred vigorously by an electromagneti-
cally-driven pump.
   With this cryostat, investigations into the extraordinarily great conduc-
tivity of some metals at low temperatures were possible, and I wish now to
report on these;
   Even the very first experiments on the resistance of metals had brought


Fig. 13.


330                       1913 H. KAMERLINGH ONNES

very surprising results. With platinum wire there was no re-rise in resistance
after reaching a minimum, as would be expected, if the electrons which pro-
vide the conduction were firmly frozen to the atoms at low temperatures,
but on the contrary resistance became independent of temperature. The con-
clusion drawn from the results of an experiment carried out with Mr. Clay
down to the freezing point of hydrogen was that for absolutely pure platinum
resistance would disappear at the boiling point of helium. At the lowest tem-
perature therefore the conduction electrons are not bound but the factors
which hinder their movement disappear. The obvious thing was to look for
these hindering factors in the energy of Planck’s vibrators, so that here the
theory of resistance agrees very well with that of specific heat.
   I attributed the fact that the resistance had become constant and not zero
to the slight impurities which remain even in pure gold. I could only hope
to get the mercury purer than gold, and the observations just made permit
one to conclude that its resistance at the boiling point of helium would still
be observable but that at the lowest temperature that could be reached with
helium it would disappear. The possibility of confirming this caused me to
think of little account all the difficulties which were attached to the experi-
ment. These were overcome and the results are, as Fig. 14 shows, convincing.
The resistance, in fractions of the resistance at zero Centigrade, is shown as
the ordinate and the temperature as the abscissa. The figure contains, as well
as the results obtained in helium, which are marked II, also those, marked I,




                                     Fig. 14


LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM   331




               Fig. 15.


332                        1913 H. KAMERLINGH ONNES

which had been found in the course of investigations carried out by Mr. Clay
down to the melting point of hydrogen. The resistance of the mercury is
indicated by Hg. The results for platinum and for gold are also given in the
figure, as well as the hypothetical curve for pure gold, the latter shown as a
dashed line.
   I would like to spend a little time on the arrangement of the experiment.
   The thread of mercury, the resistance of which was measured, is shown in
the accompanying Fig. 15. The mercury, which had been painstakingly pur-
ified, is poured off into a series of U-shaped capillary tubes of only 1/20
millimetre diameter in vacuo and frozen in them during the experiment.
At the upper ends of the U there are (see Fig. 16) reservoirs to deal with the
change in the volume of the mercury. It is, however, difficult to avoid the




                                    Fig. 16.


         LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM                              333
tubes bursting or the thread breaking either during thawing or freezing. At
the ends of the resistances there are mercury wires to conduct the current and
to measure potential differences. (This is the most simple model theoreti-
cally: a branched wire system all of the same metal. In the following model,
see Fig. 16, the lower portions of the voltage wires are replaced by platinum
wires.)
   As has been said, the experiment left no doubt that, as far as accuracy of
measurement went, the resistance disappeared. At the same time, however,
something unexpected occurred. The disappearance did not take place grad-
                                                                        o
ually but (compare Fig. 17) abruptly. From 1/500 the resistance at 4.2 K drops
to a millionth part. At the lowest temperature, 1.5oK, it could be established
that the resistance had become less than a thousand-millionth part of that at
normal temperature.
   Thus the mercury at 4.2oK has entered a new state, which, owing to its
particular electrical properties, can be called the state of superconductivity.
   It is very important to the study of the properties of this state that tin and
lead can also become superconductive. The transition point of tin lies at
3.8oK, that of lead probably at 6°K. Now that we are able to use these met-
als, which are easy to work, all types of electrical experiments with resist-
ance-free apparatus have become possible. To take one example: a self-con-
tained coil, cooled in the magnetic field, should, when the field is removed,




                                     Fig. 17.


334                              I913 H. KAMERLINGH ONNES

be able to simulate for some time an Ampère molecular current. (See Ad-
dendum 2.) There is also the question as to whether the absence of Joule
heat makes feasible the production of strong magnetic fields using coils with-
out iron,* for a current of very great density can be sent through very fine,
closely wound wire spirals. Thus we were successful in sending a current of
0.8 amperes, i.e. of 56 amperes per square millimetre, through a coil, which
contained 1,000 turns of a diameter of 1/70 square mm per square centimetre
at right angles to the turns.
   All that I have said so far about superconductors applies only to currents
below a certain threshold value, which lies all the higher the lower one drops
in temperature. Up to this threshold value of current intensities no poten-
tial differences are found at the ends of the resistance within the degree of
accuracy reached so far. The wire has at the most only a residual micro-
resistance. As soon, however, as the threshold value is exceeded, a potential
difference is necessary to maintain the current. Then, in a way as yet unex-
plained, normal resistance occurs in the wire, and at the great rate at which
the potential difference is increased at the ends, there can be a considerable
rise in temperature. Thus a bright lead wire which had been dipped in liquid
helium and which remained superconductive up to a current density of 4.20
amps. per square millimetre, melted at a current density of 940. It appears

 * Shortly before this lecture I still felt that further experiments would lead to this
question being answered in the affirmative. For if the contrary were the case new
phenomena would have to be found. It seems possible that the potential phenomena
which will be further discussed in the text can be suppressed by improving the material
and the construction of the coil. Then only the resistance would be need to be consid-
ered which, owing to the characteristic magnetic field of the coil, can be produced
in the resistanceless wire. After the experiment with the small coil mentioned in the
text, it seemed that even this resistance would not come into the picture very much,
 even when strong fields are produced. From analogy it was to be assumed that it rises
regularly with the field and even when it is proportional to the square of the field it
would not be of very great importance even in fields of 100,000 Gauss, as the resistance
produced in the coil by its own field was anyway still unnoticeable. Only experiments,
however, could make certain of this. The experiments then planned were carried out
 after this lecture was given and produced surprising results. In fields below a threshold
 value (for lead at the boiling point of helium 600 Gauss), which was not reached during
 the experiment with the small coil mentioned in the text, there is no magnetic resistance
 at all. In fields above this threshold value a relatively large resistance arises at once, and
 grows considerably with the field. Thus in an unexpected way a difficulty in the produc-
tion of intensive magnetic fields with coils without iron faced us. The discovery of the
strange property which causes this made up for the difficulties involved.


              LOW TEMPERATURE STUDIES; LIQUID HELIUM                        335
that, generally speaking, when the threshold value of the current intensity is
exceeded, local heating of the conductor through which the current is passing
occurs above the transition temperature and this is why normal resistance at
this point originates. When the current intensity increases the Joule heat pro-
duced at this point soon brings the whole resistance above the transition point.
    The great question still not solved is whether this first impulse proceeds
 from bad sections of the wire or is also produced in pure, tension-free, evenly
 crystallized metal. If the potential phenomena are to be attributed to bad
 spots, we shall learn to eliminate them and then it is perhaps possible that the
 conductivity could be increased still higher than to the value reached at pres-
 ent, which is thousand million times that at normal temperature. The poten-
 tial phenomena may, however, depend upon the nature of the metal in that
 the resting vibrators of the now superconductive metal are not made to move
 until the electron wind which blows past them has reached a certain strength,
just as the surface of water is not ruffled until the wind has reached a certain
 strength. Ohm’s law would have lost its validity for these phenomena.
    Rather than immersing myself in a possible explanation based on the quan-
 tum theory, I should like to consider one of the experimental questions
 raised by the superconductors. According to ordinary theory of electrons
 one finds, for the free paths of the electrons, which at normal temperature
 are about of molecular size, values for the superconductive state going up to
 a metre. Will superconductive foils be passed through more easily, or with
 less deflection, by electric rays of various types than are ordinary conductive
 ones? This question has been raised by Mr. Lenard and myself. Mr. Becker
 and I are already busy with the relevant preliminary experiments.
    I have already said that this is only one of the many questions which the
 superconductors raise. From each field of physics further questions push
  their way to the fore which are waiting to be solved by measurements at
  helium temperatures.
    In the future I see all over the Leyden laboratory measurements being made
 in cryostats, to which liquid helium is transported just as the other liquid
  gases now are, and in which this gas also, one might say, will be as freely
  available as water.
    In the meantime there is plenty of work which can already be done, albeit
  with difficulty (as when we began to use liquid oxygen), in the neighbour-
  hood of the liquefying apparatus, and which can contribute towards lifting
  the veil which thermal motion at normal temperature spreads over the inner
  world of atoms and electrons.


336                         1913 H.KAMERLINGH ONNES

                                    Added in proof

1. In May 1914 the qualitative validity of the Langevin theory in both the connections
mentioned in the text was established in gadolinium sulphate by experiments at helium
temperatures.
2. The following was achieved during the experiments carried out in April-June 1914
relating to currents persisting in superconductors in the absence of electromotive force.
The current, once produced, lasted for hours practically unchanged in the supercon-
ductive coil. Heating the latter above the transition point immediately destroys the
electromagnetic field borne by the circuit. The experiments evidently demonstrate the
frictionless mechanism as envisaged by Maxwell in the ether around a circuit and the
absorption of its kinetic energy by a resistance introduced into the circuit.
