SCANNING TUNNELING MICROSCOPY -
FROM BIRTH TO ADOLESCENCE
Nobel lecture, December 8, 1986

by
GERD BINNIG AND HEINRICH ROHRER

IBM Research Division, Zurich Research Laboratory, 8803 Rüschlikon,
Switzerland




We present here the historic development of Scanning Tunneling Microscopy;
the physical and technical aspects have already been covered in a few recent
reviews and two conference proceedings [l] and many others are expected to
follow in the near future. A technical summary is given by the sequence of
figures which stands alone. Our narrative is by no means a recommendation of
how research should be done, it simply reflects what we thought, how we acted
and what we felt. However, it would certainly be gratifying if it encouraged a
more relaxed attitude towards doing science.
   Perhaps we were fortunate in having common training in superconductivity,
a field which radiates beauty and elegance. For scanning tunneling microscopy,
we brought along some experience in tunneling [2] and angstroms [3], but
none in microscopy or surface science. This probably gave us the courage and
light-heartedness to start something which should “not have worked in prin-
ciple” as we were so often told.
   “After having worked a couple of years in the area of phase transitions and
critical phenomena, and many, many years with magnetic fields, I was ready
for a change. Tunneling, in one form or another had intrigued me for quite
some time. Years back, I had become interested in an idea of John Slonczewski
to read magnetic bubbles with tunneling; on another occasion, I had been
involved for a short time with tunneling between very small metallic grains in
bistable resistors, and later I watched my colleagues struggle with tolerance
problems in the fabrication of Josephson junctions. So the local study of growth
and electrical properties of thin insulating layers appeared to me an interesting
problem, and I was given the opportunity to hire a new research staff member,
Gerd Binnig, who found it interesting, too, and accepted the offer. Incidentally,
Gerd and I would have missed each other, had it not been for K. Alex Müller,
then head of Physics, who made the first contacts [l].”
   The original idea then was not to build a microscope but rather to perform
spectroscopy locally on an area less than 100 Å in diameter.
   “On a house-hunting expedition, three months before my actual start at
IBM, Heini Rohrer discussed with me in more detail his thoughts on inhomo-
geneities on surfaces, especially those of thin oxide layers grown on metal


390                                         Physics 1986




Fig. 1. Tunneling. (a) The wave function of a valence electron in the Coulomb potential well of the
atom core plus other valence electrons extends into the vacuum; it “tunnels” into the vacuum.
(b) Exposed to an electric field, ϕ, the electron can tunnel through the potential barrier and leaves
the atom. (c) If two atoms come sufficiently close, then an electron can tunnel back and forth
through the vacuum or potential barrier between them. (d) In a metal, the potential barriers
between the atoms in the interior are quenched and electrons move freely in energy bands, the
conduction bands. At the surface, however, the potential rises on the vacuum side forming the
tunnel barrier through which an electron can tunnel to the surface atom of another metal close by.
The voltage V applied between the two metals produces a difference between the Fermi levels E F,L
and E F,R , thus providing empty states on the right for the electrons tunneling from the left side. The


O xi d e J u n cti o n




T u n n el Ti p




Fi g. 2. T h e p ri n ci pl e. T h e t u n n eli n g t r a n s mitti vit y d e c r e a s e s e x p o n e nti all y        wit h t h e t u n n eli n g
di st a n c e, i n v a c u u m a b o ut a f a ct or 1 0 f or e v er y     Å. I n a n o xi d e t u n n el j u n cti o n,    m o st of t h e c urr e nt
fl o w s t hr o u g h n arr o w c h a n n el s of s m all el e ctr o d e s e p ar ati o n.      Wit h o n e el e ctr o d e s h a p e d i nt o a ti p,
t h e c urr e nt fl o w s pr a cti c all y o nl y fr o m t h e fr o nt at o m s of t h e ti p, i n t h e b e st c a s e fr o m a s p e cifi c
or bit al of t h e a p e x at o m. T hi s gi v e s a t u n n el- c urr e nt fil a m e nt       wi dt h a n d t h u s a l at er al r e s ol uti o n of
at o mi c di m e n si o n s.       T h e s e c o n d ti p s h o w n i s r e c e s s e d b y a b o ut t w o at o m s a n d c arri e s a b o ut a
milli o n ti m e s l e s s c urr e nt.




 r e s ulti n g t u n n el c u r r e nt i s r o u g hl y o f t h e f o r m I = f ( V ) e x p ( -                  s ). T h e f ( V ) c o nt ai n s a
 w ei g ht e d j oi nt l o c al d e n sit y of st at e s of ti p a n d o bj e ct, t h e e x p o n e nti al gi v e s t h e tr a n s mitti vit y    wit h
 f t h e a v er a g e d t u n n el b arri er h ei g ht i n e V, a n d s t h e s e p ar ati o n of t h e t w o         m et al s i n Å H er e f( V)
 and             ar e m at eri al pr o p erti e s o bt ai n e d b y m e a s uri n g dl nI/ d V a n d dl nI/ d s. ( e) A si m pl e c a s e of
 l o c al s p e ctr o s c o p y. A c h ar a ct eri sti c st at e, t h e “ c ol or ”, of a s urf a c e s p e ci e s i s o b s er v e d b y t h e o n s et
 o f t h e t u n n el - c u r r e nt c o nt ri b uti o n         [ s e e L a n g,   N.    D. ( 1 9 8 7 ) P h y s. R e v. L ett. 5 8, 4 5, a n d
 r ef er e n c e s t h er ei n].


392                                 Physics 1986


surfaces. Our discussion revolved around the idea of how to study these films
locally, but we realized that an appropriate tool was lacking. We were also
puzzling over whether arranging tunneling contacts in a specific manner would
give more insight on the subject. As a result of that discussion, and quite out of
the blue at the LT15 Conference in Grenoble - still some weeks before I
actually started at IBM - an old dream of mine stirred at the back of my mind,
namely, that of vacuum tunneling. I did not learn until several years later that
I had shared this dream with many other scientists, who like myself, were
working on tunneling spectroscopy. Strangely enough, none of us had ever
talked about it, although the idea was old in principle.” Actually, it was 20
years old, dating back to the very beginning of tunneling spectroscopy [4].
Apparently, it had mostly remained an idea and only shortly after we had
started, did Seymour Keller, then a member of the IBM Research Division’s
Technical Review Board and an early advocate of tunneling as a new research
area in our Laboratory, draw our attention to W.A. Thompson’s attempting
vacuum tunneling with a positionable tip [5].
    We became very excited about this experimental challenge and the opening
up of new possibilities. Astonishingly, it took us a couple of weeks to realize that
not only would we have a local spectroscopic probe, but that scanning would
deliver spectroscopic and even topographic images, i.e., a new type of micro-
scope. The operating mode mostly resembled that of stylus prolilometry [6],
but instead of scanning a tip in mechanical contact over a surface, a small gap
of a few angstroms between tip and sample is maintained and controlled by the
tunnel current flowing between them. Roughly two years later and shortly
before getting our first images, we learned about a paper by R. Young et al. [7]
where they described a type of field-emission microscope they called “topogra-
liner”. It had much in common with our basic principle of operating the STM,
except that the tip had to be rather far away from the surface, thus on high
voltage producing a field-emission current rather than a tunneling current and
resulting in a lateral resolution roughly that of an optical microscope. They
suggested to improve the resolution by using sharper field-emission tips, even
attempted vacuum tunneling, and discussed some of its exciting prospects in
spectroscopy. Had they, even if only in their minds, combined vacuum tunnel-
ing with scanning, and estimated that resolution they would probably have
ended up with the new concept, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy. They came
closer than anyone else.
    Mid-January 1979, we submitted our first patent disclosure on STM. Eric
Courtens, then deputy manager of physics at the IBM Rüschlikon Laboratory,
pushed the disclosure to a patent application with “thousands of future
 STM’s”. He was the first believer in our cause. Shortly afterwards, following
 an in-house seminar on our STM ideas, Hans-Jörg Scheel became the third.
    For the technical realization of our project, we were fortunate in securing the
craftsmanship of Christoph Gerber. “Since his joining IBM in 1966, Christoph
had worked with me (HR) on pulsed high-magnetic fields, on phase diagrams,
and on critical phenomena. By the end of 1978, we were quite excited about our
 first experimental results on the random-field problem, but when asked to


                                G. Binnig & H. Rohrer                        393


participate in the new venture, Christoph did not hesitate an instant. He
always liked things which were out of the ordinary, and, incidentally, was the
second believer. This left me and the random-field problem without his diligent
technical support. About a year later, Edi Weibel was the next one to join in,
which left another project without technical support. Finally, I completed the
team, leaving the random-field problem to others.”
   During the first few months of our work on the STM, we concentrated on the
main instrumental problems and their solutions [8]. How to avoid mechanical
vibrations that move tip and sample against each other? Protection against
vibrations and acoustical noise by soft suspension of the microscope within a
vacuum chamber. How strong are the forces between tip and sample? This
seemed to be no problem in most cases. How to move a tip on such a line scale?
With piezoelectric material, the link between electronics and mechanics, avoid-
ing friction. The continuous deformation of piezomaterial in the angstrom and
subangstrom range was established only later by the tunneling experiments
themselves. How to move the sample on a line scale over long distances from
the position of surface treatment to within reach of the tip? The ‘louse’. How to
avoid strong thermally excited length fluctuations of the sample and especially
the tip? Avoid whiskers with small spring constants. This led to a more general
question, and the most important one: What should be the shape of the tip and
how to achieve it? At the very beginning, we viewed the tip as a kind of
continuous matter with some radius of curvature. However, we very soon
realized that a tip is never smooth because of the finite size of atoms, and
because tips are quite rough unless treated in a special way. This roughness
implies the existence of minitips as we called them, and the extreme sensitivity
of the tunnel current on tip-sample separation then selects the minitip reaching
closest to the sample.
   Immediately after having obtained the first stable STM images showing
remarkably sharp monoatomic steps, we focused our attention onto atomic
resolution. Our hopes of achieving this goal were raised by the fact that
vacuum tunneling itself provides a new tool for fabricating extremely sharp
tips: The very local, high fields obtainable with vacuum tunneling at a few volts
only can be used to shape the tip by field migration or by field evaporation.
Gently touching the surface is another possibility. All this is not such a
controlled procedure as tip sharpening in field-ion microscopy, but it appeared
to us to be too complicated to combine STM with field-ion microscopy at this
stage. We hardly knew what field-ion microscopy was, to say nothing of
working with it. We had no means of controlling exactly the detailed shape of
the tip. We repeated our trial-and-error procedures until the structures we
observed became sharper and sharper. Sometimes it worked, other times it did
not.
   But first we had to demonstrate vacuum tunneling. In this endeavor, apart
from the occurrence of whiskers, the most severe problem was building vibra-
tions. To protect the STM unit also against acoustical noise, we installed the
vibration-isolation system within the vacuum chamber. Our first set-up was
designed to work at low temperatures and in ultra-high vacuum (UHV). Low


394




Fig. 3. The instrument. (a) A voltage applied to two electrodes contracts or expands the piezo-
electric material in between. The practical total excursion of a piezo is usually in the region of
micrometers. (b) A frictionless x-y-z piezodrive, which is quite vibration sensitive. (c) A rigid
tripod is at present the piezodrive most used apart from the single-tube scanner. (d) Tripod and
sample holder are installed on a rigid frame. The sample has to be cleared from the tip for
preparation and sample transfer. (e) Positioning of the sample to within reach of the piezodrive
was originally achieved with a piezoelectric ‘louse with electrostatically clampable feet. Magnetic-
driven positioners and differential screws are also now in use. (f) In the first vibration-isolation
system, the tunnel unit with permanent magnets levitated on a superconducting lead bowl.
(g) The simple and presently widely used vibration protection with a stack of metal plates
separated by viton - a UHV-compatible rubber spacer.


                                        G. Binnig & H. Rohrer                                    395




Fig. 4. Tips. (a) Long and narrow tips, or whiskers. arc vibration sensitive and thermally excited.
(b) A mechanically ground or etched tip shows sharp minitips. only one of which usually carries
the tunnel current. Further sharpening was initially achieved with gentle contact (1), later with
field evaporation (2). (c) Electrostatic and interatomic forces between tip and sample do not
deform a blunt tip, or a rigid sample, but they make the tunnel gap mechanically unstable when the
tip carries a whisker. The response of soft materials like graphite or organic matter to such forces.
however. can be appreciable and has to be taken into account


temperatures guaranteed low thermal drifts and low thermal length fluctu-
ations, but we had opted for them mainly because our thoughts were fixed on
spectroscopy. And tunneling spectroscopy was a low-temperature domain for
both of us with a Ph.D. education in superconductivity. The UHV would allow
preparation and retention of well-defined surfaces. The instrument was beauti-
fully designed with sample and tip accessible for surface treatments and super-
conducting levitation of the tunneling unit for vibration isolation. Construction
and first low-temperature and UHV tests took a year. but the instrument was
so complicated, WC never used it. We had been too ambitious, and it was only
seven years later that the principal problems of a low-temperature and UHV
instrument were solved [9]. Instead, we used an exsicator as vacuum chamber,
lots of Scotch tape, and a primitive version of superconducting levitation
wasting about 20 l of liquid helium per hour. Emil Haupt, our expert glass-
blower, helped with lots of glassware and, in his enthusiasm, even made the
lead bowl for the levitation. Measuring at night and hardly daring to breathe
from excitement, but mainly to avoid vibrations, we obtained our first clear-cut
exponential dependence of the tunnel current I on tip-sample separation s
characteristic for tunneling. It was the portentous night of March 16, 1981.


396                                       Physics 1986


            Constant Current Mode




               Feedback
                 Loop




Fig. 5. Imaging. (a) In the constant current mode, the tip is scanned across the surface at constant
tunnel current, maintained at a pre-set value by continuously adjusting the vertical tip position
with the feedback voltage V z. In the case of an electronically homogeneous surface, constant
current essentially means constant s. (b) On surface portions with denivellations less than a few
A-corresponding to the dynamic range of the current measurement-the tip can be rapidly
scanned at constant average z-position. Such “current images” allow much faster scanning than in
(a) but require a separate determination of        to calibrate z. In both cases, the tunnel voltage
and/or the z-position can be modulated to obtain in addition, dlnI/dV and/or dlnI/ds,
respectively.


                                 G. Binnig & H. Rohrer                           397


   So, 27 months after its conception the Scanning Tunneling Microscope was
born. During this development period, we created and were granted the
necessary elbow-room to dream, to explore, and to make and correct mistakes.
We did not require extra manpower or funding, and our side activities pro-
duced acceptable and publishable results. The first document on STM was the
March/April 1981 in-house Activity Report.
   A logarithmic dependence of the tunnel current I on tip-sample separation s
alone was not yet proof of vacuum tunneling. The slope of ln I versus s should
correspond to a tunnel-barrier height of φ       5 eV, characteristic of the average
workfunctions of tip and sample. We hardly arrived at 1 eV, indicating tunnel-
ing through some insulating material rather than through vacuum. Fortunate-
ly, the calibration of the piezosensitivity for small and fast voltage changes gave
values only half of those quoted by the manufacturers. This yielded a tunnel-
barrier height of more than 4 eV and thus established vacuum tunneling. This
reduced piezosensitivity was later confirmed by careful calibration with H.R.
Ott from the ETH, Zurich, and of S.Vieira of the Universidad Autónoma,
Madrid [10].
   U. Poppe had reported vacuum tunneling some months earlier [11], but his
interest was tunneling spectroscopy on exotic superconductors. He was quite
successful at that but did not measure I(s). Eighteen months later, we were
informed that E.C. Teague, in his Thesis, had already observed similar I(s)
curves which at that time were not commonly available in the open-literature
[12].
   Our excitement after that March night was quite considerable. Hirsh Cohen,
then Deputy Director of our Laboratory, spontaneously asked us “What do you
need?“, a simple and obvious question people only rarely dare to ask. "Gerd
immediately wanted to submit a post-deadline contribution [13] to the LT16
Conference to be held in Los Angeles in September. He was going there
anyway with his superconducting strontium titanate, and I was sure we would
have some topographic STM images by then. And indeed we had. I arranged
an extended colloquium tour through the USA for Gerd, but about three weeks
before his departure, a friend warned him, that once the news became public,
hundreds of scientists would immediately jump onto the STM bandwagon.
They did - a couple of years later. After two extended discussions on a weekend
hike, he nevertheless became convinced that it was time for the STM to make
its public appearance.” Our first attempt to publish a letter failed. “That’s a
good sign”, Nico Garcia, a Visiting Professor from the Universidad Autónoma
de Madrid, Spain consoled us.
   After this first important step with a complete STM set-up, it took us only
three months, partly spent waiting for the high-voltage power supplies for the
piezcs, to obtain the first images of monosteps [14] on a CaIrSn 4 single crystal
grown by R. Gambino. Here, the main problem was getting rid of the whiskers
we continually created by bumping the tip into the surface. Now we were ready
to turn to surface science, first to resolve surface reconstructions. We built a
UHV-compatible STM ( no longer with Scotch tape!) and as a quick trial,


398                                Physics 1986


operated it in vacuum suspended from a rubber band. The results indicated
that superconducting levitation might be unnecessary.
   That was the state of the art for the publicity tour through the USA in
September '81. Most reactions were benevolent, some enthusiastic, and two
even anticipated the Nobel prize, but the STM was apparently still too exotic
for any active outside engagement.
   Next, we protected the STM from vibrations by a double-stage spring system
with eddy-current damping [8], and incorporated it in a UHV chamber not in
use at that moment. We added sputtering and annealing for sample treatment,
but no other surface tool to characterize and monitor the state of the sample or
tip could yet be combined with that STM. Although the superconducting
levitation served for three months only, it was cited for years. It would appear
that something complicated is much easier to remember!
   A most intriguing and challenging surface-science problem existed, namely,
the 7 × 7 reconstruction of the Si(111) surface. A class of fashionable models
contained rather rough features which should be resolvable by the STM. So we
started to chase after the 7 × 7 structure, and succumbed to its magic. At first,
with no success. The STM would function well, sometimes with resolutions
clearly around 5 Å, but not our surface preparation. We occasionally found
quite nice patterns with monolayer step lines [8] but usually the surface always
looked rough and disordered on an atomic scale. One image even foreshadowed
the 7 × 7 by a regular pattern of depressions, the precursors of the characteris-
tic corner holes. However, a single event is too risky to make a case for a new
structure obtained with a new method. But it boosted our confidence.
   By spring ‘82, STM was already a subject talked about. Supposedly, an
image of a vicinal surface expertly prepared with a regular step sequence would
have eased the somewhat reserved attitude of the surface-science community.
We, however, thought that the mono-, double-, and triple-steps of the CaIrSn 4
with atomically flat terraces [14] and the step lines of Si(111) [8] were convinc-
ing and promising enough. And instead of wasting further time on uninterest-
ing step lines, we preferred to attack surface reconstructions with known
periodicities and with a reasonable chance of learning and contributing some-
thing new.
   For easier sample preparation and because the demand on resolution was
only 8 Å, we changed to a gold single crystal, namely, the (110) surface known
 to produce a 1 × 2 reconstruction. This seemed to be well within reach of the
 STM resolution from what we had learned from the silicon step lines. Although
 some time earlier, we had returned to Karl-Heinz Rieder, the Laboratory’s
 surface-science expert, his Si single crystal in a kind of droplet form, it did not
deter him from proposing this gold experiment which meant lending us his Au
crystal, and some weeks later we added another droplet to his collection! But in
 between, with his advice on surface preparation, we succeeded in resolving the
 1 × 2 structure [15]. Contrary to expectations, we also had to struggle with
 resolution, because Au transferred from the surface even if we only touched it
gently with our tip. The mobility of Au at room temperature is so high that
rough surfaces smooth out after a while, i. e., really sharp Au-coated tips cease


                                                                              399


to exist. We should like to mention here that later, for measurements on
Au(l00), we formed sharp Au tips by field evaporation of Au atoms from
sample to tip, and could stabilize them by a relatively high field resulting from
a 0.8 V tunnel voltage.
    In the case of the Au( 110) surface, the atomic resolution was rather a matter
of good luck and perseverance. It jumped from high to low in an unpredictable
manner, which was probably caused by migrating adatoms on the tip finding a
stable position at the apex for a while. We also observed an appreciable
disorder leading to long but narrow ribbons of the 1·× 2 reconstruction mixed
with ribbons of 1 × 3 and 1× 4 reconstructions and step lines. Nevertheless,
 these experiments were the first STM images showing atomic rows with atomic
 resolution perpendicular to the rows. The disorder, intrinsic on this surface,
but in its extent criticized from the surface-science point of view, demonstrated
very nicely the power of STM as a local method, and about a year later played
 an important role in testing the first microscopic theories of scanning tunneling
 microscopy.
    With gold, we also performed the first spectroscopy experiment with an
 STM. We wanted to test a prediction regarding the rectifying I-V characteris-
 tic of a sample-tip tunnel junction induced by the geometric asymmetry [16].
 Unfortunately, the sample surface became unstable at around 5 V, sample
 positive, and the small asymmetry observed in this voltage range could also
 have been due to other reasons. But with reversed polarity, the voltage could be
 swept up to 20 V producing a whole series of marked resonant surface states
 [8]. We consider the gold exercise during spring and early summer of ‘82 a
 most important step in the development of the method, and the STM had
 already exceeded our initial expectations. We had also won our first believers
 outside the Laboratory, Cal Quate from Stanford University [17] and Paul
 Hansma from the University of California at Santa Barbara [18]. We gave
 numerous talks on the Au work, and it attracted some attention but all in all,
there was little action. We did not even take the time to write a paper - the 7 ×
7 was waiting!
   Meanwhile, we had also made the first attempts at chemical imaging: Small
Au islands on silicon. The islands were visible as smooth, flat hills on a rough
surface in the topography, but they were also clearly recognizable as regions
with enhanced tunnel-barrier height [8]. Thus, the Au islands were imaged
thanks to their different surface electronic properties. It would certainly have
been interesting to pursue this line, but we knew that, in principle, it worked,-
and the 7 × 7 was still waiting!
   We started the second 7 × 7 attempt in autumn 1982 taking into consider-
ation the advice of Franz Himpsel not to sputter the surface. This immediately
worked and we observed the 7 × 7 wherever the surface was flat. We were
absolutely enchanted by the beauty of the pattern.
   “I could not stop looking at the images. It was like entering a new world.
This appeared to me as the unsurpassable highlight of my scientific career and
therefore in a way its end. Heini realized my mood and whisked me away for


                                          Physics 1986




Fig. 6. 7 x 7 reconstruction of Si(111), (a) Relief assembled from the original recorder traces, from
Ref. [19],  1983 The American Physical Society, and (h) processed image of the 7     ×   7 reconstruc-
tion of Si(111). Characteristic of the rhomhohedral surface unit cell are the corner hole and the 12
maxima, the adatoms. In the processed image, the six adatoms in the right half of the rhombi
appear higher. This is an electronic inequivalence on the surface owing to a structural left-right
inequivalence in the underlying layers. The reconstruction extends undisturbed to the immediate
vicinity of the large “atom hill” on the right.


                                 G. Binnig & H. Rohrer                          401


some days to St. Antönien, a charming village high up in the Swiss mountains,
where we wrote the paper on the 7 × 7."
   We returned convinced that this would attract the attention of our col-
leagues, even of those not involved with surface science. We helped by present-
ing both an unprocessed relief model assembled from the original recorder
traces with scissors, Plexiglass and nails, and a processed top view; the former
for credibility, the latter for analysis and discussion [19]. It certainly did help,
with the result that we practically stopped doing research for a while. We were
inundated with requests for talks, and innumerable visitors to our Laboratory
were curious to know how to build an STM. However, the number of groups
that seriously got started remained small. It seemed there was still a conflict
between the very appealing, conceptual easiness of displaying individual atoms
in three-dimensional real space direct by recorder traces, and the intuitive
reservation that, after all, it just could not be that simple.
   Our result excluded all the numerous models that existed, and strangely
enough also some that followed. Only one came very close: The adatom model
by W. Harrison [20] with just the number of adatoms not quite right. Nowa-
days, a variation of the adatom model where deeper layers are also reconstruct-
ed besides the characteristic 7 × 7 adatom pattern [21], is generally accepted
and compatible with most results obtained by various experimental methods
like ion channeling [22], transmission electron diffraction [23], and more
detailed STM results from other groups [24].
   The 7 × 7 experiments also accelerated the first theoretical efforts of STM on
a microscopic level. Tersoff and Hamman, and Baratoff [25] applied Bardeen’s
transfer Hamiltonian formalism to the small geometries of tip and an atomical-
ly corrugated surface. Garcia, Ocal, and Flores, and Stoll, Baratoff, Selloni,
and Carnevali worked out a scattering approach [26]. The two approaches
converged; they consoled us by roughly confirming our intuitive view on
tunneling in small geometries by simply scaling down planar tunneling, and
they certainly improved the acceptance of STM in physics circles. The theoreti-
cal treatments concentrated on the nonplanar aspect of tunneling of free
electrons, and the STM results on Au(110), still unpublished, served as a
testing ground. They remained unpublished for quite some time, since the
flashy images of the 7 × 7 silicon surface somehow overshadowed the earlier
Au( 110) experiments. One reaction to the first attempt to publish them was:
“ ... The paper is virtually devoid of conceptual discussion let alone conceptual
novelty... I am interested in the behavior of the surface structure of gold and
the other metals in the paper. Why should I be excited about the results in this
paper?...” It was certainly bad publication management on our part, but we
were not sufficiently familiar with a type of refereeing which searches for weak
points, innocently ignoring the essence.
   The gold and silicon experiments showed that STM in surface science would
benefit greatly from additional, in-situ surface characterization, in particular
low-energy electron diffraction (LEED). We had already learned that surfaces,
even elaborately prepared, were frequently not as uniform and flat as generally
assumed. The in-situ combination of LEED with STM proved extremely


402                                Physics 1986


helpful, avoiding searching when there was nothing to be searched, and it gave
us the opportunity to learn about and work with LEED and Auger electron
spectroscopy (AES). The combination of STM with other established surface-
science techniques also settled a concern frequently mentioned: How much did
our STM images really have in common with surfaces characterized otherwise?
We did not share this concern to such a degree, as we had also learned that
reconstructions extended unchanged to the immediate vicinity of defect areas,
and because we could detect most contaminants or defects individually. Thus,
for us, the combined instrumentation was more a practical than a scientific
issue.
   After a short but interesting excursion with the new STM/LEED/AES
combination into resolving and understanding the (100) surface of Au [27], we
proceeded into the realms of chemistry. Together with A. Baró, a Visiting
Professor from Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain, who also wanted to
familiarize himself with the technique, we observed the oxygen-induced 2 × 1
reconstruction of Ni( 110) [28], interpreting the pronounced and regularly
arranged protrusions we saw as individual oxygen atoms. We had seen atomic-
scale features before, which could be interpreted as adsorbates or adsorbate
clusters but they were more a nuisance than a matter of interest. The oxygen on
Ni experiments demonstrated that the oxygen overlayer was not irreversibly
changed by the imaging tunnel tip. This was a most significant result in regard
to observing, studying and performing surface chemistry with an STM tip.
About a year later, when studying the oxygen-induced 2 × 2 reconstructed
Ni(l00) surface, we observed characteristic current spikes which we could
attribute to oxygen diffusing along the surface underneath the tip [29]. We
noted that the same type of spikes had already been present in our earlier
images of oxygen-covered Ni(110), but had been discarded at that time. Not
only could diffusing atoms be observed individually, but their migration could
be correlated to specific surface features like step lines or bound oxygen atoms,
imaged simultaneously. Towards the end of 1983, we also started to probe the
possibilities of STM in biology together with H. Gross from the ETH, Zurich.
We could follow DNA chains lying on a carbon film deposited on a Ag-coated
Si wafer [30].
    That year ended with a most pleasant surprise: On Friday December 9, we
received a telegram from the secretary of the King Faisal Foundation, followed
on Monday by a phone call from the secretary of the European Physical Society
announcing the King Faisal Prize of Science and the Hewlett Packard Euro-
physics Prize, respectively. “The day the telegram arrived, Gerd was in Berlin
delivering the Otto Klung Prize lecture. It was also my twentieth anniversary
with IBM.” This was an encouraging sign that Scanning Tunneling Micro-
scopy was going to make it. It also brought a new flood of requests.
    In the summer of 1984, we were finally ready to assume what we had set out
to do in autumn 1978, before the notion of microscopy had ever evolved,
namely, performing local spectroscopy. Together with H. Fuchs and F. Salvan,
we investigated the clean 7 × 7 [ 1, 3 1] and the      ×     Au reconstructions on
 Si(111) [31], and-right back to the heart of the matter-a thin oxide film on Ni


                                G. Binnig & H. Rohrer                        403


[1,32]. We could see that surfaces are electronically structured as known, for
example, from photoemission experiments, and that we could resolve these
electronic structures in space on an atomic scale. We called this (and still do)
the color of the atoms. Indeed, the oxide layers were inhomogeneous and most
clearly visible in scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) images. On the 7 x 7,
we could see by STS down to the second layer, and observe individual dangling
bonds between the adatoms [1]. At that time, C. Quate and his group already
had an STM running, and they had performed local spectroscopy; not yet with
atomic resolution but a low temperature [33]. They had measured the energy
gap of a superconductor, and later even plotted its spatial dependence. Spec-
troscopic imaging was not really surprising, yet it was an important develop-
ment. We now had the tools to fully characterize a surface in terms of topo-
graphic and electronic structure. Although it is usually quite an involved
problem to separate the property of interest from a set of STM and STS
measurements, our vision of the scanning tunneling microscope had become
true. But nevertheless, we heard that this view was not generally shared.
Rumors reached us that scientists would bet cases of champagne that our
results were mere computer simulations! The bets were probably based on the
fact the STM was already three years old, and atomic resolution was still our
exclusive property. This was also our concern, but in another way. In late
summer ‘83, Herb Budd, promoter of the IBM Europe Institute and an
enthusiastic STM supporter, had asked us to run an STM Seminar in summer
1984 within the framework of the Institute. This meant one week with 23
lectures in front of a selected audience of the European academia. At that time,
there was no way whatsoever of filling 23 hours, let alone of committing 23
speakers. A year later, we agreed, full of optimism for summer ‘85. In De-
cember ‘84, on Cal Quate’s initiative, nine representatives of the most ad-
vanced STM groups came together for a miniworkshop in a hotel room in
Cancun. It was a most refreshing exchange of ideas, but there was still no other
atomic resolution, and thus not a sufficient number of lectures in sight for the
Seminar.
   In the following few months, the situation changed drastically. R. Feenstra
and coworkers came up first with cleaved GaAs [34], C.F. Quate’s group with
the 1 X 1 structure on Pt(l00) [35], and J. Behm, W. Hoesler, and E. Ritter
with the hexagonal phase on Pt(l00) [36]. At the American Physical Society
March Meeting in 1985, P. Hansma presented STM images of graphite struc-
tures of atomic dimensions [37], and when J. Golovchenko unveiled the beauti-
ful results on the various reconstructions of Ge films deposited on Si(111) [38],
one could have heard a pin drop in the audience. The atomic resolution was
official and scanning tunneling microscopy accepted. The IBM Europe Insti-
tute Seminar in July turned into an exclusive workshop for STM’ers, and
comprised some 35 original contributions, not all of them on atomic resolution,
but already more than in March [39]. “A watershed of ideas” as Cal Quate
expressed it.
   Our story so far has dealt mainly with the striving for structural and
electronic imaging in a surface-science environment with atomic resolution.


404                                         Physics 1986




Fig. 7. STM image of cleaved graphite. The top image was taken at a constant tunnel current of
1 nA and at 50 mV. The corrugation traced by the tip reflects the local density of states (LDOS) at
the Fermi level and not the positions of atoms, which form a flat honeycomb lattice as indicated.
The LDOS at the atoms bound to the neighbors in the second layer (open circles) is lower than at
the “free” atoms. The image is thus rather a spectroscopic than a topographic one. The middle
image is a “current image” showing essentially the same pattern. In the bottom current image,
taken closer to the surface, the two inequivalent atoms appear practically identical. This peculiar
behavior is compatible with a different local elastic response of the two types of carbon atoms to the
interatomic force exerted by the tip compensating for their different LDOS. A local perturbation of
the electronic structure might also be important.


                                 G. Binnig & H. Rohrer                         405


Individual atoms had been seen before with field-ion microscopy, and dealt
with individually by the atom probe technique [40]. The beauty of these
techniques is relativized by the restriction to distinct atom sites on fine tips
made from a rather limited selection of materials. Similarly, electron micros-
copy, the main source of present-day knowledge on submicron structures in
practically all areas of science, technology, and industry, has advanced to the
atomic level. Imaging of individual atoms or atomic structures, however, is still
reserved for specific problems, expertise, and extraordinary equipment. The
appeal and the impact of STM lie not only in the observation of surfaces atom
by atom, but also in its widespread applicability, its conceptual and instrumen-
tal simplicity and its affordability, all of which have resulted in a relaxed and
almost casual perception of atoms and atomic structures.
    But there are many other aspects, maybe less spectacular but nonetheless
significant, which have made STM an accepted and viable method now pur-
sued in many areas of science and technology.
    The instruments themselves have become simpler and smaller. Their greatly
reduced size allows easy incorporation into other systems, for instance, into a
scanning electron microscope [41]. One type of instrument retains accurate
sample positioning but is sufficiently rigid for in-situ sample and tip exchange.
Other instruments are so rigid they are even insensitive to vibrations when
immersed in liquid nitrogen [42], and even small enough to fit through the neck
of a liquid-helium storage vessel [43]. These humming-birds of STM, some
concepts of which reach back to the squeezable tunnel junctions [18], can also
operate at television speed on relatively flat surfaces using single-tube scanners
 [43, 44]. Also tip preparation has advanced to a level where well-defined
pyramidal tips ending with one [45] or more [46] atoms can be fabricated in a
UHV environment. Such tips are particularly important for investigations of
nonperiodic structures, disordered systems and rough surfaces. They are also
interesting in their own right, for example, as low-energy electron and ion point
sources.
    Outside the physics and surface-science communities, the various imaging
environments and imaging capabilities seem as appealing as atomic resolution.
 Images obtained at ambient-air pressure were first reported in 1984 [47],
followed by imaging in cryogenic liquids [42], under distilled water [48], in
saline solutions [48], and in electrolytes [49]. Scanning tunneling poten-
tiometry appears to have become an interesting technique to study the poten-
 tial distribution on an atomic scale of current-carrying microstructures [50].
 More recent advances include interatomic-force imaging with the atomic-force
microscope [51], with which the structure and elastic properties of conductors
and insulators are obtained, and combined imaging of electronic and elastic
properties of soft materials [52]. Al so the use of spin polarized electron tunnel-
ing to resolve magnetic surface structures is being explored.
    Finally, we revert to the point where the STM originated: The performance
of a local experiment, at a preselected position and on a very small spatial scale
down to atomic dimensions. Besides imaging, it opens, quite generally, new
possibilities for experimenting, whether to study nondestructively or to modify


406                                        Physics 1986




Fig. 8. Artist’s conception of spheres. Art and Science are both products of the creativity of Man,
and the beauty of nature is reflected in both. Ruedi Rempfler, the sculptor, found his interpretation
in the deformation of a surface. It was the tension of the sphere in its environment which fascinated
him, more than the mere portrayal of its shape. An independent creation, its visual and conceptual
similarity with Fig. 6 is astounding. Original sculpture by Ruedi Rempfler, photograph courtesy of
Thomas P. Frey.


                                G. Binnig & H. Rohrer                          407


locally: Local high electric fields, extreme current densities, local deformations,
measurements of small forces down to those between individual atoms, just to
name a few, ultimately to handle atoms [53] and to modify individual mole-
cules, in short, to use the STM as a Feynman Machine [54]. This area has not
yet reached adolescence.
   The STM’s “Years of Apprenticeship” have come to an end, the fundamen-
tals have been laid, and the “Years of Travel” begin. We should not like to
speculate where it will finally lead, but we sincerely trust that the beauty of
atomic structures might be an inducement to apply the technique to those
problems where it will be of greatest service solely to the benefit of mankind.
Alfred Nobel’s hope, our hope, everybody’s hope.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We should like to thank all those who have supported us in one way or another,
and those who have contributed to the development of Scanning Tunneling
Microscopy, and express our appreciation of the pleasant and collegial atmo-
sphere existing in the STM community. Thanks are also due to Dilys Brüll-
mann for her diligent handling of our manuscripts from the start and for her
careful reading of this manuscript, and to Erich Stoll for processing Figs. 6 and
7 using ideas of R. Voss.


408                                   Physics 1986


REFERENCES
 [l] For reviews, see Binnig, G., and Rohrer, H. (1986) IBM J. Res. Develop. 30, 355;
      Golovchenko, J. A. (1986) Science 232, 48; Behm, R. J., and Hoesler, W. (1986)
      Physics and Chemistry of Solid Surfaces , Vol VI, (Springer Verlag, Berlin), p. 361;
      Hansma, P. K., and Tersoff, J. (1987) J. Appl. Phys. 61, RI; Proceedings of the
      STM Workshops in Oberlech, Austria, July 1-5, 1985, IBM J. Res. Develop. 30,
      Nos. 4 and 5 (1986); Proceedings of STM ‘86, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, July
      14- 18, 1986, Surface Sci., 181, Nos. 1 and 2 (1987). An article combining technical
      and biographical details is presented in Dordick, Rowan L. (1986) IBM Research
      Magazine 24, 2.
 [2] Binnig, G. K., and Hoenig, H. E. (1978) Z. Phys. B 32, 23.
 [3] Rohrer, H. (1960) Helv. Phys. Acta 33, 675.
 [4] Giaever, I. (1974) Rev. Mod. Phys. 46, 245.
 [5] Thompson W. A., and Hanrahan, S. F. (1976) Rev. Sci. Instrum. 47, 1303.
 [6] Williamson, B. P. (1967) Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. 182,21; Guenther, K. H., Wierer,
      P. G., and Bennett, J. M. (1984) Appl. Optics 23, 3820.
 [7] Young, R., Ward, J., and Scire, F. (1972) Rev. Sci. Instrum. 43, 999.
 [8] For technical details, see Binnig, G., and Rohrer, H. (1982) Helv. Phys. Acta 5.5,
      726; idem (1983) Surface Sci. 126, 236; idem (1985) Sci. Amer. 253, 50.
 [9] Marti, 0. (1986) Ph.D. Thesis No. 8095, ETH Zurich, Switzerland; Marti, O.,
      Binnig, G., Rohrer, H., Salemink, H., (1987) Surface Sci., 181, 230.
[10] Ott, H. R., and Rohrer, H. (1981) unpublished; Vierira, S. (1986) IBM J. Res.
      Develop. 30, 553.
[11] Poppe, U. (1981) Verhandl. DPG (VI) 16, 476.
[12] Teague, E. C. (1978) Dissertation, North Texas State Univ., Univ. Microfilms
      International, Ann Arbor, Mich., p. 141; idem (1978) Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 23,
      290; idem (1986) J. Res. Natl. Bur. Stand. 91, 171.
[13] Binnig, G., Rohrer, H., Gerber, Ch., and Weibel, E. (1982) Physica B 109 & 110,
      2075.
[14] Binnig, G., Rohrer, H., Gerber, Ch., and Weibel, E. (1982) Phys. Rev. Lett. 49,57.
[15] Binnig, G., Rohrer, H., Gerber, Ch., and Weibel, E. (1983) Surface Sci. 131, L379.
[16] Miskowsky, N. M., Cutler, P. H., Feuchtwang, T. E. Shepherd, S. J., Lucas, A. A.,
      and Sullivan, T. E. (1980) Appl. Phys. Lett. 37, 189.
[17] Quate, C. F. (1986) Physics Today 39, 26.
[18] Moreland, J., Alexander, S., Cox, M., Sonnenfeld, R., and Hansma, P. K. (1983)
      Appl. Phys. Lett. 43, 387. Actually, Paul Hansma was indisposed and could not
      attend the first seminar given on STM in the USA. However, his students
      attended, and with them Paul built the squeezable tunnel junction.
[19] Binnig, G., Rohrer, H., Gerber, Ch., and Weibel, E. (1983) Phys. Rev. Lett. 50,
       120.
[20] Harrison, W. A. (1976) Surface Sci. 55, 1.
[21] Takayanagi, K., Tanishiro, Y., Takahashi, M., and Takahashi, S. (1985) J. Vac.
      Sci. Tech. A 3, 1502.
[22] Tromp, R. M., and van Loenen, E. J. (1985) Surface Sci. 155,441.
[23] Tromp, R. M. (1985) Surface Sci. 155, 432, and references therein.
[24] Becker, R. S., Golovchenko, J. A., McRae, E. G., and Swartzentruber, B. S. (1985)
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2028; Hamers, R. J., Tromp, R. M., and Demuth, J. E. (1986)
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 1972.
[25] Tersoff, J., and Hamann, D. R. (1983) Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1998; Baratoff, A.
       ( 1984) Physica 127B, 143.
[26] Garcia, N., Ocal, C., and Flores, F. (1983) Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 2002; Stoll, E.,
       Baratoff, A., Selloni, A., and Carnevali, P. (1984) J. Phys. C 17, 3073.
[27] Binnig; G., Rohrer, H., Gerber, Ch., and Stoll, E. (1984) Surface Sci. 144, 321.


                                    G. Binnig & H. Rohrer                               409


[28] Baró, A. M., Binnig, G., Rohrer, H., G e r b e r , Ch., Stoll, E., Baratoff, A., and
      Salvan, F. (1984) Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 1304.
[29] Binnig, G., Fuchs, H., and Stoll, E. (1986) Surface Sci., 169, L295.
[30] Binnig, G., and Rohrer, H. (1984) Trends in Physics, editors, J. Janta and J.
      Pantoflicek (European Physical Society) p. 38.
[31] Baratoff, A., Binnig, G., Fuchs, H., Salvan, F., and Stoll, E. (1986) Surface Sci.,
      168, 734.
[32] Binnig, G., Frank, K. H., Fuchs, H., Garcia, N., Reihl, B., Rohrer, H., Salvan, F.,
      and Williams, A. R. (1985) Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 991; Garcia, R., Saenz, J. J., and
      Garcia, N. (1986) Phys. Rev. B 33, 4439.
[33] de Lozanne, A. L., Elrod, S. A., and Quate, C. F. (1985) Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2433.
[34] Feenstra, R. M., and Fein, A. P. (1985) Phys. Rev. B 32, 1394.
[35] Elrod, S. A., Bryant, A., de Lozanne, A. L., Park, S., Smith, D., and Quate, C. F.
      (1986) IBM J. Res. Develop. 30, 387.
[36] Behm, R. J., Hoesler, W., Ritter, E., and Binnig, G. (1986) Phys. Rev. Lett. 56,
      228.
[37] Hansma, P. K. (1985) Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 30, 251.
[38] Becker, R. S., Golovchenko, J. A., and Swartzentruber, B. S. (1985) Phys. Rev.
      Lett. 54, 2678.
[39] Proceedings published (1986) IBM J. Res. Develop. 30, 4/5.
[40] For a review, see Ernst, N., and Ehrlich, G. (1986) Topics in Current Physics, Vol. 40,
      editor U. Gonser (Springer Verlag, Berlin) p. 75.
[41] Gerber, Ch., Binnig, G., Fuchs, H., Marti, O., and Rohrer, H. (1986) Rev. Sci.
      Instrum. 57, 221.
[42] Coleman, R. V., Drake, B., Hansma, P. K., and Slough, G. (1985) Phys. Rev.
      Lett. 55, 394.
[43] Smith, D. P. E., and Binnig, G. (1986) Rev. Sci. Instrum. 57, 2630.
[44] Bryant, A., Smith, D. P. E., and Quate, C. F. (1986) Appl. Phys. Lett. 48, 832.
[45] Fink, H.-W., (1986) IBM J. Res. Develop. 30,460.
[46] Kuk, Y., and Silverman, P. J. (1986) Appl. Phys. Lett. 48, 1597.
[47] Baró, A. M., Miranda, R., Alaman, J., Garcia, N., Binnig, G., Rohrer, H., Gerber,
      Ch,. and Carrascosa, J. L. (1985) Nature 315, 253.
[48] Sonnenfeld, R., and Hansma, P. K. (1986) Science 232, 211.
[49] Sonnenfeld, R., and Schardt, B. C. (1986) Appl. Phys. Lett. 49, 1172.
[50] Muralt, P., and Pohl, D. W’. (1986) Appl. Phys. Lett. 48, 514.
[51] Binnig, G., Quate, C. F., and Gerber, Ch. (1986) Phys. Rev. Lett. 56,930.
[52] Soler, J. M., Baró, A. M., Garcia, N., and Rohrer, H. (1986) Phys. Rev. Lett. 57,
      444; Dürig, U., Gimzewski, J. K., and Pohl, D. W. (1986) Phys. Rev. Lett. 57,
      2403.
[53] Becker, R. S., Golovchenko, J. A., and Swartzentruber, B. S. (1987) Nature 325,
      419.
[54] Feynman, R. P. (1960) Engr. and Sci., 22, February; Hameroff, S., Schneiker, C.,
      Scott, A., Jablonka, P., Hensen, T., Sarid, D., and Bell, S. (1987).
