                              J . HA N S D . J E N S E N


             Glimpses at the history of the nuclear
                       structure theory
                         Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1963


During the last weeks, I have often thought of my teachers, especially of the
one man who had great influence on my attempts to gain some understanding
of nuclei, Niels Bohr. I think it is also appropriate at this occasion to consider
first the background from which our concepts of nuclear structure emerged.

I can devote only a few sentences to the time preceding Chadwick’s discovery
of the neutron (1932). At that time our information regarding the nucleus
was very sparse. All we had was a chart of known stable isotopes with nuclear
masses which were not very accurate, a few nuclear spins, an estimate of the
nuclear radius, about 1.4 10 - 3 A1/3, the phenomena of natural radioactivity,
                              •




and a few known nuclear reactions. Ideas on nuclear structure were still domi-
nated by Prout’s hypothesis of 1815, that electrons and protons, the only
known elementary particles, are bound together in a nucleus in such a way that
A protons and A-Z electrons form a nucleus of charge Z. But from the point
of view of quantum mechanics a great puzzle was inseparably inherent in this
picture. Consider the deuteron as the simplest example. According to the
model, the deuteron contains two protons and one electron, just like the ion
of the hydrogen molecule. Yet in the deuteron the linear dimensions are 10-5
times smaller than in the hydrogen molecule. The uncertainty principle re-
quires very strong forces to confine electrons to such a small volume. These
non-Coulomb forces should then show up just as well in the hydrogen spec-
trum and change the Balmer formula; in particular, they should give rise to a
much larger splitting than that discovered later by Lamb. I cannot discuss
other similarily grave inconsistencies of the model in this limited time.
   In view of these conflicts many physicists, including Niels Bohr, were in-
clined to expect far-reaching changes in our basic physical concepts, even in
quantum mechanics*. At that time one was tempted to consider alpha particles

* Some physicists thought that it might even become necessary to give up the conserva-
tion laws in their current form, especially in connection with the problem of beta decay.




                                               40


                  THE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE THEORY                                         41
as basic building blocks of nuclei. However, from those days a warning from
Schroedinger still persists in my mind. During the late twenties he chided the
participants in a Berlin seminar for their lack of imagination. In his impulsive
manner he said: «Just because you see alpha particles coming out of the nucleus,
you should not necessarily conclude that inside they exist as such.» And he
gave an illustrative example from every-day life to show how such reasoning
can lead to fallacious conclusions.
   It is remarkable that very little information about nuclear structure could be
gained from the study of alpha decay. Max von Laue has pointed this out very
clearly in a letter to Gamow in 1926; he congratulated Gamow on his explana-
tion of the Geiger-Nuttal law* in terms of the tunnelling effect and then went
on: «however, if the alpha decay is dominated by quantum phenomena in the
region outside the nucleus, we obviously cannot learn much about nuclear
structure from it.». Gamow says that at first he was quite perplexed while
reading these lines, but thinking it over he had to agree with von Laue. The
situation that very little insight into nuclear structure could be gained from
this oldest nuclear phenomenon persisted for a long time. Only about 6 years
ago some progress was made when Mang applied the shell model to the
problem of alpha decay. It seems to me that Mang’s results justify Schroedin-
ger’s scepticism; the alpha particles obviously only form while emerging
from the nucleus.

The discovery of free neutrons changed the situation entirely. Now it became
possible to separate the grave difficulties of «the localization of electrons in the
nucleus», to which I shall return later, from the specific problem of nuclear
structure. Thus, in spite of Schroedinger’s warning (this time, of course, re-
garding the neutrons), one could consider the hypothesis that protons and
neutrons are the fundamental units within the nucleus. (Rutherford had al-
ready suggested this in conversations before Chadwick’s discovery, and Har-
kins had published the same proposal). Specific nucleon-nucleon forces acting
between them must be responsible for the nuclear binding. Heisenberg was
the first to explore the consequences of this hypothesis, and to arrive at im-
portant concepts and results in a series of pioneering papers in the Zeitschrift

  These ideas can be separated into two stages. First, the saturation phenome-

* That is, the fact that the lifetime of an α -emitter changes by 25 powers of ten when the
alpha-particle energy increases only by a factor of two.


42                         1963     J. HANS D. JENSEN

non can be accepted as an empirical fact, i. e. the approximate proportionality
of nuclear binding energy to the particle number A , as well as the proportion-
ality of the nuclear volume to A, with a radius already mentioned.The numer-
ical value of r was a crude estimate at that time; now we know from the
Stanford experiments that it is about 20% smaller. These facts as well as the
results of scattering experiments led to the conclusion that nuclear forces must
have a short range. In spite of this shortness of range, in one of his papers
Heisenberg considered the nucleus as a superposition of two Fermi gases (a
neutron gas and a proton gas) which freely permeate each other and which by
an averaged potential are confined to the given volume. The basic fact that
stable nuclei have about the same number of neutrons and protons,
is explained on this basis as a consequence of Pauli’s principle. In addition, one
obtains the right order of magnitude for the curvature of the parabola defined
by taking an A=const. cross-section through the surface of binding energies
of stable nuclei; the opening of the parabola was somewhat too large, with
the new nuclear radius obtained by Hofstadter the agreement is even better.
The decrease of the ratio Z:A with increasing mass number is a natural con-
sequence of the interplay between the accumulating Coulomb interaction
 and the consequences of Pauli’s principle.
    Thus the basic idea of the shell model was expressed for the first time, i. e.,
 the idea of free motion of individual nucleons in an averaged potential. Every
further development was an inevitable extension of these ideas to a system
 with a finite number of particles*. The Leipzig school as well as Wigner and
 his co-workers devoted great effort to the study of light nuclei, mainly on the
 basis of the shell model. The particular stability of the nuclei              and
          was not the only fact explained in this way. For example, Wigner and
     co-workers came to a quantitative conclusion that the then unknown nu-
 clides       and         should be stable; later these nuclides were in fact ob-
 served in mass spectrometers as natural isotopes with very small abundance.
* However, Heisenberg’s interest extended far beyond this stage to the following ques-
tion: By which properties of the forces can the nuclear saturation be explained? To ac-
count for this phenomenon, he introduced the concept of « exchange forces » which he
formulated in terms of « isospin » formalism, first invented for this purpose. Thus he
created a conceptual apparatus which is still used in discussing the most direct studies of
nucleon-nucleon interaction, the scattering experiments. The quantitative results con-
cerning exchange mixtures which would guarantee saturation are by now outdated. It is
unfortunate that at that time one did not systematically pursue one other possible ex-
planation of saturation: a property of the forces which is today usually called « hard
core » or « most hardcore ». Heisenberg also discussed this possibility in one of his papers.


                THE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE THEORY                                43

Although this was somewhat a matter of luck in view of the insufficient knowl-
edge of the forces, it was nevertheless one of the first predictions of nuclear
theory to be verified experimentally. In 1937 Hund and Wigner, indepen-
dently of each other, developed the concept of supermultiplets that played
such an important role in classifying nuclides and in the systematics of beta
decay. This concept was based on the assumption that nucleon-nucleon forces
were essentially charge- and spin-independent. In the article by Bethe and
Bacher in Reviews of Modern Physics (1936), which was soon called « Bethe’s
bible », very convincing arguments had been presented to show that, in fact,
nuclear forces should not show much spin- and isospin-dependence; in partic-
ular the spin-orbit coupling should be very weak.

In the years immediately following the discovery of neutrons, a vigorous de-
velopment of experimental nuclear physics began. This was partially due to
the possibility of performing experiments with neutrons; partially to the
completion of the first accelerators and to great improvements in measuring
and counting techniques. For me these were the years of my first visits to
Copenhagen and meeting Niels Bohr; in Copenhagen I was privileged to
witness many attempts at a theoretical interpretation of the rapidly accumu-
lating experimental data.
    Two new phenomena were particularly important to the development of
our concepts of nuclear structure: relatively high effective cross-sections for
nucleon-nucleon scattering, and sharp, closely spaced resonances discovered
by Fermi, Amaldi, and co-workers in slow-neutron scattering and capture.
The latter phenomenon could not be explained at all in terms of the picture in
which the neutron moves in an averaged potential. Thus Niels Bohr’s concept
of the «compound nucleus» originated. In his model, the state of the nucleus is
characterized by an intimate coupling of all nucleons with each other; this
 description does not permit us to speak of the motion of a single nucleon in-
dependently of the simultaneous motion of all the others. However, this in-
tuitive, semiclassical picture of Niels Bohr had to be brought into agreement
 with the postulates of quantum mechanics. To this day the golden bridge has
 been the Breit-Wigner formula. It originated independently outside Copen-
 hagen, but it could soon be seen on every blackboard of Niels Bohr’s institute.
 Naturally it received appropriate space in the above-mentioned «Bethe bible».
 Probably every theoretician has pondered long and often about its interpreta-
 tion and about its proof; and it still occupies many minds.
    One was inclined to describe even the ground state of a nucleus in terms of


44                                      1963 J. HANS D. JENSEN
Bohr’s picture. A concept of nuclear matter, packed to saturation density and
having a binding energy proportional to its volume became generally accepted. For
finite nuclei a surface tension resulting from a surface energy proportional to the
surface was to be added. The « Bethe bible » also contains an excellent discussion
of the basis for these assumptions. The greatest success of this model was Bohr and
Wheeler’s theory of nuclear fission (1939), which contains almost everything that
is understood to date (1963) about this phenomenon.

Schroedinger’s remark, that one should not necessarily assume that the particles,
observed as free particles emerging from the nucleus during nuclear
transformations, must exist in the same form inside the nucleus, was emphasized in
Fermi’s paper on beta decay (1933-1934). In these papers the abovementioned
dilemma, which arises from the concept of « electrons inside the nucleus or inside
the neutron », was literally dissolved into nothing. Fermi drew radical
consequences from the idea that the proton and the neutron are two quantum states
of one single fundamental particle, the nucleon. Between these two states quantum
transitions can take place. Such a transition is accompanied by the creation of an
electron and a neutrino; (Fermi used Heisenberg’s concept of isospin and its
formalism in the theory of beta transformation). Today’s young physicist, who
already as a student juggles creation and annihilation operators on the blackboard,
can hardly fathom the importance of the conceptual breakthrough contained in
Fermi’s theory. As an illustration, let me quote from a historical letter sent by Pauli
to several friends and colleagues (December 1930) in which he proposed his
neutrino hypothesis for the first time.
  « … bin ich auf einen verzweifelten Ausweg verfallen, … nämlich die
Möglichkeit, es könnten elektrisch neutrale Teilchen, die ich Neutrinos* nennen
will, in den Kernen existieren … Das kontinuierliche β-Spektrum wäre dann
verständlich unter der Annahme, dass beim β-Zerfall mit dem Elektron jeweils
noch ein Neutrino emittiert wird … »
  « I came to a desperate conclusion … that inside the nucleus there may exist
electrically neutral particles which I shall call neutrinos*. The continuous beta
spectrum becomes understandable if one assumes that, during beta decay, the
emission of an electron is accompanied by the emission of a neutrino… »
* In his letter, written long before Chadwick’s discovery, the word « neutron » appears instead of
« neutrino »; the latter was adopted by Pauli later, following a suggestion by Fermi.


                 THE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE THEORY                                 45
  I emphasize the words exist inside the nucleus and emission. Pauli certainly
did not choose these words simply to make his ideas more palatable to his ex-
perimental colleagues, but because the words characterize the physical con-
cept of those days. It is all the more remarkable in view of the fact that the
concept and mathematical technique of particle creation used by Fermi had
been available long before in the so-called second quantization of Jordan,
Klein, and Wigner. However, even in 1932, in his Handbuch article Pauli
himself regarded that rather as a mathematical trick, it was Fermi’s work
which finally convinced him that there was tangible physics in it.
   Yukawa’s theory also became known in the middle of that decade. He em-
phasized that the forces between nucleons are transmitted by a field, which
must show retardation effects, and quanta associated with the retardation
effects, the mesons. The latter are perhaps of secondary importance in nuclear
structure problems, since it was established by Heisenberg’s investigations
that in the nucleus the nucleons move so slowly that one may hope to under-
stand the essential features of nuclear structure by using non-relativistic quan-
tum mechanics. However, the strong coupling of the Yukawa field to its
source is extremely important; its strength,          is of the order of magnitude
of ten (in contrast with the Sommerfeld constant               = 1/137 in electro-
dynamics). This led Niels Bohr to an idea on nuclear matter, which, to my
knowledge, he never wrote down; but from conversations it has remained
ineradicably engraved in my memory: since the field is strongly coupled to
its sources, the hitherto existing picture of the « compound nucleus » may still
be much too naive. Perhaps, the only sensible concept is to consider the whole
nucleus as an « Urfeld » which is highly nonlinear because of such strong coup-
lings. When this field is quantized, it must give (in addition to other con-
served quantities, like angular momentum) integral charges Z, and energies
(i.e. masses) that form a spectrum with values close to the integral numbers A,
on which the « exaction energy » bands are superimposed. The assumption
that inside the nucleus there exist Z protons and (A- Z) neutrons such as we
encounter them as free particles in appropriate experiments would then
hardly make any sense.
   Schroedinger’s scepticism (mentioned at the beginning) would thus be
formulated in its extreme. Nevertheless, Niels Bohr had thus hinted at a pic-
ture of the nucleus which closely resembles current concepts in high- energy
physics on elementary particles and « resonances » (e.g., such as the hyperons
or the          etc. mesons). Certainly, one should not entirely forget such a
point of view in nuclear physics either, although it has meanwhile been


46                        1 9 6 3 J. HANS D. JENSEN

shown*, that it is legitimate to speak of the existence of individual nucleons
inside the nucleus in a useful approximation.

The picture of the nucleus just described is in accord with the fact that, just
glancing at the table of stable isotopes, we can see that the nuclear properties
are continuous functions of A and Z. However, there were indications of dis-
continuities and windings in the valley of the energy surface. I have already
pointed out the exceptional cases of nuclei with Z and N=2, 8, 20. I. t also
seemed strange that the alpha energy does not increase uniformly as one goes
further away from the alpha-stable nuclei in the mass valley; instead it is
largest right at the polonium isotopes. This indicates that a special disconti-
nuity occurs for Z=82. In the diagram in which alpha energies are plotted
against Z and N, we also see curves with steep slopes from N=128 to N=126;
Gamow called this feature the « Heisen-Berg ». The work of Seaborg and
collaborators made the profile of these peaks even more striking. Elsasser,
Guggenheim, Ivanenko, and others had attempted to explain these and other
phenomena in terms of the shell model; however, it seemed impossible to ac-
commodate the groups of numbers Z and N= 2, 8, 20, on the one hand and
Z= 82, N= 126 on the other, under the same roof. Yet, mainly because of the
success of Bohr’s compound-nucleus model, there was a general tendency to
consider these phenomena as curiosities of little significance to the fundamen-
tal questions of nuclear structure.
   The war years and also the first few years thereafter brought the physicists
in Germany into a stifling isolation, but at the same time they gave us some
leisure to pursue questions off the beaten trails. At that time I had many dis-
cussions with Haxel in Berlin, later Göttingen, and with Suess in Hamburg
on the empirical facts which single out the above-mentioned numbers. To
Suess they became more and more significant, primarily in his cosmo-chem-
ical studies: he found that in the interval between the numbers already men-
tioned, the numbers Z and N= 50 and N= 82 were also clearly prominent**.
Haxel, at first quite independently, encountered the same numbers in the
study of other nuclear data.
   Although my two colleagues tried hard to convince me that these numbers
 might be a key to the understanding of nuclear structure, at first I did not know
 what to make of it. I thought the name « magic number », whose origin was
* In particular, through the work of Brueckner and recent literature inspired by it.
** V. M. Goldschmidt also came to the same conclusion; Suess and I had the privilege of
discussing it with him in Oslo in 1942 and 1943.


                  THE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE THEORY                                        47
unknown to me*, to be very appropriate. Then, a few years after the war, I had
the privilege of returning to Copenhagen for the first time. There in a recent
issue of the Physical Review, I found a paper by Maria Goeppert-Mayer, « On
closed shells in nuclei », where she too had collected the empirical evidence
pointing out the significance of the magic numbers. That gave me courage
to talk about her work, along with our results, in a theoretical seminar. I shall
never forget that afternoon. Niels Bohr listened very attentively and threw in
questions which became more and more lively. Once he remarked: « But that
is not in Mrs. Mayer’s paper! »; evidently Bohr had already carefully read and
pondered about her work. The seminar turned into a long and lively discus-
sion. I was very much impressed by the intensity with which Niels Bohr re-
ceived, weighed, and compared these empirical facts, facts that did not at all
fit into his own picture of nuclear structure. From that hour on I began to
consider seriously the possibility of a « demagification » of the « magic num-
bers ».
   At first I tried to remain as much as possible within the old framework. To
begin with, I considered only the spin of the whole nucleus, since there appear-
ed to exist a simple correlation between the magic nucleon numbers and the
sequence of nuclear spins and their multiplicities. I first thought of the single-
particle model with strong spin-orbit coupling** during an exciting discussion
with Haxel and Suess, in which we tried to include all available empirical facts
in this scheme. As we did this it turned out that, because of the spin-orbit
coupling, the proton- and the neutron-number 28 should also be something
like a magic number. I remember our being elated when we found some hints
in the still meagre data that was available at that time. Nevertheless, I did not
feel very happy about the whole picture, and I was not really surprised when
a serious journal refused to publish our first letter, stating « it is not really
physics but rather playing with numbers ». Only when I thought of the lively
interest in the magic numbers which Niels Bohr had shown did I dare send
the same letter to Weisskopf who forwarded it to the Physical Review. Yet it
was not until later, after I had presented our ideas in a Copenhagen seminar
and been able to discuss them with Niels Bohr, that I finally gained some con-
fidence. One of Bohrs first comments seemed remarkable to me: « Now I
understand why nuclei do not show rotational bands in their spectra ». With
the accuracy of measurement available at the time, one had looked for such
* I learned only yesterday that the name was coined by Wigner.
* * Fortunately, I was not too well versed in « Bethe’s bible » and I did not remember the
old arguments against a strong spin-orbit coupling too well.


48                        1963    J. HANS D. JENSEN

spectra in lighter nuclei, which according to the liquid drop or a similar model
should have relatively small moments of inertia and therefore widely sepa-
rated rotational levels. As we know today, these light nuclei, like many others,
in fact show no rotational bands; Bohr’s argument was, of course, that in a
picture in which single particles move independently in an average spherically
symmetric potential, there was no place for a superimposed rotation of the
nucleus as a whole, just as in the system of electrons in the atomic shells.

Even though the shell model finally proved to be more than just a convenient
language in which the experimentalists could compare their notes, and al-
though during the following years it led us to some understanding of a few
fundamental features of nuclear structure, I still had to agree with Robert
Oppenheimer when he told me : « Maria and you are trying to explain magic
by miracles. » In a lecture at Oak Ridge, Wigner recently said something quite
similar, of course more cryptic, in his careful way of choosing his words.
   From the beginning it was clear to me as well as to Mrs. Goeppert-Mayer
that the shell model could at best approximately describe the ground state and
the low-lying excited states of nuclei. While the consequences of the Pauli
principle for these states could possibly guarantee the self-consistency of our
model, the Pauli principles becomes less and less stringent as the excitation
energies become higher, and the nucleon-nucleon correlations arising from
nuclear forces become increasingly important. In an exact description such
correlations are, of course, also present in the ground state.
   Therefore, during my next visit to Copenhagen I had a certain satisfaction
when, questioned about news on the shell model, I could instead talk about
the ideas which then occupied my namesake Peter Jensen and myself as well as
Steinwedel and Danos. Following a suggestion by Goldhaber and Teller, we
tried to provide a semi-classical explanation for the recently discovered large
dipole absorption in the nuclear photoeffect at 15 to 20 MeV; that is, we de-
scribed it as an excited state of nuclear matter in which all nucleons are in a state
of motion with strict phase relations existing between all of them. In this way
the frequency of the absorption maximum, as well as its dependence on the
nuclear mass number, could be related in a satisfactory way to the symmetry
energy and to the nuclear radius. The width of the « giant resonance » provided
a measure of the rate at which such phase correlations disappear. Niels Bohr
understood immediately why the study of this particular type of « collective
motion » (in the present-day jargon of specialists) was of such great interest
to me. Even though the importance of phase correlations be kept down in the


                 THE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE THEORY                                 49
ground state by Pauli’s principle, we wanted to determine at which excitation
energies the correlations enforced by the nucleon-nucleon interaction become
dominant over the effect of the averaged forces.
   In the following years much work was devoted to the study of such corre-
lations. A most remarkable feature of current nuclear physics was brought to
light by the work of Kurath, of the former Harwell group (Flowers, Elliot,
and others), and of the young Copenhagen School (Aage Ben Bohr, Mottel-
son, Nilsson and others). I mean the fact that, even though the groups started
from points of view which, whilst complementing also limit each other, their
quantitative results seem quite soon to meet, and to overlap, in the next steps
of approximation.
    The first group started from the shell-model point of view with a spheri-
cally symmetric potential, and handled the problem of correlations by calcu-
lating the configuration mixing which is caused by the forces acting individ-
ually in each pair of nucleons. Thus it was shown that, even with only a few
nucleons outside a closed shell, one obtains level sequences very similar to
rotational spectra. In this way, although it is difficult to perform a quantitative
calculation, one can understand how in the case of nuclei with many nucleons
outside closed shells (for example, the rare-earth region and the nuclei be-
yond) many close-lying and very different particle states can contribute to
configuration mixing, creating such correlations that the ground state be-
 comes a strongly deformed nucleus. The Copenhagen group started by treat-
 ing mainly the latter group of nuclei; they included correlations ab initio by
 assuming in their calculation a non-spherically symmetric, collective poten-
 tial in which single-particle states are calculated. Then the coupling of the
 single-particle motion to the collective motion of the remaining deformed
 nucleus determines the spectra. (The ingenuity of the Copenhagen concept
 lies in the clever and successful treatment of the interplay of « collective » and
 ((individual)) features of nuclear motion; this provides the model with ade-
 quate flexibility to account for all new empirical facts.) It was shown that this
 easily calculable « unified model », as Aage Bohr likes to call it, could also ex-
 plain the spectra of nuclei with only a few nucleons outside a closed shell. In
 this context one should also mention the new work of de-Shalit, in which the
 first excited states of nuclei with odd A are explained as a combination of « core
 excitations of the nucleus A -1 » and the single-particle motion of the odd
 nucleon.
    When one considers all these questions as a whole - the problems of nuclear
 structure and nuclear forces, as well as the problems of elementary particles -


50                        1963 J. HANS D. JENSEN

a verse by Rilke still seems to fairly describe the situation. In the early days of
quantum mechanics my late teacher, Wilhelm Lenz, brought this verse to my
attention. In it Rilke speaks of his feelings at the turn of the century in terms of
a large book in which a page is slowly being turned over, he concludes:

                  « Man fühlt den Glanz von einer neuen Seite,
                  Auf der noch alles werden kann.
                  Die stillen Kräfte prüfen ihre Breite
                  Und sehn einander dunkel an. »

                  [ « The lustre of the new-turned page one senses,
                  Where everything may yet unfold,
                  The silent forces measure their expanses;
                  Each other dimly they behold. »]
