                           JA M E S C H A D W I C K

                 The neutron and its properties
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1935

The idea that there might exist small particles with no electrical charge has
been put forward several times. Nernst, for example, suggested that a neutral
particle might be formed by a negative electron and an equal positive charge,
and that these "neutrons" might possess many of the properties of the ether;
while Bragg at one time suggested that the γ -rays emitted by radioactive
substances consisted of small neutral particles, which, on breaking up, re-
leased a negative electron.
   The first suggestion of a neutral particle with the properties of the neutron
we now know, was made by Rutherford in 1920. He thought that a proton
and an electron might unite in a much more intimate way than they do in
the hydrogen atom, and so form a particle of no nett charge and with a mass
nearly the same as that of the hydrogen atom. His view was that with such
a particle as th e first step in the formation of atomic nuclei from the two
elementary units in the structure of matter - the proton and the electron - it
would be much easier to picture how heavy complex nuclei can be gradually
built up from the simpler ones. He pointed out that this neutral particle
would have peculiar and interesting properties. It may be of interest to quote
his remarks:
   "Under some conditions, however, it may be possible for an electron to
combine much more closely with the H nucleus, forming a kind of neutral
doublet. Such an atom would have very novel properties. Its external field
would be practically zero, except very close to the nucleus, and in conse-
quence it should be able to move freely through matter. Its presence would
probably be difficult to detect by the spectroscope, and it may be impossible
to contain it in a sealed vessel. On the other hand, it should enter readily the
structure of atoms, and may either unite with the nucleus or be disintegrated
by its intense field.
   The existence of such atoms seems almost necessary to explain the build-
ing up of the nuclei of heavy elements; for unless we suppose the production
of charged particles of very high velocities it is difficult to see how any
positively charged particle can reach the nucleus of a heavy atom against its
intense repulsive field."


340                          1935 J. CHADWICK

  Rutherford’s conception of closely combined proton and electron was
adopted in pictures of nuclear structure developed by Ono (1926), by Four-
nier and others, but nothing essentially new was added to it.
  No experimental evidence for the existence of neutral particles could be
obtained for years. Some experiments were made in the Cavendish Labor-
atory in 1921 by Glasson and by Roberts, hoping to detect the formation of
such particles when an electric discharge was passed through hydrogen. Their
results were negative.
  The possibility that neutral particles might exist was, nevertheless, not lost
sight of. I myself made several attempts to detect them - in discharge tubes
actuated in different ways, in the disintegration of radioactive substances, and
in artificial disintegrations produced by                   No doubt similar ex-
periments were made in other laboratories, with the same result.
  Later, Bothe and Becker showed that γ -radiations were excited in some
light elements when bombarded by α-particles. Mr. H. C. Webster, in the
Cavendish Laboratory had also been making similar experiments, and he
proceeded to examine closely the production of these radiations. The radia-
tion emitted by beryllium showed some rather peculiar features, which were
very difficult to explain. I suggested therefore that the radiation might con-
sist of neutral particles and that a test of this hypothesis might be made by
passing the radiation into an expansion chamber. Several photographs were
taken: some β-particle tracks -presumably recoil electrons - were observed,
but nothing unexpected.**
  The first real step towards the discovery of the neutron was given by a
very beautiful experiment of Mme. and M. Joliot-Curie, who were also
investigating the properties of this beryllium radiation. They passed the ra-
diation through a very thin window into an ionization vessel containing air.
When paraffin wax or any other matter containing hydrogen was placed in
front of the window the ionization in the vessel increased. They showed that
this increase was due to the ejection from the wax of protons, moving with
very high velocities.
  This behaviour of the beryllium radiation was very difficult to explain if
it were a quantum radiation. I therefore began immediately the study of this
new effect using different methods - the counter, the expansion chamber,
and the high-pressure ionization chamber.
  It appeared at once that the beryllium radiation could eject particles not
 * Cf. Rutherford and Chadwick, Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc., 25 (1929) 186.
** The failure was partly due to the weakness of the polonium source.


                     NEUTRON AND ITS PROPERTIES                            341
only from paraffin wax but also from other light substances, such as lithium,
beryllium, boron, etc., though in these cases the particles had a range of only
a few millimetres in air. The experiments showed that the particles are recoil
atoms of the element through which the radiation passes, set in motion by
the impact of the radiation.
   The occurrence of these recoil atoms can be shown most strikingly by
means of the expansion chamber. These experiments were carried out by
Dr. Feather and Mr. Dee.




                                    Fig. 1.
   Fig. 1 is a photograph taken by Dee, which shows the tracks of protons
ejected from gelatine on the roof of the expansion chamber. Fig. 2 shows
two photographs taken by Feather, using an expansion chamber filled with
nitrogen. Two short dense tracks are seen. Each is due to an atom of nitrogen
which has been struck by the radiation. One track (Fig. 2b) shows a short
spur, due to collision with a nitrogen atom; the angle between the spurs is
90 o, as it should be if the initial track is due to a nitrogen atom.




                      Fig. 2a.                    Fig. 2b.


342                            1935 J. CHADWICK

   The beryllium radiation thus behaved very differently from a quantum
radiation. This property of setting in motion the atoms of matter in its path
suggests that the radiation consists of particles.
   Let us suppose that the radiation consists of particles of mass M moving
with velocities up to a maximum velocity V. Then the maximum velocity
which can be imparted to a hydrogen atom, mass 1, by the impart of such a
particle will be




and the maximum velocity imparted to a nitrogen atom will be




Then




The velocities U P and       were found by experiment. The maximum range
of the protons ejected from paraffin wax was measured and also the ranges
of the recoil atoms produced in an expansion chamber filled with nitrogen.
From these ranges the velocities U P and         can be deduced approximately:
    = ca. 3.7 x 10 c m / s e c ,
                    9
                                   = ca. 4.7 x 10 8 c m / s e c . T h u s w e f i n d M
= 0.9.
  We must conclude that the beryllium radiation does in fact consist of par-
ticles, and that these particles have a mass about the same as that of a proton.
Now the experiments further showed that these particles can pass easily
through thicknesses of matter, e.g. 10 or even 20 cm lead. But a proton of
the same velocity as this particle is stopped by a thickness of          mm of lead.
Since the penetrating power of particles of the same mass and speed depends
only on the charge carried by the particle, it was clear that the particle of the
beryllium radiation must have a very small charge compared with that of
the proton. It was simplest to assume that it has no charge at all. All the prop-
erties of the beryllium radiation could be readily explained on this assump-
tion, that the radiation consists of particles of mass 1 and charge 0, or neu-
trons.


                     NEUTRON AND ITS PROPERTIES                            343
                            The nature of the neutron

I have already mentioned Rutherford’s suggestion that there might exist a
neutral particle formed by the close combination of a proton and an electron,
and it was at first natural to suppose that the neutron might be such a com-
plex particle. On the other hand, a structure of this kind cannot be fitted into
the scheme of the quantum mechanics, in which the hydrogen atom repre-
sents the only possible combination of a proton and an electron. Moreover,
an argument derived from the spins of the particles is against this view. The
statistics and spins of the lighter elements can only be given a consistent de-
scription if we assume that the neutron is an elementary particle.
   Similar arguments make it difficult to suppose that the proton is a com-
bination of neutron and positive electron. It seems at present useless to dis-
cuss whether the neutron and proton are elementary particles or not; it may
be that they are two different states of the fundamental heavy particle.
   In the present view of the β-transformations of radioactive bodies the hy-
pothesis is made that a neutron in the nucleus may transform into a proton
and a negative electron with the emission of the electron, or conversely a
proton in the nucleus may transform into a neutron and a positive electron
with the emission of the positron. Thus




If spin is to be conserved in this process we must invoke the aid of another
particle - Pauli’s neutrino; we then write

                        n      n       + neutrino
                        p      n       + antineutrino

where the neutrino is a particle of very small mass, no charge, and spin ½.
   If we knew the masses of the neutron and proton accurately, these consid-
erations would give the mass of the hypothetical neutrino.
   As I have shown, observations of the momenta transferred in collisions of
a neutron with atomic nuclei lead to a value of the mass of the neutron but
the measurements cannot be made with precision. To obtain an accurate
estimate of the neutron mass we must use the energy relations in a disintegra-
tion process in which a neutron is liberated from an atomic nucleus. The best


344                          1935 J.CHADWICK

estimate at present is obtained from the disintegration of the deuteron by the
photoelectric effect of a y-ray




The energy of the protons liberated by a y-ray quantum of hv = 2.62 x 106
eV has been measured recently by Feather, Bretscher, and myself. It is
180,000 eV. Thus the total kinetic energy set free is 360,000 eV, giving a
binding energy of the deuteron of 2.26 x 106 eV. Using the value of the
deuteron mass given by Oliphant, Kempton, and Rutherford, we then ob-
tain a value for the mass of the neutron of I.0085*. The mass of the hydrogen
atom is 1.0081. It would seem therefore that a free neutron should be un-
stable, i.e. it can change spontaneously into a proton + electron + neu-
trino, unless the neutrino has a mass of the order of the mass of an electron.
On the other hand, an argument from the shape of the      ray spectra suggests
that the mass of the neutrino is zero. One must await more exact measure-
ments of the masses of hydrogen and deuterium before speculating further
on this matter.



                     Passage of neutrons through matter

The neutron in its passage through matter loses its energy in collisions with
the atomic nuclei and not with the electrons. The experiments of Dee showed
that the primary ionization along the track of a neutron in air could not be as
much as I ion pair in 3 metres’ path, while Massey has calculated that it may
be as low as I ion pair in 105 km. This behaviour is very different from that
of a charged particle, such as a proton, which dissipates its energy almost
entirely in electron collisions. The collision of a neutron with an atomic nu-
cleus, although much more frequent than with an electron, is also a rare
event, for the forces between a neutron and a nucleus are very small except
at distances of the order of 10 -12 cm. In a close collision the neutron may be
deflected from its path and the struck nucleus may acquire sufficient energy
to produce ions. The recoiling nucleus can then be detected either in an
ionization chamber or by its track in an expansion chamber. In some of these
collisions, however, the neutron enters the nucleus and a distintegration is
* Recent measurements of the mass of deuterium lead to a value of 1.0090 for the
mass of the neutron.


                    NEUTRON AND ITS PROPERTIES                            345
produced. Such disintegrations were first observed by Feather in his observa-
tions on the passage of neutrons through an expansion chamber filled with
nitrogen. An example is shown in Fig. 3. The disintegration process is

                                             +

Since these early experiments many examples of this type of disintegration
have been observed by different workers.




                                    Fig.3.

   Fermi and his collaborators have also shown that the phenomenon of ar-
tificial radioactivity can be provoked in the great majority of all elements,
even in those of large atomic number, by the bombardment of neutrons.
They have also shown that neutrons of very small kinetic energy are pecul-
iarly effective in many cases.
   In some cases an α-particle is emitted in the disintegration process; in
others a proton is emitted; while in others an unstable species of nucleus is
formed by the simple capture of the neutron.
   Examples of these types are:




In the cases just cited the nuclei formed in the reaction are unstable, showing
the phenomenon of induced activity discovered by Mme. and M. Joliot-
Curie, and return to a stable form with the emission of negative electrons.
   In the transformations produced in heavy elements by neutrons, the pro-


346                             1935 J.CHADWICK

cess is, with very few exceptions, one of simple capture. The nucleus so
formed, an isotope of the original nucleus, is often unstable but not invariably
so. For example the reaction


                                                 +

The cadmium isotope formed is stable, but a γ-ray quantum is emitted of
energy corresponding to the binding energy of the neutron.
   Other cases of this type of transformation are known.
   The great effectiveness of the neutron in producing nuclear transmutations
is not           to explain. In the collisions of a charged particle with a nu-
cleus, the chance of entry is limited by the Coulomb forces between the par-
ticle and the nucleus; these impose a minimum distance of approach which
increases with the atomic number of the nucleus and soon becomes so large
that the chance of the particle entering the nucleus is very small. In the case
of collisions of a neutron with a nucleus there is no limitation of this kind.
The force between a neutron and a nucleus is inappreciable except at very
small distances, when it increases very rapidly and is attractive. Instead of the
potential wall in the case of the charged particle, the neutron encounters a
potential hole. Thus even neutrons of very small energy can penetrate into a
nucleus. Indeed slow neutrons may be enormously more effective than fast
neutrons, for they spend a longer time in the nucleus. The calculations of
Bethe show that the chance of capture of a neutron may be inversely propor-
tional to its velocity. The possibility of capture will depend on whether the
nucleus possesses an unoccupied p-level or a level with azimuthal quantum
number l = 1.
   In cases where a particle (α-particle or proton) is ejected from the nucleus,
the possibility of disintegration will depend on whether the particle can es-
cape through the potential barrier. This will be easier the greater the energy
set free in the disintegration process. As a rule disintegration by neutrons
 will take place with absorption of kinetic energy if a proton is released in the
transformation, and may take place with release of kinetic energy if one at
least of the products is an α-particle. Thus processes in which a proton is
emitted can only occur with fast neutrons, even in collisions with elements
of low atomic number; while processes in which α-particles are emitted can
 occur with slow neutrons in elements of low atomic number, but again only
 with fast neutrons in elements of higher atomic number. If the atomic num-
ber is sufficiently high, the neutrons at present at our disposal have insufficient


                    NEUTRON AND ITS PROPERTIES                              347
energy and the particles cannot escape through the potential barrier. Thus
with elements of high atomic number, only capture processes are observed,
although there may be a few exceptions. There may be, however, special
cases in which the particles escape through a resonance level. These would
be characterized by the phenomenon that the energy of the escaping particle
would be independent of the energy of the incident neutron. These special
cases may explain the exceptional disintegrations in which a particle is emit-
ted from a heavy nucleus. They may be of particular interest in giving in-
formation about the resonance levels of atomic nuclei.
   There is also the possibility of resonance capture of the neutrons, more
particularly with very slow neutrons. The capture of neutrons of a certain
energy may take place with very great frequency in one species of nucleus
while for another neighbouring nucleus the same neutrons may have a long
free path. These resonance regions may perhaps be rather broad and there-
fore comparatively easy to observe experimentally.



                         The structure of the nucleus

Before the discovery of the neutron we had to assume that the fundamental
particles from which an atomic nucleus was built up were the proton and
the electron, with the α-particle as a secondary unit. The behaviour of an
electron in a space of nuclear dimensions cannot be described on present the-
ory; and other difficulties, e.g. the statistics of the nitrogen nucleus, the
peculiarities in the mass defect curve in the region of the heavy elements, also
arose. These difficulties are removed if we suppose that the nuclei are built up
from protons and neutrons. The forces which determine the stability of a
nucleus will then be of three types, the interactions between proton and pro-
ton, between proton and neutron, and between neutron and neutron. It is
assumed, with Heisenberg and Majorana, that the interaction between neu-
tron and proton is of the exchange type - similar to that between the hy-
drogen atom and the hydrogen ion - and that the interaction between neu-
tron and neutron is small.
   For a nucleus of mass number A and charge Ze we shall have

                             +     = A           = Z
                                   =


348                             1935 J.CHADWICK

The value of Nn/Np for the most stable nucleus of a given mass number will
be determined by the condition that the binding energy is a maximum. The
repulsive Coulomb force between the protons tends to diminish the number
of protons in a nucleus, while the neutron-proton interaction tends to make
N n = N P, Z = A/2; the neutron-neutron interaction is probably very small.
Now in existing nuclei N P ~ N n, and therefore the neutron-proton inter-
action must be the predominating force in the nucleus. In heavy elements
N n > N P. This relative increase in the number of neutrons may be due
either to an attractive force between neutron-neutron, or more probably to
the Coulomb forces between proton-proton.
    Thus it appears that the interaction between proton and neutron is of the
highest significance in nuclear structure and governs the stability of a nucleus.
It is most important to obtain all experimental evidence about the nature of
this interaction. The information we have at present is very meagre, but I
think that it does to some degree support the view that the interaction is of
the exchange type. Dr. Feather and I hope to obtain more definite informa-
 tion on this subject by an extensive study of the collisions of neutrons and
protons.
    Heisenberg’s considerations of nuclear structure point very strongly to
 this exchange interaction. Such an interaction provides an attractive force at
 large distances between the particles and a repulsive force at very small dis-
 tances, thus giving the effect of a more or less definite radius of the particles.
 A system of particles interacting with exchange forces will keep together
 due to the attraction, but there will be a minimum distance of approach of
 the particles; thus the system will not collapse together but will have a more
 or less definite "radius".
    The exchange forces between a hydrogen atom and a hydrogen ion are
 large compared with the forces between neutral atoms; by analogy we ex-
  plain why the neutron-proton interaction is so much stronger than the pro-
  ton-proton or neutron-neutron interactions.
     By a suitable choice of the exchange forces it is possible to obtain a sat-
  uration effect, analogous to the saturation of valency bindings between two
  atoms, when each neutron is bound to two protons and each proton to two
  neutrons. Thus two neutrons and two protons form a closed system - the
  α-particle.
     These ideas thus explain the general features of the structure of atomic
  nuclei and it can be confidently expected that further work on these lines
  may reveal the elementary laws which govern the structure of matter.
