

JAMES        RANCK

Transformations of kinetic  energy  of free electrons into excitation  energy  of atoms  by impacts
Nohel  Lecture,    Drrr+#rr 11 , 1926

Ladies and gentlemen!
The exceptional  distinction  conferred  upon our work  on electron impacts by  the  Royal  Swedish 
 Academy  of  Sciences  requires  that  my  friend  Hertz and I have  the honour  of reporting  to 
you  on current  problems  within  this province,
The  division  of  the  material  between  us  left  me with  the  task  of  presenting, in a 
historical  setting, the development  of these  projects  which  have  led to an  association  with 
 Bohr's  atomic  theory.
Investigations of collision  processes  between  electrons,  atoms  and  mole- cules have already 
got well under way. Practically all investigations into the discharge of electricity through gases 
can be considered  under this heading. An enormous amount of knowledge, decisive for the whole 
development  of modern  physics,  has  been  gained,  but  it is just  in this  gathering  that  I 
feel  it is unnecessary for me to make any special comment, since the lists of the men whom the 
Swedish Academy  of Sciences have deemed worthy of the Nobel Prize  contain a large number of names 
of research  workers who  have  made their most significant discoveries in these fields.
Attracted by the complex problems of gas discharges and inspired partic- ularly  by  the  
investigations  of  my  distinguished  teacher  E.  Warburg,  our interest  turned  in  this  
direction.  A  starting-point  was  provided  by  the  ob- servation  that  in inert  gases  (and  
as found  later,  also  in  metal  vapour)  no negative  ions were  formed  by the attachment  of 
free electrons  to an atom. The electrons remained rather as free ones, even if they were moving 
slowly in a dense gas of this type, which can be inferred from their mobility  in an electric  
field.  Even  the  slightest  pollution  with  normal  gases  produced,  at once,  a  material  
attachment  of  the  electrons  and  thus  the  appearance  of normal  negative  ions.
As a result, one can perhaps divide gases somewhat more clearly than has been  the case  up  to now 
 from  the  observations  described  in the literature, into one class with, and one class without, 
an electron affinity.  It was to be

1t


< I N E T I C - E X C I T A T I O N    E N E R G Y    T R A N S F O R M A T I O N S   9   9

expected   that  the  motion  of  electrons  in  gases  of  the  latter  kind  would  obey laws  of 
 a   particularly   simple  kind.  These  gases  have  exhibited   special  behav- iour  during  
investigations  of  other  kinds  into  gas  discharges.  For  instance, according  to  Ramsay  and 
 Collie,  they  have  a  specially  low  dielectric  strength, and   this   was,  further,   
extremely   dependent   upon   the  degree   of   purity   of   the gas  (see,  for  example,   
Warburg’s   experiments).   The  important   theory   of  the dielectric   strength   of  gases,  
founded   by  Townsend,   the  equations   of  which even   today,   when   used   formally,   
still   form   the   basic   foundation   of  this   field failed   in   these   cases.  The   
reason   for  this  seemed   likely   to  be  that  Town- send's  hypothesis  on  the  kind  of  
collisions  between  slow  electrons  and  atoms, particularly   inert-gas   atoms,  differed   
from  the  reality,   and  it  seemed   prom- ising  to  arrive  at  a  kinetic  theory  of  
electrons  in  gases  by  a  systematic  exami- nation   of   the   elementary   processes   
occurring   when   collisions   took   place   be- tween   slow   electrons   and   atoms   and   
molecules.   We   had   the   experiences   and techniques   to  support   us,  which   men   like  
 J.  J.   Thomson,   Stark,   Townsend, and   in  particular,   however,   Lenard,  had  created,   
 and  also  had  their  concept of  the   free  path-lengths   of electrons  and  the   ionization  
 energy,   etc.,   to   make use  of.
The  free   path-lengths   in  the   light   inert   gases  were   examined   first.   B y "free   
path    in  this  connection   is  to  be  understood   that   path   which,   on  the average,   
is   that   which   an   electron   traces   between   two   collisions   with   atoms along  a  
straight   track.  The  distance  is  measurable   as  soon  as  the  number   of atoms   per   
unit   volume  is sufficiently   small,  this  being  attained   by  taking  a low   gas   
pressure.   The   method   of   measurement   itself   differed   but   slightly from   that   
developed   by  Lenard.   It  is  unnecessary   to  go  into   closer    detail since   the   
results   gave   the  same   order   of   values   for  the  free  path-length   as Lenard   
obtained   for  slow  electrons   in   other  gases.  The  value  is  of  that  order which  is  
obtained   by  calculation  if  the  formulas  of  the  kinetic  gas   theory  are used   for   the 
 free   path-length,   taking   for   the  impact   radius   of   the  electron   a value   which   
is  very   small   compared   with   the  gas-kinetic   atom   radii.  With this  assumption,  the  
electrons  behave,  to  a  first  approximation,   like  a  gaseous impurity   in  the  inert   
gas,   not   reacting   chemically   with   it   —   an   impurity, however,   which  has  the  
special   quality  of  consisting   of  electrically   charged particles   and  having   a  
vanishingly   small  impact   radius.  As  a  result  of  signif- icant  experiences,   we  know,  
today,  from  the  work  of  Ramsauer   and  others on  the  free  path-lengths   of  electrons   
in  heavy  inert  gases  that  the  picture  we had  formed  at  that  time  was  a  very  rough  
one,  and  that  for  collisions  of  slow electrons  the  laws  of  quantum   theory   are  of  
far  more  significance   than  the





100                                                      1 9 2 5    J  . F  RA   N C K
mechanical  diameter,  but  as  a  first  approximation  for  the  establishment  of the  kinetics  
it suffices.  Further,  it also  sufficed,  as it  turned  out,  to gain  an understanding  of the 
energy  conversion  on the occurrence  of  a collision  be- tween the slow electrons and the atoms 
of the inert gases and metal vapours. Since  the mass of the electron  is 1800 times  smaller  than 
 that  of the  lightest atom  we  know,  the  hydrogen  atom,  the  transfer  of  momentum  from  
the light electron to the heavy  atom  during  customary  gas-kinetic  collisions,  i.e. collisions 
such as between  two elastic balls, must be exceptionally  small ac- cording  to the  laws  of 
momentum.  A slow  electron  with  a given  amount  of kinetic   energy,   meeting   an  atom  at  
rest,  ought   to  be  reflected  without practically  any energy  loss,  much  the same  as a 
rubber  ball against  a heavy wall. These  elastic  collisions  can now  be pursued  by 
measurements.
I will pass over the detection of the single reflection  and mention  in more detail a simple  
experimental  arrangement  which,  by  means  of an accumula- tion  of collisions,  enables  us to 
measure  the energy  loss  which  is otherwise too  small  to  measure  in one  elementary  
process.  The  mode of action  might well  be  clear  from  a schematic  layout  (Fig.  1 ›.









Fig. 1.
G  indicates  the  electron  source.  It  consists  of  a  tungsten  wire,  heated  to  a 
bright-red  glow  by an electric  current.  That such a glowing  wire is a source of electrons can, 
I think, be taken as read in this age of radio. A few centime- tres away is a wire-screen electrode 
N. If we now charge the screen positively with respect  to the glowing  wire, by means  of an 
accumulator,  the electrons emitted  by  the  wire  towards  the  screen  will  be  accelerated.  
The  kinetic energy  which  the  electrons  must  gain  through  this  acceleration  can  easily be 
found for the case where no gas exists between G and N, that is, when the electrons  fall  through  
the  field  of  force  freely  without  collisions.  We  have the relationship:



KINETIC-EXCITATION   ENERGY   TRANSFORMATIONS   101

Here,  I rnr° is the kinetic energy of each electron, e is its electrical elementary charge,  and  
U the  applied  potential  difference.  If  the  latter  is  measured  in volts,  then,  for  
instance,  the  kinetic  energy  of  an  electron  which  has  fallen through  10 volts  is  
approximately   10 “ ergs.  We  have  become  accustomed to  speak  of  x-volt  electrons,  and  to 
 simply  denote  the  acceleration  voltage (x volts)  as a measure  of energy.  Thus  in our 
arrangement  the electrons  fall upon  the  screen  with  an energy  of  x volts  (the  potential  
difference  between G and N). Some of the electrons  are caught  by the screen,  some fly through 
the  mesh.  The  latter,  assuming  no  field  between  N  and  P  which  would throw  the  
electrons  back,  all  reach  the  electrode  P  and  produce  a  negative current  which  flows  
to  earth  through  a  galvanometer.  By  introducing  an electric  field  between  N  and  P  the  
energy  distribution  of  those  electrons passing  through  the screen  can be determined.  If, 
for example,  we take only 4-volt  beams,  which  pass  perpendicularly through  the  screen,  then 
 the elec- tron  current  measured  at  the  galvanometer  as  a  function  of  a  decelerating 
potential  difference  applied  between  N  and  P,  must  be constant,  until  P  be- comes  4 
volts more negative  than N.  At this  point the current  must  become suddenly  zero  since  
henceforth  all  electrons  will  be  so  repelled  from  P  that they return to N. If now we 
introduce  an inert gas such as helium or a metal vapour  between  the  three  electrodes  and  
choose  such  a  pressure  as will  en- sure  that  the  electrons  between  G  and  N  will  make  
many  impacts  upon atoms,  whilst  passing  freely  through  the  space  between  N  and  P,  we  
can determine,  by  plotting  the  energy  distribution  of  the  electrons  arrlving  at P,  
whether  the  electrons  have  lost  energy  by  impacts  on  the  atoms.  In  dis- cussing  the  
resulting  current-voltage  curve  it  should  be  noted  that  the  elec- trons  no  longer  pass  
through  the  screen  mesh  perpendicularly,  but  are  scat- tered  in  all  directions  due  to  
reflection  from  the  atoms.  As  a  result  of  this, there is an easily calculable  change in 
shape of the curve, and this holds, too, for  uniform  kinetic  energy  of  the  electrons.  From  
a  consideration   of  the resulting curves it was found that for not too high pressures,  
particularly  for monatomic  gases of high atomic weight, the kinetic energy  of slow electrons was 
 the  same  as  for  those  in  vacuum  under  the  same  acceleration  voltage. The  gas  
complicates  the  trajectory  of  the  electrons  in  the  same  way  that  a ball's  trajectory  
is  affected  by  rolling  down  a  sloping  board  bedecked  with  a  large  number  of  nails,  
but  the  energy  (because  of  the  large  mass  of  the atom  compared  with that of the 
electron)  is practically  the same as for con- ditions  of  free  fall.  Only  for  high  
pressures,  that  is,  with  the  occurrence  of many  thousands  of  collisions,  can  the  energy 
 loss  corresponding  to  elastic




102                                                      1 9 2 5   I . F R A N C K
collision  be  demonstrated.*  A  calculation  of  the  number  of  collisions  was later carried  
out  by Hertz.  Taking  this as a basis and evaluating  the curves measured  for higher pressures  
accordingly,  it emerges  that, for example,  en- ergy  is  transferred  to  a  helium  atom  
amounting  to i.z—  .o x Io    of the en- ergy of the electron  prior to the collision,  whilst the 
calculated  value for the mass  ratio under conditions  of pure mechanical  elastic  impact 1S  2.9 
   io-'. We  may  therefore,  with  close  approximation  to  reality,  speak  of  elastic 
collisions.
For polyatomic gases a significantly greater average energy loss was deter- mined.  Using  the 
methods  available  at that  time, it was not possible  to dis- tinguish  whether  this  latter  
effect  was  contingent  upon  attachment  of  the electrons  to the molecule,  that is, the 
formation  of negative ions, or whether a transfer  of the kinetic  energy  of the striking  
electrons  into vibrational  and rotational  degrees of freedom of the molecules  was taking place. 
An investi- gation  just  carried  out  in  my  institute  by  Mr.  Harries  shows  that  the  
latter elementary  process,  even  though  at  a  low  level,  does  occur,  and  is  impor- tant 
in the explanation  of the energy  losses.
Can the principles of action found for slow electrons in the case of elastic collisions  hold  good 
 for  higher  electron  velocities?  Apparently  not,  for  the elementary knowledge of gas 
dlscharges teaches us that with faster electrons,
i.e.  with  cathode  rays,  the  impacted  atoms  are  excited  to  lumlnescence  or become  
ionized.  Here,  energy  of  the  impacting  electrons  must  be  trans- ferred   into   internal   
energy   of   the   impacted   atoms,   the  electrons   must henceforth  collide  inelastically  
and  give  up  greater  amounts  of  energy.  The determination  of the least amount  of energy  
which an electron  must possess in order  to ionize  an atom  was therefore  of interest.  Measured 
 in volts, this energy  is called  the  ionization  voltage.  Calculations  of  this  value  of  
energy by Townsend  were available for some gases and these were based  upon the validity  of  his  
assumptions  about  the  course  of  the  elementary  action  on collision.  I  mentioned  already  
the  reasons  for  doubting  the  correctness  of these  indirectly  determined   values.  A  
direct  method  had  been  given  by Lenard,  but it gave  the  same  ionization  voltage  for all 
gases.  Other  writers had obtained the same results within the range of measurement.  We therefore 
repeated  Lenard's  investigations,  using  the  improved  pumping  techniques which  had  become  
available  in  the  meantime,  and  obtained  characteristic, marked  differences  in  values  for  
the  various  gases.  The  method  used  by
* It is better to Usc here the experimental  arrangements  indicated  later  by Compton and Benade, 
Hertz, and others.


KINETIC—EXCITATION   ENERGY   TRANSFORMATIONS   103

Lenard  was  as  follows.  Electrons,  from  a  glowing  wire,  for  example,  were accelerated  by 
a suitable  electric  field  and allowed  to pass through  a screen grid into a space in which they 
suffered collisions with atoms. By means of a strong  screening  field  these  particular  
electrons  were  prevented  from  reach- ing  an  electrode  to  which  was  connected  a  
measuring  instrument.  Atoms ionized  by  the  impact  resulted  in  the  newly  formed  positive  
ions  being  ac- celerated  through  the  screening  field,  which  repelled  the  electrons,  
towards the  negatively  charged  electrode.  A  positive  current  was  thus  obtained  as soon as 
the energy of the electrons was sufficient for ionization to take place. I will talk later about  
the fact that a positive charge appears  if the impacted atoms  are  excited  to  emit  ultraviolet 
 light,  and  that,  as  shown  later,  the charges measured  at that time are to be attributed  to 
this process  and not to ionization,  as  we  formerly  supposed.
In any  case,  as already  discussed,  inelastic  collisions  were  to be expected between  
electrons  and  atoms  for  the  characteristic  critical  voltages  apper- taining  to  each  kind 
 of  atom.  And  it  proved  easy  to  demonstrate  this  fact with the same apparatus as was used 
for the work on elastic collisions. Meas- urement  of  the  energy  distribution  of  the  
electrons,  on  increasing  the  ac- celerating  voltage  above  the  critical  value,  showed  
that  electrons  endowed with  the  critical  translation  energy  could  give  up  their  entire  
kinetic  energy on collision,  and that electrons whose energy exceeded the critical by a frac- 
tion, likewise  gave up the same significant  amount  of energy,  the rest being retained  as 
kinetic  energy.  A  simple  modification  of  the  electric  circuit  dia- gram  of our  apparatus 
 produced  a significantly  sharper  measurement  of  the critical voltage and a visual  proof of 
the discontinuously occurring  release of energy  from  the  electrons  on  collision.  The  
measurement  method  consisted of measurements  of the number of those electrons  (possessing  
markedly  dif- ferent energies  from  zero after many collisions)  as a function  of the acceler- 
ating  voltage.
The graph (Fig. 2) shows the results of measurements  of electron current in
mercury  vapour.  In  this  case,  all  electrons  whose  energy  is  greater  than  the energy of  
Uz-volt beams were measured. It can be seen that in Hg vapour this partial  electron  current  
increases  with  increasing  acceleration,  similar  to  the characteristic odt‹ glow-electron  » 
current in vacuum, until the critical energy stage  is  reached  when  the  current  falls  
suddenly  to  almost  zero.  Since  the electrons  cannot  lose  more  or  less  than  the  
critical  amount  of  energy,  the cycle  begins  anew with  further increase  of voltage.  The 
number of electrons
whose velocity is greater tha_n    volt, again climbs up until the critical value is





104


35O
1 9 2 5   J . F R A N C K

Curve 3





250



2OO



ISO












Fig.

reached,  the current  again  falls  away.  The  process  repeats  itself  periodically as  soon  
as  the  accelerating  voltage  overreaches  a  multiple  of  the  critical voltage.  The  distance 
 between  the  succeeding  maxima  gives  an  exact  value of the critical voltage.  This is 4.9 V 
for mercury  vapour.
As already  mentioned  we  took this  value to be the  ionization  voltage  (the same  applied  to  
He  which  was  determined  by  the  same  method  and  was about  20  V).  Nevertheless,  the  
quanta-like  character  of  the  energy  transfer could not help but remind  us - who practically  
from the start could witness from nearby the developments of Planck's quantum theory - to the use 
of the theory made by Einstein to explain the facts of the photoelectric  effect! Since here,  
light  energy  is converted  into the kinetic  energy  of electrons,  could  not perhaps,  in  our  
case,  kinetic  energy  from  electrons  be  converted  into  light energy?  If that were  the 
case, it should  be easy to prove in the case  of mer- cury;  for  the  equation     mr° = âr  
referred  to  a  line  of  2,537  &  which  is



K I N E T I C — E X C I TA  T I O N    E N E R G Y    T R A N S F O R M A T I O N S       t0s
easily accessible  in the ultraviolet  region. This line is the longest  wavelength absorption  
line  of  Hg  vapour.  It  is  often  cited  as  Hg-resonance  line  since
R.W.  Wood  has carried  out  with it his important  experiments  on resonance fluorescence.  If  
the  conjectured  conversion  of  kinetic  energy  into  light  on impact  should  take  place,  
‘then  on  bombardment  with  4.9 eV electrons,  the line  2,537  A, and  only  this  line  out  of 
 the  complete  line  spectrum  of  mer- cury shou1d   app e ar.
Fig. 3 shows the result of the experiment.  Actually, only the 2,537 & line
appears  in the spectrogram  next to a continuous  spectrum  in the  long-wave region emitted  by 
the red-glowing  filament. (The second spectrogram  shows the arc spectrum  of mercury  for 
comparison.)  The first works of Niels Bohr on  his  atomic  theory  appeared  half  a  year  
before  the  completion  of  this work.  Let  us  compare,  in  a  few  words,  the  basic  
hypothesis  of  this  theory with our results.
According  to  Bohr  an  atom  can  absorb  as  internal  energy  only  discrete quantities  of  
energy,  namely  those  quantities  which  transfer  the  atom  from one stationary state to 
another stationary state. If following on energy supply an excited state results from a transfer to 
a stationary state of higher energy, then  the energy  so  taken  up  will be radiated  in quanta  
fashion  according  to the hv relationship.  The frequency  of  the absorption  line  having  the 
longest wavelength,  the  resonance  line,  multiplied  by  Planck's  constant,  gives  the energy  
required  to  reach  the  first  state  of  excitation.  These  basic  concepts agree in very 
particular with our results. The elastic collisions at low electron velocities show that for these 
impacts no energy is taken up as inner energy, and  the  first  critical  energy  step  results  in 
 just  that  amount   of  energy required for the excitation  of the longest wave absorption  line 
of Hg. Subse-





106                                                 1 9 2 5    J . F R A N C K
quently it appeared to me to be completely  incomprehensible that we had fail- ed to recognize  the 
fundamental  significance  of Bohr's theory, so much so, that we never  even  mentioned  it  once  
in  the  relevant  paper.  It  was  unfortunate that  we  could  not  rectify  our  error  (due  in 
 part  to  external  circumstances) ourselves  by  clearing  up  the  still  existing  
uncertainties  experimentally. The proof  that  only  monochromatic   light  was  radiated  at  the 
 first  excitation step,  as  Bohr's  theory  requlred,  and  that  the  gas  is not  
simultaneously ion- ized  (as  we  were  also  obliged  to  think  for  reasons  other  than  those 
 men- tioned)  came  about  instead  during  the  war  period  through  suggestions  from Bohr  
himself  and  from  van  der  Bijl.  The  appearance  of  positive  charge  at the  first  
excitation  step  in Lenard's  arrangement  was explained  by  them  on the  basis  of  a  
photoelectric  effect  at  the  collector  electrode,  an  hypothesis which  was substantiated  by 
Davis  and Goucher.
Time  does  not  allow  me  to  describe  how  our  further  difficulties  were clarified in the 
sense of Bohr's theory. And in regard to further development, too,  I  would  like  to  devote  
only  a  few  words,  particularly  since  my  friend Hertz's  lecture  covers  it more  closely.  
The  actual  ionization  voltage  of  mer- cury  was  for  the  first  time  determined  by  Tate  
as  being  10.3  volts,  a  value which  agreed   exceptionally   well  with  that  resulting,   
according   to  Bohr, from  the  llmit  of  the  absorption  series.  A  great  number  of  
important,  ele- gantly  carried  out,  determinations  of  the  first  excitatlon  level  and  the 
 ioni- zation  voltage  of  many  kinds  of  atoms  was  made  during  the  war  years  and also in 
the following  years,  above all by American  scientists;  research  work- ers such  as Foote  and  
Mohler,  K. T. Compton  and  others  are to be  thanked for extensive  clarification  in this  
field.
Without  going  into  details  of  the  experimental  arrangements,  I  should like to mention  
that  it  later  proved  successful,  by  the choice  of  suitable  ex- perimental  conditions,  to 
 demonstrate  also,  from  the  current-voltage  curves, the  stepwise  excitation  of  a  great  
number  of  quantum  transitions,  lying  be- tween  the  first  excitation  level  and  
ionization.  A  curve  plotted  for  mercury vapour  might  well  serve  again  as  an  example.  
It  shows  the  quantum-like appearance  of  higher  excitation  levels  by  kinks  in  the  curve  
(Fig.  4).  It  is noteworthy  that,  in  addition,  transitions  which  under  the  influence  of  
light according  to Bohr's  correspondence  principle  do  not appear,  manifest  them- selves  
clearly.  When,  as  is  the  case  with  mercury,  and  still  more  decldedly so  with  helium,  
the  first  transition  is  such  that  it  cannot  be  achieved  by light,  we  have  excited  
atoms  in  a  so-called  metastable  state.  The  discovery of a metastable  state  by  means of 
the electron-impact method  was first suc-



K I N E T I C - E X C I T A T I O N    E N E R G Y    T R A N S F O R M A T I O N S      107
4 p-  ao14mmf T= 5O°C












75
2

9.43

0.06




&75 634







4         5
-Curvel-
Curves n

7


Fig. 4.


10
VOI I S

cessful with helium.  Since helium  is a gas in which the absorption  series lies in the far 
ultraviolet-it was later found optically  by Lyman - and on the other side,  helium,  apart  from  
hydrogen,  is  the  most  simply  constructed  atom, the  approximate  determination  of  the  
energy  levels  of  helium  and  perhaps too,  the  appearance,  in  particular,  of  the  
metastable  level  has  proved  useful for  the  development  of  Bohr's  theory.
Much  more  could  be  said,  but  I  think  I  have  given  you  the  main  outline as far as is 
possible within  the framework  of a short survey,  and must there-







108                     1 9 2 5    J . F RA N C K
fore  draw  to  a  close.  The  desire  to  describe,  historically,  our  part  in  the 
development  of  the investigations leading  to the  establishment  of  the  quan- tum  transfer  
of energy  to the atom by impacting  electrons  has  forced  me to take up your time with the 
description of many a false trail and roundabout path which  we took in a field in which the direct 
 path has now been opened by  Bohr's  theory.  Only  later,  as we  came  to have  confidence  in  
his leader- ship,  did all  difficulties  disappear.  We  know  only  too  well  that  we owe  the 
wide  recognition  that  our  work  has  received  to  contact  with  the  great  con- cepts  and  
ideas  of M.  Planck  and particularly  of N. Bohr.
