CP SYMMETRY VIOLATION -
THE SEARCH FOR ITS ORIGIN
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1980

by
JAMES W. CRONIN
The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA




The greatest pleasure a scientist can experience is to encounter an unexpected
discovery. I am always astonished when a simple apparatus, designed to ask
the right question of nature, receives a clear response. Our experiment, carried
out with James Christenson, Val Fitch and Renk Turlay, gave convincing
evidence that the long-lived neutral K meson (KL ) decayed into two charged
pions, a decay mode forbidden by CP symmetry. The forbidden decay mode
was found to be a small fraction (2.0±0.4) X 10 -3 of all charged decay modes.
Professor Fitch has described our discovery of CP symmetry violation. He has
discussed how it was preceded by brilliant theoretical insights and incisive
experiments with K mesons. My lecture will review the knowledge that we have
                                                    1
obtained about CP violation since its discovery. The discovery triggered an
intense international experimental effort. It also provoked many theoretical
speculations which in turn stimulated a variety of experiments.
   At present there is no satisfactory theoretical understanding of CP violation.
Such understanding as we do have has come entirely from experimental studies.
These studies have extended beyond the high energy accelerator laboratories
into nuclear physics laboratories and research reactor laboratories. The experi-
ments which have sought to elucidate the tiny effect have involved both ingenuity
and painstaking attention to detail.
   Upon learning of the discovery in 1964, the natural reaction of our colleagues
was to ask what was wrong with the experiment. Or, if they were convinced
of the correctness of the measurements, they asked how could the effect be
explained while still retaining CP symmetry. I remember vividly a special
session organized at the 1964 International Conference on High Energy Physics
at Dubna in the Soviet Union. There, for an afternoon, I had to defend our
experiment before a large group of physicists who wanted to know every detail
of the experiment-more details than could have been given in the formal
conference session.
   As the session neared a close, one of my Soviet colleagues suggested that,
perhaps, the effect was due to regeneration of short-lived K mesons (Ks) in
a fly unfortunately trapped in the helium bag. We did a quick “back of
the envelope” estimate of the density of the fly necessary to produce the
effect. The density required was far in excess of uranium.
   More serious questions were raised at this session and by many other


                                   J. W. Cronin                               571


physicists who had thought deeply about our result. While we were confident
that the experiment had been correctly carried out and interpreted, many
sought reassurance through confirmation of the experiment by other groups.
This confirmation came quickly from experiments at the Rutherford Laboratory 2
in England, and at CERN3 in Geneva, Switzerland.
   Another important issue was raised. In the original experiment, the decay
to two pions was inferred kinematically, but no proof was given that these
pions were identical to the ordinary pions or that the decay was not accompanied
by a third light particle emitted at a very low energy. The direct proof that
the effect was indeed a violation of CP symmetry was the demonstration of
interference between the decay of the long-lived and short-lived K meson to
two charged pions. This interference was first demonstrated in a simple and
                                                                                4
elegant experiment by my colleague Val Fitch with Roth, Russ and Vernon.
  Their experiment compared the rate of decay of a K L, beam into two charged
pions in vacuum and in the presence of a diffuse beryllium regenerator. The
density of the regenerator was adjusted so that the regeneration amplitude A,
was equal to the CP violating amplitude      These amplitudes are defined by




and




The yield of              in the presence of the regenerator is proportional to



In the expression for        is given by                where MS and ML , are the
K S and K L , masses, and       the decay rate of the KS meson, A is the mean
decay length of the KS meson, k is the wave number of the incident K L , beam
and f and f are the forward scattering amplitudes for K and K, respectively
on the nuclei of the regenerator. The regeneration amplitude is proportional
to N, the number density of the material. The quantity (f-f)/k was determined
in an auxiliary experiment with a dense regenerator. Then a regenerator of
appropriate density was constructed using the formula for Ar.5 The actual
regenerator was constructed of 0.5 mm sheets separated by 1 cm. Such an
arrangement behaves as a homogeneous regenerator of 1/20) normal density
if the separation of the sheets is small compared to the quantity
   In the earliest experiment Fitch and his colleagues found that with
chosen to be equal to          the rate of      decays was about four times the
rate without the regenerator. This result showed not only that there was
interference, but also that the interference was fully constructive. Complete
analysis of this experiment reported subsequently6 gave the           yield as a
function of density as shown in Fig 1. The quantity a in the figure is the
relative phase between the regeneration amplitude and the CP violating
amplitude.
   The result of this experiment also permits the experimental distinction


572                                      Physics 1980




Fig. I. Yield of     events as a function of the diffuse regenerator amplitude. The three curves
correspond to the three stated values of the phase between the regeneration amplitude    and the
CP violating amplitude

between a world composed of matter and a world composed of antimatter.7
Imagine that this experiment were performed in the antiworld. The only
difference would be that the regenerator material would be antimatter. If we
assume C invariance for the strong interactions, the forward scattering ampli-
tudes for K and K would be interchanged so that A, would have the opposite
sign. Thus, in the antiworld an investigator performing the interference experi-
ment would observe destructive interference similar to the dashed curve of
Fig 1, an unmistakable difference from the result found in our world. The


                                    J. W. Cronin                                573


interference experiment of Fitch and collaborators eliminated alternate explana-
tions of the KL .            decay, since the effect was of such a nature that an
experiment distinguishing a world of matter and antimatter was possible.
    It was also suggested that the effect might be due to a long range vector field
of cosmological origin.8 Such a source of the effect would lead to a decay
rate for                 which would be proportional to the square of the KL
energy in the laboratory. Our original experiment was carried out at a mean
K L energy of 1.1 GeV. The confirming experiments at the Rutherford Laboratory
and CERN were carried out at mean K L . energies of 3.1 and 10.7 GeV,
respectively. Since the three experiments found the same branching ratio for
KL            the possibility of a long range vector field was eliminated.
    Before continuing, it is necessary to state some of the phenomenology which
describes the CP violation in the neutral K system. The basic notation was
introduced by Wu and Yang.” For this discussion CPT conservation is assumed.
Later we shall refer to the evidence from K-meson decays which show that all
data are consistent with a corresponding T violation. Any CPT violation is
consistent with zero within the present sensitivity of the measurements.
   There are two basic complex parameters which are required to discuss CP
violation as observed in the two pion decays of K L mesons. The first quantity
  is a measure of the CP impurity in the eigenstates         and        These
eigenstates are given by




and




The quantity can be expressed in terms of the elements of the mass and decay
matrices which couple and control the time evolution of the         and
states. It is given by




Limits on the size of          can be obtained from the observed decay rates
of KS and KL, to the various decay modes. If       were zero, then the phase of
  would be determined by the denominator which is just the difference in
eigenvalues of the matrix which couples K and K. These quantities have been
experimentally measured and give arg       45”.
   The second quantity     is defined by




Here A 0 and A 2 are respectively the amplitudes for a K meson to decay to
standing wave states of two pions in the isotopic spin 0 and 2 states, respectively.
Time reversal symmetry demands that A 0 and A 2 be relatively real. 10 T h e
quantities   and      are the s-wave       scattering phase shifts for the states


574                                Physics 1980


I = 0 and I = 2, respectively. The parameters            and     are related to
observable quantities defined by




and




   The magnitude and phase of the quantity           have been most precisely
measured by studying the time dependence            decays from a K beam which
was prepared as a mixture of KS and K L . This experimental technique was
suggested by Whatley,12 long before the discovery of CP violation. If we let
   be the amplitude for K S at t = 0, relative to the KL amplitude, then the
time dependence          decays will be given by13




   The initial amplitude for the K S component can be prepared by two
different methods. In the first method we pass a K L , beam through a
regenerator. Then is the regeneration amplitude. Here the interference term is
                                           In the second method we produce a
beam which is pure K (or       at t = 0. In practice protons of ≈20 GeV produce
at small angles about three times as many K as K. The K dilution is a detail
which need not be of concern here. In this case        = + 1, and the interference
term is
   The important CP parameters are             and        We see, however, that
a knowledge of the auxiliary parameters          and ∆ M is also required. In the
first method one measures                and one must also have a technique to
independently measure         In both cases the         yield is most sensitive to
the interference term when the two interfering amplitudes are of the same
size. For the second method we require observation at 12 K S lifetimes. (We
want e                                As a consequence, a small error in ∆ M can
lead to a large uncertainty on        and, more importantly, a systematic error
in ∆ M can lead to an incorrect value for            A one percent error in ∆ M
corresponds to an error in         of about 3°. The measurement of ∆ M with
satisfactory precision has required an effort as formidable as the interference
experiments themselves.14
   Time and space do not permit a survey which does justice to the many


  As an example of the quality of the measurements mentioned above, Fig 2
shows a time distribution of     decays following the passage of a  beam
                                                                        16
of 4 to 10 GeV/c momentum through an 81 cm thick carbon regenerator.




Fig. 2. Yield of          events as a function of proper time downstream from an 81 cm carbon
regenerator placed in a      beam.


576                                 Physics 1980


The destructive interference is clearly seen. If the experiment were carried out
with a regenerator of anticarbon, then constructive interference would have
been observed.
   Measurements of the charge asymmetry         for KL decays began in 1966. This
asymmetry is found in the abundant semileptonic decay modes
where       is either an electron or muon. It basically measures the difference
in amplitude of K and K in the eigenstate of the KL . It does so by virtue
of the ∆ S = ∆ Q rule, which states that all semileptonic decays have the change
in charge of the hadron equal the change in strangeness. Thus, K mesons
decay to            and    mesons decay to          The validity of the ∆ S   ∆Q
rule was in doubt for many years, but it has finally been established that the
∆Q       -∆ S transitions are no more than about 2% of the ∆ Q        +∆ S transi-
tions. 17 The size of the charge asymmetry expected is                  ≈ 3X 10 -3.
Millions of events are required to measure       accurately, and excellent control
of the symmetry of the apparatus and understanding of charge dependent
biases are needed to reduce systematic errors.
   Again, we must omit a detailed review of all asymmetry measurements.
These have been carried out at CERN, Brookhaven, and SLAC. The net result
of these measurements gives15

                =               x
and
                =               x

We expect these two asymmetries to be equal since they both are a measure
of 2     These asymmetries are measured for a pure K L beam. For a beam
which is pure K at t = 0 the charge asymmetry shows a strong oscillation
term with angular frequency ∆ M. Figure 3 shows the time dependence of the


                                             J. W. Cronin                                 577


charge asymmetry taken from the thesis of V. Lüth. 18 The small residual charge
asymmetry of the KL decays after the oscillations have died out is clearly resolved.
    The charge asymmetry is a manifest violation of CP, and as such also
permits an experimental distinction between a world and an antiworld. In our
world we find that the positrons in the decay are slightly in excess. The
positrons are leptons which have the same charge as our atomic nuclei. In the
antiworld the experimenter will find that the excess leptons have opposite charge
to his atomic nuclei; hence, he would report a different result for the same
experiment.
    Simple examination of the relations between the experimentally measurable
parameters and the complex quantities and             show that measurements of
               are essential to finding and       The path to reliable results for
      and     has been torturous. This statement is based on personal experience;
six years of my professional life have been spent on the measurement of
    Measurement of the parameters associated with                    is complicated
by the fact that each     decays rapidly             into two photons. For typical
K L beams used in these experiments the photon energies are in the range of 0.25
to 5 GeV. It is difficult to measure accurately the direction and energy of such
photons. In addition to that difficulty, the CP conserving decay K L .
occurs at a rate which is about 200 times as frequent, and presents a severe
background.
    Early results suggested that      was about twice       with the consequence
that     was a large number. By 1968 however, an improved experiment using




Fig. 4. Distributions of reconstructed K L         events, and regenerated K S   events


578                                Physics 1980


spark chambers19 and a painstaking heavy-liquid bubble chamber experiment
from CERN 20 showed that           was rather close in value to           Figure 4
shows the results from the most accurate measurement of                     Shown
are reconstructed events from free KL, decays as well as a sample of KS
from a regenerator used to determine the resolution of the apparatus. The
serious background from the         decays is clearly seen. The result           =
1.00±0.06 is based on only 167 events. The equality of           and        means
that the ratio of charged 2π decays to neutral 2π decays is the same for CP
violating KL , decays as for CP conserving KS decays. This result implies that
   is very small providing    is close to
   The              events cannot be collected at the rate of the          decays,
nor can they be separated so cleanly from backgrounds. As a consequence,
the precision with which we know the parameters              and      is much less
than the charged parameters. A weighted average of all the data presently
available gives15


and


The results are quoted with reference to the charged decay mode parameters
because the most accurate experiments have measured the quantity
directly. The result for      is principally due to a recent experiment by
J. Christenson et al.22
   The phase of the quantity     is given by the angle          Information
concerning the pion-pion scattering phase shifts comes from several sources.”
A compendium of these sources gives             =           The phase of is
naturally related to      arg                              =            This
is the phase    would have if there were no contributions from           The
measured phase of                      is within measurement precision equal
to
   The measured parameters are plotted on the complex plane in Fig 5a. The
size of the box for       and      and the width of the bar for     correspond to
one standard deviation. The derived quantities and          are plotted in Fig 5b.
Boxes corresponding to both one and two standard deviations are shown.
Also plotted is the constraint coming from the π−−π scattering phase shifts
which defines the phase of       to be          With this constraint we find that
          and       lie nearly on a common line. There is a mild disagreement
between the           phase shift constraint and the result of Christenson et al.

  A more general analysis of the neutral K system which includes the possibility
of violation of CPT with T conservation as well as CP violation with CPT
conservation has been given by Bell and Steinberger.24 The analysis does depend
on the assumption of unitarity which requires that the M and             matrices
remain Hermitian. The Bell-Steinberger analysis has been applied to the data
with the conclusion that while a small CPT violation is possible, the predominant
effect is one of CP violation. All experiments are consistent with exact CPT


                                          J W. Cronin                            579




Fig. 5. Summary of CP violating parameters in the neutral K system
(a) Measured quantities.
(b) Derived quantities.



conservation,25 and, hence, imply a violation of time reversal symmetry. The
conservation or non-conservation of CPT remains, however, a question that
must continue to be addressed by experiment. A briefdiscussion of the unitarity
analysis is given in an appendix.
   The essential point of this analysis rests on the measurement of the phase
of       Limits on the contribution of          can be estimated from measured
decay rates to all modes of decay of the neutral K mesons. The absence,
within present experimental limits, of CP violation in the decay modes other
than the 2π modes limits the contribution of               to to be                a
value small compared to            Thus the phase of and hence           is expected
to be close to     We can examine the other extreme, namely, that CP and CPT
symmetry are both violated while time reversal symmetry remains valid. Under
these conditions we would find the natural phase           to be ~       and would
expect       to be close to 135°. The fact that this is not the case is the essence
of the argument that CPT is not violated.
   We note that the natural phase depends on the sign of the mass difference.
We have assumed AM =                     < 0. If the sign of the mass difference
were opposite, we would expect the phase of to be equal to 135° or -45° for
CP violation with CPT symmetry. The phase of             would remain the same,
however, since it does not depend on AM in any way. Thus, the conclusion
that the phase of and        are approximately the same is a consequence of the
fact that the long lived K is heavier than the short lived K. The sign of the
mass difference has been measured by several groups with complete agreement. 26
   Independent of any particular theory, we would expect results which are
similar to those observed. The constraint of unitarity and ππ scattering phase
shifts force            for         Under these circumstances, a measurement
of the ratio               is a d’     measurement of the quantity         by means
of the relation        [1                     Applying this relation to the present


580                                        Physics 1980


data we have         = -0.007±0.013. New experiments at the Fermilab and at
Brookhaven will attempt to increase the sensitivity of the measurement by a
factor 10.
   As we have shown, detailed analysis of the CP violation in the neutral K meson
system leads to the conclusion that time reversal is also violated. Table I
gives a representative set of experiments which have searched for T violation,
CP violation, and C violation (in non-weak interactions). None of these experi-
ments has led to a positive result. Many of the experiments are approaching
a sensitivity for the violation of 10-3, but few have attained this value. A
strength of 10-3 in amplitude or relative phase is what we might expect for
the CP violation based on the results of K-decay. For experiments involving
decays with electromagnetic interactions in the final states, an apparent
T-violation effect is usually expected at the 10 -3 level. An example of this
is the result for the       decay in which a significant effect is found, but it
is of the size expected on the basis of the final state electromagnetic interaction.




Table I. Searches for CP, ‘I’, and C Violation

Measurement


                                  J. W. Cronin                              581


   Among the many measurements listed in Table I, we would like to single
out the electric dipole moment of the neutron. The first measurement of this
quantity was made in 1950 by Purcell, Ramsey and Smith27 with the avowed
purpose of testing the assumptions on which one presumed the electric dipole
moment would be zero. Today, outside of the K-system, the search for an
electric dipole moment of the neutron is the most promising approach to the
detection of T violation. At present the upper limit is ~ 10 -24 e-cm. New
experiments using ultra-cold neutrons give promise of an increase in intensity
by 100-fold within the next several years. The significance of a negative result
for the electric dipole moment, or for any of the measurements in Table I, is
difficult to assess without a theory of CP violation.28
   Up to now our discussion has been entirely experimental. In the analysis
of the CP violation in the neutral K system general principles of quantum
mechanics have been used. The manifest charge asymmetry of the KL semi-
leptonic decays requires no assumptions at all for its interpretation. The
literature abounds with theoretical speculations about CP violation. One of
these speculations by Wolfenstein29 is frequently referred to. He hypothesizes a
direct ∆S = 2 superweak interaction which is constructed to produce a CP
violation. This direct interaction interferes with the second order weak inter-
action to produce the CP-violating ∆ S = 2 coupling between K and K. Since
the hypothesized superweak transition is first order, it need have only ~ 10-7
of the strength of the normal weak interaction. As such the only observable
consequence is a CP violation in K          2π decay characterized by a single
number, the value of ImM12 in the mass matrix.
   At present the data are in agreement with this hypothesis, which leads to
predictions that                  and              =     However, the relation
     =       =      to a good approximation follows from the constraints of
unitarity and the π−−π scattering phase shifts with no further assumptions.
On the other hand, the relation                 has not been tested to very high
accuracy, especially considering the difficulty of experiments which attempt
to measure the properties of KL              These experiments are more prone
to systematic errors, and in truth          and        could differ considerably
more than appears to be allowed by the experiments. Thus, while the superweak
hypothesis is in agreement with the present data, the data by no means make
a compelling case for the superweak hypothesis.
   In 1973, Kobayashi and Maskawa 30 in a remarkable paper pointed out
that with the (then) current understanding of weak interactions, CP violation
could be accommodated only if there were three or more pairs of strongly
interacting quarks. The paper was remarkable because at that time only three
quarks were known to exist experimentally. Since then, strong evidence has
been accumulated to support the existence of a charmed quark and a fifth
bottom quark. It is presumed that the sixth quark, top, will be eventually
found. With six quarks the weak hadronic current involving quarks can be
characterized by three Cabibbo-angles, and a phase δ. This phase, if non-zero,
would imply a CP violation in the weak interaction.
   In principle, the magnitude of this phase δ which appears in the weak


582                                  Physics 1980


currents of quarks can be related to the CP violation observed in the laboratory.
Unfortunately, all the experimental investigations are carried out with hadrons,
which are presumed to be structures of bound quarks, while the parameter one
wants to establish, δ, is expressed in terms of interactions between free quarks.
The theoretical “engineering” required to relate the free quark properties to
bound quark properties is difficult and, as a consequence, is not well developed.
A balanced and sober view of this problem is given in a paper by Guberina
and Peccei.31 Even if the CP violation has its origin in the weak currents, it is
not clear whether the experimental consequences with respect to K decay can
be distinguished from the superweak hypothesis. If we are successful in
establishing the fact that CP violation is the result of a phase in the weak currents
between quarks, we will still have to understand why it has the particular
value we find.
   There are, however, on the horizon new systems which have some promise to
give additional information about CP violation. These are the new neutral
mesons,             (composed of      bd, and     quarks), and their antiparticles
            These mesons have the same general properties as K mesons.
They are neutral particles that, with respect to strong interactions, are distinct
from their own antiparticles, and yet are coupled to them by common weak
decay modes. While we may not expect any stronger CP impurities on the
eigenstates (the parameter analogous to         we might expect stronger effects
in the decay amplitudes (the parameter analogous to E’). We might expect
this since the CP violation comes about through the weak interactions of the
heavy quarks, c, b, t, which participate only virtually in K decay, but can
be more influential in heavy neutral meson decay. At present, D mesons can
be made rather copiously at the e + e - storage ring SPEAR at SLAC,32 and B
mesons are beginning to be produced at the e+e - storage ring CESR at Cornell.33
   It is conceivable that the effect of CP violation may become stronger with
energy. Soon collisions of protons with antiprotons will be observed at CERN
with a total center of mass energy greater than 500 GeV. It will be most
interesting to look for C violations in the spectra of particles produced in
those collisions. Also, improvements in technology of detectors over the next
several decades may permit sensitive searches for time reversal violating
observables in high energy neutrino interactions.
   Recently, much attention has been given to the role that CP violation may
play in the early stages of the evolution of the universe. 34 A mechanism has
been proposed with CP violation as one ingredient which leads from matter-
-antimatter symmetry in the early universe to the small excess of matter observed
in the universe at the present time. The first published account of this
mechanism, of which I am aware, was made by Sakharov 35 in 1967. He explicitly
stated the three ingredients which form the foundation of the mechanism as
it is presently discussed. These ingredients are: (1) baryon instability, (2) CP
violation, and (3) appropriate lack of thermal equilibrium. The recent intense
interest in this problem has risen because baryon instability is a natural
consequence of the present ideas of unification of the strong interactions with the
successfully unified electromagnetic and weak interactions. This latter unifica-


                                         J. W Cronin                               583


tion was discussed in the 1979 Nobel lectures of Glashow, Salam, and
Weinberg. 36
   A very oversimplified explanation of the process which leads to a net baryon
number can be given with the aid of Fig 6a. Quarks and leptons are linked
by a very heavy boson X and its antiparticle        While the total decay rates




 Fig. 6. (a) Simplified diagrams of baryon number non-conserving X boson decays.
 (h) A proton decay mediated by an X boson.


584                                Physics 1980
          __
of X and X may be equal, with CP violation the fractional partial rates r and r
          1              1                              _
to B = - 3 and B = + -- decay channels of X and X, respectively, can differ.
                         3
At an early stage where - the temperature is large compared to the mass of X,
the density of X and X may be equal. On decay, however, the net evolution
of baryon number is proportional to (r--Y). The excess can be quite small
since the ratio of baryons to photons today is ~ 10-9. Figure 6b shows how
such an X boson can mediate the decay p + e++n’. If nucleon decay is
discovered it will give a strong support to these present speculations.
   Whether the CP violation that we observe today is a “fossil remain” of
these conjectured events in the early universe is a question that cannot be
answered at present. That is to say, does the CP violation we observe today
provide supporting evidence for these speculations? We simply do not know
enough about CP violation. Our experimental knowledge is limited to its
observation in only one extraordinarily sensitive system that nature has provided
us. We need to know the theoretical basis for CP violation and we need
to know how to reliably extrapolate the behavior of CP violation to the very
high energies involved.
 At present our experimental understanding of CP violation can be sum-
marized by the statement of a single number. If we state that the mass matrix
which couples K and K has an imaginary off-diagonal term given by



then all the experimental results related to CP violation can be accounted for.
If this is all the information nature is willing to provide about CP violation
it is going to be difficult to understand its origin. I have emphasized, however,
that despite the enormous experimental effort, punctuated by some experiments
of exceptional beauty, we have not reached a level of sensitivity for which
a single parameter description should either surprise or discourage us.
   We must continually remind ourselves that the CP violation, however small,
is a very real effect. It has been used almost routinely as a calibration signal
in several high energy physics experiments. But more importantly, the effect is
telling us that there is a fundamental asymmetry between matter and antimatter,
and it is also telling us that at some tiny level interactions will show an
asymmetry under the reversal of time. We must continue to seek the origin
of the CP symmetry violation by all means at our disposal. We know that
improvements in detector technology and quality ofaccelerators will permit even
more sensitive experiments in the coming decades. We are hopeful then, that
at some epoch, perhaps distant, this cryptic message from nature will be
deciphered.




APPENDIX

The evolution of a neutral K system characterized by time dependent amplitudes
a and Z for the |K> and |K> components, respectively, is given by


                                                    J. W. Cr o ni n                                                 585




w h er e M a n d          a r e e a c h H e r miti a n m at ri c e s, a n d t i s t h e ti m e m e a s u r e d i n t h e
r e st s y st e m of t h e K m e s o n. E x p r e s s e d i n t e r m s of t h eir el e m e nt s t h e m atri c e s ar e




T he     m a t ri x                 h a s ei g e n v al u e s         =                  and         =

W e d e fi n e s m all p a r a m e t e r s              =                                           and A =
                                                                W e c a n t h e n e x p r e s s t h e ei g e n -
v e ct or s a s




T h e p a r a m et e r       r e p r e s e nt s a C P vi ol ati o n wit h T n o n- c o n s e r v ati o n. T h e
p ar a m et er ∆ r e pr e s e nt s a C P vi ol ati o n wit h C P T n o n- c o n s er v ati o n.
     If w e f or m a st at e                    w hi c h i s a n ar bitr ar y s u p er p o siti o n of    and
             wit h a m plit u d e s aS a n d a L at t = 0, w e c a n c o m p ut e it s n or m
a s a f u n cti o n of ti m e. At t = 0 b y c o n s er v ati o n of pr o b a bilit y w e h a v e t h e
r el ati o n.




w h er e f r e pr e s e nt s t h e s et of fi n al st at e s. E x pli cit e v al u ati o n of t h e e x pr e s si o n
gi v e s




   A n u m b er of d efi niti o n s a n d a p arti c ul ar p h a s e c o n v e nti o n ar e u s e d. W e
d efi n e         =                                w her e       and         a r e t h e st a n di n g w a v e
a m plit u d e s f o r K a n d K, r e s p e cti v el y, t o d e c a y t o t h e I = 0 st at e of t w o
pi o n s. A 0 a n d      a r e c h o s e n r e al a n d d efi n e t h e p h a s e c o n v e nti o n u s e d i n
                                                                                                     2
t h e a n al y si s. F r o m t h e e x p e ri m e nt al p a r a m et e r s    w e d efi n e

a n d         =                                         =
Wit h t h e s e d efi niti o n s w e fi n d t o a g o o d a p pr o xi m ati o n t h at


                                                                                                                    ( 1)
and


586                               Physics 1980


The sum over f, which now excludes the I = 0 ππ state, consists of the
following terms:




The equations ( 1) and (2) take a very simple form if we resolve the components
of         parallel and perpendicular to the direction which makes an angle
   with the real axis, where




and

Within the present experimental limits, we find that all the measurements are
consistent with T violation and CPT conservation. In particular, we see the
limit on    is very small so that we cannot expect    and     to differ greatly
from       Further, if the values of               and      were < 10 -2 , then


                                              J. W. Cronin                                               587


we would find          10-5. Such an expectation is reasonable if the strength of
the CP violation is roughly the same in all modes.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank Professors S. Chandrasekhar, R. Oehme, R. G. Sachs
and B. Winstein for their advice and critical comments concerning this lecture.
I would also like to thank Professors V. Telegdi, S. Treiman, and L. Wolfenstein
for many valuable discussions concerning CP violation over the years.




REFERENCES
 1. This lecture cannot cover all the important details, refer to all the important work concerning
    CP violation, or do justice to the work that is referred to in the text. For a more complete
    discussion, the reader is referred to the most recent review by K. Kleinknecht, Annual Reviews
    of Nuclear S c i e n c e , Vol. 26, I, 1976. Also, a good perspective of the progress in the field can
    he found by reading the appropriate sections of the Proceedings of the biannual International
    Conferences on High Energy Physics, 1964-1974.
 2. Galhraith, W. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 14, 383 (1965).
 3. de Bouard, X. et al., Phys. Letters 15, 58 (1965).
 4. Fitch, V. L. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 15, 73 (1965).
 5. The value of A r depends on the K S - KL mass difference          which was, at the time, measured
    to he 0.5±0.1 by J. H. Christenson et al.. Phys. Rev. 140B, 74 (1965).
 6. Fitch, V. L. et al., Phys. Rev. 164, 1711 (1967).
 7. This argument was presented in the literature by Wattenberg, A. and Sakurai, J., Phys. Rev.
    161, 1449 (1967).
 8. Bell, J. S. and Perring, J. K., Phys. Rev. Letters 13, 348 (1964); Bernstein. J., Cabibbo, N.
    and Lee, T. D., Phys. Letters 12, 146 (1964).
 9. Wu, T. T. and Yang, C. N., Phys. Rev. Letters 13, 380 (1964); the phenomenology was first
    discussed by Lee, Oehme and Yang, Phys. Rev. 106, 340 (1957).
10. Wigner, E. P., Göttinger Nachrichten 31, 546 (1932); see also paper of Lee, Oehme, and Yang
    in Ref. 9.
I I. Some approximations have been made. The first two expressions should read:            =         1
    and      =                  where ω =                               The magnitude of ω ≈ 0.05, so

    that its effect is not large. The charge asymmetry          should he given by       = 2

    where x is the ratio of the            = -AS amplitude to the             =       amplitude in the
    semi-leptonic decay. Evidence strongly favors x ≈ 0; see Ref. 17.
12. Whatley, M. C., Phys. Rev. Letters 9, 317 (1962).
13. Here AM = M S - ML and we have neglected            compared to       The interference experiments
                                                               1
    are always performed over a time scale such that t             so that the decay of the KL amplitude

    is negligible.
14. Precise measurements of AM have been reported by: Aronson, S. H. et al.. Phys. Rev. Letters
    25, 1057 (1970); Cullen, M. et al.. Phys. Letters 32B, 523 (1970); Carnegie, R. K. et al., Phys.
    Rev. D4, I (1971); Geweniger, C. et al., Phys. Letters 52B, 108 (1974).
15. The data for this compilation are most readily available from the Particle Data Group,
    Barash-Schmidt, N. et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, S1 (1980).


588                                                  Physics 1980


16. Figure taken from thesis of Modis, T., Columbia University (1973), (unpublished); a published
      version of this work is given by Carithers, W. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 34, 1244 (1975).
17. Niebergall, F. et al., Phys. Letters 49B, 103 (1974).
18. Figure taken from thesis of Lüth, V., Heidelberg University (1974), (unpublished); a published
      version of this work can be found in Gjesdal, S. et al., Phys. Letters 52B, 113 (1974).
19. Banner, M. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 21, 1103 (1968).
20. Budagov, I. A. et al., Phys. Letters 28B, 215 (1968).
21. Holder, M. et al., Phys. Letters 40B, 141 (1972).
22. Christenson, J. H. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 43, 1209 (1979).
23. From extrapolation of the phase shift analysis of Ke 4 decays, one finds                                =
      Rosselet, J. et al., Phys. Rev. D 1 5 , 5 7 4 ( 1 9 7 7 ) . F r o m a n a l y s i s o f K+ a n d KS d e c a y s t o
      p + p - and       one finds           =                 Abbud, Lee, and Yang, Phys. Rev. Letters, 18,
      980 (1967); Particle Data Group, Barash-Schmidt, N. et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, S1 (1980).
      From analysis of pion production by pions, one finds                            =            see for example,
      Baton, J. et al., Phys. Letters 33B, 528 (1970); Estabrooks, P. and Martin, A. D., Nucl.
    Phys. B79, 301 (1974).
24. Bell, J. S. and Steinberger, j., Proceedings of the Oxford International Conference on
      Elementary Particles, 1965, edited by Walsh, T. et al., (Rutherford Laboratory, Chilton,
      England 1966). An analysis with a similar purpose has also been given by Sachs, R. G., Progr.
      Theor. Phys. (Japan) 54, 809 (1975). References to the literature concerning the analysis of
      the neutral K meson decay data into a T conserving part and T violating part are given
      by Sachs.
25. Schubert, K. R. et al., Phys. Letters 3lB, 662 (1970).
26. Canter, J. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 17, 942 (1966); Meisner, G. W. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters
      17, 492 (1966); Mehlhop, W. A. W. et al., Phys. Rev. 172, 1613 (1968). The last reference
      uses a highly innovative technique, and will give pleasure to those who take the time to read it.
27. Purcell, E. M. and Ramsey, N. F., Phys. Rev. 78, 807 (1950); also, Smith, J. H. Ph.D. thesis
      Harvard University (1951) (unpublished).
28. Weinberg has suggested a mechanism whereby the CP violation is due to Higgs mesons. The
      suggestion is attractive because the CP violation can be maximal and a neutron electric dipole
      moment of ~ 10-24 might be expected, see Weinberg, S., Phys. Rev. Letters 37, 657 (1976).
29. Wolfenstein, L., Phys. Rev. Letters 13, 569 (1964).
30. Kobayashi, M. and Maskawa, K., Progr. Theor. Phys. 49,652 (1973).
31. Guberina, B. and Peccei, R. D., Nucl. Phys. B163, 289 (1980).
32. Lüth, V., Proceedings of the 1979 International Symposium on Lepton and Photon Interactions
      at High Energies, 1979, edited by Kirk, T. B. W., p. 83 (Fermilab, Batavia, IL, USA, 1980).
33. Andrews, D. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 4.5, 219 (1980); Finocchiaro, G. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters
      45, 222 (1980).
34. Yoshimura, .M., Phys. Rev. Letters 41,381 (1978); Dimopoulos, S. and Susskind, I,., Phys. Rev.
      D18, 4500 (1978); Toussaint, B. et al., Phys. Rev. D19, 1036 (1979); Ellis, J., Gaillard, M. K.
      and Nanopoulos, D. V., Phys. Letters 80B, 360 (1979); Weinberg, S., Phys. Rev. Letters 42,850
      (1979).
35. Sakharov, A. D., ZhETF Pis’ma 5, 32 (1967); English translation JETP Letters 5, 24 (1967).
36. Glashow, S. L., Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, 539 (1980); Salam, A., ibid. 52, 525 (1980); Weinberg, S.,
    ibid, 52, 515 (1980).
37. Ford, W. T. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 2.5, 1370 (1970).
38. Smith, K. M. et al., Nucl. Phys. B60, 411 (1970).
39. Schmidt, M. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 43, 556 (1979).
40. Baltrusaitis, R. M. and Calaprice, F. P., Phys. Rev. Letters 38, 464 (1977).
41. Steinberg, R. I. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 33, 41 (1974).
42. Layter, J. G. et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 29, 316 (1972); Jane, M. R. et al., Phys. Letters 4 8 B ,
      260 (1974).
43. Dress, W. B. et al., Phys. Rev. D15, 9 (1977).
44. Altarev, I. S. et al., “ Search for an Electric Dipole Moment by Means of Ultra-cold Neutrons,”
      p. 541, Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Neutron Capture Gamma-Ray


                                             J. W. Cronin                                       589

    Spectroscopy and Related Topics, 1978, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY and
    State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY, ed. By Chrien, Robert E. and Kane, Walter R.,
    (Plenum Press).
45. Gimlett, J. L., Phys. Rev. Letters 42, 3.54 (1979).
46. Davis, B. R. et al., Phys. Rev. C22, 1233 (1980).
47. Weitkamp, W. G. et al., Phys. Rev. 165, 1233 (1968); von Witsch, W. et al., Phys. Rev. 169,
    923 (1968); Thornton, S. T. et al., Phys. Rev. C3, 1065 (1971); Driller, M. et al., Nucl. Phys.
    A317 300 (1979).
