DEFINING AND MEASURING OPTICAL
FREQUENCIES: THE OPTICAL CLOCK
OPPORTUNITY – AND MORE
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2005
by
John L. Hall

JILA, NIST, and University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0440, USA.



ABSTRACT
Four long-running currents in laser technology met and merged in 1999–
2000. Two of these were the quest toward a stable repetitive sequence of
ever-shorter optical pulses and, on the other hand, the quest for the most
time-stable, unvarying optical frequency possible. The marriage of UltraFast-
and UltraStable lasers was brokered mainly by two international teams and
became exciting when a special “designer” microstructure optical fiber was
shown to be nonlinear enough to produce “white light” from the femto-
second laser pulses, such that the output spectrum embraced a full optical
octave. Then, for the first time, one could realize an optical frequency in-
terval equal to the comb’s lowest frequency, and count out this interval as
a multiple of the repetition rate of the femtosecond pulse laser. This “gear-
box” connection between the radio frequency standard and any/all optical
frequency standards came just as Sensitivity-Enhancing ideas were maturing.
The four-way Union empowered an explosion of accurate frequency meas-
urement results in the standards field and prepares the way for refined tests
of some of our cherished physical principles, such as the time-stability of
some of the basic numbers in physics (eg., the “fine-structure” constant, the
speed of light, certain atomic mass ratios ...), and the equivalence of time-
keeping by clocks based on different physics. The stable laser technology
also allows time-synchronization between two independent femto-second
lasers so exact they can be made to appear as if the source were a single laser.
By improving pump/probe experiments, one important application will be
in bond-specific spatial scanning of biological samples. This next decade in
optical physics should be a blast!


OVERVIEW AND SUMMARY
The view backward over some momentous developments often suggests a
kind of certainty and inevitability that may not have been evident, even in the
slightest form, when the story was going on. One modern trend is to focus
on some particular research project – one which is so simple and transparent
that the Manager can expect to be successful in the chosen research task. But

                                                                            103


such a project will likely have modest consequences: Surely its consequences
were at least dimly visible from the beginning. By contrast, this “Optical
Frequency Comb” capability has come “out of the blue” from a remarkable
synthesis of independent “state-of-the-art” developments in four distinct
fields: UltraStable Lasers, UltraFast Pulse Lasers, Ultra-NonLinear Materials
and Responses, and UltraSensitive Laser Spectroscopy. These separate fields
were alike in their shared – but independent – pursuit of advancing simple
and effective technology for using electromagnetic signals for their own
spectroscopic and other optical physics interests in the visible domain. After
the Great Laser Technology Synthesis of 1999–2000, celebrated by the brief
name of “Optical Frequency Comb,” the Optical Toolbox has really blos-
somed. In respecting our Patron, Dr. Nobel, we may be more expansive and
clear: the field of optics has blossomed explosively!
   The resulting new capabilities are unbelievably rich in terms of the tools
and capabilities that have been created, and these in turn are reinforcing
progress in these related contributing fields. For example, after the frenzy
of the first generation frequency measurements, some of the Generation II
comb applications now include: low-jitter time synchronization between ultra-
fast laser sources, coherent stitching-together of the spectra of separate fs
laser sources so as to spectrally broaden and temporally shorten the compos-
ite pulse, optical waveform synthesis for Coherent Control experiments, pre-
cision measurement of optical nonlinearities using the phase measurement
sensitivity of rf techniques, coherently storing a few hundred sequential pulses
and then extracting their combined energy to generate correspondingly
more intense pulses at a lower repetition rate… . Attractive topics of research
for Generation III applications include precise remote synchronization of
accelerator cavity fields and the stable reference oscillators for Large Array
Microwave Telescopes; and potential reduction of the relative phase-noise of
the oscillator references used for deep space telescopes. (NASA, VLBI …)
That’s just part of the first five years.
   So in the precision metrology field, what exactly could one say is different
now? In the same way we have enjoyed for the last half-century powerful spec-
troscopy methods with radiofrequency signals (consider Magnetic Resonance
Imaging as one of its useful forms!), we now can use frequency-control methods
for optical spectroscopy. But there is a really important difference: the
number of cycles per second in the optical domain is roughly 10-million-fold
greater than in the rf domain, even as the rf processes themselves are still a
few million-fold faster than human perception scales. In essence, these large
factors map into a corresponding improvement in resolution – our meas-
urement capability. See the discussion below. With human senses we can
perceive halves and quarters and tenths, and perhaps a little better. These
capabilities are enhanced approximately by the product of these two large
numbers, bringing us immediately into the garden of a few parts in 1014 me-
trology. We can do even better by averaging independent measurements.




104


METROLOGICAL STANDARDS AND SCIENCE
A Close and bi-directional Connection
On occasion, accumulation of progress in the details of some scientific
enquiry leads us to a glorious new vision of some parts of our experience:
basically a new insight or organizing principle becomes available. But behind
this revelation normally is a huge amount of painstaking work, quantitatively
stating experimental results, which normally are expressed in absolute units.
Sometimes an experiment can provide its own internal calibration, but in the
main we really need to have practical standards to reference the measure-
ments against. Of course the Standards must themselves be reproduced and
distributed before the scientific results can be confirmed by several labs. The
best case is that the needed Standard is based on some fundamental physical
effect, ideally a quantum effect, so it can be independently realized by different
laboratories at the same accuracy. This standards-realization process is in a
revolution itself! [1]

The Length Standard and its Relationship to Frequency/Time
It’s useful to discuss a bit about metrological Standards, which we can initially
take to be the seven base quantities of the Système International d’Unités
(International System of Units), or more briefly the SI, or “the Metric System”
[2]. From these seven base units, another ~30 useful derived units can be
defined. For our purposes of stretching measurement precision to the ultimate
limits, clearly Time and Length are the two quantities offering the highest po-
tential precision. For eons the day was a natural unit for Time, but standards
for Length have seemed artificial and arbitrary. In 1791 the Metric System
was first discussed but, lacking serious metrology experience, these Age of
Enlightenment gentlemen of the French Academy of Sciences decided that
the Metre would be defined as some small fraction (¼ x10 –7) of the earth’s
circumference on a great circle passing through the poles and France. Of
course, having the standard based on surveying had some limitations in prac-
tical lab work, but at least the unit of length was finally a definite and basically
absolute distance. This was welcome change since public exhibits in places
such as Braunschweig, Germany and on Santorini Island, Greece show there
was a succession of length standards in sequential use, as a new Duke of differ-
ent personal arm length came into power. But by 1875, with the Treaty of the
Metre Convention, a stable metal bar began to look like a good idea. While
not fully universal and independently realizable, the factory could make many
of these prototype Metre bars, and could confirm their equivalence.
   The community of Metric countries in 1889 welcomed the improved X-
cross-section meter bars known as the “International Prototype Metre” length
standard. This design used graduations (lines) engraved onto a platinum-
iridium bar, with a Meter defined as the separation between two graduation
lines at 0 °C, measured with a specified mounting arrangement, and under
atmospheric pressure. The 30 new bars were calibrated using an optical com-
parator technique, before dissemination of two to each country.

                                                                                105


   By 1890 A. A. Michelson had identified the exceptional coherence of the
Cd red line, and by 1892 had used it with his new interferometer to deter-
mine the length of the International Prototype Metre. His measurements
showed the defined Metre contained 1,553,164.13 units of the wavelength of
the cadmium red line, measured in air at 760 mm of atmospheric pressure
at 15 °C. For this and other contributions, Michelson was awarded the Nobel
Prize in 1907. Of course thermal expansion was a limiting problem, such
that when the low-expansion steel alloy <<Invar>> was invented, the creator
(and Director of the BIPM), C. D. Guillaume, was awarded the Nobel Prize
for 1920. However, the SI Metre definition was unchanged for 85 years: the
Meter Bars worked well and optical comparitors got fatigueless photo-electric
eyes.
   Spectroscopic experiments and supporting Quantum Theory led to im-
proved understanding and improved light sources. The metrological needs of
the World Wars changed the Science climate, and transportation disruptions
emphasized the advantage of having independently-reproducible standards based
on quantum physics. Eventually, in 1960 the Eleventh General Conference
on Weights and Measures was able to redefine the International Standard of
Length as 1,650,763.73 vacuum wavelengths of orange light resulting from
transitions between specified atomic energy levels of the krypton isotope of
atomic weight of 86. Going forward with a new definition, one would say the
Kr wavelength is ɇ = 1 m / 1,650,763.73 = 0.605,780,211 µm. While the ad-
opted Definition speaks about unperturbed atoms, in fact several shifts were
observed in light from the discharge lamp used for realizing this Metre in
practice. Pressure shifts and discharge operating conditions were stabilized
by operating the lamp at a specified discharge current and at a fixed pressure
and temperature (using the triple-point of liquid nitrogen). A field-induced
gas flow of Kr+ led to a wavelength difference of light viewed from the two
cell ends. When laser comparisons with this standard were performed, the
additional problem of radially-dependent Doppler shifts of the emitted light
was discovered.
   The 1960’s and 1970’s saw a number of different stabilized lasers systems
introduced, refined, and the wavelengths measured and compared between
various national labs. Basically, all these laser systems were entered into the
competition to be the next International Length Standard. There were
then 48 nations involved in the Metre Convention, so politically speaking,
choosing one out of the many offered candidate lasers would be difficult.
In addition, none of these approaches were overwhelmingly superior, when
performance, cost and complexity were all considered. And scientifically, it
seemed attractive for the new Length Standard definition to be based on the
Speed of Light, introduced as a defined quantity. On the basis of a number
of laser-based measurements, this value was taken as 299,792,458 m/s exactly,
a rounded value in accord with the measurements of the several standards
labs. This redefinition of 1983 took the form:




106


      “the Meter is the length of the path traveled by light in vacuum during
      a time interval of 1/299,792,458 of a second. The speed of light is
      c = 299,792,458 m/s , exactly.
      The second is determined to an uncertainty, U = 1 part in 1014 by the
      Cesium clock.”

The General Conference also suggested several recommended radiations for
realizing the meter at that time, eg.:
      “The wavelength of the iodine-stabilized Helium-Neon laser is
      λHeNe = 632.99139822 nm ,
      with an estimated relative standard uncertainty (U) of ± 2.5 x 10–11.”

In all of these changes in definition, the goal was not only to improve the
precision of the definition, but also to change its actual length as little as pos-
sible. See [3]. With the speed of light defined, an optical frequency (linked
to time) can thus serve as a length unit.

Fundamental Physics Issues in the Re-Definition of Length
At the times of these redefinitions, there were some concerns that we were
switching the physical basis for the Metre definition. For example, if in the
future we discover that some of the “constants of Physics” actually are slowly
changing, one could worry that the new definition might impact or even limit
our discovery process. In any case, we would be unaware of a global change
that would conserve the physical relationships we have discovered. But could
there be a differential effect that might be observable? Before 1960 we were
accepting the spacing of some lattice planes in the Pt-Ir alloy of the Meter
Bar as our measurement basis for length: this length certainly would funda-
mentally involve Quantum Mechanics, and Electricity and Magnetism. And,
considering the thermal vibration of molecules in the somewhat-anharmonic
interatomic potentials, we can suppose that the nuclear masses – and thus
the Strong Interactions – will also play a role in length via the thermal expan-
sion. With the 1960 redefinition of the Metre in terms of a Krypton atom’s
radiation’s wavelength, perhaps we were opening some opportunity for con-
fusion? Now Quantum Mechanics and Electricity and Magnetism are still fun-
damentally involved, but the atom’s mass is involved only in a reduced-mass
correction, rather than via thermal effects. Certainly a new “constant,” the
speed of light, is linearly serving as the dimensioned scale constant. Initially
the 1983 redefinition appears to be still a different sort compared with the
1960 Kr definition, but really it just repeats the energy level difference idea
(now it is Cs in defining the second rather than Kr defining an optical en-
ergy) followed by a conversion of dimensions. Who knows if there is some
fun hidden in here?
   Where we have come to is that the SI is now functioning with six, rather

                                                                                107


than seven, basic units. The Metre has been demoted to a derived unit, and
the significance of Time and Frequency have been further elevated. This
begins a long story, with the SI base units being challenged by spectacular
advances “at the bottom of a Dewar” [4], giving us a Josephson-effect based
voltage standard (Nobel Prize of 1973), while the von-Klitzing-effect defines a
quantum resistance standard (Nobel Prize of 1985). Taken together as V2 /R,
an electrical Watt unit is apparent, while an SI Watt – defined as a Joule per
second – would be represented as ½ kg (m/s)2 /s . The relationship between
these is established by a “Watt Balance” experiment [5]. Recently the Single
Electron Transistor begins to enable digital counting of electron charges per
second, contacting the SI Ampere, the unit of electric current. This interface
between metrology and quantum physics is becoming a “Hot Topic” of our
time [1, 6]. The remarkable advances in Metrology also allow – and advances
in Cosmology and Astronomy strongly motivate – curiosity about the “exact-
ness” and “time-invariance” of the various physics numbers used in our de-
scription of physical reality.


CLOCKS AND TIME
Time represents our most precisely measurable quantity and so it always has
attracted certain kinds of devoted researchers. But also, now with various sen-
sors and microprocessor control, many physical parameters can be read out
by frequency measurements, and so we add a huge number of scientists in
other fields who want to recover the finest details within their measurements.
(Still, many really important research subjects are not yet so well developed
that these frequency tools are useful: for example, world-changing decisions
about air pollution management are being made even though we scarcely are
sure about the sign of some effects.)
   But for technology people, the improvement of time measurement preci-
sion grows as a field of intense interest and competition worldwide. In no
small part this is because of the very advances singled out by this year’s Prize:
a capability jump by several decades is uncommon in any field, let alone the
field where the precision of measurement was already at the highest level,
and had already been driven to near its apparently basic limits.
   Of course interest in time has been part of man’s history from our begin-
nings, but only in the last several recent centuries have some lucky subsets of
people been somewhat isolated from seasonal variations, with leisure to think
about Nature, and so time as an experimental parameter began to emerge.
Nowadays we can look from the scientific and experimental point at the
question: why would one be interested in time? For those who love precision,
the clear reason is that time is the most powerful metrological variable.

Scaling of Precision Attainable when we are Measuring Time
The precision of time measurements can be increased essentially without
limit, by increasing the measurement duration and simply counting the in-
creased number of cycles of some regularly-spaced events. However a strong-

108


er information growth with measurement duration is possible if we have a
nice source that has coherence from the beginning of the measurement until
the end. (For the present purpose we may take this “coherence” to mean that
if we know the oscillation cycle’s phase early in the measurement, the coher-
ent source is so steady that the oscillation phase could be predicted at later
times near the measurement’s end to a precision of 1 radian of phase.) In
this case we can have a measurement precision which will grow with the meas-
urement interval τ according to τ3/2. A simple way to explain this assertion
is to suppose we divided the measurement duration into 3 equal sections,
each with N/3 measurements. In the starting zone we compare the reference
clock and the unknown clock, with a relative phase precision which scales as
(N/3)1/2. Next, in the middle section, we merely note the number of events,
N/3. In the last section we again estimate the analog phase relationship
between test and reference waves, with a relative imprecision which is again
(N/3)1/2. Subtracting the two analog phases increases the uncertainty of one
measurement by a factor 21/2 so, altogether, the relative precision increases
as (1/21/2) * (N/3)3/2 . Thinking of a microwave frequency measurement,
with a base frequency of 1010 Hz, in a 1 s measurement we have a factor of
105 potentially to win. Commercial counters already can register 12 digits
in 1 s for a reasonable input signal. One can see there is just a huge gain in
measurement precision if we can measure a coherent frequency source in a
proper way: No wonder we have the situation where metrology scientists as
well as philosophers, sailors, and farmers are interested in clocks and time
and seasons [7]. Indeed our most powerful test of the existence of Einstein’s
predicted gravitational radiation comes from the observed shortening of the
year of the Hulse-Taylor binary pulsar: orbital clock physics vs. quantum fre-
quency standard physics on the earth. This marvelous work was celebrated by
the Nobel Prize of 1993.

What makes a clock?
The three essentials of clocks are: a source of regular events, a counter/inte-
grator to totalize the events, and a suitable readout mechanism to present the
current result to an interested human or machine. In many ways the frequen-
cy source is the most interesting part since it is intrinsically an analog system,
where the design goal is to diminish as little as possible the intrinsic stability
of some physical oscillation, in the course of reading out its information. In
this game, nuance and subtlety count for a lot. It is customary that the per-
formance of clocks based on some well-known source of regular “clicks” will
be improved several orders of magnitude by the work of many people over
many years, with the ultimate fate of becoming suddenly obsolete due to the
introduction of a better kind of stable oscillator. The new idea must be a ser-
ious advance, since it must be competitive at the start of its life with the previ-
ous technology which has been enhanced and improved in many stages. Still,
some technologies have had a long lifetime – for example one can still buy
a good wristwatch based on a torsional oscillator, even though this balance
wheel concept was used by Ch. Huygens in 1675.

                                                                               109


   Keeping time has been of serious interest since man turned agrarian, but
became of critical interest with the expansion of lucrative international trade:
“inevitable” shipwrecks could be avoided by better knowledge of position
(mainly longitude) at sea. Parliament’s Longitude Prize of 1714 (above $10
M in current terms) attracted John Harrison’s attention and some 40 years of
his inventive work. In 1761 his H-4 clock demonstrated 1/5 s/d , δν/ν ~2.5
x10–6 even while at sea. This was several-fold better that the requirement, but
only half the Prize was initially paid: in part the controversy was about the
Intellectual Property! A second problem was conflict of interest within the
judging Committee. (This story is well-told in [7].) Present customers of
precise timekeeping include TV Networks (for synchronization), cellular
telephone companies, the GPS users who need the limiting performance, ra-
dio astronomers, NASA Deep Space Tracking, and various other branches of
Science in which a physical variable has been read out by frequency methods.

Evolution of Frequency Sources: Distinguishing Precision and Accuracy
In discussing the performance of a mechanical clock, or the electronic oscil-
lators based on vibrational modes of quartz crystals, it is clear that the basic
frequency is set by mechanical dimensions. Such a device could be stable
and have good precision, in that its readout could be determined with many
digits, but there can be no claim to any particular fixed or natural frequency.
Still the stability of any particular crystal device could be remarkable: a drift
of >10–6 /day gradually improved to the present <          –10
                                                    ~1 x10 /day, while the shift
                                     –9
with acceleration remains near 10 per “g”. The high frequency of electronic
oscillators served well for convenient interpolation between “clicks” of the
absolute standard, provided by zenith sightings of the daily motion of the
Sun, as codified by the 1875 Metre Convention. (Later the earth rotation data
series were based on telescopic observations of the lunar occulation starts
of various stars and planets.) By the 1950’s the electronic oscillators were
refined enough that variability ~10–8 was inferred in the earth’s spin rate,
and was associated with changes of the earth-atmosphere system’s moment
of inertia due to North-South ocean tides, and large storms. The community
wished to eliminate the variability, but still needed an absolute and univer-
sal (rather than local artifact) standard. The new choice in 1960 adopted a
stated number of seconds in the “Tropical Astronomical Year 1900”. Perhaps
this was good in its motivation, in that the rotation of the earth around the
sun would have a lower level of perturbation. However, a clock/oscillator
that has only a single click per year will be hard to enjoy at its full precision.
As a metrology principle we rather would prefer the basic frequency source
to be at a very high frequency so that the integer multiple of the standard’s
clicks will be a huge digital number in our measurement of some interesting
phenomenon, and the unavoidable noise and uncertainty of the remaining
analog subdivision of the unit will be as insignificant as possible.




110


Electronic Clocks based on Quantum Transitions
Based on Otto Stern’s atomic beam method, which had resulted in his Nobel
Prize of 1943, I. I. Rabi introduced atomic beam resonance methods which
allowed probing internal (hyperfine) quantum energy states of atoms such as
Cesium with greater precision. This work was recognized by the Nobel Prize
of 1944. Using atoms in this way, the independent realizability and universality
requirements for a Primary Standard could be well addressed. In addition,
the transition frequencies were near the high-frequency-end of the usable rf
spectrum, so the Metrology aspects were optimized as well. The first Atomic
Beam Clock was developed at NBS in 1949 based on microwave transitions
in Ammonia, and by 1955 Cs beam clocks were in operation at the NPL and
NBS. The powerful Method of Separated Oscillating Fields was invented by
N. F. Ramsey, reported in 1955, and later recognized by the Prize in 1989. In
this dual-excitation concept, suitable atoms were excited once, and then left
to evolve their internal phase (ideally) free of perturbation, until a second
excitation pulse effectively completed the interferometric comparison of the
phase evolution rates between the atomic and laboratory oscillating systems.
Progress on the Cs beam atomic frequency standard was widespread and
rapid, allowing redefinition in 1967 of the SI Second as 9 192 631 770 units
of the Cs hyperfine oscillation period. Correspondingly, the Cs oscillation
frequency is defined as (exactly) 9 192 631 770 Hertz (cycles of per second).
The specialists involved in this redefinition of Time and Frequency wisely did
not specify exact details of the measurement process, leaving room for con-
siderable progress. For example when laser-based optical pumping of atoms
between hyperfine states became feasible and popular in the early 1990’s,
NIST colleagues built a new atomic beam cesium standard, NIST-7, based on
optically transferring most of the population from the 16 available hyperfine
levels into the special (| 3,0> ) lower state involved in the clock transition.
Along with this factor, ~16x, improvements of the atom source itself, and bet-
ter frequency source and readout electronics were helpful. Above all, com-
puter-based signal processing and active control of measurement systematic
offsets made it possible to reduce the inaccuracy of realizing the Cs second
at NIST to ~5 x10–15 . But as usual in the art-form of Precision Measurement,
this “tour de force” system was soon made obsolete in a single step by a quali-
tatively better technology.
   As shown by Kasevich and Chu [8], laser cooling of the Cs atoms made
it possible to successfully implement the “atomic fountain” concept for the
realization of the Cs-based frequency definition. By shifting laser frequen-
cies or powers, a slowly moving ball of atoms could be dispatched vertically
upward through the excitation rf cavity, reaching apogee a good part of a
meter above the cavity, and then beginning the return trip to pass through
the excitation cavity a few 100 ms later. With such a long coherent interac-
tion time, instantly the resonance linewidth dropped to ~ 1 Hz, down from
~300 Hz in the previous epoch of thermal beam of atoms. Optical probing of
the atoms below (and temporally after) the cavity could yield the excitation-


                                                                            111


probability vs. probe-frequency-tuning curve needed to control the source
oscillator’s frequency. By using suitably-closed optical transitions for readout,
one can have many photons emitted per atom so that, even after solid angle
and detection inefficiencies are considered, the measurement noise is not
much larger than the minimum associated with the finite number of atoms.
Andre Clairon and his colleagues made the first real Cs Fountain Frequency
Standard, in 1995 [9] at the Paris Institute now known as LNE-SYRTE [10].
Even without the contemporary schemes to break this atom-shot-noise limit,
the fountain clocks at NIST and SYRTE now achieve accuracy levels below
1 x10–15 when all the known measurement and perturbation issues are taken
into account [11]. Of course with the resolution improvement one hopes for
more potential accuracy, but will have beforehand an expanded list of small
shifts and niggling concerns to consider. After all, even with the extended in-
teraction time, fewer tha n 1010 oscillation cycles are counted, so the achieved
inaccuracy of 1 x10–15 already corresponds to 10 ppm splitting of the atomic
fountain’s resonance linewidth. Fountain Cs clocks are limited by two newly
important effects, collisionally induced frequency shifts due to the hugely
increased atom density [12], and shifts due to the effects of the ambient ther-
mal radiation associated with the vacuum system’s walls. Attempting to split
lines further always brings a diverging list of new small problems, leading to
an effective barrier.
   An important observation is that for many types of Quantum Absorber
samples the line broadening processes will be the same for both radio and
optical frequency domains. For example, the atomic fountain apparatus
could explore optical transitions, rather than microwave ones, with the same
interaction time. Clearly we would prefer the higher base frequency of the
optical world, since the resonance feature of interest will then display a rela-
tive sharpness increased by roughly the same huge factor of optical/micro-
wave frequency ratio. With sharper line shapes we can expect more precise
measurements that will let us better see the small effects of various experi-
mental parameters, leading to better independent reproducibility which, with
major investment of efforts, can often be parlayed into nearly a correspond-
ing increase in measurement accuracy capability as we come more fully to char-
acterize the offset processes. But before the Millennium Year of the Optical
Comb, just how did you plan to measure the absolute optical frequency?
   This repeatability idea seems weaker than the gold standard of accuracy,
which additionally conveys our being able to connect the measured result
with the base units of the Systeme International. But in fact we now know
several optical clock systems that have 10-fold smaller uncertainty than the Cs
standard. So before a redefinition is appropriate, their comparisons will be
most interesting, especially as an entry point for one of the most interesting
branches of Science, trying to figure out which physical “laws” are essentially
exact, which ones are ignoring some details to have a tidy presentation, and
which are in fact stating “facts” about Nature which are not exactly actually
true. Celestial mechanics, ideal gas laws ignoring molecular volumes, and
parity conservation in atomic physics could be my examples.

112


STARTING THE DREAM OF OPTICALLY-BASED CLOCKS
The Laser Arrives
The future of metrology was changed fundamentally on 12 December 1960
when a small team at Bell Labs, led by Ali Javan, eventually found the right
conditions for their Optical Maser to generate self-sustained optical oscilla-
tions. Their specially crafted gas discharge tube had the improbable situation
in which the populations in two particular Neon atomic levels were reversed
from the thermal norm: by means of the discharge in the more-abundant He
gas, collisional energy transfer set up a population inversion, whereby more
atoms were in the higher energy state. It is impressive that these conditions
were established on the basis of careful measurements and modeling of the
discharge conditions! Having the populations inverted from the usual case
reverses the sign of the absorption that experience teaches us is a universal
property of (normal) matter. Accordingly, with an inverted population,
rather than absorption, Javan’s group had optical emission. The atoms would
provide amplification of any resonant optical signal passing down the dis-
charge cell. A few percent gain wouldn’t be very exciting normally, except
that the utilized multilayer mirrors were designed and fabricated to have
reflection losses that could be even smaller, setting the stage for a buildup
of power on every pass. So finally they did obtain a self-sustained continuous
optical oscillation, and observed the collimated beam that was anticipated by
Charles Townes and Arthur Schawlow in a classic paper of 1958. Similar ideas
were also considered in the Former Soviet Union, leading to the Nobel Prize
of 1964 being shared by N. Basov, A. Prokhorov, and Townes.

Connection to Glauber’s Quantum Coherent States of Light
In planning a theoretical study of optical fields, perhaps one can understand
starting with known results for single-photon fields, then adding a few pho-
tons cautiously to see what happens. Actually, for all of us following Professor
Glauber’s work it was surprising just how few photons were needed for the
new photon density distribution functions to change fundamentally from the
customary Poisson limit: with increasing number of photons in a mode the
fields start showing the small fractional fluctuations that would characterize a
classical field. On the experimental side, for Javan’s very first laser, the output
laser power was ~ 1 milliWatt, about 1016 photons per second! We can proceed
to estimate the expected fractional variation of 1/Sqrt(N), but with such an
incredibly large number of coherent photons in one mode, the result is an
unphysically small variation. Thousands of merely technical processes would
cause fluctuations larger than the predicted 1:108 ! An equivalent statement
is that these lasers were operating strongly, very far into the domain of classic-
al fields, and quantum fluctuations would be very hard to observe. Indeed
it was not until the end of the 1970’s that people began again to appreciate
how to study manifestly quantum fields with just a few photons in them. At
this vastly-reduced intensity, quantum correlations are a bit challenging to
observe, but they are very interesting, since they correspond to rather signifi-

                                                                               113


cant fractional effects. For example, H. J. Kimble’s group used phase-depen-
dent Squeezed Light to make a spectroscopic measurement with about 2-fold
better Signal/Noise than the naïve shotnoise limit [13]. To observe strong
Squeezed Light effects, it is essential to minimize optical losses, as they work
to revert the statistics toward the thermal limit. Regrettably, noise from tech-
nical sources will grow linearly in the laser power, while the advantage due to
squeezing will grow more slowly. It seems that getting a factor 10 amplitude
S/N improvement appears to be incredibly difficult.

Coherence of the Laser Field Enables Frequency-Diagnostics
The Bell Labs laser design success had grown out a semiclassical view of how
Optical Masers would operate. Yes, amplification would be provided by quan-
tum mechanical atomic systems, rather than radio tubes or klystrons, and yes
each atom could contribute just one photon to the field in each event. But
still, considering how huge is the number of photons in the field, the dis-
creteness probably will hardly matter. Almost immediately the Bell-Labs team
was testing this understanding by combining two separate laser beams into
a single coaxial beam, and shining this onto the sensitive surface of a high-
speed photodetector. They already were thinking of each laser oscillation as
being an essentially classical field, satisfying reflection boundary conditions
at the two mirrors. So this stable-and-repeating bouncing specification would
define the possible wavelength(s) of the generated laser light. By luck and
design the discharge was wonderfully calm, so one could expect the gas’
refractive index would be essentially constant. Thus the interferometric
boundary conditions would essentially define the oscillation frequency and,
accordingly, one would expect to see a sharp optical frequency come out of
this device. With two lasers’ sharp frequencies on the nonlinear detector’s
surface, one should expect the difference frequency to be generated, which
it was. I can still remember hearing the audio beat whistle that Javan had re-
corded when his two lasers were tuned almost to the same optical frequency.
It was a ~1 kHz difference between two sources at 260 THz!
   Actually the linewidth of these beats was remarkably narrow. We already
expected that based on the numbers noted above: a stream of ~1016 pho-
tons/s would have random power fluctuation of ~10–8 relative to the full
power. So the optical phase could be extremely well defined. However, the
laser’s Schawlow-Townes linewidth calculation includes the role of optical
loss, which actually limits the laser coherence, giving ~ milliHz linewidth
expectation.
   In principle then we have a radiation of incredible sharpness, and should
be ready to seek interesting physical effects. The immediate disappointing
truth is that this tiny predicted laser phase fluctuation will be completely
masked by noise of technical origins. We already noted that the strongest
definition of the oscillation’s frequency is fixed by the interferometric stand-
ing-wave condition bouncing on the laser cavity mirrors. But the lab is a noisy
place, seismically speaking, with a quiet lab having a ground noise of ~3 x10–9
m/Sqrt(Hz) in the vibration frequency band say 1–30 Hz. A laser cavity is

114


some fraction of a meter in length, so it will be difficult to make a system arbi-
trarily stiff. Rather, some important fraction of the ground noise will appear
as cavity length variations, and therefore laser frequency variations. Suppose
we say only 1% couples in to relative length changes. One can instantly see
the scale of the problem: ~10–10 fractional frequency variations will be our
apriori scale. Even temperature variations will be painful, since the 10–10 scale
already corresponds to a few milliKelvin temperature change for low expan-
sion materials like fused silica. We can make progress by locking the laser to
a stable reference cavity [14]. Optimizing for vibrational integrity, we will use
a stiff structure for mounting the reference cavity mirrors, and then mount
the assembly with a horizontally soft suspension. By focusing on the vibration
isolation, Bergquist has obtained [15] a record narrow laser linewidth ~0.16
Hz! Another approach seeks to minimize the cavity acceleration sensitivity.
By use of a vertically-symmetric mounting [16] of the reference cavities, our
group recently reported Hz-level laser linewidths.

Coherence of the Laser Beats Enables Frequency-Based Laser Control
Considering the small intrinsic phase noise of the laser source, and the ra-
ther high power ~ mW, heterodyne detection of the beat frequency between
two laser sources yields an interestingly high Signal/Noise ratio. Even with
very short averaging times, say 1 µs, we have generous S/N performance.
Additionally, for such short times a well-engineered laser will scarcely re-
spond to the “garbage effects” of real life in the lab (temperature variations,
power-supply variations, vibrations …) – within 1 µs these have not changed
the system very much. The duration of the perturbations is too small for
them to begin to wreak havoc with the stability of the frequency-defining
cavity. So we actually can make useful measurements of the laser’s phase in
such a quick time frame that the problems are not yet apparent! One begins
to see a strategy coming up: We will quickly measure what the laser actually is
doing, compared with our desired behavior, and then use feedback onto suit-
able actuators to control the laser’s frequency. If we can make the corrections
quickly enough and accurately enough, then the controlled laser will very
closely approximate the ideal frequency-stable laser we need.
Implementation of this servo-control feedback concept is a multi-nuanced thing, in the
perfection of which this author has invested something over 40 years of active work. It
has led to a lot of interesting and useful electro-optic tools and techniques.

The Relative High Power of Lasers Empowers Nonlinear Spectroscopy and
Sharp Resonances
Let’s begin with the first approach to observation of narrow atomic reso-
nances, using Saturated Absorption Spectroscopy. These phenomena were
studied first within a laser cavity by Bill Bennett using the dispersion effects
associated with the active Neon laser gas. Owing to the Doppler effect, the
Neon atom’s natural resonance linewidth of ~10 MHz becomes masked and
broadened to ~1500 MHz. Thus most of the gas atoms are detuned, and in

                                                                                  115


a velocity-specific way. Some atoms have velocities near the special one giv-
ing the Doppler shift that will bring them into resonance with the intracavity
laser field. Actually there are two such velocities to consider, since the laser
beam goes both directions as it is bouncing back and forth between the mir-
rors. These resonant atoms will interact rather strongly with the field, lead-
ing to an increased decay rate for excited state atoms of that velocity – their
inverted population gets converted into cavity photons! If we imagine a plot
of the population difference (upper state minus lower state populations) we
can expect to see a local and rather narrow dip around the velocity which
is being converted from population inversion into light quanta. Actually
there are the two mirror-symmetric dips as noted before. The interesting
effects come when we let the laser frequency be tuned toward the atom’s
rest-frame frequency. Then the resonant atoms will have lower and lower
Doppler velocities, until finally the selected velocity is zero. Now a new thing
happens: when detuned, we had two groups of active atoms contributing
their power to the laser output. When we reach the central tuning, both
running-wave fields interact with a single atom velocity group. So with fewer
atoms contributing, the laser power decreases conspicuously, but only at the
central tuning. This feature in the power output with laser tuning could be
used for locking the laser to this central tuning dip, which is called “Lamb’s
dip” after Willis Lamb whose early theoretical work made clear this origin
of the experimentally-observed effect. (His Nobel Prize in 1955 was for his
work on the new sub-hyperfine structure in the Hydrogen spectrum.) As it
turns out, operating pressures for optimum laser operation were rather large
(~3 Torr, 400 Pa), which led to substantial probability of atom-atom col-
lisions, even during the few 10’s of ns optical lifetimes. So the Lamb dips
would be broader and less deep, and had to be observed against a somewhat-
peaked Doppler profile representing the distribution of available atom vel-
ocities. In addition to reducing the Lamb-dip contrast, significant frequency
shifts were generated [17]. One could not arbitrarily reduce the gas pressure
since the discharge pumping mechanism actually populated a metastable
He* level, and collisions were needed to transfer this excitation to the Neon
atom component in the discharge. So even though the wavelength of the
laser’s characteristic coherent light was more-readily-measurable than the
incoherent light from the krypton discharge lamp (the existing wavelength
standard), in fact the lasers’ pressure shifts were simply too large to accept.
Particularly this was the case since the discharge technology of the day led
to important change of the fill gas pressure and species ratio with operation,
due to electrode sputter-pumping.
   The clearly important idea of separating the amplifier and the reference
gas cells’ functions was soon introduced by Lee and Skolnick. More discus-
sion of those interesting developments is available elsewhere [18, 19], but for
our present purposes we do need to consider some of the essentials. Since
the purpose was to have a sheltered life for our reference atoms, it was at-
tractive to be thinking in terms of absorption, rather than amplification. Then
we didn’t need any discharge or optical pumping of the reference quantum

116


Figure 1. Saturated absorption peak in CH4 molecules. HeNe laser at 3.39 µm is excited by
rf discharge. CH4 cell at 12 mTorr (16 mBar) is located inside laser cavity. Power output is
300 ~µW and peak contrast is ~12%. Peak width is ~270 kHz HWHM. At maximum power
(~0.8 mW) contrast is ~15%. Cavity free spectral range is 250 MHz. Note cross-over reso-
nances in two-mode region near cusps. Hysteresis of scan causes trace doubling.




resonators. Of course, to be able to use Lamb’s nonlinear resonance for
frequency stabilization, we certainly needed to be able to tune the laser to
the reference cell’s resonance frequency. Nowadays, this is no big problem,
by just using tunable lasers. At that time, the best idea to get a wavelength
coincidence would be to use molecules as the absorbers – then we would
have zillions of absorption lines to choose from. The modern champion for
this approach is molecular Iodine, with narrow useful absorption lines from
the Near IR down to ~500 nm. For other molecules, utilizing transitions only
between vibrational-rotational states, typical wavelengths are in the IR from
∼2–10 micrometers range.
   The first such dual-component optical frequency reference system, and
still one of the better ones, uses a HeNe discharge cell to provide gain and
laser oscillation at 3392 nm [18]. Also contained in the laser cavity is a cell
containing CH4 molecules, plain old tetrahedrally-symmetric methane,
which has interesting lines that can be reached with the HeNe laser. To be
brief, the necessary emitter/absorber spectral overlap is arranged by selec-
tion, based on good luck! The IR absorption band utilized, ν3 , is a strong
fundamental vibration band, providing 0.18 cm–1 absorption coefficient per
Torr. Of course having the absorber gas inside the cavity means we don’t
need very much absorption to have an impact on the laser dynamics – just a
few percent would be fine, since it would then be roughly ½ the loss associ-
ated with the output-coupling mirror. At 10 milliTorr, the associated pressure
broadening of the CH4 resonance would then be ~160 kHz, similar to the
130 kHz broadening associated with the molecular free-flight through the
intracavity light beam, of 0.3 mm typical diameter. Importantly, the pressure-

                                                                                       117


induced shift turns out to be very small for these transitions, only ~1 kHz
under these conditions.
    So we are talking about a system with a resonance in the power curve of
~0.6 MHz FWHM, with perhaps 5% relative contrast on the total laser output
of say 200 µW. A little calculation leads one to a Signal/ShotNoise ratio ~106
in a 1 Hz measuring BW, while we’re looking at the sub-MHz – wide peak
produced at the central tuning, when both cavity running waves are bleach-
ing the same absorbing molecules and thereby reducing the intracavity ab-
sorption losses. If this S/N were optimally used, the laser could be stabilized
to have sub-Hz frequency deviations measured in 1 s intervals. In 1968 when
this Saturated Absorption Optical Frequency Reference business began, our
detectors and preamplifiers were not so good, and we didn’t begin to ap-
proach the shot noise limit – that would have been a frequency (in)stability
of ~2 x10–14 at 1s. Early on, we did get δν/ν ~1 x10–12 , which was soon im-
proved to 3 x10–13 with better detectors and signal processing.
   By locating the sample cell outside the laser resonator, the physical situ-
ation could be more-readily analyzed, and this arrangement was employed
by Bordé, and by Hänsch, and by Chebotayev’s group in early experiments.
The interesting details are discussed in textbooks: see eg. Letokhov and
Chebotayev [20], and Stenholm [21], Levenson and Kano [22]. Now we
consider the transit-time linewidth issue.

Free-flying Molecules see a Light Pulse: two views of the Uncertainty Principle
For these transitions, the radiative lifetime (~ ms) was much larger than the
transit time of the essentially free-flying molecules in crossing the laser beam.
At low pressure the saturated absorption linewidth was not collisionally nor
Doppler limited, so it could be immediately observed that the resonance
linewidths could be reduced by increasing the field/molecule interaction
time. Larger beams helped. So did liquid Nitrogen cooling of the glass cell.
So a serious study began to really understand the lineshape in the free-flight
regime. Chebotayev and his colleagues developed the theory analytically
near the low-pressure, low optical power limit [23]. The JILA theory was
based on computer integrations of the Density Matrix for absorbers making
a free transit through the assumed Gaussian light beam mode [24]. Low in-
tensity and weak interactions were assumed to simplify the calculations, but
soon it became clear that most of the observed signal would be contributed
by a very small number of slow molecules. The theoretical result is a logarith-
mic cusp at the exact line center. With long interaction times, even a “weak”
power would lead to saturation and other strong-field effects.
   We need low velocity in the longitudinal direction so that the molecule
wouldn’t cross wavefronts axially, and thereby begin to develop Doppler-
related phase modulation. Effectively molecules should fly perpendicular
to the axis, and leave the wavefront after the transit with only <1 radian geo-
metrical phaseshift. We also need low transverse velocities, since a longer
transit time will be directly imaged into a narrower line. We can see δν ⋄ τ ≈
1 will yield δν = β vth/w0 , δν is the HWHM of the observable resonance, vth

118


is the thermal velocity, w0 is the Gaussian beam radius, and β is a measured
parameter. Experimentally we found β vth = 88 kHz mm for Methane at
room temperature. Laser mode radius w0 values from 56 µm to 9 cm were
measured, with corresponding HWHM values from 1.6 MHz down to 940
Hz. (The interesting substructure will be addressed momentarily.) First it is
useful to consider the transit-time broadening in the Fourier-dual domain:
angular divergence. Corresponding to a Gaussian beam radius w0 there is a
minimum angular divergence of the collimated laser beam of δθ = λ/ 2πw0.
The k-vector spread, particularly the non axial components lead to a velocity-
dependent Doppler shift of the same sign for both running waves, which will
appear as broadening and shift of the resonance. Of course with a smaller
mode diameter, the angular content is increased, and more broadening will
appear spectrally.
   While molecules typically do not have the “closed” optical transitions
analogous to those needed for normal laser atom cooling, polar molecules
do have a dipole moment. So with some electrical effort, one can arrange
Sisyphus-like molecule slowing by switching the sign of the strong applied
electric field, as shown by Meijer’s group [25]. More recently Ye’s group has
achieved unprecedented high resolution microwave spectroscopy on Stark-
slowed OH free radicals [26]. Certainly this will be an interesting frontier!
   Other important directions are high sensitivity detection and improving
the accuracy of locking to the molecular signals. For example some JILA
work (“NICE-OHMS”) shows a road to sensitivity increase by combining
cavity enhancement and rf sideband techniques [27]. A fascinating phys-
ics avenue is the search for a parity-related frequency shift between suitable
enantiomers [28]. Other important laser applications are considerred in
Svanberg’s book [29].

Momentum transfer from Light to Molecules – the Recoil Splitting
A full treatment of radiative interactions must include the field and mo-
lecular momenta, as well as the photon numbers and internal states of the
quantum system. Such a treatment is essential for the case of pumping atoms
with closed energy levels, which can allow the repeated interactions and
deep velocity cooling celebrated by the 1997 Atom Cooling Prize of Phillips,
Chu, and Cohen-Tannoudji. For the molecular sample of interest here, there
are many decay channels, and likely even impact on the vacuum chamber
walls before any particular molecule reappears in the laser fields: so a single
interaction picture is reasonable. A clear observation of the transfer of mo-
mentum from field to atomic system is available with Saturated Absorption
Spectroscopy, basically because it is a two-step process. Let’s consider absorb-
ers that initially have essentially zero velocity along the light beam. Then the
                                                      hv
                                                (
left-running light beam can be tuned to v = v0 1 +
                                                     2Mc 2 )
                                                           , the extra (recoil)

energy being needed beyond the transition energy ν0 to provide the kinetic
energy associated with the recoil momentum the molecule will have after

                                                                            119


the transition occurs. The opposite-running beam will also deplete this zero-
velocity group. So at this resonance tuning, the resulting nonlinear decrease
of molecular opacity will lead to a peak in the transmission spectrum, and it
is shifted slightly to the blue of the rest frequency. Another interesting case
occurs when the molecules have a velocity v = h/Mλ, ie., there is enough mo-
lecular momentum initially so that when the red-detuned laser interacts with
this molecule, the photon and molecular momenta just cancel, and the origi-
nal kinetic energy can make up for the photon’s energy deficit. The result is
an excited molecule with zero axial velocity. Now the laser beam in the other
running direction will experience amplification from this particular tuning
condition, again leading to a relative peak in the sample’s transmission. With
the molecule initially possessing some kinetic energy, the laser tuning for this
                                                          nhv
upper-state resonant condition will be v = v0 1 –   (     2Mc 2 )
                                                                . So considering pho-

ton recoil, the nonlinear interaction is associated with either the ground or
excited state population being accessed by both beams for the same detun-
ing, namely zero velocity in either one of the two states. For methane the
splitting between the two peaks is 2.163 kHz and may be seen clearly in
Figure 2 [30].
   While the JILA and University of Paris Nord work exploited mainly the
large diameter optical beams to gain a longer molecular interaction time,
Chebotayev, Bagayev, and colleagues in the Novosibirsk group made good
use also of another physical idea, namely the use of super-slow molecules to
contribute the main part of the observed signal. In this way an additional 20-
fold linewidth reduction to <50 Hz was achieved [31]. An important aspect
of this approach is that the total 3-D effective molecular temperature is below
0.1 K, leading to a much-reduced second-order Doppler shift, of << 1 Hz. An
average velocity 13x below thermal for slow C2HD molecules was shown by Ye
et al. [27], and was feasible only because of the very large sensitivity provided
by the NICE-OHMS technique.




Figure 2. Recoil Splittings of Hyperfine-Structure Peaks in free-flight Methane Molecules.
The vertical strokes indicate the positions of the two recoil components in one of the
Hyperfine components.


120


Other Optical Frequency References Based on NonLinear Spectroscopy
Many research groups have been attracted to working with laser stabilization
for Measurement Standards applications, such as interferometric calibration
of gage blocks that serve to check reference standards used by industry. For
this kind of application it is highly desirable that the reference laser beam be
visible, as well as stable enough and reproducible enough. A huge success in
this area is the 633 nm HeNe laser with an intracavity Iodine cell, and well
developed systems of this type are even available commercially. This HeNe/I2
system was the one whose frequency was measured by the NBS efforts in the
early 1980’s, with an uncertainty of 70 kHz. (Being the first measurement of
such a visible system, it is perhaps understandable that several of the uncer-
tainties were far from fundamental in their origins). Other labs joined in and
over the next decade many labs gained experience and a few had frequency
measurements confirming the NBS result, so that it became attractive to
reconsider the definition of the International Unit of Length, the SI Metre.
   As may be seen, the world of spectroscopy offers us an unending garden
of fascinating details. Presumably Parity-Non-Conservation will lead to a
next generation of fine structures in chiral molecules, particularly with the
development of cold-molecule techniques. But enough about the “ticks”
of the clock: now we must return to the main story, the development of
frequency stabilization and cycle-counting measurement tools – The inside
Gear-Works of the Optical Clock!


MEASURING OPTICAL FREQUENCIES WITH OPTICAL COMBS
The Metre redefinition of 1983 was not really a kindness to metrologists
tasked with actually measuring some physical parts, because the practical
methods for application to measurements were not yet spelled out. But it was
a boon to the metrology researchers: it became their task to explore just which
good stabilized laser system would have the optimal properties for precision
interferometry, for outdoor surveying, for servo-loop guidance of milling




                                                   Frequency
                0     88     192.    266.2 281.   385. 456 473.    563 617
                              Rb/2        I2/2
                      CH4     C2H2    Hg+ C2HD     Rb    Ca HeN      I2   H



            λ         3390     1556 1126           778   657       532    486
                                       1064                 633

Figure 3. Stable Lasers based on NonLinear Doppler-free Resonances in Gases (1995). The
frequency axis (above) is in THz units, the wavelength scale (below) is in nm.


                                                                                  121


machines, for … ? So within a dozen years after the redefinition there were at
least 10 well-developed optical frequency standards, as illustrated in Figure 3.
   As may be seen in Figure 3, there are stable frequency sources available
from roughly 10 µm (30 THz) to ~280 nm (~1PHz), well beyond the visible
range. It was striking that the difference between lines were surprisingly simi-
lar frequency intervals, ~88 THz, approximately the frequency of the CH4
– stabilized laser. This led to schemes where doubled frequency of one laser
would be compared with the sum of the two straddling lasers. Some “pocket
change” of frequency, a few THz, could be synthesized as sidebands using
a Kourogi comb, based on a microwave modulator in a cavity whose length
provided resonance enhancement of all the generated sidebands [32]. In
such a way we measured the 532 nm Iodine standard in terms of the differ-
ence of frequency between twice the HeNe Iodine system at 633 nm, and the
Rb two photon line at 782 nm [33].
   This was our introduction to the elegance of having an optical comb – a
coherent ensemble of spectral lines whose frequencies are accurately repre-
sented by a simple formula. Our system covered just a few nm wavelength.
How sweet it would be to cover the entire visible band, giving several million
accurately known frequency reference lines all at once!
   One way to broaden this comb’s spectral width would be to provide intra-
cavity gain, to compensate the modulator’s optical losses, a scheme which
was demonstrated by Diddams using an OPO crystal also inside the resona-
tor. Oscillation and generation of hundreds of FM sidebands were easily
observed [34]. For some tuning conditions the phase of the several spectral
components led to pulse generation, rather than pure FM emission. In many
ways this was just the hard way to do what the Ultra-Fast Laser scientists ap-
preciated about the Ti:Sapphire self-mode-locked lasers: stable, self-orga-
nized, ultra-short high repetition rate pulse trains. Elsewhere our group’s
papers discuss the technical richness of these lasers and the comb business
[35]. This is just one further note about the mutual coupling between “in-
dependent” research streams: we switched to Ti:Sapphire fs lasers and never
looked back.
   Coincidentally, in these final days of the last Millennium, this laser com-
munity received a fundamentally-important gift from the laser industry.
There would probably be no widely-used frequency combs without it. This
“gift” was the introduction of high-power visible lasers, based on frequency-
doubling the output of a laser-diode-pumped Nd solid state laser. These were
immediately put to use replacing the fussy and quite noisy Argon Ion laser
in wide use for pumping the Solid State lasers. Competitive forces led these
new pump lasers to be well engineered, with intensity stabilization to yield
exceedingly low levels of residual amplitude noise. This property is crucial
because of the way a self-mode-locked laser operates – these Ti:Sapphire
lasers are self mode-locked by a self-induced optical lens which makes the
cavity less lossy when the laser modes are all synchronized to form an “opti-
cal bullet” in the laser medium [36]. This temporary lens is formed by the
radial index gradient, induced and present only if a light bullet is present.

122


So the laser cavity is originally set up to need this extra focusing to produce
low-loss cavity modes, and after the laser is started in the pulse regime, stable
self-mode-locking is maintained. Consider that the pulse lengths are only
~10 fs, while the repetition periods are ~10 ns. With ideal synchronization,
the peak power/average power ratio is ~106 . A typical laser will emit ~0.5
W through an output mirror of 5% transmission. So we have 10 W average
internal power, and 10 MW peak power, which is focused to a ~14 µm radius
spot in the Ti:Sapphire laser crystal. This active area is only 3 x10–6 cm2 , so
with 10 MW peak power we have 3 TW/cm2 ! The associated electric field is
~10% of the interatomic fields in the crystal, so it is not so surprising that a
significant optically-induced increase of the index of refraction occurs (opti-
cal Kerr effect). The low amplitude noise of the pump laser is now seen to be
critical: an intensity-dependent phase-shift though the laser crystal will pro-
duce amplitude → frequency conversion and thus unacceptable phase noise
if the pump is noisy. In a good case the linewidth of laser comb-lines without
frequency control is ~3 – 10 kHz due to this cause, before the servo is used.
Details of the process have been studied [37].
   So leaving the laser is a pulse train of ~500 kW peak power, much of which
we will focus into the special nonlinear fibers that brought in the age of
the Optical Comb. Because of the microstructure design of the fiber, full
light guiding is possible even with fiber core sizes of 1.5–2 µm diameter. So
now when we calculate the fiber’s active area, it is roughly 200-fold smaller
than the laser’s, while the power level is ~20-fold lower. The 10-fold higher
intensity produces a 3-fold higher electric field in the silica fiber, being
now essentially comparable with interatomic field and setting the stage for
SERIOUS NonLinear interactions. Forget Mr. Taylor’s expansion here: this
is strong signal NonLinear physics! All frequency components from the laser
are mixed with each other, resulting in a drastic spectral broadening. By the
fiber’s optical design, a broad range of optical frequencies can travel through
the fiber with little speed variation, which allows these frequency conversion
processes to remain phase-matched and accumulate power into the newly
created frequencies. Essentially, in a few cm of length, the input spectrum is
converted to white light and covers an octave or more of optical bandwidth.
Actually the light is not quite “white” since it still carries the basic heartbeat
of the original fs laser, for example 100 MHz. As explained previously, this in-
trinsically generates a comb spectrum with component widths just connected
to the spectral resolving power employed. Eventually, at the kHz level and
below, the broadly-active phase modulation processes that affect all lasers will
broaden these lines also (before the servo control is ON).



COMPLEMENTARITY, COOPERATION, AND COMPETITION
The Basics
The remarkable insights of Professor Hänsch’s Stanford work [38] were pub-
lished in ~1978, and already demonstrated using a repetitively-pulsing laser

                                                                              123


to generate an optical comb which could serve as a spectral ruler. However,
the bandwidth of the covered spectrum was too small for general frequency
measurements – only a GHz or two. Since these intervals could be spanned
in other ways, the methods were not widely adopted. Basically there was not a
technical growth path available at the time. Principle, yes; Tool, no.
   The hard work, straight-ahead “government” approach to frequency
measurement had been demonstrated at NBS in 1972 [39], following the
pioneering work of Ali Javan’s MIT frequency measurement group (See ref-
erences in [40]). But this was a heroic effort and mainly only national stan-
dards laboratories took much interest. Laser after different laser had to be
lined up and frequency-related to the doubled frequency of its predecessor,
to step-by-step build up the frequency measurement chain. This kind of work
required development of frequency- and phase-locking schemes now in wide
use. We also got a “one-of-a-kind” physical result: a single laser frequency was
measured by the cooperative and extended work of the NBS group [41]. But
it was enough to get the Metre redefinition process started.

The Divide and Conquer Scheme
In a notable paper (1990), Professor Hänsch and his colleagues suggested an
excellent way to simplify the frequency chains: one should use the difference
frequencies between lasers as the entities that were harmonically marching up
the spectrum [42]. In this way, the ensemble of lasers would all have nearly
the same wavelength, and could be built essentially by duplication of a basic
diode laser unit. Then with nonlinear crystals, fast photodetectors, and suit-
able phase-locking electronics one could progress from microwaves to optical
frequencies. This system also felt rather elaborate and specialized, but was
used with good results in Garching. A related strategy was developed at NRC
[43], based on difference frequencies, using CO2 lasers. Inspecting such a
system, one came to see that the first 9 or 10 of the 14 stages served only to
get the frequency up into the low THz range.
   Then in 1994 came Kourogi and Ohtsu’s multiply-resonant cavity ap-
proach, allowing one to reach a few THz in a single step [32]. Eventually the
buildup of phase noise – according to the high harmonic of the original micro-
wave source – would have been a problem in going into the visible range. But
the fs laser Comb arrived and offers an easier and better way. See below.


A Brief History of the Optical Miracle of 1999–2000
Fibers for Spectral Broadening
By now the JILA group had accepted the fs laser as a great source of pulsed
laser light. Ours had ~ 80 nm bandwidth at 800 nm. But the optical frequen-
cy standards we wanted to connect were at 1064 nm (fundamental of Iodine-
stabilized Nd laser) and 778 nm (Rb two-photon-stabilized diode laser). An
ordinary communication fiber was found to be just barely capable of spectral
broadening the necessary amount – 104 THz. This paper was submitted at
the end of September 1999 [44].

124


MicroStructure Fibers for Serious Nonlinearity
The Conference on Laser and Electro-Optics of June 1999 had a spectacular
postdeadline presentation by a Bell Labs team [45], wherein a normal fs
laser pulse evolved its color in a dramatic way in propagating through a few
meters of a special fiber. Such a fiber did make collimated white light, in the
form of stably-repeating pulses, just as Ted Hänsch had postulated for his
(unpublished) frequency measurement proposal. Using that previously-un-
known light source, most of the rest should be possible. (Seeing the repeti-
tively-pulsed laser-like white light the fiber generated instantly convinced me
that Ted’s Concept actually could be a real and physical possibility! Without
a repetitive white-light laser, there was no chance.) Lengthy appeals for scien-
tific collaboration with the fiber owners’ organization ultimately became ir-
relevant due to the miraculous appearance in JILA of a sample of this Magic
Fiber. The concept of “band-gap” or “Photonic-Crystal” fibers was introduced
in 1996 by Knight et al., pointing out the possibility of controlling the spatial
modes and effective group velocity dispersion by the mechanical design
of the air holes [46]. Our first JILA experiments were made using micro-
structured fiber drawn from a preform prepared on September 10, 1997 by
Robert S. Windeler of Bell Labs [47], using a construction technique of his
own devising. A broad range of fiber designs was investigated in Bath, UK, by
P. St. J. Russell and colleagues.



The Race is ON
Of course in JILA we didn’t know that the Garching team had already gone
from a plan to the first demonstration of a comb-based phase coherent link
from microwaves to the visible, and had submitted their Phys. Rev. Letter in
November 1999. Even before we got the Magic Fiber! They used a comb of
somewhat limited bandwidth, 44 THz, but their divider stages could con-
nect the optical frequency with the 28th harmonic of the difference between
the comb’s edges. It is a beautiful result, and appeared finally on 10 April
2000 [48]. In the meantime the JILA team was working hard with the Magic
Fiber’s white light output to implement and demonstrate our phase-coherent
locking of the carrier-envelope offset frequency in terms of the laser’s repeti-
tion rate. Our Disclosure of the scheme called this “Self-Referencing”. The
control electronics we built had a digital click switch so the phase could be
set on any integer multiple of 1/16 of a phase-slip cycle per pulse. The JILA
experimental demonstration was based on interferometrically determining
the carrier-envelope phase difference between two optical pulses, separated
by one intervening pulse. Finally the new electronics worked, the experimen-
tal data were clear and our report [49] appeared in Science on 28 April 2000.
A PRL joint article celebrating the success of the combined Garching, Bell
Labs, and JILA teams appeared on 29 May 2000 [50]. Within the next year
there was an avalanche of absolute optical frequency measurements from
labs all over the world. This was a glorious chapter in optical physics history,

                                                                             125


in no small part because of the high mutual respect of the two teams for each
other, aided by the complete openness fostered by the frequent exchange of
postdocs Scott Diddams and Thomas Udem between the two hotly-compe-
ting groups.

Some Frequency Measurement Results
Many laser frequency standards were being actively studied worldwide so
that, when the Comb breakthrough came, there were many things to be ac-
curately measured – many for the first time. A few of the world-wide results
include the work shown in the following Table.
   The comb technology spread explosively in 2000, bringing vast simplifica-
tion of optical frequency measurements, along with a steady improvement
in the accuracy. Very soon after the initial measurements, it has become the
case that the comb’s measurement precision can exceed that of the standards
being measured. Recent tests at NIST, BIPM, and ECNU [51] confirm the
earlier MPQ experiments [52] showing that the comb principle is strictly cor-
rect up to a measurement precision of more than 18 digits.




   Ca           657 nm    Schnatz         PTB        PRL                 1 Jan ‘96
   Rb           780 nm    Ye             JILA        Opt. Lett.          August ‘96
   C2H2         1500 nm   Nakagawa       NRLM        JOSA-B              Dec ‘96
   I2           532 nm    Hall           JILA        IEEE Instr,Meas     April ‘99
   Sr+          674 nm    Bernard        NRC         PRL                 19 Apr ‘99
        +
   In           236 nm    v. Zanthier    MPQ         Opt.Comm.           Aug’99
   H            243 nm    Reichert       MPQ         PRL                 10 Apr ’00
   Rb           778 nm    D. Jones       JILA        Science             28 Apr '00
   I2           532 nm    Diddams        JILA        PRL                  29 May ’00
   H            243 nm    Niering        MPQ         PRL                 12 June ‘00
        +
   Yb           467 nm    Roberts        NPL         PRA                 7 July ‘00
   In+          236 nm    v. Zanthier    MPQ         Opt. Lett.          1 Dec.‘00
   Ca           657 nm    Stenger        PTB         PRA                 17 Jan ‘01
            +
   Hg           282 nm    Udem           NIST        PRL                 28 May ‘01
   Ca           657 nm    Udem           NIST        PRL                 28 May ‘01
   Yb+          435 nm    Stenger        PTB         Opt. Lett.          5 Oct ‘01

Table I. Measured Optical Frequencies. The reference atom/molecule and its transition
wavelength are indicated, followed by lead author and institution, the journal name and
date. The first fs Comb measurement was Hydrogen, by Reichert et al. The first direct fs
optical measurements were by the JILA team (Jones). Note the brevity of time between
publications!


126


Figure 4. Long-term frequency stability of Iodine-based Optical Clock. This figure conveys
the refinement and small frequency offset of this stable optical clock’s frequency from
previous, much less accurate measurements. With improved technology in 2002 the uncer-
tainty was further reduced to ~6 x10–14 .



Molecular Iodine Optical Frequency Standard
The Iodine-stabilized Nd:YAG laser is a sweet spot in the stabilized laser
domain, counting on its excellent performance and relative simplicity. One
system was made in Japan that met airlines cabin baggage limitations and still
delivered excellent performance [53]. Because of the Iodine’s great atomic
mass, the second-order Doppler correction for this system is only ~5 x10–13
and it is likely that independent reproducibility perhaps 5-fold superior to
this can come with improved technical realizations. In particular, providing
an offset-free modulation strategy is still a challenge. The advantage of this
system is its compactness and potentially reasonable cost. Taken with an opti-
cal comb, one can have an attractive clock [54]. See Figure 4. The frequency
(in-)stability of all the 1 million optical comb lines is ~ 4 x10–14 /√τ .
   Recently stable Yb:YAG single frequency lasers became available, with
output tunable to 1029 nm. When frequency doubled, excellent stabilization
performance should be possible with the I2 transitions at 514.5 nm, consider-
ing that the linewidth is at least 5-fold smaller than for the 532 nm line [55].
Single frequency fiber systems can also offer this wavelength.


SO WHAT COMES NEXT ?
In addition to the simplification of optical frequency measurements, the
resulting new capabilities are unbelievably rich in terms of the tools and
capabilities that have been created, and these in turn are reinforcing pro-
gress in these contributing fields. This paper can’t even attempt to present a
myriad of delicious physical effects, which are normally understood as being
in different fields, but which in their now-unified relationships can be seen as
creating a truly remarkable and enabling advance of the research tools avail-
able in optical science. But let me still give a few examples.
   After the frenzy of Generation I frequency measurements of Table I, some

                                                                                     127


of the Generation II comb applications in Jun Ye’s group include: low-jitter
time synchronization (~fs) between ultrafast laser sources [56]; coherent
stitching-together the spectrum of separate fs laser sources so as to spectrally
broaden and temporally shorten the composite pulse [57]; precision meas-
urement of optical nonlinearities using the phase measurement sensitivity of
rf techniques [58] ; coherently storing a few hundred sequential pulses and
then extracting their combined energy to generate correspondingly more
intense pulses at a lower repetition rate [59]; and searching for a change in
the physical constants by the Garching team [60]. Exciting topics of research
for Generation III applications now include connecting optical frequency in-
terim standards at the sub-Hz level (in spite of their different locations spec-
trally and physically), allowing precise remote synchronization of accelerator
cavity fields, providing stable reference oscillators for Large Array Microwave
Telescopes, and potentially reducing the relative phase-noise of the oscillator
references used for deep space telescope arrays (NASA, VLBI …) That’s part
of the first five years.
   And the next projects? What about 14.4 keV comb-line harmonics to look
at Mössbauer 57Fe nuclear resonances? Another sharp line is in 181Ta at 6.2
keV. How about parallel processing to determine biological activity of a
candidate drug, by means of CARS using synchronized pulse lasers to excite
specific ligand Raman resonances of a single molecule that was attracted to
and stuck by a particular test protein patch on a surface?
   In a larger framework, we now find ourselves at an almost unique point in
the development of Science, where we the have remarkable ability to “under-
stand” practically all phenomena, to compute accurate predictions from our
equations, and to integrate a variety of details into our models. Consider for
example the GPS system, in which different kinds of physics such as gravity
and relativity are successfully merged with our sophisticated atomic clocks
– not to forget satellite dynamics and radio engineering and computer soft-
ware – so that in the total we have a coherent and highly useful practical tool.
Remarkably, the system is simple for the end user to apply. We must count
this GPS achievement as one of the all-time ultimate technical success levels
ever achieved.
   The work recognized by the 2005 Nobel Physics Prize represents entry of
another dramatic, major and enabling advance, and one which we can expect
to show some flavors of the same breadth and character just noted regarding
GPS. But in these first moments after its birth, our opto-electronic technol-
ogy is new and is barely illustrated, not much beyond the first cases of interest
to frequency-standards people and metrologists. We know that the accuracy of
optical frequency measurements is now limited to “just” 15 digits by the pres-
ent microwave standard of frequency, but the “Comb” technology actually
allows two optical frequencies to be compared with several orders of magni-
tude more precision. If the history of physics is any guide, we realistically can
expect to find some nice surprises ahead as these capabilities become even
more widespread, and are applied to ingenious fundamental measurements
by a growing and imaginative community of “fundamental physics” scientists.

128


After considering all the known progress in Science, would you bet that we
have already opened the Russian Matryoshka doll of Nature and already
found the ultimate inside limit?


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The joy of interacting with superb young scientists is clearly one of life’s trea-
sures. Among these many I must single out for special thanks Jim Bergquist,
Leo Hollberg, Miao Zhu, and Jun Ye for their enthusiasm and unique con-
tributions to the JILA program. The NIST management is enthusiastically
thanked for accepting and sponsoring over the years a series of risky pro-
posals in Laser Spectroscopy. Particularly Leo Hollberg, Steve Cundiff and I
were glad they accepted the fs comb frequency synthesizer proposal in Spring
1999. Scott Diddams and David Jones were the excellent colleagues addition-
ally involved in these experiments, and JILA’s research force was hugely ex-
panded when Jun Ye rejoined JILA in 1999 to start his own group. As always,
whenever Professor Long Sheng Ma was visiting us from Shanghai our pace
was strongly advanced. Visiting scientists such as Christian Bordé continue to
be collaborators even three decades after their JILA time. I am pleased and
grateful to acknowledge that the work has been supported in part by the NSF,
ONR, AFOSR, and NASA, and for over 4 decades by the NIST. I benefited
greatly from the knowledge and generous sharing of ideas and opportunities
by my NBS mentor, Peter L. Bender. Above all I am indebted to my patient
and insightful lifetime friend Lindy Hall for her understanding, her great
efforts and contributions to this scientific work and, more importantly, to
our joyous and fun life together. It has been wonderful in the course of these
45 years to see a progression of experiments and technical advances make
possible this ultimate payoff in the optical comb. Now we’re discussing if it’s
almost time to clean my office at JILA and pack up into a new camper unit to
go out and further explore another domain in the world.

Appendix: The Full Comb Story in an Undergraduate’s World
I’m glad you asked how to think about frequency combs. Suppose you have a
sinewave voltage or field. Then a plot in time shows a smooth oscillation and
a plot in frequency shows a single Fourier component, namely a sharp line.
Now add a few harmonics onto this wave. The spectrum now has a few more
lines at exact harmonic frequencies, while the time picture has a rather com-
plicated shape. By adjusting the phases of the harmonics, we can begin to
synthesize some disturbance in time that begins to remind one of a pulse, or
more exactly, a series of identical pulses. Carry this a step forward by having
a large number of harmonics. The more we add, the sharper is the pulse we
can synthesize, and of course the richer is the spectrum of this wave. Going
further in this direction of adding coherent harmonics, the spectrum now
has zillions of spectral lines, all at the harmonics of our original sinewave.
Carrying this concept to the visible will require a few million (106) harmon-
ics for a source with 100 MHz basic repetition rate. With the proper phase

                                                                              129


adjustments, the time domain pulse can be 106 times sharper in time than
the original sinewave. So we can expect really narrow temporal pulses, and
really wide spectral bandwidths.
   This situation fits well with what we would expect from Fourier analysis of
a single pulse: such an impulse will have Fourier components at all frequen-
cies, with their nearly-constant amplitudes gradually decreasing for frequen-
cies above the reciprocal temporal pulsewidth. If we have a repetitive pulse
train in time, but insist to ask about its spectrum, we will need an analyzer
with a narrower passband compared with the repetition frequency, otherwise
it couldn’t resolve the harmonic structure. But a narrow spectral passband
corresponds to a long temporal response time. So the output of the spec-
trometer at any particular wavelength or frequency setting will be the result
of coherent addition of the contributions of many pulses. While an individual
pulse has a broad and continuous spectrum, when we coherently add their
spectral amplitudes we can expect to have interferences that will modulate
the spectrum. Adding more pulses temporally (narrower spectral resolution)
will give deeper modulation. Eventually we arrive at very sharp spectral lines,
evenly arranged as Fourier harmonics. Until we encounter technical issues
such as phase-noise of the repetition rate, the sharper an analysis resolution
we apply to the waveform, the sharper will be the spectral lines we observe.
So the spectrum does indeed remind one of a “comb.” You can demonstrate
these ideas safely at home for yourself easily in the electronics domain, but of
course the optical and electronics worlds should work the same …
   In fact, with the fs lasers used to generate these pulses, there is one more
little item of interest. That is that the laser can oscillate in any one of its cav-
ity modes, defined by having a repeating phase after going one loop around
the cavity. All the many modes involved have their own longitudinal quantum
numbers, essentially how many full optical cycles are contained in the closed
loop. This calculation clearly involves the wavelength-dependent phase vel-
ocity, and some average of the propagation through the many optical compo-
nents. Another reality is that the laser operates in a self-organized repetitive
pulsing mode. Effectively the laser’s optical losses can be made large enough
to inhibit laser action, unless all the cavity modes can adjust their phases
to synthesize a delta-function spatially. The critical thing is to have a short
pulse when passing through the Ti:Sapphire crystal, since the short pulse
will correspond to very high peak power, and that will interact with the laser
rod’s material in a quadratic way (optical Kerr effect) to produce a positive
lens: a bigger index on the axis where the intensity is maximum. So the self-
organized pulse situation is stable in which the laser’s cavity has a high dif-
fraction-loss (doesn’t have quite enough positive lens power), but the losses
are periodically remedied by a bullet of light which uses its self-action on the
crystal to produce the needed extra refraction that makes the cavity losses be
suitably less.
   Now the pulse envelope that describes this light “bullet” results from
superposition of many cavity modes, and the shape will evolve if there are
temporal delay differences with wavelength. We are now just discussing the

130


group velocity concept, whereby the shape of a disturbance will evolve unless
all the frequencies have the same propagation speed. In the physical laser
we must include some optical elements specifically to deal with the fact that
blue light in the laser crystal will travel more slowly than red light. To get
the shortest pulses the time delays around the loop need to be essentially
the same, although you can see this becomes a little complicated in that the
laser pulses themselves act to influence the time delays. In any case, the light
which comes out of the laser’s coupling mirror will be a regular time series of
sharp pulses, and will display a comb-like structure under frequency analysis.
However the underlying fast optical oscillations will in general have a differ-
ent phase each time the pulse hits the mirror’s surface. The fast oscillation’s
phase will shift a bit forward or backward from one pulse to the next, and
so the optical frequency comb may be offset a bit from the strictly Fourier
harmonic case we first imagined. The usual case is a constant phase shift for
each pulse, and so a constant rate of accumulating a phase beyond the repeti-
tion-rate’s harmonic. We have developed an electro-optic scheme called “self-
referencing” in which this additional frequency, the Carrier-Envelope Offset
Frequency, is stably locked to the repetition frequency in a digital ratio. For
example one could choose zero for the setpoint ratio and thereby have a
strictly harmonic comb. With the offset = 1/2, one generates a comb offset by
1/2 the basic repetition rate, which itself is of course the frequency comb’s
tooth spacing. See Ref [48–52].


REFERENCES
[1]  BIPM, “http://www.bipm.org/en/si/si_constants.html.”
[2]  These are Mass, kg; Time, s; Length, m; Current, A; Temperature, K; Quantity of
     Matter, mol; Unity of Light Intensity (Candela), cd.
[3] NIST, “http://www.mel.nist.gov/div821/museum/timeline.htm.”
[4] J. L. Flowers and B. W. Petley, “Progress in our knowledge of the fundamental con-
     stants of physics,” Reports on Progress in Physics, vol. 64, pp. 1191–1246, 2001.
[5] R. Steiner, E. R. Williams, D. B. Newell, and R. Liu, “Towards an electronic kilogram:
     an improved measurement of the Planck constant and electron mass,” Metrologia,
     vol. 42, pp. 431–441, 2005.
[6] C. J. Bordé, “Base units of the SI, fundamental constants and modern quantum
     physics,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society a-Mathematical Physical and
     Engineering Sciences, vol. 363, pp. 2177–2201, 2005.
[7] D. Sobel, Longitude, the True Story of a Lone Genius Who Solved the Greatest Scientific
     Problem of His Time. New York: Penguin Books, 1995.
[8] M. A. Kasevich, E. Riis, S. Chu, and R. G. Devoe, “Rf Spectroscopy in an Atomic
     Fountain,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 63, pp. 612–616, 1989.
[9] A. Clairon, P. Laurent, G. Santarelli, S. Ghezali, S. N. Lea, and M. Bahoura, “A
     Cesium Fountain Frequency Standard – Preliminary-Results,” IEEE Transactions on
     Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 44, pp. 128–131, 1995.
[10] T. P. Heavner, S. R. Jefferts, E. A. Donley, J. H. Shirley, and T. E. Parker, “NIST-F1:
     recent improvements and accuracy evaluations,” Metrologia, vol. 42, pp. 411–422,
     2005.
[11] K. Gibble and S. Chu, “Laser-Cooled Cs Frequency Standard and a Measurement of
     the Frequency-Shift Due to Ultracold Collisions,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 70, pp.
     1771–1774, 1993.


                                                                                       131


[12] E. S. Polzik, J. Carri, and H. J. Kimble, “Atomic Spectroscopy With Squeezed Light
     For Sensitivity Beyond the Vacuum-State Limit,” Applied Physics B-Photophysics and
     Laser Chemistry, vol. 55, pp. 279–290, 1992.
[13] R. W. P. Drever, J. L. Hall, F. V. Kowalski, J. Hough, G. M. Ford, A. J. Munley, and
     H. Ward, “Laser Phase and Frequency Stabilization Using an Optical-Resonator,”
     Applied Physics B-Photophysics and Laser Chemistry, vol. 31, pp. 97–105, 1983.
[14] B. C. Young, F. C. Cruz, W. M. Itano, and J. C. Bergquist, “Visible lasers with subhertz
     linewidths,” Physical Review Lett., vol. 82, pp. 3799–3802, 1999.
[15] B. C. Young, R. J. Rafac, J. A. Beall, F. C. Cruz, W. M. Itano, D. J. Wineland, and J. C.
     Bergquist, “Hg+ OPTICAL FREQUENCY STANDARD: Recent Progress,” in ICOLS
     2005, vol. XVII, LASER SPECTROSCOPY. Cairngorm, Aviemore, Scotland: World
     Scientific, 2005, pp. 433.
[16] M. Notcutt, L. S. Ma, J. Ye, and J. L. Hall, “Simple and compact 1-Hz laser system via
     an improved mounting configuration of a reference cavity,” Optics Letters, vol. 30, pp.
     1815–1817, 2005.
[17] J. L. Hall, “The laser absolute wavelength standard problem,” IEEE Journal of
     Quantum Electronics, vol. QE-4, pp. 638–41, 1968.
[18] R. L. Barger and J. L. Hall, “Pressure shift and broadening of methane line at 3.39
     um studied by laser-saturated molecular absorption,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 22,
     pp. 4–8, 1969.
[19] J. L. Hall, “Optical frequency measurement: 40 years of technology revolutions,”
     IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 6, pp. 1136–44, 2000.
[20] V. S. Letokhov and V. P. Chebotayev, NonLinear Laser Spectroscopy. Berlin: Springer-
     Verlag, 1977.
[21] S. Stenholm, Foundations of Laser Spectroscopy. New York, Wiley, 1984.
[22] M. D. Levenson and S. S. Kano, Introduction to NonLinear Laser Spectroscopy. San
     Diego: Academic, 1988.
[23] S. N. Bagaev, L. S. Vasilenko, A. K. Dmitriev, M. N. Skvortsov, and V. P. Chebotaev,
     “Narrowing of Nonlinear Resonances in Low Pressure Gases,” JETP Letters, vol. 23,
     pp. 360–363, 1976.
[24] C. J. Bordé, J. L. Hall, C. V. Kunasz, and D. G. Hummer, “Saturated absorption line
     shape: Calculation of the transit-time broadening by a perturbation approach,”
     Physical Review A (General Physics), vol. 14, pp. 236–63, 1976.
[25] H. L. Bethlem, G. Berden, and G. Meijer, “Decelerating neutral dipolar molecules,”
     Physical Review Letters, vol. 83, pp. 1558–1561, 1999.
[26] E. R. Hudson, H. J. Lewandowski, B. C. Sawyer, and J. Ye, “Cold molecule spectro-
     scopy for constraining the evolution of the fine structure constant,” Physical Review
     Letters, vol. 96, 2006.
[27] L. S. Ma, J. Ye, P. Dubé, and J. L. Hall, “Ultrasensitive frequency-modulation spec-
     troscopy enhanced by a high-finesse optical cavity: theory and application to over-
     tone transitions of C2H2 and C2HD,” Journal of the Optical Society of America B-Optical
     Physics, vol. 16, pp. 2255–2268, 1999.
[28] M. Ziskind, C. Daussy, T. Marrel, and C. Chardonnet, “Improved sensitivity in the
     search for a parity-violating energy difference in the vibrational spectrum of the
     enantiomers of CHFCIBr,” European Physical Journal D, vol. 20, pp. 219–225, 2002.
[29] S. Svanberg, Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Berlin, Springer-Velag,
     1992..
[30] J. L. Hall, C. J. Bordé, and K. Uehara, “Direct Optical Resolution of Recoil Effect
     Using Saturated Absorption Spectroscopy,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 37, pp. 1339–
     1342, 1976.
[31] S. N. Bagayev, V. P. Chebotayev, A. K. Dmitriyev, A. E. Om, Y. V. Nekrasov, and B. N.
     Skvortsov, “2nd-Order Doppler-Free Spectroscopy,” Applied Physics B-Photophysics and
     Laser Chemistry, vol. 52, pp. 63–66, 1991.
[32] M. Kourogi, T. Enami, and M. Ohtsu, “A coupled-cavity monolithic optical frequency
     comb generator,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 8, pp. 1698–1700, 1996.

132


[33] J. L. Hall, L.-S. Ma, M. Taubman, B. Tiemann, F.-L. Hong, O. Pfister, and J. Ye,
     “Stabilization and frequency measurement of the I/sub 2/-stabilized Nd:YAG laser,”
     IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 48, pp. 583–6, 1999.
[34] S. A. Diddams, L.-S. Ma, J. Ye, and J. L. Hall, “Broadband optical frequency comb
     generation with a phase-modulated parametric oscillator,” Optics Letters, vol. 24, pp.
     1747–9, 1999.
[35] J. L. Hall, J. Ye, S. A. Diddams, L.-S. Ma, S. T. Cundiff, and D. J. Jones, “Ultrasensitive
     spectroscopy, the ultrastable lasers, the ultrafast lasers, and the seriously nonlinear
     fiber: a new alliance for physics and metrology,” IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics,
     vol. 37, pp. 1482–92, 2001.
[36] F. Salin, J. Squier, and M. Piche, “Mode locking of Ti:Sapphire lasers and self-focus-
     ing: a Gaussian approximation,” Opt. Lett., vol. 16, pp. 1674–1678, 1991.
[37] K. W. Holman, R. J. Jones, A. Marian, S. T. Cundiff, and J. Ye, “Detailed studies and
     control of intensity-related dynamics of femtosecond frequency combs from mode-
     locked Ti : Sapphire lasers,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol.
     9, pp. 1018–1024, 2003.
[38] J. N. Eckstein, A. I. Ferguson, and T. W. Hänsch, “ High-resolution 2-photon spec-
     troscopy with picosecond light-pulses,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 40, pp. 847–850,
     1978.
[39] K. M. Evenson, J. S. Wells, F. R. Petersen, B. L. Danielson, G. W. Day, R. L. Barger,
     and J. L. Hall, “Speed of light from direct frequency and wavelength measurements
     of the methane-stabilized laser,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 29, pp. 1346–9, 1972.
[40] A. Sanchez, C. F. Davis, K. C. Liu, and A. Javan, “Mom Tunneling Diode – Theoretical
     Estimate of Its Performance at Microwave and Infrared Frequencies,” Journal of
     Applied Physics, vol. 49, pp. 5270–5278, 1978.
[41] D. A. Jennings, C. R. Pollock, F. R. Petersen, R. E. Drullinger, K. M. Evenson, J. S.
     Wells, J. L. Hall, and H. P. Layer, “Direct Frequency-Measurement of the I/sub 2/-
     Stabilized He-Ne 473-THz (633-nm) Laser,” Optics Letters, vol. 8, pp. 136–138, 1983.
[42] H. R. Telle, D. Meschede, and T. W. Hänsch, “Realization of a New Concept for
     Visible Frequency-Division – Phase Locking of Harmonic and Sum Frequencies,”
     Optics Letters, vol. 15, pp. 532–534, 1990.
[43] B. G. Whitford, “Measurement of the Absolute Frequencies of CO2-Laser Transitions
     by Multiplication of CO2-Laser Difference Frequencies,” IEEE Transactions on
     Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 29, pp. 168–176, 1980.
[44] S. A. Diddams, D. J. Jones, L. S. Ma, S. T. Cundiff, and J. L. Hall, “Optical frequency
     measurement across a 104-THz gap with a femtosecond laser frequency comb,”
     Optics Letters, vol. 25, pp. 186–188, 2000.
[45] R. W. J. Ranka, and A. Stentz, “Visible continuum generation in air-silica microstructure
     optical fibers with anomalous dispersion at 800 nm,” Opt. Lett., vol. 25, p. 25, 2000.
[46] J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. S. Russell, and D. M. Atkin, “All-silica single-mode optical
     fiber with photonic crystal cladding,” Optics Letters, vol. 21, pp. 1547–1549, 1996.
[47] R. S. Windeler, private communication to J. L. Hall, May 2006.
[48] J. Reichert, M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, M. Weitz, T. Udem, and T. W. Hänsch, “Phase
     coherent vacuum-ultraviolet to radio frequency comparison with a mode-locked
     laser,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 84, pp. 3232–3235, 2000.
[49] D. J. Jones, S. A. Diddams, J. K. Ranka, A. Stentz, R. S. Windeler, J. L. Hall, and S. T.
     Cundiff, “Carrier-envelope phase control of femtosecond mode-locked lasers and
     direct optical frequency synthesis,” Science, vol. 288, pp. 635–639, 2000.
[50] S. A. Diddams, D. J. Jones, J. Ye, T. Cundiff, J. L. Hall, J. K. Ranka, R. S. Windeler, R.
     Holzwarth, T. Udem, and T. W. Hänsch, “Direct link between microwave and optical
     frequencies with a 300 THz femtosecond laser comb,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 84,
     pp. 5102–5, 2000.
[51] L. S. Ma, Z. Y. Bi, A. Bartels, L. Robertsson, M. Zucco, R. S. Windeler, G. Wilpers, C.
     Oates, L. Hollberg, and S. A. Diddams, “Optical frequency synthesis and compari-
     son with uncertainty at the 10(–19) level,” Science, vol. 303, pp. 1843–1845, 2004.

                                                                                           133


[52] T. Udem, R. Holzwarth, and T. W. Hänsch, “Optical frequency metrology,” Nature,
     vol. 416, pp. 233–237, 2002.
[53] F. L. Hong, J. Ishikawa, K. Sugiyama, A. Onae, H. Matsumoto, J. Ye, and J. L. Hall,
     “Comparison of independent optical frequency measurements using a portable iod-
     ine-stabilized Nd : YAG laser,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement,
     vol. 52, pp. 240–244, 2003.
[54] J. Ye, L. S. Ma, and J. L. Hall, “Molecular iodine clock,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 87,
     pp. 270801–4, 2001.
[55] W. Y. Cheng, L. S. Chen, T. H. Yoon, J. L. Hall, and J. Ye, “Sub-Doppler molecular-
     iodine transitions near the dissociation limit (523–498 nm),” Optics Letters, vol. 27,
     pp. 571–573, 2002.
[56] R. K. Shelton, S. M. Foreman, L. S. Ma, J. L. Hall, H. C. Kapteyn, M. M. Murnane, M.
     Notcutt, and J. Ye, “Subfemtosecond timing jitter between two independent, actively
     synchronized, mode-locked lasers,” Optics Letters, vol. 27, pp. 312–314, 2002.
[57] R. K. Shelton, L. S. Ma, H. C. Kapteyn, M. M. Murnane, J. L. Hall, and J. Ye, “Phase-
     coherent optical pulse synthesis from separate femtosecond lasers,” Science, vol. 293,
     pp. 1286–9, 2001.
[58] T. M. Fortier, D. J. Jones, J. Ye, and S. T. Cundiff, “Highly phase stable mode-locked
     laser’s,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 9, pp. 1002–1010,
     2003.
[59] R. J. Jones and J. Ye, “High-repetition-rate coherent femtosecond pulse amplifica-
     tion with an external passive optical cavity,” Optics Letters, vol. 29, pp. 2812–2814,
     2004.
[60] M. Fischer, N. Kolachevsky, M. Zimmermann, R. Holzwarth, T. Udem, T. W.
     Hänsch, M. Abgrall, J. Grunert, I. Maksimovic, S. Bize, H. Marion, F. P. Dos Santos,
     P. Lemonde, G. Santarelli, P. Laurent, A. Clairon, C. Salomon, M. Haas, U. D.
     Jentschura, and C. H. Keitel, “New limits on the drift of fundamental constants from
     laboratory measurements,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 92, 2004.

Portrait photo of John L. Hall by photographer Sears. P. Studio.




134
