                            JO H N BA R D E E N


      Semiconductor research leading to the point
                 contact transistor
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1956




In this lecture we shall attempt to describe the ideas and experiments which
led to the discovery of the transistor effect as embodied in the point-contact
transistor. Some of the important research done subsequent to the discovery
will be described in the following lectures by Shockley and Brattain. As we
shall see, the discovery was but a step along the road of semiconductor re-
search to which a great many people in different countries have contributed.
It was dependent both on the sound theoretical foundation largely built up
 during the thirties and on improvement and purification of materials, partic-
 ularly of germanium and silicon, in the forties. About half of the lecture will
 be devoted to an outline of concepts concerning electrical conduction in
semiconductors and rectification at metal-semiconductor contacts as they
were known at the start of our research program.
   The discovery of the transistor effect occurred in the course of a funda-
 mental research program on semiconductors initiated at the Bell Telephone
Laboratories in early 1946. Semiconductors was one of several areas selected
under a broad program of solid-state research, of which S. O. Morgan and
W. Shockley were co-heads. In the initial semiconductor group, under the
general direction of Shockley, were W. H. Brattain, concerned mainly with
 surface properties and rectification, G. L. Pearson, concerned with bulk
properties, and the writer, interested in theoretical aspects of both. Later a
physical chemist, R. B. Gibney, and a circuit expert, H. R. Moore, joined
 the group and made important contributions, particularly to chemical and
instrumentation problems, respectively.
   It is interesting to note that although Brattain and Pearson had had consid-
 erable experience in the field prior to the war, none of us had worked on
 semiconductors during the war years. We were able to take advantage of
 the important advances made in that period in connection with the devel-
 opment of silicon and germanium detectors and at the same time have a


                     SEMICONDUCTOR RESEARCH                                   319
fresh look at the problems. Considerable help was obtained from other
groups in the Laboratories which were concerned more directly with war-
time developments. Particular mention should be made of J. H. Scaff, H.
C. Theuerer and R. S. Ohl.
    The general aim of the program was to obtain as complete an under-
standing as possible of semiconductor phenomena, not in empirical terms,
but on the basis of atomic theory. A sound theoretical foundation was avail-
able from work done during the thirties:
                                             1
( I) Wilson’s quantum mechanical theory , based on the energy band
 1




model, and describing conduction in terms of excess electrons and holes. It
is fundamental to all subsequent developments. The theory shows how the
concentration of carriers depends on the temperature and on impurities.
                                                                   2
(2) Frenkel’s theories of certain photoconductive phenomena (change of
contact potential with illumination and the photomagneto electric effect)
in which general equations were introduced which describe current flow
when non-equilibrium concentrations of both holes and conduction elec-
trons are present. He recognized that flow may occur by diffusion in a con-
centration gradient as well as by an electric field.
       (3) Independent and parallel developments of theories of contact rectifica-
tion by Mott3, Schottky4 and Davydov 5 . The most complete mathematical
theories were worked out by Schottky and his co-worker, Spenke.
    Of great importance for our research program was the development dur-
ing and since the war of methods of purification and control of the electrical
properties of germanium and silicon. These materials were chosen for most
of our work because they are well-suited to fundamental investigations with
the desired close coordination of theory and experiment. Depending on the
nature of the chemical impurities present, they can be made to conduct by
either excess electrons or holes.
    Largely because of commercial importance in rectifiers, most experimental
work in the thirties was done on copper oxide (Cu2O) and selenium. Both
have complex structures and conductivities which are difficult to control.
 While the theories provided a good qualitative understanding of many semi-
conductor phenomena, they had not been subjected to really convincing
quantitative checks. In some cases, particularly in rectification, discrepancies
between experiment and theory were quite large. It was not certain whether
the difficulties were caused by something missing in the theories or by the
fact that the materials used to check the theories were far from ideal.
    In the U.S.A., research on germanium and silicon was carried out during


320                          1956 J. BARDEEN

the war by a number of university, government and industrial laboratories
in connection with the development of point-contact or « cat’s whisker » de-
tectors for radar. Particular mention should be made of the study of germa-
nium by a group at Purdue University working under the direction of K.
Lark-Horovitz and of silicon by a group at the Bell Telephone Laboratories.
The latter study was initiated by R. S. Ohl before the war and carried out
subsequently by him and by a group under J. H. Scaff. By 1946 it was
possible to produce relatively pure polycrystalline materials and to control
the electrical properties by introducing appropriate amounts of donor and
acceptor impurities. Some of the earliest work (1915) on the electrical prop-
erties of germanium and silicon was done in Sweden by Prof. C. Benedicks.
    Aside from intrinsic scientific interest, an important reason for choosing
semiconductors as a promising field in which to work, was the many and
increasing applications in electronic devices, which, in 1945, included diodes,
varistors and thermistors. There had long been the hope of making a triode,
 or an amplifying device with a semiconductor. Two possibilities had been
 suggested. One followed from the analogy between a metal semiconductor
 rectifying contact and a vacuum-tube diode. If one could somehow insert a
 grid in the space-charge layer at the contact, one should be able to control
 the flow of electrons across the contact. A major practical difficulty is that
 the width of the space-charge layer is typically only about 10 -4 cm. That
 the principle is a sound one was demonstrated by Hilsch and Pohl 6, who
 built a triode in an alkali-halide crystal in which the width of the space-
 charge layer was of the order of one centimeter. Because amplification was
 limited to frequencies of less than one cycle per second, it was not practical
 for electronic applications.
    The second suggestion was to control the conductance of a thin film or
 slab of semiconductor by application of a transverse electric field (called the
field effect). In a simple form, the slab forms one plate of a parallel plate
 condenser, the control electrode being the other plate. When a voltage is
 applied across the condenser, charges are induced in the slab. If the induced
 charges are mobile carriers, the conductance should change with changes of
 voltage on the control electrode. This form was suggested by Shockley; his
 calculations indicated that, with suitable geometry and materials, the effect
 should be large enough to produce amplification of an a.c. signal7.
    Point-contact and junction transistors operate on a different principle than
 either of these two suggestions, one not anticipated at the start of the pro-
 gram. The transistor principle, in which both electrons and holes play a role,


                      SEMICONDUCTOR RESEARCH                                    321

was discovered in the course of a basic research program on surface prop-
erties.
   Shockley’s field-effect proposal, although initially unsuccessful, had an
important bearing on directing the research program toward a study of sur-
face phenomena and surface states. Several tests which Shockley carried out
at various times with J. R. Haynes, H. J. McSkimin, W. A. Yager and R. S.
Ohl, using evaporated films of germanium and silicon, all gave negative
results. In analyzing the reasons for this failure, it was suggested8 that there
were states for electrons localized at the surface, and that a large fraction of
the induced charge was immobilized in these states. Surface states also ac-
counted for a number of hitherto puzzling features of germanium and silicon
point-contact diodes.
   In addition to the possibility of practical applications, research on surface
properties appeared quite promising from the viewpoint of fundamental sci-
ence. Although surface states had been predicted as a theoretical possibility,
little was known about them from experiment. The decision was made,
 therefore, to stress research in this area.. The study of surfaces initiated at that
 time (1946) has been continued at the Bell Laboratories and is now being
carried out by many other groups as well9.
   It is interesting to note that the field effect, originally suggested for pos-
sible value for a device, has been an extremely fruitful tool for the fun-
 damental investigation of surface states. Further, with improvements in
semiconductor technology, it is now possible to make electronic amplifiers
with high gain which operate on the field-effect principle.
    Before discussing the research program, we shall give first some general
 background material on conduction in semiconductors and metal-semicon-
 ductor rectifying contacts.



                     Nature of conduction in semiconductors

An electronic semiconductor is typically a valence crystal whose conduc-
tivity depends markedly on temperature and on the presence of minute
amounts of foreign impurities. The ideal crystal at the absolute zero is an
insulator. When the valence bonds are completely occupied and there are
no extra electrons in the crystal, there is no possibility for current to flow.
Charges can be transferred only when imperfections are present in the elec-
tronic structure, and these can be of two types: excess electrons which do not


322                                    1956 J . B A R D E E N
fit into the valence bonds and can move through the crystal, and holes, places
from which electrons are missing in the bonds, which also behave as mobile
carriers. While the excess electrons have the normal negative electronic
charge -e, holes have a positive charge, +e. It is a case of two negatives
 making a positive ; a missing negative charge is a positive defect in the elec-
tron structure.
    The bulk of a semiconductor is electrically neutral; there are as many pos-
 itive charges as negative. In an intrinsic semiconductor, in which current
 carriers are created by thermal excitation, there are approximately equal
 numbers of excess electrons and holes. Conductivity in an extrinsic semicon-
 ductor results from impurity ions in the lattice. In n-type material, the neg-
 ative charge of the excess electrons is balanced by a net positive space charge
 of impurity ions. In p-type, the positive charge of the holes is balanced by
 negatively charged impurities. Foreign atoms which can become positively
 charged on introduction to the lattice are called donors; atoms which become
 negatively ionized are called acceptors. Thus donors make a semiconductor
 n-type, acceptors p-type. When both donors and acceptors are present, the
 conductivity type depends on which is in excess. Mobile carriers then balance
 the net space charge of the impurity ions. Terminology used is listed in the
 table below:


                                        Table I.

                   Designation              Majority       Dominant
                of conductivity type         carrier      impurity ion

              n-type       excess      electron (n/cm3)    donor
             p-type       defect       hole (p/cm3)         acceptor



These ideas can be illustrated quite simply for silicon and germanium,
which, like carbon, have a valence of four and lie below carbon in the
Periodic Table. Both crystallize in the diamond structure in which each atom
is surrounded tetrahedrally by four others with which it forms bonds. Car-
bon in the form of a diamond is normally an insulator; the bond structure
is complete and there are no excess electrons. If ultraviolet light falls on di-
amond, electrons can be ejected from the bond positions by the photoelectric
effect. Excess electrons and holes so formed can conduct electricity; the crys-
tal becomes photoconductive.


                    SEMICONDUCTOR RESEARCH                                 323
   The energy required to free an electron from a bond position so that it
and the hole left behind can move the crystal, is much less in silicon and
germanium than for diamond. Appreciable numbers are released by thermal
excitations at high temperatures; this gives intrinsic conductivity.
   Impurity atoms in germanium and silicon with more than four valence
electrons are usually donors, those with less than four acceptors. For example,
Group V elements are donors, Group III elements acceptors. When an ar-
senic atom, a Group V element, substitutes for germanium in the crystal,
only four of its valence electrons are required to form the bonds. The fifth is
only weakly held by the forces of Coulomb attraction, greatly reduced by
the high dielectric constant of the crystal. The energy required to free the
extra electron is so small that the arsenic atoms are completely ionized at
room temperature. Gallium, a typical Group III acceptor, has only three va-
lence electrons. In order to fill the four bonds, Ga picks up another electron
and enters the crystal in the form of a negative ion, Ga -. The charge is
balanced by a free hole.
   While some of the general notions of excess and defect conductivity, do-
nors and acceptors, go back earlier, Wilson was the first to formalize an
                                                  1



adequate mathematical theory in terms of the band picture of solids. The
band picture itself, first applied to metals, is a consequence of an application
of quantum mechanics to the motion of electrons in the periodic potential
field of a crystal lattice. Energy levels of electrons in atoms are discrete.
When the atoms are combined to form a crystal, the allowed levels form
continuous bands. When a band is completely occupied, the net current
of all of the electrons in the band is zero. Metals have incompletely filled
bands. In insulators and semiconductors, there is an energy gap between the
highest filled band and the next higher allowed band of levels, normally un-
occupied.
   The relations are most simply illustrated in terms of an energy-level dia-
gram of the crystal. In Fig. 1 is shown a schematic energy-level diagram of
an intrinsic semiconductor. Electrons taking part in the chemical bonds form
a continuous band of levels called the valence band. Above these is an en-
ergy gap in which there are no allowed levels in the ideal crystal, and then
another continuous band of levels called the conduction band. The energy
gap, E G, is the energy required to free an electron from the valence bonds.
Excess, or conduction, electrons have energies in the lower part of the con-
duction band. The very lowest state in this band, EC, corresponds to an elec-
tron at rest, the higher states to electrons moving through the crystal with


324                                       1956 J . B A R D E E N



      Conduction band




      Forbidden band




Fig. 1 . Energy-level diagram of an intrinsic semiconductor. There is a random dis-
                   tribution of electrons and holes in equal numbers.



additional energy of motion. Holes correspond to states near the top of the
valence band, EV, from which electrons are missing. In an intrinsic semicon-
ductor, electrons and holes are created in equal numbers by thermal excita-
tion of electrons from the valence to the conduction band, and they are
distributed at random through the crystal.
   In an n-type semiconductor, as illustrated in Fig. 2a, there is a large num-
ber of electrons in the conduction band and very few holes in the valence
band. Energy levels corresponding to electrons localized around Group V
donor impurity atoms are typically in the forbidden gap and a little below
the conduction band. This means that only a small energy is required to
ionize the donor and place the electron removed in the conduction band.
The charge of the electrons in the conduction band is compensated by the
positive space charge of the donor ions. Levels of Group III acceptors (Fig.
2b) are a little above the valence band. When occupied by thermal excitation
of electrons from the valence band, they become negatively charged. The
space charge of the holes so created is compensated by that of the negative
acceptor ions.
    Occupancy of the levels is given by the position of the Fermi level, E F.
 The probability, ƒ, that a level of energy E is occupied by an electron is given
by the Fermi-Dirac function:



                                I   +   e x p


                      SEMICONDUCTOR RESEARCH                               325
The energy gap in a semiconductor is usually large compared with thermal
energy, kT (~ 0.025 eV at room temperature), so that for levels well above
EF one can use the approximation

                               exp [- (E

For levels below EF, it is often more convenient to give the probability




that the level is unoccupied, or « occupied by a hole ». Again, for levels well
below EF,
                               exp [- (EF

The expressions for the total electron and hole concentrations (number per
unit volume), designated by the symbols n and p respectively, are of the
form
                        n = N C exp [- ( EC - EF ) / k T ]
                        p = N V exp [- ( EF - EV ) / k T ]




        Conduction   band                             Conduction band


326                                  1956 J. BARDEEN
where Nc and Nv vary slowly with temperature compared with the expo-
nential factors. Note that the product np is independent of the position of
the Fermi level and depends only on the temperature:

      =     =      v e x p [- (E C            =        exp

Here n is the concentration in an intrinsic semiconductor for which n = p.
  In an n-type semiconductor, the Fermi level is above the middle of the
gap, so that        The value of n is fixed by the concentration of donor
ions,      so that there is electrical neutrality:


                     SEMICONDUCTOR RESEARCH                                 327
The minority carrier concentration, p, increases rapidly with temperature
and eventually a temperature will be reached above which n and p are both
large compared with Nd+ and the conduction is essentially intrinsic. Cor-
respondingly in a p-type semiconductor, in which there are acceptor ions,
      n, and the Fermi level is below the center of the gap.
    The Fermi level is equivalent to the chemical potential of the electrons. If
two conductors are electrically connected together so that electrons can be
transferred, the relative electrostatic potentials will be adjusted so that the
Fermi levels of the two are the same. If the n- and p-type materials of Fig.
2 are connected, a small number of electrons will be transferred from the
n-type to the p-type. This will charge the p-type negatively with respect
 to the n-type and raise the electrostatic potential energy of the electrons ac-
cordingly. Electron transfer will take place until the energy levels of the p-
 type material are raised relative to those of the n-type by the amount required
 to make the Fermi levels coincide.
    The amount of impurity required to make significant changes in the con-
ductivity of germanium or silicon is very small. There is given in Fig. 3
a plot, on a log scale, of the resistivity VS. 1/T for specimens of germanium
 with varying amounts of antimony, a donor impurity. This plot is based on
 some measurements made by Pearson several years ago11. The purest spec-
 imens available at that time had a room temperature resistivity of about 10-
 20 ohm cm, corresponding to about one donor atom in 10 germanium
                                                                   8



 atoms. This material (H.B.V.) is of the sort which was used to make germa-
 nium diodes which withstand a high voltage in the reverse direction (High
 Back Voltage) and also used in the first transistors. The purest material avail-
 able now corresponds to about one donor or acceptor in 1010. The resistivity
 drops, as illustrated, with increasing antimony concentration; as little as one
 part in 107 makes a big difference. All specimens approach the intrinsic line
 corresponding to pure germanium at high temperatures.
     Conduction electrons and holes are highly mobile, and may move through
  the crystal for distances of hundreds or thousands of the interatomic dis-
  tance, before being scattered by thermal motion or by impurities or other
 imperfections. This is to be understood in terms of the wave property of
  the electron; a wave can travel through a perfect periodic structure without
 attenuation. In treating acceleration in electric or magnetic fields, the wave
 aspect can often be disregarded, and electrons and holes thought of as clas-
  sical particles with an effective mass of the same order, but differing from
  the ordinary electron mass. The effective mass is often anisotropic, and dif-


328                            1956 J . B A R D E E N

ferent for different directions of motion in the crystal. This same effective
mass picture can be used to estimate the thermal motion of the gas of elec-
trons and holes. Average thermal velocities at room temperature are of the
order of 107 cm/sec.
   Scattering can be described in terms of a mean free path for the electrons
and holes. In relatively pure crystals at ordinary temperatures, scattering oc-
curs mainly by interaction with the thermal vibrations of the atoms of the
crystal. In less pure crystals, or in relatively pure crystals at low tempera-
tures, the mean free path may be determined by scattering by impurity
atoms. Because of the scattering, the carriers are not uniformly accelerated
by an electric field, but attain an average drift velocity proportional to the
field. Ordinarily the drift velocity is much smaller than the average thermal
velocity. Drift velocities may be expressed in terms of the mobilities,    and
    of the electrons and holes respectively*.
   In an electric field E,

                                            =
                                            =

Because of their negative charge, conduction electrons drift oppositely to
the field. Values for pure germanium at room temperature are             = 3,800
                   = 1,800              sec. This means that holes attain a drift
velocity of 1,800 cm/sec in a field of one volt/cm.
  Expressions for the conductivity are:

                              n-type :          =
                              p-type :          =
                              intrinsic :       =


It is not possible to determine n and    separately from measurements of the
conductivity alone. There are several methods to determine the mobility;
one which has been widely used is to measure the Hall coefficient in addition
to the conductivity. As part of the research program at the Bell Laboratories,
Pearson and Hall made resistivity measurements over a wide range of tem-
peratures of silicon containing varying amounts of boron (a Group III ac-


* A subscript n (referring to negative charge) is used for conduction electrons, p (pos-
itive) for holes.


                    SEMICONDUCTOR            RESEARCH                        329
ceptor) and of phosphorus (a Group V donor). Analysis of the data 10 gave
additional confirmation of the theory we have outlined. Similar meas-
urements on germanium were made about the same time by Lark-Horovitz
and co-workers, and more recently more complete measurements on both
materials have been made by other groups. The result of a large amount of
experimental and theoretic work has been to confirm the Wilson model in
quantitative detail.
  Carriers move not only under the influence of an electric field, but also
by diffusion; the diffusion current is proportional to the concentration gra-
dient. Expressions for the particle current densities of holes and electrons,
respectively, are


                             =
                             =               grad

Einstein has shown that mobilities and diffusion coefficients are related:




where k is Boltzmann’s constant. Diffusion and conduction currents both
play an important role in the transistor.
   The diffusion term was first considered by Wagner in his theory of oxida-
tion of metals. The equations were worked out more completely by Frenkel 2
in an analysis of the diffusive flow which occurs when light is absorbed near
one face of a slab, as shown schematically in Fig. 4. The light quanta raise


                                     Light


330                         1 9 5 6 J. BARDEEN

electrons from the valence to the conduction bands, creating conduction
electrons and holes in equal numbers. These diffuse toward the interior of
the slab. Because of recombination of conduction electron and hole pairs,
the concentration drops as the diffusion occurs. Frenkel gave the general
equations of flow when electrons and holes are present in attempting to ac-
count for the Dember effect (change in contact potential with light) and the
photomagnetoelectric (PME) effect. The latter is a voltage analogous to a
Hall voltage observed between the ends of a slab in a transverse magnetic
field (perpendicular to the paper in the diagram). The Dember voltage was
presumed to result from a difference of mobility, and thus of diffusion co-
efficient, between electrons and holes. Electrical neutrality requires that the
concentrations and thus the concentration gradients be the same. Further,
under steady-state conditions the flow of electrons to the interior must equal
the flow of holes, so that there is no net electrical current. However, if D n
is greater than Dp, the diffusive flow of electrons would be greater than that
of holes. What happens is that an electric field, E, is introduced which aids
holes and retards the electrons so as to equalize the flows. The integral of
E gives a voltage difference between the surface and the interior, and thus
a change in contact potential. As we will mention later, much larger changes
in contact potential with light may come from surface barrier effects.




In order to understand how a point-contact transistor operates, it is necessary
to know some of the features of a rectifying contact between a metal and
semiconductor. Common examples are copper-oxide and selenium rectifiers
and germanium and silicon point-contact diodes which pass current much
more readily for one direction of applied voltage than the opposite. We
shall follow Schottky’s picture4, and use as an illustration a contact to an n-
type semiconductor. Similar arguments apply to p-type rectifiers with ap-
propriate changes of sign of the potentials and charges. It is most convenient
to make use of an energy-level diagram in which the changes in energy
bands resulting from changes in electrostatic potential are plotted along a
line perpendicular to the contact, as in Fig. 5. Rectification results from the
potential energy barrier at the interface which impedes the flow of electrons
across the contact.
   The Fermi level of the metal is close to the highest of the normally oc-


                      SEMICONDUCTOR         RESEARCH                     331




              Metal                   Semiconductor




                conductance in the bulk to p-type at the surface.


cupied levels of the conduction band. Because of the nature of the metal-
semiconductor interface layers, a relatively large energy, χ, perhaps of the
order of 0.5 eV, is required to take an electron from the Fermi level of the
metal and place it in the conduction band in the semiconductor. In the inte-
rior of the semiconductor, which is electrically neutral, the position of the
Fermi level relative to the energy bands is determined by the concentration
of conduction electrons, and thus of donors. In equilibrium, with no voltage
applied, the Fermi levels of the metal and semiconductor must be the same.
This is accomplished by a region of space charge adjacent to the metal in
which there is a variation of electrostatic potential, and thus of potential
energy of the electron, as illustrated.
   In the bulk of the semiconductor there is a balance between conduction
electrons and positive donors. In the barrier region which is one of high po-
tential energy for electrons, there are few electrons in the conduction band.
The uncompensated space charge of the donors is balanced by a negative
charge at the immediate interface. It is these charges, in turn, which produce
the potential barrier. The width of the space-charge region is typically of
the order of 10-5 to 1 0 c m .
                         -4


332                           1956 J.BARDEEN
   When a voltage is applied, most of the drop occurs across the barrier
layer. The direction of easy flow is that in which the semiconductor is neg-
ative relative to the metal. The bands are raised, the barrier becomes nar-
rower, and electrons can flow more easily from the semiconductor to the
metal. In the high resistance direction, the semiconductor is positive, the
bands are lowered relative to the metal, and the barrier is broadened. The
current of electrons flowing from the metal is limited by the energy barrier,
χ, which must be surmounted by thermal excitation.
   If χ is sufficiently large, the Fermi level at the interface may be close
to the valence band, implying an inversion from n-type conductivity in
the bulk to p-type near the contact. The region of hole conduction is
called, following Schottky, an inversion layer. An appreciable part of the
current flow to the contact may then consist of minority carriers, in this
case holes. An important result of the research program at the Bell Labora-
tories after the war was to point out the significance of minority carrier
flow.




      Uncharged   condenser                    Charged   condenser


Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of a field-effect experiment for an n-type semiconductor
                                with no surface states.


                      SEMICONDUCTOR             RESEARCH                            333




Fig. 7. Formation of a space-charge barrier layer at the free surface of a semiconductor


                           Experiments on surface states

We have mentioned in the introduction that the negative result of the field-
effect experiment was an important factor in suggesting the existence of sur-
face states on germanium and silicon, and directing the research program
toward a study of surface properties. As is shown in Fig. 6, the experiment
consists of making a thin film or slab one plate of a parallel plate condenser
and then measuring the change in conductance of the slab with changes in
voltage applied across the condenser. The hypothetical case illustrated is an
n-type semiconductor with no surface states. When the field plate is positive,
the negative charge induced on the semiconductor consists of added elec-
trons in the conduction band. The amount of induced charge can be deter-
mined from the applied voltage and measured capacity of the system. If the
mobility is known, the expected change in conductance can be calculated
readily.
   When experiments were performed on evaporated films of germanium
and silicon, negative results were obtained; in some cases the predicted effect
was more than one thousand times the experimental limit of detection. An-
alysis indicated that a large part of the discrepancy, perhaps a factor of 50
to 100, came from the very low mobility of electrons in the films as com-
pared with bulk material. The remaining was attributed to shielding by
 surface states.


334                            1 9 5 6 J. B A R D E E N




Fig. 8. Types of barrier layers which may exist at the free surface of an n-type semi-
conductor: (a) excess conductance from an inversion layer of p-type conductivity; (b)
near the minimum surface conductance; (c) excess conductance from an accumulation
                                  layer of electrons.


   It was predicted that if surface states exist, a barrier layer of the type found
at a metal contact might be found at the free surface of a semiconductor.
The formation of such a layer is illustrated schematically in Fig. 7. Occu-
pancy of the surface levels is determined by the position of the Fermi level
at the surface. In the illustration, it is presumed that the distribution of sur-
face states is such that the states themselves would be electrically neutral if
the Fermi level crossed at the position FS relative to the bands. If there is no
surface barrier, so that the Fermi level crosses the surface above FS, there are
excess electrons and a net negative charge in the surface states. When the
surface as whole is neutral, a barrier layer is formed such that the positive
charge in the layer is compensated by the negative surface states charge. If
the density of surface states is reasonably high, sufficient negative charge is
obtained with the Fermi level crossing only slightly above FS.
   Types of barriers which may exist at the surface of an n-type semicon-
ductor are illustrated in Fig. 8. On the left (a) the energy bands are raised
at the surface so as to bring the valence band close to the Fermi level. An
inversion layer of opposite conductivity type is formed, and there is excess
conductance from mobile holes in the layer. Negative charge on the surface
proper is balanced by the charge of holes and of fixed donor ions in the
barrier region. In (b) the b ands are raised at the surface, but not enough to
form a barrier layer. The surface resistance is near a maximum. In (c), the
bands bend down so as to form an accumulation layer of excess electron con-
ductance near the surface. The charge on the surface proper is now positive,
and is balanced by the negative charge of the excess electrons in the layer.


                     SEMICONDUCTOR RESEARCH                                     335
   The postulated existence of surface states and surface barrier layers on the
free surface of germanium and silicon accounted for several properties of
germanium and silicon which had hitherto been puzzling8. These included
( 1) lack of dependence of rectifier characteristics on the work function of
the metal contact, (2) current voltage characteristics of a contact made with
two pieces of germanium, and (3) the fact that there was found little or no
contact potential difference between n- and p-type germanium and between
n- and p-type silicon.
   While available evidence for surface states was fairly convincing, it was
all of an indirect nature. Further, none of the effects gave any evidence about
the height of the surface barrier and of the distribution of surface states. A
number of further experiments which might yield more concrete evidence
about the surface barrier was suggested by Shockley, Brattain and myself.
 Shockley predicted that a difference in contact potential would be found
between n- and p-type specimens with large impurity concentration. A sys-
tematic study of Brattain and Shockley12 using silicon specimens with va-
rying amounts of donor and acceptor impurities showed that this was true,
 and an estimate was obtained for the density of surface states. Another exper-
iment which indicated the presence of a surface barrier was a measurement
 of the change in contact potential with illumination of the surface. This is
just the Dember effect, which Frenkel had attempted to account for by the
 difference in mobilities of the electrons and holes generated by the light and




Fig. 9. Schematic diagram of apparatus used by Brattain to measure contact potential
                     and change of contact potential with light.


336                                 1956 J. BARDEEN
diffusing to the interior. It was found13 that the change is usually much
larger and often of the opposite sign than predicted by Frenkel’s theory,
which did not take into account a surface barrier.
   Some rather difficult experiments which at the time gave negative results
have been carried out successfully much later by improved techniques, as
will be described by Dr. Brattain in his talk.
   Apparatus used by Brattain to measure contact potential and change in
contact potential with illumination is shown in Fig. 9. The reference elec-
trode, generally platinum, is in the form of a screen so that light can pass
through it. By vibrating the electrode, the contact potential itself can be
measured by the Kelvin method. If light chopped at an appropriate fre-
quency falls on the surface and the electrode is held fixed, the change with
illumination can be measured from the alternating voltage developed across
the condenser. In the course of the study, Brattain tried several ambient
atmospheres and different temperatures. He observed a large effect when a
liquid dielectric fille d th e space between the electrode and semiconductor
surface. He and Gibney then introduced electrolytes, and observed effects
attributed to large changes in the surface barrier with voltage applied across
the electrolyte. Evidently ions piling up at the surface created a very large
field which penetrated through the surface states.


              Control   electrode




Fig. 10. Diagram of experiment used to observe effect of the field produced by an
electrolyte on an inversion layer of n-type conductance at the surface of a p-type silicon
block. Negative potential applied to the probe in the electrolyte decreases the number
of electrons in the inversion layer and thus the current of electrons flowing to the point
contact biased in the reverse direction. Arrows indicate the conventional direction of
                 current flow; electrons move in the opposite direction.


                     SEMICONDUCTOR RESEARCH                                       337




Fig. 11. Diagram of experiment in which the transistor effect was first observed.
Positive voltage applied to the gold spot introduced holes into the n-type germanium
block which flowed to the point contact biased in the reverse direction. It was found
that an increase in positive voltage increased the reverse current. When connected
across a high impedance, the change in voltage of the point contact was larger than the
        change at the gold spot, both measured relative to the base electrode.



                        Experiments on inversion layers

Use of an electrolyte provided a method for changing the surface barrier,
so that it should be possible to observe a field effect in a suitable arrangement.
We did not want to use an evaporated film because of the poor structure
and low mobility. With the techniques available at the time, it would have
been difficult to prepare a slab from bulk material sufficiently thin to observe
a sizable effect. It was suggested that one could get the effect of a thin film
in bulk material by observing directly the flow in an inversion layer of op-
posite conductivity type near the surface. Earlier work of Ohl and Scaff
indicated that one could get an inversion layer of n-type conductivity on
p-type silicon by suitably oxidizing the surface. If a point contact is made
which rectifies to the p-type base, it would be expected to make low resist-
ance contact to the inversion layer.
   The arrangement which Brattain and I used in the initial tests is shown in
Fig. 10. The point contact was surrounded by, but insulated from, a drop
of electrolyte. An electrode in the electrolyte could be used to apply a strong
field at the semiconductor surface in the vicinity of the contact. The reverse,
 or high resistance direction is that in which point is positive relative to the
block. Part of the reverse current consists of electrons flowing through the
n-type inversion layer to the contact. It was found that the magnitude of


338                         1956 J. BARDEEN

this current could be changed by applying a voltage on the electrolyte probe,
and thus, by the field effect, changing the conductance of the inversion layer.
Since under static conditions only a very small current flowed through the
electrolyte, the set-up could be used as an amplifier. In the initial tests,
current and power amplification, but not voltage amplification, was ob-
served. As predicted from the expected decrease in number of electrons in
the inversion layer, a negative voltage applied to the probe was found to
decrease the current flowing in the reverse direction to the contact.
    It was next decided to try a similar arrangement with a block of n-type
germanium. Although we had no prior knowledge of a p-type inversion
layer on the surface, the experiments showed definitely that a large part of
 the reverse current consisted of holes flowing in an inversion layer near the
surface. A positive change in voltage on the probe decreased the reverse
 current. Considerable voltage as well as current and power amplification
was observed.
     Because of the long time constants of the electrolyte used, amplification
 was obtained only at very low frequencies. We next tried to replace the elec-
 trolyte by a metal control electrode insulated from the surface by either a
 thin oxide layer or by a rectifying contact. A surface was prepared by Gibney
 by anodizing the surface and then evaporating several gold spots on it. Al-
 though none made the desired high resistance contact to the block, we de-
 cided to see what effects would be obtained. A point contact was placed very
 close to one of the spots and biased in the reverse direction (see Fig. 11).
 A small effect on the reverse current was observed when the spot was biased
 positively, but of opposite direction to that observed with the electrolyte. An
 increase in positive bias increased rather than decreased the reverse current
 to the point contact. The effect was large enough to give some voltage, but
 no power amplification. This experiment suggested that holes were flowing
 into the germanium surface from the gold spot, and that the holes introduced
 in this way flowed into the point contact to enhance the reverse current.
  This was the first indication of the transistor effect.
     It was estimated that power amplification could be obtained if the metal
  contacts were spaced at distances of the order of 0.005 cm. In the first at-
  tempt, which was successful, contacts were made by evaporating gold on
  a wedge, and then separating the gold at the point of the wedge with a razor
  blade to make two closely spaced contacts. After further experimentation,
  it appeared that the easiest way to achieve the desired close separation was
  to use two appropriately shaped point contacts placed very close together.


                     SEMICONDUCTOR RESEARCH                                 339


                     Emitter




   Signal                                                                Load




              Fig. 12 . Schematic diagram of point-contact transistor.

Success was achieved in the first trials; the point-contact transistor was
born 14.
   It was evident from the experiments that a large part of both the forward
and reverse currents from a germanium point contact is carried by minority
carriers, in this case holes. If this fact had been recognized earlier, the tran-
sistor might have come sooner.
   Operation of a point-contact transistor is illustrated in Fig. 12. When
operated as an amplifier, one contact, the emitter, is biased with a d.c. volt-
age in the forward direction, the second, the collector, in the negative or
high resistance direction. A third contact, the base electrode, makes a low
resistance contact to the block. A large part of the forward current consists
of holes flowing into the block. Current from the collector consists in part
of electrons flowing from the contact and in part of holes flowing toward
the contact. The collector current produces an electric field in the block
which is in such a direction as to attract holes introduced at the emitter. A
large part of the emitter current, introduced at low impedance, flows in the
collector circuit. Biased in the reverse direction, the collector has high impe-
dance and can be matched to a high impedance load. There is thus a large
voltage amplification of an input signal. It is found 14 that there is some
current amplification as well, giving an overall power gain of 20 db. or more.
 An increase in hole current at the collector affects the barrier there in such a
way as to enhance the current of electrons flowing from the contact.


340                           1956 J . B A R D E E N

   The collector current must be sufficiently large to provide an electric field
to attract the holes from the emitter. The optimum impendance of the col-
lector is considerably less than that of a good germanium diode in the reverse
direction. In the first experiments, it was attempted to achieve this by treat-
ing the surface so as to produce a large inversion layer of p-type conductivity
on the surface. In this case, a large fraction of the hole current may flow in
the inversion layer. Later, it was found that better results could be obtained
by electrically forming the collector by passing large current pulses through
it. In this case the surface treatment is less critical, and most of the emitter
current flows through the bulk.
    Studies of the nature of the forward and reverse currents to a point con-
tact to germanium were made by making probe measurements of the varia-
tion of potential in the vicinity of the contact15. These measurements showed
a large increase in conductivity when the contact was biased in the forward
direction and in some cases evidence for a conducting inversion layer near
 the surface when biased in the reverse direction.
    Before it was established whether the useful emitter current was confined
to an inversion layer or could flow through the bulk, Shockley 16 proposed
 a radically different design for a transistor based on the latter possibility. This
 is the junction transistor design in which added minority carriers from the
 emitter diffuse through a thin base layer to the collector. Independently of
 this suggestion, Shive17 made a point-contact transistor in which the emitter
 and collector were on opposite faces of a thin slab of germanium. This
 showed definitely that injected minority carriers could flow for small dis-
 tances through bulk material. While transistors can be made to operate either
 way, designs which make use of flow through bulk material have been most
 successful. Junction transistors have superseded point-contact transistors for
 most applications.
    Following the discovery of the transistor effect, a large part of research at
 the Bell Laboratories was devoted to a study of flow on injected minority
 carriers in bulk material. Much of this research was instigated by Shockley,
 and will be described by him in the following talk.
    Research on surface properties of germanium and silicon, suspended for
 some time after 1948 because of the pressure of other work, was resumed
 later on by Brattain and others, and is now a flourishing field of activity with
 implications to a number of scientific fields other than semiconductors such
  as adsorption, catalysis, and photoconductivity. This research program will
  be described by Dr. Brattain in his talk.


                      SEMICONDUCTOR RESEARCH                                        341

   It is evident that many years of research by a great many people, both
before and after the discovery of the transistor effect, has been required to
bring our knowledge of semiconductors to its present development. We
were fortunate enough to be involved at a particularly opportune time and
 to add another small step in the control of Nature for the benefit ofmankind.
In addition to my colleagues and to others mentioned in the lecture, I would
like to express my deep gratitude to Drs. M. J. Kelly and Ralph Bown for
the inspired leadership of the Laboratories when this work was done.




 1. A. H. Wilson, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, A 133 (1931) 458; A 134 (1932) 277; A 136
     (1932) 487.
 2. J. Frenkel, Physik. Z. Sowjetunion, 8 (1935) 185.
 3. N. F. Mott, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, A 171 (1939) 27.
 4. W. Schottky, Z. Physik, 113 (1939) 367; 118 (1942) 539.
 5. B. Davydov, J. Tech. Phys. U.S.S.R., 5 (1938) 87.
 6. R. Hilsch and R. W. Pohl, Z. Physik, III (1938) 399.
 7. Amplifiers based on the field-effect principle had been suggested earlier in the
     patent literature (R. Lillienfeld and others), but apparently were not successful.
     Shockley’s contribution was to show that it should be possible according to existing
     semiconductor theory to make such a device. An early successful experiment is
     that of W. Shockley and G. L. Pearson, Phys. Rev., 74 (1948) 232.
 8. J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev., 71 (1947) 717.
 9. A review is given in the lecture of Dr. Brattain, this volume, p. 337.
10. G. L. Pearson and J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev., 75 (1949) 865.
11. See K. Lark-Horovitz, Elec. Eng., 68 (1949) 1047.
12. W. H. Brattain and W. Shockley, Phys. Rev., 72 (1947) 345.
13. W. H. Brattain, Phys. Rev., 71 (1947) 345.
14. J. Bardeen and W. H. Brattain, Phys. Rev., 74 (1948) 230; 75 (1949) 1208.
15. W. H. Brattain and J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev., 74 (1948) 231.
16. W. Shockley, Electrons and Holes in Semiconductors, D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc.,
     New York, 1950, p. 86.
17. J. N. Shive, Phys. Rev., 75 (1949) 689.
