                         J OHN D . C OCKCROFT


      Experiments on the interaction of high-speed
              nucleons with atomic nuclei
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1951


The experimental researches in nuclear physics with which I have been
associated have been concerned with the transmutation of atomic nuclei, the
study of their level structure and of the forces which hold nuclei together.
I began this work in the Cavendish Laboratory under the direction of Lord
Rutherford in 1928. At this time experimental work on the energies of α−
 particles ejected from the radioactive elements had shown that these par-
ticles could have a substantially lower energy than the calculated height of
 the potential barrier around the nucleus. For a time this was somewhat of a
 puzzle, but in 1928 Gamow, who was then working in Copenhagen, and
 also Gurney and Condon, showed that this could be readily explained by
 attributing wave properties to the escaping α-particle so that the particle
 could escape from the nucleus without having a high enough energy to sur-
mount the potential barrier. Gamow visited the Cavendish Laboratory in
 1928 and I discussed with him the converse problem - the energy which
 would be required for a proton accelerated by high voltages to penetrate
 the nuclei of the light elements. As a result of these talks I prepared a mem-
 orandum which I sent to Rutherford showing that there was a quite high
 probability for the boron nucleus to be penetrated by a proton of only 300
 kilovolts energy whilst conditions for lithium were even more favourable.
 Rutherford then agreed to my beginning work on this problem and I was
 soon joined by Dr. Walton who had previously been working on the de-
 velopment of an early linear accelerator and also on an equally early be-
 tatron.
    Dr. Walton will describe the work on the development of our equip-
 ment. With our first apparatus we produced beams of protons from a canal
 ray tube and accelerated them by voltages of up to 280 kilovolts, and in 1930
  bombarded a lithium target and other targets and looked for γ -rays with
  a gold-leaf electroscope. We found then only soft continuous radiation; we
  did not find gamma rays - as we now know, our proton energy was too far
  below the first resonance which gives rise to gamma ray emission. We were


168                       1951 J.D.COCKCROFT




                                 Fig. 1a.

then interrupted by the necessity to move our laboratory and in doing so we
decided to increase the energy of our protons.
  Fig. 1 a and 1 b show the new apparatus which was completed in early
1932. We were soon able to bring a narrow beam of 500 kilovolts protons


           EXPERIMENTS WITH HIGH-SPEED NUCLEONS                          169




                                  Fig. 1 b.

out through a thin mica window in the base of the experimental tube, and to
measure their range as a function of energy.
   Soon after this, we resumed our experiments on lithium, but this time,
instead of looking for gamma rays, we set out to look for α-particles from
the disintegration of lithium. A mica window was provided to allow the α−
particles to escape, and opposite the mica window we placed the well-tried
tool of Rutherford - the zinc sulphide screen (Fig. 2). Almost at once, at an
energy of 125 kilovolts, Dr. Walton saw the bright scintillations characteris-
tic of α-particles, and a first primitive absorption experiment showed that
they had a range of about 8.4 cm. We then confirmed by a primitive coin-
cidence experiment, carried out with two zinc sulphide screens and two ob-
servers tapping keys (Fig. 3), that the α-particles were emitted in pairs. Our
resolving time was a second or so - somewhat longer than the resolving time
of modern coincidence circuits which operate in units of millimicroseconds.
More refined experiments showed that the energy of the α-particles was 8.6
million volts (Fig. 4). It was obvious then that lithium was being disinte-
grated into two α-particles with a total energy release of 17.2 million volts.


170                         1951         J.D.COCKCROFT
                                                 Stream of fast protons

                                                          I




                                Fig. 2.

                                        Stream of
                                        fast protons

                                             I




                                                    Thin lithium
                                                    target

                                Fig. 3.


  This energy could be provided by a diminution of mass of 0.0184 mass
units.
  The mass balance of the reaction at that time was

                                    7
                                        Li        7.0104 (Costa)
                                    1
                                        H          1.0072
                                                   8.0176
                             2 He
                                4
                                     8.0022
                       Mass decrease 0.0154


          EXPERIMENTS        WITH     HIGH-SPEED       NUCLEONS           171




                                    Fig. 4.

 A little later Bainbridge redetermined the mass of 7Li to be 7.0130. This
changed the mass decrease to 0.0180 mass units, in very good agreement
 with the observed figure.
    We also studied the variation of the number of disintegrations with en-
 ergy and obtained the results shown in Fig. 5. The increase in disintegration
 with higher proton energy results from the increasing probability of penetra-
 tion of the nuclei potential barriers predicted by the Gamow, Gurney and
Condon theory.
    We studied also the disintegration of boron and found a different type
 of absorption curve (Fig. 6) for the α-particles which were emitted with a
continuous distribution in energy with a maximum range of 4.4 cm. The
continuous distribution in energy was explained by boron breaking up into
 α-particles. We found also that α-particles were emitted from most elements
but we found later that these were due largely to boron impurities in our
 targets, boron having a very high probability of disintegration.
    These experiments were powerfully supported by Dee who was diverted
 by Rutherford from his cloud chamber work carried out with C. T. R.
 Wilson to join in this promising new field. Dee, with Walton, built himself
another accelerating tube and arranged for protons to pass down a tube into
a Wilson chamber. Thin mica windows were arranged for the α-particles
to enter the cloud chamber. Figs. 7 and 8 show the transmutation of lithium
into two α-particles and of boron into three α-particles.
    Our next group of experiments were carried out with ions of heavy
hydrogen which became available to the laboratory in 1933 through the
 kindness of Professor G. N. Lewis who sent a few cubic millimetres of heavy


172      1951    J.D.COCKCROFT




                     Fig. 5.




                Thickness Of absorbing layer in cm Of air


      Fig. 6. Absorption curve of boron.


             EXPERIMENTS WITH HIGH-SPEED NUCLEONS                         173




                                    Fig. 7.

water over to Rutherford. Lawrence, Livingston, and Lewis, had carried out
some pioneer experiments on disintegration produced by deuterons and had
found that a group of protons of 18 cm range was emitted from most targets.
By this time Oliphant had built a low-voltage accelerator to enable him to work
with Rutherford in this exciting new field. Together they discovered the
disintegration of deuterium by deuterons - or diplons as Rutherford wanted
to call them. Figure 9 is a beautiful photograph by Dee showing the
disintegration into a triton and a proton. The protons explained the observa-
tions of Lawrence, Livingston, and Lewis. In September, 1933, I brought back
two cans of dilute heavy water from Berkeley and after this was concentrated
by Harteck we obtained a little for our own use. We then studied the (d, p)
type of reaction - the transmutation of 6Li into 7Li with the emission of a
proton; the transmutation of 10 B into 11 B, 12 C into 13 C, again with the
emission of one or more proton groups. The multiple proton groups showed
the existence of excited levels of the residual nucleus.
   During the course of these experiments we had looked for the emission
of delayed α-particles from nuclei but had never found them. In early 1934
we heard of the production of artificial radioactivity by Curie and Joliot
who observed a delayed emission of positrons from targets of boron, magne-
sium, and aluminium bombarded by α-particles. Walton and I were able to
borrow a Geiger-counter equipment from Dr. Bainbridge - there was only
one portable equipment in the Cavendish Laboratory at that time - and at


I74                        1951 J.D.COCKCROFT




                                   Fig. 8.


once found that when graphite was bombarded by a beam of 400-500 kilo-
volt protons, delayed positrons were emitted, and that the activity had a
half-life of about 11 minutes. We found also that similar effects were pro-
duced by the deuteron bombardment of carbon, an effect which had also
been found by Lauritsen and Crane. These two reactions were seen to be
due to the formation of nitrogen 13, the first by proton capture and the sec-
ond by a (d,p) reaction.


            EXPERIMENTS WITH HIGH-SPEED NUCLEONS                        175




                                   Fig. 9.

  The next group of experiments were carried out in association with
Dr. W. B. Lewis. Our apparatus was greatly improved in accuracy and we
were able to study the disintegration of boron, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen
by deuterons with some precision.


  176                    1951   J.D.COCKCROFT




                                                               MeV
                                 Fig.   II .




   We studied for example the interesting            reactions in carbon and ni-
trogen


                     +             +

                                  +            [or     4


         EXPERIMENTS          WITH     HIGH-SPEED         NUCLEONS        I77
These new reactions enabled a close check to be made on the new scale of
nuclear masses which had recently been proposed by Bethe and Oliphant.
   For some time after this I was diverted by Rutherford from nuclear
physics to take charge of the Royal Society Mond Laboratory when Kapitza
was retained in Russia. I was interested however to some extent in the build-
ing of the Cavendish Laboratory cyclotron, which I was at last able to per-
suade Rutherford to build, on my return from Berkeley in 1937; and in the
High Voltage Laboratory, with its voltage multiplier accelerator for 1 million
volts. Dee was however the effective leader of this laboratory.
   After the War in the autumn of 1946 with many colleagues I started to
transform the Royal Air Force Station at Harwell into a Research Establish-
ment. Since then we have built a synchrocyclotron for producing 180 MeV
protons, a Van de Graaff generator for experiments with 3 MeV protons




                                                   Neutron energy (MeV)


               Fig. 12 . Neutron energy distribution for beryllium.


178                         1951   J.D.COCKCROFT




                                              Neutron energy (MeV)


      Fig. 13. Energy distribution of neutrons from carbon target bombarded by
                                   100-MeV protons.


and deuterons, and a linear accelerator for electrons as our principle tools of
nuclear physics. I will now describe some of the experiments which have
been carried out by the cyclotron group working under the leadership of
Dr. Pickavance.
   Experiments on nuclear forces have been carried out with beams of neu-
trons and protons. High-energy neutrons are produced by allowing the pro-
ton beam to strike a target inside the vacuum tank. Neutrons which are
projected forward pass through a thin window in the wall of the vacuum
tank and then through collimating tubes in blocks of concrete having a total
thickness of 4½ metres. (Fig. 10). The energy of the neutrons can be deter-
mined by allowing them to project protons from a polythene disc. The
projected protons then pass through a coincidence « telescope »of two pro-
portional counters and one gridded ionization chamber which records slow
protons. Fig. 11 shows the energy spectrum of the neutrons from beryllium.
A fairly high proportion of the neutrons are projected forward with almost
the full energy of the protons. The tail of neutrons is due to multiple scat-
tering inside the nucleus. I will also show the results of a similar experiment
(Fig. 12 ) carried out by the Harvard workers using 110 MeV protons. You
will see that the peak is more pronounced. It seems that nuclear matter is
particularly transparent to neutrons of about 110 MeV energy, due to a
peculiar interference effect. You will perhaps think that the Harvard peak


         EXPERIMENTS        WITH      HIGH-SPEED      NUCLEONS           179
is more clearly defined because of better geometry. So I will show you their
results for carbon (Fig. 13 ). The peak has now almost vanished. This must
be connected with the fact that about 20 MeV of energy are required to
extract a neutron from carbon so that the neutrons will be of a lower energy
for which the nuclear matter is not so transparent. Fig. 14 shows the Harwell
results for aluminium. You will see that there is now a very pronounced
tail. This must be due again to the neutrons losing energy making multiple
small-angle collisions in the nuclear matter before emerging.
   Experiments have also been carried out by Mrs. Skyrme to investigate the
spectrum of lower energy neutrons. Fig. 15 shows that there is a strong
group of «evaporation neutrons» which have a peak energy of about 1 MeV.
It appears that about four neutrons are evaporated from a Tungsten target
for each inelastic collision of a high-energy neutron with a target. Smaller
numbers of neutrons are evaporated from light nuclei.
   Experiments have also been carried out on neutron-proton scattering. The
beam of neutrons was used to project protons, and the number projected
at different angles was measured. The effective neutron energy could be
defined by two limits - the first set by only recording protons through a
given thickness of graphite - the second from the maximum energy of the
internal proton beam in the cyclotron.




                                                                  MeV

                                   Fig. 14.


      1951 J.D. COCKCROFT




                                          MeV

                  Fig. I 5.




Fig. 16. Abscissa: Neutron scattering angle.


           EXPERIMENTS WITH HIGH-SPEED NUCLEONS                             181




                 Fig. 17. Abscissa: Centre of mass scattering angle.


    The results of the (n,p) scattering experiment, plotted in centre of gravity
 co-ordinates are shown in Fig. 16. You will see that there is a pronounced
minimum and that the general character of the scattering is far removed
 from elastic sphere scattering.
    Experiments were then carried out on (p,p) scattering. The protons are
 scattered out of their final orbit by a uranium foil and then enter a magnet-
 ically screened channel so that they can escape from the cyclotron into a
 long pipe. We obtain about 1015 protons /cm2 per second at a distance of 40
 feet. The protons, which have an energy of about 145 MeV are then scat-
 tered by polythene and the projected protons are received by a telescope
 of counters. Background effects can also be reduced by recording the scat-
 tered proton at 90°. The results are shown in Fig. 17. You will see that the
 (p,p) cross section is almost independent of angle in centre of gravity co-
 ordinates down to 30°. The characteristics of (p,p) scattering are therefore
 quite different from (p,n) scattering. Some differences would be expected
 owing to the effect of the Pauli exclusion principle on (p,p) scattering. It
 is therefore not certain that the (p,p) and (p,n) forces are basically different.
    The results for the (p,p) differential scattering cross section at 90º can be
 compared with the values obtained at other energies of other cyclotron
 groups. The cross section tends to become constant at energies above about
 200 M e V .


182                      1951 J.D.COCKCROFT




                    Fig. 18. Abscissa : Centre of mass angle.


    A further experiment was carried out on the inelastic scattering of pro-
 tons by deuterons. To achieve this, the protons were scattered from heavy
 water. The results of this experiment are shown in Fig. 18. It is hoped next
to carry out a similar experiment on the scattering of neutrons by deuterons.




                                                                Energy

                      Fig. 20. Total cross section of silver.


                                               Steel load



                                                            RF
                                                            output


                                                                       pump




                                                              Air    coils




Fig. 19. Schematic diagram of 4.0 MeV linear accelerator.


 184                      1951 J.D.COCKCROFT

    The linear accelerator. During the post-war years another group at Har-
 well has developed the electron travelling wave linear accelerator. Fig. 19
 shows a diagram of the 3.5 MeV accelerator. This accelerator has been used
 at Harwell to produce an intense pulsed source of neutrons. The electrons
 are produced in pulses having a duration of about two microseconds and
 produce high energy X-rays in a heavy target which in turn splits up heavy
water and produces neutrons. About 2.10 neutrons/second are produced
                                            12




 in the pulse when the beam current in the accelerator is 120 milliamperes,
 when the electron energy is 3.2 MeV. The neutrons are partially slowed
 down in the heavy water. We then use the time of flight method to carry
 out experiments on neutrons of a given energy. Fig. 20 shows results for
 the total cross section of silver.
    The energy of this linear accelerator is now being extended to 13 MeV
 and perhaps to 15 MeV. We then hope to increase the neutron intensity by
 a factor of 100. We may also reduce the pulse width to a fraction of a micro-
 second. After this we hope to have good resolution up to 10,000 volts.
    Work is also proceeding on linear accelerators to produce much higher
 energy particles.
