From the Big Bang to the Nobel Prize and
Beyond
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2006
by
John C. Mather
NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA.




ABSTRACT
NASA’s COsmic Background Explorer satellite mission, the COBE, laid the
foundations for modern cosmology by measuring the spectrum and aniso­
tropy of the cosmic microwave background radiation, and discovering the
cosmic infrared background radiation. I describe the history of the COBE
project, its scientific context, the people who built it, and the scientific re­
sults. The COBE observed the universe on the largest scales possible, by map­
ping the cosmic microwave and infrared background radiation fields and
determining their spectra. It produced conclusive evidence that the hot Big
Bang theory of the early universe is correct, showed that the early universe
was very uniform but not perfectly so, and that the total luminosity of post-Big
Bang objects is twice as great as previously believed. The COBE concept was
developed by a Mission Definition Study Team appointed by NASA in 1976,
based on three competing proposals submitted in 1974. The COBE was built
in-house by Goddard Space Flight Center, with a helium cryostat provided
by Ball Aerospace, and was launched on a Delta rocket built by McDonnell
Douglas. It is in a circular orbit 900 km above the Earth, in a plane inclined
99 degrees to the equator and roughly perpendicular to the line to the Sun.
It carried three instruments, a Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer
(FIRAS), a Differential Microwave Radiometer with three channels (DMR),
and a Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment (DIRBE). The helium
cryostat cooled the FIRAS and DIRBE for 10 months until the helium was
exhausted, but operations continued for a total of four years. Subsequent
observations have confirmed the COBE results and led to measurements of
the main cosmological parameters with a precision of a few percent.




64


I. SCIENTIFIC INTRODUCTION


A. CMBR Spectrum and the Big Bang
In the beginning was the Big Bang, so we now say with great certainty. The
COsmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite, proposed to NASA in 1974
and launched in 1989, provided very strong evidence for it: the spectrum of
the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMBR) has the spectrum of
an almost-perfect blackbody emitter at 2.725 ± 0.001 K, and the radiation is
isotropic (the same in all directions) within 10 parts per million (rms) on
angular scales of 7o and larger. This radiation is interpreted as the relic of
an incredibly hot and dense early phase of the universe. In such a hot and
dense phase, the creation, destruction, and energy equilibration of photons
with one another and with all other forms of matter and energy would occur
very rapidly compared with the expansion time scale of the universe. Such a
state would immediately produce a blackbody radiation field. The expanding
universe should preserve this blackbody spectrum, so measurement of any
significant deviation from a perfect blackbody spectrum would either invali­
date the whole idea of the Big Bang, or show that energy (e.g. from decay of
primordial particles) was added to the CMBR after the rapid equilibration
ended.

B. Isotropy
The fact that the radiation is isotropic to such a high degree is key evidence
for its origin in the Big Bang. All the local systems that we know, from our
Solar System to our Galaxy and the local cluster and supercluster of galaxies,
are recognized because they are not uniform. Indeed, the isotropy itself was
hard to explain, because it demands uniformity in the initial conditions of
the great explosion of the entire observable universe. This was one of the
great mysteries facing science in 1974.

C. Anisotropy
Moreover, according to the COBE, this radiation shows the imprint of the pri­
mordial density variations. On large angular scales the primordial radiation
suffers a small gravitational redshift on exiting from denser regions (Sachs
and Wolfe, 1967). These measured fluctuations have a nearly scale-invari­
ant noise spectrum, in which the mean square variations are plotted against
spatial (angular) frequency. The scale-invariant form of this spectrum was
expected on the basis of general arguments (Peebles and Yu, 1970; Harrison,
1970; Zeldovich, 1972). When the theory of cosmic inflation was developed
(Guth, 1981), it neatly explained the general isotropy of the radiation, since
the currently observable piece of presumably infinite universe was at one
time contained in a small region that existed for long enough to establish a
uniform temperature.




                                                                           65


D. Small angular scale anisotropy and primordial sound waves
On smaller angular scales, the measured fluctuation spectrum is dramati­
cally modified, with a major peak at a typical angular size of a few degrees.
According to the Big Bang theory, the universe became transparent when the
temperature fell to about 3,000 K, around 380,000 years after the Big Bang.
At that time, regions of the universe smaller than 380,000 light years would
begin to exchange information and begin to erase or amplify the primordial
fluctuations. We can describe these fluctuations as primordial sound waves
in a multi-component fluid including photons (electromagnetic radiation),
ordinary matter (baryons and leptons), dark matter (with mass but no elec­
tromagnetic interactions), and dark energy (causing the rate of expansion of
the universe to increase).

E. Modern cosmology
Modern cosmology began in earnest with the recognition that galaxies are
really far away and are made of billions of stars. This discovery depended on
the continued production of ever larger telescopes, such as the four built
by George Ellery Hale, each of which was the largest in the world for some
years, and each making a wealthy donor proud. Einstein’s theory of general
relativity provided a way of computing the effects of gravity on large scales,
and Georges Lemaître (1927, 1931) applied the theory to predict that the
universe could not be static, but must be expanding or contracting. Einstein
had introduced a constant of integration that could be adjusted to achieve
a balance between the attractive forces of gravity and the “Λ constant,” but
the solutions were not stable. Edwin Hubble (1929) found that distant gal­
axies are receding from us and that the farther away they are, the faster
they are going. This discovery, in the same year that the worldwide economy
collapsed, changed cosmology from almost pure speculation to an observa­
tional subject. The apparent age of the universe was just the quotient of the
distance divided by speed of recession, and the reciprocal of that number is
called the Hubble Constant.



II. MY INTRODUCTION TO COSMOLOGY


A. Childhood
In the 1950’s, when I was a child, the space age had not started yet, and there
were famous debates between advocates of the Steady State theory and the
Big Bang theory. In the 1940’s, George Gamow was considering the conse­
quences of the Big Bang idea, and with his graduate students Ralph Alpher
and Robert Herman, was working on the question of the formation of the
chemical elements. One key result was that only hydrogen and helium would
come from the Big Bang, which means that the others had to be formed in
nuclear reactions inside stars (Alpher, Bethe and Gamow, 1948). Even then
it was already clear that we humans are made of recycled stellar material.

66


Their second key result was that the universe would be filled with the heat
radiation left over from that great explosion. There were various estimates of
its temperature, but in any case it would have been difficult to measure this
radiation at the time.
   By the 1950’s, the modern age had begun in earnest. Transistors were in­
vented, the H-bomb race began when the Soviet Union exploded a hydrogen
bomb in 1953, and the US was worried. Then the Soviet Union launched the
Sputnik in 1957. Suddenly, physicists and engineers were supposed to save
the country from a really serious threat. Science fairs appeared in public
schools, and government money flowed into civil defense and scientific edu­
cation. I assembled a 5-tube shortwave radio kit, and I wanted to be a ham ra­
dio operator. Microwave technology grew to support the telephone network
as well as radar, and in my rural neighborhood, a 4H club teaching children
about electronics was sponsored by a small engineering firm. My father, one
of the few PhD scientists in the county, had a Geiger counter. In high school,
I went away to summer math and physics courses sponsored by the National
Science Foundation. In a few short years, the US space program went from
nothing to a declaration by President Kennedy that we would place a man on
the moon within the decade.

B. College
By 1965, I was a freshman in college, and I had read one of George Gamow’s
(1947) popular books on the universe. I knew that the Big Bang might have
produced a radiation field that filled the universe, so I wasn’t surprised when
it was discovered by Penzias and Wilson (Nobel Prize, 1978). Robert Dicke’s
group at Princeton was looking for the radiation at the same time. The story
of the simultaneous publication of the results of the two groups has been
widely told.
   If the radiation is cosmic, it should have the spectrum of a blackbody and
be equally bright in all directions (isotropic). Since the detections were made
at relatively low frequencies, there was a contribution of emission from elec­
trons in our galaxy that had to be measured and removed by some kind of
modeling. At first, it was only possible to measure the Rayleigh-Jeans (long
wavelength) part of the spectrum, and that part is a featureless power law, but
at least the measurements were roughly consistent with a single cosmic tem­
perature. There was also information from the measurements of the rotation­
al temperatures of interstellar molecules, which could be accomplished by ob­
serving their absorption of starlight. It turned out that this measurement had
already been made, by Adams and McKellar around 1941, but the significance
was not recognized at the time. Then, in 1968, a rocket carried an instrument
above the atmosphere, and found 50 times the brightness expected for the
cosmic blackbody radiation (Shivanandan, Houck, and Harwit, 1968).

C. Graduate school
This was the situation when I started looking for a thesis project at the
University of California at Berkeley in 1970. I met Michael Werner, then a

                                                                            67


new postdoctoral fellow working with Charles Townes (Nobel Prize 1964 for
masers), and Paul L. Richards, a young faculty member with expertise in low
temperature physics. They were starting up projects to measure the cosmic
microwave background radiation in the wavelength range around 1 mm. The
first was a ground-based measurement using a Fabry-Pérot interferometer to
define wavelengths, and liquid helium-cooled far infrared detectors. We took
this instrument to White Mountain in California and used it to measure the
CMBR temperature at those wavelengths that were not too badly blocked
by atmospheric emissions (Mather, Richards, and Werner, 1971). Following
that project, Richards took a Miller Fellowship sabbatical to England and
learned about the newly developed Martin-Puplett interferometer (Puplett
and Martin, 1970). He developed a concept to fly such a device as a payload
suspended below a high-altitude research balloon, above 99.5% of the at­
mosphere. This idea later developed into the spectrometer that flew on the
COBE satellite. Richards returned to Berkeley and explained the idea to two
of his graduate students, David Woody and me.
   The instrument concept included the polarizing interferometer, a mod­
ern version of that invented by Michelson (Nobel Prize, 1907), immersed in
liquid helium to keep it cold, a far IR detector (a bolometer), a cold refer­
ence blackbody, and a conical metal light collector that defined a 7 degree
beamwidth on the sky and fed the light through a small hole into the instru­
ment (Mather, Woody, and Richards, 1974). Compromises had to be made,
due to the presence of a warm atmosphere in close proximity to the liquid
helium. First, the conical antenna had to connect to a stainless steel reflector
that made the transition from helium temperature (1.5 K) to atmospheric
temperature. Second, a Mylar window kept the atmosphere out of the aper­
ture. Third, a small warm calibrator body could be moved over the aperture
to measure the sensitivity of the instrument. A NASA review panel visited the
Space Science Laboratory at Berkeley in 1973, and we presented our story.
The panel immediately told us that this instrument ought to be proposed as
a space mission.
   The instrument failed on its first flight but was retrieved in one piece. I
wrote my thesis on the ground-based work and on the design of the balloon
payload, and David Woody continued with the project. He built a test cham­
ber, found the reasons for the initial failures, fixed them, and prepared the
payload for re-flight. By now I had taken a postdoctoral position with Patrick
Thaddeus in New York at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS).
This time the flight was successful (Woody et al., 1975).


III. ORIGINS AND DESIGN OF THE COBE


A. Initial Goddard concept
I joined Thaddeus’s group to escape the perils of the CMBR field. However,
a few months after I arrived at GISS at the end of January 1974, NASA issued
an Announcement of Opportunity for new small satellites to be launched

68


on Scout or Delta rockets. Thaddeus asked members of the lab for ideas.
My thesis project had not worked right, but the main scientific difficulty was
the atmosphere, and a space mission would be a lot better. Thaddeus was al­
ready very interested in the CMBR, and had measured its temperature using
spectroscopy of interstellar molecules of CN, cyanogen (Thaddeus, 1972).
He suggested that I call Rainer Weiss of MIT, Dave Wilkinson, one of the
pioneers of the CMBR studies just a few miles away in Princeton, and Michael
Hauser, who had just a few days before joined the Goddard Space Flight
Center in Greenbelt, MD. We knew we would need a liquid helium cryostat,
and we contacted Ball Aerospace in Boulder, CO to learn if it was possible to
get one.
   At that time, the Steady State theory still had strong advocates and inge­
nious defenders. The evidence for the age of the universe and for the age
of the oldest stars seemed inconsistent. The evidence that the CMBR had
a good blackbody spectrum was not very strong, and indeed most measure­
ments were showing deviations from the prediction. There was not yet any
serious theory for the fundamental anisotropy, but it was thought that the
CMBR might not be the same brightness in every direction even if it were
from the Big Bang.
   We did not know we had competitors, but Luis Alvarez at Berkeley (Nobel
Prize, 1968) had hired several people to work on this cosmic background
radiation, including Richard A. Muller and George F. Smoot. Their team
prepared a proposal for a single instrument to measure the anisotropy, much
simpler than our Goddard proposal, and similar to concepts they were de­
veloping for receivers that would fly on U-2 aircraft and on balloons. Samuel
Gulkis and Michael Janssen of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena
also prepared a proposal.
   NASA did not choose any of us immediately. There were about 150 pro­
posals submitted altogether, covering a huge range of topics. NASA was very
interested in doing the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), in coopera­
tion with the Netherlands and the UK. This mission would be a pioneering
project, with a liquid helium cryostat in space, and new types of infrared
detectors covering a huge wavelength range.
   I started serious work on the flared horn concept. The balloon-borne
thesis experiment used a design with an abrupt junction between the beam-
defining cone and a stainless steel reflector to protect it from stray radiation
from angles far off the line of sight. My new idea was to make a gradual tran­
sition, with a curved flare like those in musical instruments. The mathemat­
ics for this had been developed already, by Joseph Keller (1962), under the
title of the “geometrical theory of diffraction.” This approach said that light
rays propagate in straight lines except at boundaries and obstacles, and that
there were a variety of scattering and attenuation coefficients that could be
computed for the boundaries and obstacles. The waves do diffract around
curved surfaces, but they are attenuated exponentially as they go. This was
just what I needed to protect the input of the instrument over a wide range of
wavelengths (Mather, 1981; Mather, Toral, and Hemmati, 1986).

                                                                             69


Figure 1. Original concept for COBE as proposed by Goddard group in 1974.




70


B. Building the COBE Team
In early 1976, Michael Hauser offered me a job at the Goddard Space Flight
Center (GSFC) in Greenbelt, MD, and thought the COBE idea would go for­
ward. In any case, it was worth a try.
   In late 1976, NASA started a study of the COBE idea, but chose a new
team composed of six members of the three competing groups. There were
four members of my group, with me, Michael Hauser, David Wilkinson,
and Rainer Weiss, plus George Smoot from the Berkeley group, and Sam
Gulkis from the JPL group. We were to work with Nancy Boggess of NASA
Headquarters, who was responsible for all of infrared astronomy at NASA,
and a team of engineers at Goddard Space Flight Center, to define a new mis­
sion. We decided that one of the original four instruments on the Goddard
concept would have to be omitted, and that the microwave radiometers
should use corrugated horn antennas. We elected principal investigators
and proposed to NASA Headquarters that these people be approved and
given responsibilities for the individual instruments. These assignments
were: G. Smoot, Differential Microwave Radiometers; M. Hauser, Diffuse
Infrared Background Experiment; and myself for the Far Infrared Absolute
Spectrophotometer. We chose Rainer Weiss as Chair of the Science Working
Group, and NASA assigned me the job of Study Scientist, to coordinate the
scientific requirements with the engineering teams.
   We prepared our report with Martin Donohoe as engineering lead. Our
study had to show that the mission could not be accomplished in any other
way. We discussed whether a mission on board the newly approved Space
Shuttle could possibly meet the scientific requirements, and we argued that
all three instruments were really essential. We were soon directed to redesign
our mission to use the Space Shuttle as a launch vehicle.
   After this initial round of competition, we were told to continue and were
given some funds to spend and people to work with. The Goddard engineer­
ing team assigned to us was led by Jerry Longanecker, project manager for
the IUE, the International Ultraviolet Explorer. This engineering team was
very experienced and quick to understand the challenges we brought them.
   Around 1978, it was decided that Goddard would build the entire COBE
mission in-house, which means that civil servants and neighborhood contrac­
tors would do most of the work. The advantage for Goddard was that this
project was an excellent way to recruit bright young engineers and train
them on a real space mission. The advantage for the COBE mission was that
it would enable the scientists and engineers to work very closely together,
without the impediments of contract management and physical distance.
This was very important for the creative process and the give-and-take of solv­
ing problems. However, part of the plan was that the COBE had the lowest
priority of all the Center’s major projects.
   Our team membership changed with time, but two photographs (Figs. 4
and 5) show the engineering and science teams as of 1988. The captions list
the team members and their roles. Roger Mattson was our Project Manager
and Dennis McCarthy was the Deputy for technical matters.

                                                                            71


Figure 2. Artist’s concept of COBE as flown. COBE was in orbit 900 km above the Earth,
with the Sun to the side and the Earth below.




Figure 3. Concept for the Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer. The movable black
calibrator emits the same spectrum of radiation that is received from the sky.


72


C. Mission Concept and Design
The design included a protected region for the instruments, surrounded
by a reflective shield. In the center is a liquid helium cryostat containing
two instruments, a Far-Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS),
and a Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment (DIRBE). The Differential
Microwave Radiometer (DMR) receivers were mounted in four (later three)
boxes just outside the cryostat. Solar panels surrounded the spacecraft, and
massive cylindrical pins projected from the sides to attach the COBE to the
Space Shuttle. Inside, hidden from view, were tanks containing hydrazine fu­
el, to raise the orbit from the maximum height the Shuttle could reach. The
orbit chosen for the COBE was circular, at 900 km altitude, with the orbital
plane inclined 99o to the equator, and nearly perpendicular to the Sun line.
The altitude and inclination are chosen in combination so that the Earth’s
equatorial bulge causes a torque on the orbit plane, just sufficient to make it
precess a full revolution once per year and follow the Sun. With this choice
of orbit, the COBE stays in full sun almost all the time, and the Earth’s limb
is only 60o from the nadir. However, for about 3 months each year, the com­
bination of the orbital plane inclination (9o past perpendicular) with the tilt
of the Earth’s spin axis of 23.5o from the ecliptic means that the COBE flies
through the Earth’s shadow for up to 20 minutes per orbit, and flies between
the Earth and the Sun for an equal period of time. Both events require atten­
tion. During shadow, the COBE must draw electric power from batteries, and
some heat must be provided to those parts that would cool off too rapidly.
During the opposite part of the orbit, the Earth shines over the top of the
shield and illuminates the instrument apertures, causing stray light to reach
the detectors.
   The spacecraft design for the COBE had some very unusual features. The
most interesting is perhaps the attitude control system, which was required
to spin the spacecraft around its symmetry axis at about 1 rotation per min­
ute (in flight, there was one spin per 72 sec), and keep the spin axis roughly
perpendicular to the Sun line (actually 94o away), and roughly vertical, as the
spacecraft orbited the Earth.
   The spacecraft had a hybrid command and control system: it sent its en­
gineering data through the TDRSS, the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite
System, but it sent its scientific data directly to a ground station at Wallops
Flight Facility of the Goddard Space Flight Center.
   The liquid helium cryostat was a great technological achievement of the
Ball Aerospace Division in Boulder, Colorado. Ours was a nearly-identical
copy of the cryostat developed for the IRAS. The design has an outer vacuum
tank with a cover that can be ejected after launch, a toroidal tank filled with
about 500 liters of liquid helium at launch, and an instrument chamber inside
the toroidal tank. The helium tank is suspended inside the vacuum shell by
sets of fiberglass-epoxy straps in tension, and surrounded by concentric alu­
minum shells cooled by tubes carrying the escaping helium gas. Between the
concentric shells are multiple layers of aluminized insulation blankets.


                                                                            73


Figure 4. COBE Science Working Group. Eli Dwek is missing. Left to right, Ed Cheng, Dave
Wilkinson, Rick Shafer, Tom Murdock, Steve Meyer, Chuck Bennett, Nancy Boggess, Mike
Janssen, Bob Silverberg, Sam Gulkis, John Mather, Harvey Moseley, Phillip Lubin, Ned
Wright, Mike Hauser, George Smoot, Rainer Weiss, and Tom Kelsall.




Figure 5. COBE engineering team leadership. Left to right, top photo, Don Crosby, Jeff
Greenwell, Bill Hoggard, Roger Mattson, Ernie Doutrich, Herb Mittelman, Eileen Ferber,
Bob Schools, Joe Turtil, Maureen Menton, Bob Sanford, Mike Roberto. Bottom photo, Pierce
“Lee” Smith, Earle Young, Dennis McCarthy, Dave Gilman, Bob Maichle, Chuck Katz, Steve
Leete, Bernie Klein, Loren Linstrom, Tony Fragomeni, John Wolfgang, and Jack Peddicord.


74


D. FIRAS
The purpose of the FIRAS was to determine whether the Big Bang radiation
has the spectrum of a perfect blackbody. Even small deviations from perfec­
tion would signify that the universe is not simple, that there is some new phe­
nomenon to be understood. Since the radiation comes almost equally from
all directions, the instrument must be absolutely calibrated. Since there are
processes in galaxies, and in our own Milky Way Galaxy, that produce radia­
tion at wavelengths overlapping the CMBR, it is essential to map the radiation
and see what part can be correlated with identifiable local sources. The main
expected sources are dust grains, heated by starlight in the Milky Way, and
interstellar molecules, atoms, and ions, heated by starlight and by collisions
with other components of the interstellar medium. At longer wavelengths
than those observed by the FIRAS, interstellar electrons, colliding with pro­
tons and spiraling in the magnetic field, are brighter than the CMBR, but all
these local sources are easily recognized by their concentration in the plane
of the Milky Way.
   The FIRAS was an upgraded version of Paul Richards’ original balloon-
borne instrument. The main improvements were: 1. The whole instrument
was in space, above the atmospheric emission and potential condensation on
the optics. 2. The light gathering power (étendue) was increased, to collect
more light, and extend the sensitivity to longer wavelengths. 3. The interfero­
meter was symmetrized, providing access to both input ports and both out­
put ports, so that it could be used as a differential comparator between the
inputs, and so all the available input light could be detected. 4. The primary
input from the sky could be entirely covered by an accurate external black­
body radiator, effectively a simulator of the Big Bang radiation, called the
XCAL, the external calibrator. 5. The secondary input was fed by a smaller
blackbody radiator, with an adjustable temperature to balance the input
from the sky, called the ICAL, the internal calibrator. 6. The conical light
concentrator of the balloon payload was improved to use a Winston cone, a
non-imaging parabolic concentrator with a better beam profile, called the
Sky Horn. 7. The stainless steel reflector that joined the balloon payload’s
input cone to the warm environment was replaced by a smoothly flared bell
resembling that of a musical instrument. 8. The temperature of the Sky Horn
and its flared section was controllable over a wide range of temperatures,
as was the matching concentrator (the Reference Horn) on the secondary
input. 9. The wavelength range was extended, and divided into two bands,
Short and Long. 10. The detectors were improved. 11. The observing time
was increased to 10 months instead of a few hours, and the entire sky was
mapped with a single instrument.
   The main sources of improved accuracy were the differential mode of op­
eration, reducing the dynamic range (contrast) between the signal level and
the detector noise, and the accurate external blackbody calibrator.
   We have received many questions about the calibrator. According to
Kirchhoff’s laws, the emissivity of a body is the same as the absorptivity. The
emissivity is the ratio of the emission from the actual body to that from an

                                                                            75


ideal blackbody at the same temperature. The absorptivity is the fraction of
incident radiation that is absorbed. Hence, an ideal absorber is an ideal emit­
ter. The chief aim of the calibrator design was to ensure that the only rays
reaching the spectrometer input came from the calibrator, and not from oth­
er locations. We define the spectrometer input as the junction between the
calibrator and the input concentrator. There are three possible sources of
radiation crossing this boundary that do not come from the calibrator emis­
sion. These are: 1. Emission from the concentrator that strikes the calibrator
and is reflected back into the acceptance angle of the Sky Horn. 2. Emission
or reflection from the spectrometer that comes towards the calibrator and is
reflected back towards the spectrometer by the XCAL. 3. Leakage of radia­
tion from the sky or the calibrator support hardware or other objects above
the XCAL, around the junction of the calibrator with the concentrator, or
through the XCAL material. We analyzed all of these possible errors and as
far as we know we avoided them at the level of a few parts per million. The
details are given by Mather et al. (1998).
   In order to achieve this level of performance we needed a highly absorp­
tive material. We chose Eccosorb®, an epoxy filled with very fine iron powder.
The epoxy has a refractive index of about 2, so that its surface reflections,
about 10% at normal incidence, are not negligible (Hemmati, Mather, and
Eichhorn, 1985). We therefore designed the XCAL as a re-entrant cone, like
a trumpet mute, so that a light ray entering the cone would have to suffer at
least 5 specular reflections before it could exit again.
   Thermal gradients produce a second-order effect and we believe the ef­
fect was less than a few parts per million on the spectrum. However, for
comparison with measurements by other instruments, we needed to know
the absolute temperature very well. Our thermometers were germanium
resistance thermometers traceable to the National Institute of Standards
and Technology, but after launch there was doubt about the stability of their
calibration, at the level of a few millikelvin. Fortunately, there were other
methods to confirm the temperatures after launch.
   To prevent leakage of radiation around the edge of the calibrator, where it
meets the Sky Horn, the calibrator was provided with two rings of aluminized
Kapton leaves, adjusted so that they barely made contact with the Sky Horn.
   The detectors for the FIRAS were kept as cold as possible with copper cool­
ing straps that reached directly from the detectors to the liquid helium cryo­
stat attachment fittings. They were composite bolometers, built at Goddard.
Each bolometer had a very thin diamond sheet, with a partially conductive
coating optimized to absorb the incoming radiation, and suspended by thin
Kevlar fibers. Attached to the diamond was a tiny cube of silicon, doped to
become a temperature-sensitive resistor. Incoming radiation was absorbed by
the coating on the diamond, converted to heat, and conducted to the silicon
thermometer. A DC voltage was applied to the thermometer through a resis­
tor, and the voltage on the thermometer was amplified by a JFET transistor
nearby. The transistor would not work at the 1.5 K temperature of the rest of


76


the instrument, so was suspended inside a small chamber on Kevlar threads,
and heated electrically to around 70 K.
   In developing concepts for the detectors, I pursued an idea I had from
graduate school, to establish a convenient theory for the noise and ultimate
sensitivity of bolometers. I worked on the manuscript while my future wife
Jane was teaching ballet; I was driving her to work because we had broken
her arm doing the samba. This work developed into a series of papers (e.g.
Mather, 1984) which have ended up being my most cited publications. The
reason was unexpected: our bolometers were good detectors for every kind
of radiation, including cosmic rays. Harvey Moseley saw this as an opportu­
nity, knowing that the detectors could be greatly improved. The improved
detectors have been flown in space on the X-ray mission Suzaku, and they
worked beautifully, able to measure the energy of a single 6 KeV X-ray pho­
ton with a precision of a few eV.
   The interferometer mirrors had to move precisely, smoothly, without fric­
tion, for millions of strokes on a parallelogram linkage, with leaf springs
at the joints, driven by a solenoid. This easily met the friction and lifetime
requirement. The position of the mirrors was measured precisely by a scale.
The scale was read out optically through fiber optics leading to light sources
and detectors outside the cryostat. This led to a problem during flight, when
cosmic rays hit the fiber optics and caused light flashes that confused the
position measurement and led the control circuit to drive the motor hard
against a physical stop. Fortunately, a timer circuit had been implemented to
protect the equipment from such an event.

E. DMR
The DMR instrument was not inside the cryostat but shared the objective of
measuring the CMBR. I trust that the story of this instrument will be more
fully told by my co-recipient, George Smoot. Its purpose was to measure the
anisotropy, the difference in brightness of the CMBR across the sky. When
the COBE was first proposed, there was no serious theoretical prediction for
the amount or pattern of such variations, but our view was that whatever it
was, it had to be measured. Over the 17 years from proposal to our first data
release, predicted amplitudes of the variations declined exponentially with
time, as new equipment repeatedly failed to find anything but the dipole
term due to the Earth’s motion.
   Not being guided by theory, we set the objective of measuring the aniso­
tropy as well as our environment would allow. As with the FIRAS, there are
local sources of radiation in the Milky Way Galaxy that are bright compared
with the anisotropies we sought to measure. Our approach was to map the
sky at three (originally four) frequencies, with identical receiver antenna
patterns, and take advantage of the fact that only the cosmic microwave back­
ground radiation would have the spectrum of a blackbody. The electrons in
our galaxy produce two kinds of radiation, by colliding with protons, and by
spiraling in magnetic fields. Both of these types of radiation are strong at
long wavelengths and drop rapidly as the wavelength gets shorter. The dust

                                                                           77


in our Galaxy has the opposite sort of spectrum and its emission spectrum is
strongest at shorter wavelengths than the CMBR. In any case, measurements
at multiple wavelengths are required to model and compensate for these
emissions. We chose three frequencies: 31.4, 53, and 90 GHz.
   The central idea of the instrument was the Dicke switch. This is a device
that could switch the input of the microwave receivers rapidly between two
sources, so that a difference in brightness seen from them could be recog­
nized by a lock-in amplifier. For mapping the CMBR, it is possible to just
compare two antennas pointed in different directions. Our special observing
scheme swept the two antennas rapidly around the sky, measuring all pos­
sible pairs of directions separated by the fixed angle between the two an­-
te­nnas. Our spinning spacecraft, with its spin vector smoothly rotating
around the Sun line on each orbit, and gradually moving around the Sun
through the year, was an excellent solution. Over the course of the mis­
sion, the radio­meter would observe hundreds of millions of differences in
brightness between points on the sky 60o apart. Then, a least-squares fitting
computer program would build a map from them that best represents all the
data, including detailed modeling of the systematic errors.
   The particular challenges for this instrument were sensitivity and immuni­
ty to systematic errors. The microwave receivers available in 1974 were almost
all made with diode mixers, microwave circuits that combine the signal from
the sky with a local oscillator signal to produce a new signal at an intermedi­
ate frequency. This intermediate frequency signal can then be amplified and
its intensity measured. As the COBE design progressed, improvements in the
mixers were made, and eventually we decided to sacrifice one of the original
four frequency channels to gain the resources to use the new technology.
The improvement was based on cooling the receivers. In our case there was
plenty of cooling available, since the receivers were protected inside the sun­
shield and had to be heated to keep them warm.
   Some systematic errors were obvious. First, the Dicke switches were made
with ferrite beads activated by magnetic fields, and there was sensitivity to
external magnetic fields from the Earth and from the magnetic torquer bars.
We provided magnetic shielding, but we knew that we would have a residual
problem. Second, the receiver antennas were susceptible to interference
coming from other directions. We chose corrugated horn antennas, and
learned how to make them so precisely that the stray radiation sensitivity was
very small. We had to measure this effect after launch and compensate for it.
The major source of stray radiation was the Earth, which is 10 million times
as bright as the cosmic fluctuations that we eventually found. The Earth is
hidden from the receivers most of the year, but some of its emission diffracts
over the edge of the sunshield and reaches the antennas. Third, the receivers
and switches were sensitive to temperature, and presumably to power supply
voltages, and all sorts of other minor disturbances. Since we were looking for
signals remaining after processing hundreds of millions of observations, we
had to devise ways to find very small effects that could have ruined the data.
Most of these were found and fixed before launch, but some had to be mea­

78


sured and compensated in software after launch. During the months when
the Earth rose slightly above the plane of the sunshield for part of the orbit,
and the satellite passed through the Earth’s shadow on the opposite side of
the orbit, the residual thermal, stray radiation, and other effects were suffi­
ciently large that the data were not entirely trustworthy.

F. DIRBE
The DIRBE instrument was designed for a different purpose: to search for
and measure the diffuse infrared background light at shorter wavelengths
than the CMBR. The accumulated light of distant galaxies should produce a
nearly-uniform glow in the sky. If the universe were infinite, stationary, and
uniform in both time and space, then every line of sight would terminate on
the surface of some star, and we would be bathed in light as though we were
just inside some such star. The expanding universe gives only a finite observ­
able volume and a finite time, and the most distant parts are highly redshift­
ed. Nevertheless, the cosmic glow is one of the most important traces of the
distant universe, the cosmic reservoir of lost photons. Measuring it would tell
us about those faint, most distant early galaxies, even if no telescope could
ever observe them.
   The main obstacle to measuring the diffuse IR background light is our lo­
cal astrophysical environment. There are several bright sources, beginning
with the interplanetary dust in our Solar system. This grayish dust reflects
some sunlight and absorbs the rest, coming to a temperature around 200 K,
and re-emitting the light at mid-IR wavelengths. This dust is visible to the na­
ked eye as the Zodiacal Light, and is much brighter at infrared wavelengths.
Farther out, the interstellar dust behaves in similar ways. Its temperature
depends on its distance from stars, and ranges from a few K to much higher
values in shock waves or near stars. Very small dust grains are also heated mo­
mentarily to very high temperatures, up to 1,000 K or more, by absorption of
individual visible or UV photons, or by cosmic ray impacts.
   The observational strategy for understanding and compensating for these
foreground sources was to measure at as many wavelengths as possible (10),
over as wide a wavelength range as possible (from 1.2 to 240 µm), to measure
the polarization at the three shortest wavelengths because the scattered sun­
light is polarized, and to measure over as wide a range of angles from the Sun
as possible because the zodiacal light is strongly concentrated towards the
Sun and towards the ecliptic plane. Our range of angles was from about 64o
to 124o, achieved by placing the DIRBE line of sight 30o from the spin axis of
the COBE. The wide wavelength range required four different detector tech­
nologies: InSb photovoltaic detectors from 1 to 5 µm, Si:As photoconductors
for 12 and 25 µm, Ge:Ga detectors for 60 and 100 µm, and bolometer detec­
tors for 140 and 240 µm.
   The instrument also had to be designed to be absolutely calibrated. To
achieve this we needed the following features: 1. A dark interior of the instru­
ment, representing zero signal. 2. A modulator, switching the instrument
beam rapidly back and forth between the sky and the interior of the instru­

                                                                             79


ment, the infrared equivalent of the Dicke Switch. 3. A calibrator body that
could intercept the instrument beam and replace it with zero emission. 4. A
light source that could establish the gain of the instrument and verify its sta­
bility with time. 5. A precise measurement of the beam profile of the instru­
ment, to compare calibration from standard stars with a diffuse background
surface brightness. 6. Detailed understanding of the response to standard
stars. 7. Suppression of stray light from bright objects (such as the Moon,
Earth, Sun, Galactic Center, and Jupiter) outside the field of view.
   The optical design for the DIRBE was optimized for these purposes. The
aperture was only 20 cm, but the field of view was large (0.7o), to optimize
sensitivity for the diffuse radiation. The DIRBE was enclosed in the cryostat,
so its interior was truly cold and dark. The modulator was a specially-de­
signed tuning fork “chopper” with vanes that opened and closed at 32 Hz.
The telescope was a Gregorian design, so that field and pupil stops ahead of
the chopper could limit stray radiation. A carefully designed baffle system in
the telescope tube intercepted light that might be scattered into the instru­
ment, a shiny cone at the entrance to the telescope tube intercepted and
reflected away any light coming in from angles just grazing the top of the
cryostat, and a tightly fitted cover protected the telescope from molecular or
dust contamination before reaching orbit. All of the detectors had the same
field of view, so that relative colors of the detected objects would always be
correct. The field of view was square, so that a star passing through the field
would always produce about the same response, regardless of exactly where
it was in the field.
   The DIRBE instrument was also used to provide accurate pointing infor­
mation. As the COBE spins, the DIRBE beam sweeps rapidly around the sky,
and the precise timing of signals from bright stars passing through the beam
is available. With an algorithm developed by science team member Edward
L. (Ned) Wright, these timing signals were combined with a model of the
spin of the COBE and its other pointing sensors to give accurate pointing
information.


IV. REBUILDING AND LAUNCHING THE COBE
The COBE project was officially approved in 1982, when it became clear that
the IRAS was going to fly. The IRAS cryostat was extremely challenging, and
the COBE depended completely on its success, since we had almost the same
design. Also, the NASA budget was very tight in those days, with cost growth
in the IRAS, the Hubble Space Telescope, and other projects. The IRAS was
at last launched successfully on January 25th, 1983 and our way seemed clear.
Michael Hauser was a member of the science working group for the IRAS and
was responsible for the data analysis, so he was very familiar with the techno­
logical details and the scientific results of the IRAS. The IRAS produced
some very remarkable surprises: many nearby stars were surrounded by dust
clouds, like our own zodiacal light but far brighter; and distant gal­axies were
extremely bright at far infrared wavelengths, sometimes 100 or 1,000 times

80


brighter than they are at visible wavelengths. Our project proceeded with
many minor revisions and major review meetings. Our budget requirements
also grew, but Headquarters did not have the extra funds to give, so we took
many risky decisions and cut some corners. We were lucky about them.
   By January of 1986, we were assembling flight hardware, and a full-scale
plywood mockup of the spacecraft was built for setting up the electronic box­
es and the electrical cables. Then came the fateful frozen day in Florida when
the Space Shuttle Challenger and our 7 astronauts perished in flames. For us
on the COBE team, and for most of NASA, the future looked bleak. Dennis
McCarthy, the Deputy Project Manager, started looking around for alternate
launch vehicles. NASA had been forced to abandon its trusty Delta launchers
and all the other one-shot rockets in favor of the Shuttle, so we had nothing
ready. Fortunately, there were still spare parts for the Delta rockets, and it
was possible to assemble a complete set. However, the Delta could certainly
not carry our payload as it was. The COBE was far too large and weighed too
much. Our engineering team was not deterred. The COBE was proposed in
1974 for a Delta launch, and the Shuttle design we had was using 5000 lb of
fuel and physical structure that would not be needed if a Delta rocket could
take us all the way to the needed orbit. In the end, it was just barely possible
to launch the COBE on the Delta.
   One really new design was now needed though: the sunshield would have
to be folded up and deployed after launch. The unfolding would be pro­
pelled by spring energy after a circular strap around the folded shield was cut
by an explosive charge.
   One minor change was then needed for the DMR instruments. The avail­
able space between the new folding sunshield and the cryostat shell was not
quite enough to fit the microwave receiver boxes without modification. New
box designs and some new waveguide hardware were needed, but this was
also possible.
   Now that we had a new mission concept, we presented it to NASA
Headquarters. It was quickly recognized that the COBE could now be NASA’s
first scientific mission to fly after the Challenger explosion. We were given
the green light in late 1986, and urged to be ready for launch as soon as pos­
sible. Suddenly our project went from the bottom of the priority totem pole
almost to the top, behind the Hubble Space Telescope. We began round-the-
clock work, as much as people could stand, to finish the redesign, rebuild the
hardware, and fix all the known problems with the instrumentation.
   Our payload was finally ready, and was loaded into a huge truck and
driven around the Capital Beltway to Andrews Air Force Base. There, the
truck was driven right into a waiting C5-A transport aircraft, and flown to
the Vandenberg launch site in California. At the launch site, final assembly
was completed, and final tests were made. On October 17th 1989, the Earth
trembled with the San Francisco earthquake, but COBE was bolted down
that day, because two of our engineers had gone off to be married.
   On the evening before November 18, 1989, we were ready to launch. Ralph
Alpher and Robert Herman had come to watch the launch of the mission that

                                                                             81


would test their theory. In the early morning of the launch day, the main ques­
tion was about the winds. If the wind direction and speed changes too rapidly
with altitude, the rocket control system will be unable to compensate and the
rocket can break up. Weather balloons were launched and tracked to deter­
mine the wind shear, and the assembled crowds stood in a cold and dark field
3 km away from the launch pad. We watched the rocket ascend, dropping its
spent booster rockets, and go out of sight, in just a few minutes. A few minutes
later, the high altitude winds twisted the trail of rocket exhaust into contorted
loops, making quite visible the hazard that the Delta had just traversed.
   The COBE was not heard from again for about an hour, when it passed
over the tracking station in Alaska, and it was alive and well. In the first few
days it faced new hazards. First, the outside of the cryostat was cooling off
rapidly. We worried that if it got too cold, the cover might not come off.
Second, one of the gyros in the pointing control system failed a few days
after launch. Fortunately our engineering team had designed the system to
keep right on going. Then, we re-discovered Antarctica. The power system
was designed to cope with a certain amount of sunshine, but we had not
remembered how much sunlight would be reflected up to the COBE by the
ice in Antarctica. Next, trapped electrons and protons in the Van Allen belts
disrupted the functioning of the mirror control electronics for the FIRAS,
but we commanded the FIRAS not to run there.
   The liquid helium in the cryostat lasted about 10 months. The end was
abrupt, and within a minute the temperature was rising rapidly. We con­
tinued to operate the DIRBE because its short wavelength detectors, made
with InSb, worked just fine at the higher temperature. The interior of the
cryostat ended up around 60 K. The DMR, which did not use the helium, was
operated for a total of 4 years.
   The fate of the satellite was to be used for communications practice. It is
still in the same orbit, and still spinning in its proper orientation, as it needs
no fuel to do so, and the guidance system is highly redundant and reliable. It
was estimated that the orbit will decay in about 1,000 years.


V. DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
The command and control of the spacecraft and the analysis and interpre­
tation of the data required up to 100 software engineers and scientists. All
three instruments required special analysis to deal with instrument systematic
errors and calibration, and then with understanding the local astrophysical
environment.

A. FIRAS
The first instrument to produce scientific results was the FIRAS. We adjusted
the temperature of the internal reference body to null the signal from the
interferometer as well as possible. The depth of the null was a direct measure
of the match between the internal body and the spectrum of the CMBR. Even
before we had a precise calibration, we knew immediately that the match was

82


excellent. With a rough calibration, we added the difference we observed to
the Planck function for the matching temperature, and plotted the result.
Not yet knowing the error bars, we assumed 1%. When I presented this
spectrum at the January 1990 meeting of the American Astronomical Society
in Crystal City (a suburb of Washington, D.C.), the audience of over 1,000
people rose in a standing ovation. None of us on the COBE team anticipated
this response, since the spectrum was not a surprise to us.
   In retrospect we now appreciate the reason for the enthusiasm. Not
only was the spectrum beautiful to look at, but at one stroke it banished the
doubts of almost everyone about the Big Bang theory. For so many decades,
the intense combat between the Big Bang and Steady State advocates had
continued, and for so many years, a series of small discrepancies between
theory and measurement had been explained by ingenious people. Now it
was over, although some Steady State proponents do not agree. The Big Bang
theory was safe, and the universe was simple, simple enough for theorists to
go on to the next problem.
   Only a few weeks after the COBE was launched, Herb Gush and his team
from the University of British Columbia launched a sounding rocket with
their version of the FIRAS instrument (Gush, Halpern, and Wishnow, 1990).
This payload had been flown several times, each without success, but this time
it worked. Their results agreed with the FIRAS results, with the same tem­
perature within the error bars, and showed no deviation from the blackbody
spectrum either. With a little better luck they might have stolen some of our
thunder years before the COBE was launched, but to achieve our final conclu­
sions we really needed the all-sky maps that only COBE could provide.
   Our spectrum plot now graces many astronomy textbooks, but people
still ask one elementary question: why does the plot not look like the ones
in other textbooks? The key point is that our plot gives the intensity versus
frequency in reciprocal centimeters, the number of waves per centimeter.
Textbooks usually plot the intensity versus frequency in Hz, or versus wave­
length, usually in micrometers. The plots do not appear to match, not only
because the scales are different, but because the differentials are different:
the plots give the power per unit area per frequency interval or per wave­
length interval, and those intervals also have to be converted. When these
conversions are done, the plots agree.
   The full calibration and analysis of the FIRAS data took many years. The
systematic errors that we discovered in the data were not complete surprises,
but developing accurate models for them required a least-squares fit with
thousands of parameters, a few of which were critically important. Dale
Fixsen was the main architect of this process. The main errors to be compen­
sated were: 1. The cosmic rays that hit the detectors produced voltage im­
pulses that had to be detected and removed. 2. Temperature variations from
many causes caused the detector gain to vary. 3. There was a small amplitude
vibration in the mirror mechanism, due to torsion in the parallelogram link­
age, that was excited by the servo circuit. Although this was minimized in the
servo by a notching filter at 57 Hz, there was a small residual effect on the

                                                                           83


shape of the interferograms. 4. The internal reference body was not a very
good blackbody. 5. The thermometer calibrations apparently changed after
they were done, years before launch, and the three thermometers on the ex­
ternal calibrator did not agree at the expected millikelvin tolerance. 6. There
was a small optical effect in which radiation could make multiple passes
through the interferometer, and appear to be modulated at twice or three
times the proper frequency. Fortunately, the instrument had 4 detectors, two
on each side and two in each frequency band, and it had two different stroke
lengths, for a total of 8 different ways to observe. Comparison of the multiple
detectors and stroke lengths gave many ways to understand and detect the
errors. Observation of interstellar spectrum lines, particularly that of [C II]
at 157.74 µm, gave ways to confirm the absolute frequency scale, and hence
to confirm the temperature scale (Fixsen and Mather, 2002).
   The understanding and compensation for the local astrophysical sources was
also difficult. One result was that the dust in the Galaxy is almost all at about
the same temperature and has about the same spectrum, but not quite. There
are also some directions in the Galactic plane where there are clearly multiple
dust clouds with different temperature in the same line of sight. Our analysts
were amazed to see that some interferograms appeared to be “contaminated”
with sine waves. These were just the expected response to bright interstellar
spectrum lines. The fine structure line of ionized carbon [C II] at 157.74 µm
is by far the brightest we saw, and carries about 0.3% of the total luminosity of
the Milky Way. We observed the [N II] line at 205.178 µm for the first time;
it was then observed in the laboratory. Other lines from CO, [C I], and H2O
were also seen (Bennett et al., 1994). The 157.74 µm line is so bright that we
were able to measure the differential Doppler shift of the line due to the rota­
tion of the Galaxy, even though our spectral resolution was very modest.
   The main measurement is that the spectrum of the CMBR matches a black­
body at 2.725 ± 0.001 K with an rms deviation of 50 parts per million of the
peak brightness. The interpretation of that result is that less than 0.01% of
the energy of the CMBR was added to it after the first year of the expanding
universe. Energy added before that time would just change the temperature
of the radiation (Wright et al., 1994).
   Energy added between redshifts of 105 to 3x106, roughly the first 1,000
years, would give the radiation a modified spectrum with a chemical po­
tential µ, as worked out by Zeldovich and Sunyaev (1970). In this case the
photon mode occupation number is η = 1/(ex+µ-1), where x = hν/kT, and h
is Planck’s constant, ν is the oscillation frequency, k is Boltzmann’s constant,
and T is the temperature. Our measured value (1994) was µ = (-1 ± 4) · 10-5,
or |µ| < 9 · 10-5, with 95% confidence.
   Radiation added later would give a CMBR spectrum that is a mix of
blackbodies at a range of temperatures, parameterized by y, as described by
Zeldovich and Sunyaev (1969). Here y = (1/mec2) ∫ k(Te – Tγ)dτe, where me is
the electron mass, c is the speed of light, Te is the temperature of the scatter­
ing electrons, Tγ is the temperature of the CMBR at the time, and dτe is the
differential opacity of the scattering electrons. The distortion of the spec­

84


trum produced by this kind of mix of blackbodies is described by dSy/dy = T0
[x coth (x/2) – 4] dBν/dT, where S is the spectral brightness, B is the Planck
function, and T0 is the average temperature. We found y = (-1 ± 6) · 10-6, a
very small number.
   There is a long list of hypothetical energy sources that had been used to
explain prior measurements of deviations from the blackbody form, includ­
ing turbulence, proton decay, other unstable particles, decaying massive
neutrinos, late photoproduction of deuterium, explosive or normal galaxy
formation, cosmic gravity waves, cosmic strings, black holes, active galactic
nuclei, Population III stars, hot intergalactic medium, etc. Our results do not
rule out small contributions from these sources but do show that they could
not have been responsible for most of the universe that we see today.
   The FIRAS instrument also measured: 1. The spectrum of the far IR cos­
mic background radiation, first detected by the DIRBE instrument (Fixsen et
al., 1998), 2. The spectrum of the far IR zodiacal light, showing that the re­
sponsible dust particles are large, ~ 30 µm in size, 3. The spectrum of the part
of the CMBR due to the motion of the Earth through the cosmos, called the
dipole (Fixsen et al., 1994), and 4. Limits on spatial variation of the CMBR
spectrum (Fixsen et al., 1997).
   The FIRAS also confirmed Planck’s formula for the blackbody spectrum
(Nobel Prize, 1918). If Planck’s formula were incorrect, the calibration soft­
ware would not have produced self-consistent results. The FIRAS calibration
depends on temperatures through the form for the photon mode occupa­
tion number, η = 1/(ex-1), and this is the part of the Planck function that we
tested.
   A recent paper by Fixsen and Mather (2002) argued that modern detectors
and instrument designs could produce a factor of 100 improvement in sensitiv­
ity and accuracy. In that case the astrophysical interference from dust and mol­
ecules would certainly limit the cosmological conclusions. However, if these
foregrounds could be managed, it is not unlikely that the distortions of the
CMBR spectrum from known forms of energy release (e.g. the reionization of
the universe at a redshift of 10–20 as detected by WMAP) could be detected.
   Several papers have been written about the possibility of detecting distor­
tions of the CMBR spectrum from small effects during the recombination
era. For instance, small opacities due to the molecule lithium hydride, LiH,
might be seen, if the level populations of the molecule were slightly out of
thermal equilibrium. A common question concerns the Lyman α photons
remaining from the last recombination for each H atom. There would be
approximately one photon per H atom, at a wavelength of (1+ z) · 0.1216
µm, where z ~ 1,089, and a fractional line width of a few percent. H atoms are
very much less numerous than CMBR photons, by a factor of more than 109,
and the expected wavelength is in a region of the spectrum that is filled with
Galactic dust, atomic, and molecular emission, and zodiacal dust emission, so
these few photons are very unlikely to be observable.
   Improved measurements of the CMBR spectrum at longer wavelengths
are now in progress. The ARCADE project (Kogut et al., 2004) is a balloon-

                                                                             85


borne microwave radiometer with a full-beam external blackbody calibrator.
Operating without a protective window, it depends on high-speed flow of he­
lium gas to keep the residual atmosphere at balloon altitudes from falling into
the instrument and condensing on the antennas. Preliminary results show that
the measured temperature is consistent with the FIRAS number. Eventually,
this approach will provide improved measurements of the µ parameter for
early energy release, since this distortion is greatest at long wavelengths.

B. DMR
The DMR instrument was the second to produce cosmological results. The
data analysis team worked diligently to understand the needed corrections
for known systematic errors, particularly the magnetic and thermal sensi­
tivities of the Dicke switches, and the stray light from bright objects like the
Earth. The first hint that we had detected a cosmic anisotropy was shown to
the Science Working Group at a special team meeting at Nancy Boggess’s
home in October 1991 by Ned Wright, who had written his own analysis pro­
gram for the first year of DMR data. The immediate response of the science
team was that this was very important, too important to release quickly. We
were well aware of recent junk science results on polywater, cold fusion, and
other topics, and we were determined to get the answer right.
   There were three main issues. First, were all the known instrument errors
properly modeled and compensated? Second, had we properly understood
and removed the effects of the Galactic foreground electrons and dust? And
third, were the elaborate computer programs reliable?
   To tackle the first issue, we held team meetings devoted to brainstorming
about everything that could possibly affect the accuracy of the data, and de­
vising strategies to measure and analyze each effect. For each one, we needed
two different people and computer programs to agree, and we needed a
science team review of the results. Alan Kogut and Ned Wright were the key
analysts, and David Wilkinson was our most determined skeptic. This process
took many months.
   The second issue was analyzed at Goddard by Charles Bennett and Gary
Hinshaw, and by the rest of the team, and described in Bennett et al., 1992.
Their strategy was to represent the two kinds of foreground emission by
Galactic electrons and the dust emission by models with adjustable coef­
ficients, and then to determine those coefficients by comparing the maps
made by the DMR and other equipment at different wavelengths. The result
was that a linear combination of the three DMR maps, weighted with particu­
lar coefficients, would eliminate almost all the Galactic emission for direc­
tions outside the Galactic plane.
   The third issue, that of software reliability, was managed by thorough tests
of each computer code, and comparison of results of the personal code
written by Ned Wright with the official code written by the DMR team at
Goddard and the code developed independently by George Smoot and his
team at Berkeley.


86


   An additional verification came from the data from balloon-borne instru­
ments. We had agreed to delete the long-wavelength channel (at 23 GHz)
from the DMR, and to fly a balloon-borne maser instrument to map part of
the sky at that wavelength. The maps from this instrument contained strong
signals from the Milky Way galaxy, but they were consistent with the DMR
data (Fixsen, Cheng, and Wilkinson, 1983). Also, the MIT-Princeton team of
Stephan Meyer, Edward Cheng, Ken Ganga, and Lyman Page, including two
COBE team members, flew a balloon-borne instrument with bolometer de­
tectors at shorter wavelengths, and achieved enough sensitivity to see the cos­
mic fluctuations (Ganga et al., 1993). Their data were processed just in time
to show that they were consistent with the cosmic fluctuations seen by DMR,
before the DMR data were made public. Indeed, if the DMR had not been
built, it is possible that the balloon data would have eventually been accepted
as the first detection of cosmic structure. For our purpose, it was enough that
we knew the DMR data, covering the whole sky, were sound.
   Finally, the results were ready and prepared for publication. The announce­
ment was made at the meeting of the American Physical Society in April 1992
in Washington, D.C. There had been enough advance publicity, and some
leaks, that the press conference was filled with TV cameras and reporters.
Within the day, the results were reported worldwide, and George Smoot’s fam­
ous remark about seeing the face of God made the news everywhere. Steven
Hawking is quoted as saying something like this was “the most important dis­
covery of the century, if not of all time.” The next day, interpretive papers had
been submitted and distributed on the worldwide web by leading cosmolo­
gists, who had everything written in advance except the conclusions. Within
the year, there were thousands more papers citing our results.
   The results we showed were in the form of maps and fluctuation spectra.
The maps were nicely adjusted to show pink and blue blobs to represent
hot and cold parts. As Sachs and Wolfe (1967) had pointed out, the colder
regions represent higher density, because of the gravitational redshift of the
photons leaving potential wells. The spectra were statistical characterizations
of the spatial fluctuations, mathematically precise descriptions of the typical
sizes of the blobs. To a first approximation, we found that there is no typical
size – blobs of all sizes are equally likely and equally bright. This is called
“scale-invariant”, as predicted by Harrison and Zeldovich and by simple forms
of the theory of cosmic inflation. On closer examination, the fluctuations are
a little too weak on large angular scales (90 degrees and larger), and they in­
crease a little on the smallest angular scales we could see (7 degrees), as they
should according to theory. The first point has still not been explained, and
may not be statistically significant. The second is very important, and is due
to the motions of matter at the time of the cosmic decoupling.
   So what had the DMR measured? We had indeed discovered and mapped
the primordial density fluctuations of the universe. If these had not been
found, theorists would have been extremely disappointed, because by 1992,
there was a nearly complete theory of the origin of the large scale structure of
the universe, built on the idea of cosmic inflation to set initial conditions and

                                                                              87


guarantee large scale uniformity of the universe. The theory holds that very
small amplitude primordial density fluctuations are the seeds for large scale
structure, and that ordinary matter falls into the regions with greatest initial
density, leaving empty regions (cosmic voids) where the initial density is least.
The only needed force is gravitation. A remarkable result of the theory is that
the density fluctuations grow linearly with time, and not exponentially like so
many other natural phenomena. The reason is that the gravitational attrac­
tions of distant parts of the universe diminish with the expansion, slowing
down the exponential growth to linear growth. Therefore, measurements of
the large scale structure of the universe as represented by galaxies and galaxy
clusters should also represent the initial conditions, the primordial fluctua­
tions. By 1992, we had measurements of the large scale fluctuations traced by
galaxies, and so we thought we knew what to expect.
   However, there was trouble with this picture. Ordinary matter alone gives
the wrong patterns, and it is not free to move relative to the rest of the uni­
verse until it becomes a neutral gas at the cosmic decoupling era. Fortunately,
it was already recognized that some kind of additional matter might fill the
universe, called cosmic dark matter. By hypothesis, it is invisible, and has no
interactions with light except through gravitation. On the other hand, since
it is not tied to the CMBR radiation field, it is free to start moving before the
cosmic decoupling, and can fall into the primordial gravitational wells and
make them grow deeper. Also, nothing is known of this dark matter except
what astronomers claim to know: there is no agreed theory of it, no measure­
ment of any of its particles in laboratories, and no knowledge of the masses
of the particles, their stability, or anything else. Only one kind of dark matter
has so far been observed in the laboratory, the neutrinos, with their three
flavors and their antiparticles, and it seems that their masses are not enough
to explain the cosmic dark matter.
   The other thing at issue in 1992 was whether the universe is spatially flat
or not. Theorists felt that a zero curvature universe was simple and pleasing
and somehow ought to be true. To make such a universe, we would have to
have a cosmic acceleration term in the equations, like the Λ constant that
Einstein (Nobel Prize 1921, but not for this work) proposed and later rejec­
ted. Perhaps just the right amount of such a term, which produces negative
spatial curvature, could balance the positive curvature produced by ordinary
matter and dark matter. That would be an amazing coincidence, unless there
is some unknown law of nature that requires this to be true. This acceleration
term is now called the cosmic dark energy, which points out that it might not
be just a constant of mathematical integration as Einstein saw it, but could
perhaps be a new kind of force or matter with its own peculiar equation of
state. So the interpretation of the measured cosmic fluctuations has become
a major scientific industry.
   The DMR was operated for a total of four years, and the additional data
were statistically consistent with the first year’s data. The new data gave much
better ways to hunt for and correct systematic errors of all sorts, so the final
results improved much more than the factor of two in random noise levels.

88


   The DMR data were analyzed to hunt for many interesting things, none
of which have been found with much statistical significance. For instance,
there was a suggestion that cosmic strings might exist, stretching across vast
regions of space. At one time it was thought that they could produce the cos­
mic density fluctuations all by themselves. If they were strong enough, they
would produce discontinuities in the temperature maps, and should be vis­
ible. Since none have been found, they apparently were not responsible for
the CMBR anisotropy, but perhaps they are just very rare. Searches were also
made for non-Gaussian fluctuations; perhaps there were specific localized
objects, with either positive or negative temperatures, that could be found
by close examination. None of these have been found either, above the levels
that should appear from ordinary Gaussian fluctuations, and from known
point sources like Jupiter. The DMR angular resolution is too coarse for it to
respond much to fainter objects. Another possibility is that the universe has
a peculiar topology: suppose that we found the same object or pattern in two
different places on the map. In that case, the universe could have the topo­
logy of a sphere or a torus, in which the same object could be viewed in two
different directions. None of these searches have returned positive results
either.
   Following the DMR announcement, there have been many more instru­
ments built, and hundreds of scientists worldwide have continued to measure
and analyze. Ground-based and balloon-borne instruments have measured
with improved angular resolution. COBE team members Charles Bennett
and David Wilkinson conceived, proposed, and built the MAP, the Microwave
Anisotropy Probe, launched in 2001 and still operating. It was renamed the
Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe in 2002, following Wilkinson’s death
on September 5th, 2002. The WMAP has extended the DMR all-sky maps to
much higher sensitivity and angular resolution, and has confirmed that the
DMR data are accurate. With the WMAP data, we now know many of the
cosmic parameters (matter, dark matter, dark energy density, age of the uni­
verse, etc.) to precisions of a percent or two. It has also detected a wonderful
surprise: evidence of the effects of the reionization of the universe, at a red­
shift around 13. This is recognized through the polarization of the CMBR,
produced as a result of the quadrupole anisotropy of the CMBR seen by the
electrons when they scatter the radiation towards us for the last time. The
angular scale of the polarization pattern we observe measures the redshift at
which the scattering occurs, and the amplitude measures the optical depth
of the scattering.
   There are several remaining challenges for future CMBR anisotropy meas­
urements. The one receiving the most attention now is the hunt for the
polarization induced by gravitational waves in the Big Bang itself. A Task
Force on Cosmic Microwave Background Research, chaired by Rainer Weiss,
prepared a beautiful summary report about the benefits, challenges, and
strategy for measuring this polarization. The polarization map is a vector
field on a sphere, and can be decomposed into two parts: the divergence
of a scalar field, called E-mode, and curl of a vector field, called B-mode.

                                                                             89


According to theory, the primordial gravity waves should produce a polariza­
tion pattern with a curl, and no other subsequent process should be able to
do so. The polarization pattern would be much fainter than the temperature
anisotropy map, and the curl component would be much fainter than the
divergence component. Hence this is very difficult to measure, but it may
already be possible with current generations of detectors. The generic name
for this space mission in the US is “Inflation Probe” and three design studies
have been supported by NASA. Technically, such a mission could be flying in
a decade, but competition for scarce resources may delay it. In any event, the
measurement of the B-mode polarization is the most direct method available
to learn about the forces prevailing in the Big Bang itself, could help us come
to the long-sought Theory of Everything, and presumably would be a Nobel-
winning discovery. It is no surprise that elementary particle physicists, both
theorists and experimenters, have been turning to CMBR studies as their
next exciting opportunity.

C. DIRBE
The DIRBE instrument was the last to produce cosmological results, largely
because the local foregrounds at DIRBE wavelengths are very bright and
complex. The definitive DIRBE results are given in a series of papers (Hauser
et al., Kelsall et al., Arendt et al., and Dwek et al., 1998). The surprise found in
the DIRBE data is that the universe is twice as bright as previously believed
from measurements of individual galaxies. There is a general glow called the
cosmic infrared background or CIB, composed of two parts, at near IR wave­
lengths of a few µm, and far IR wavelengths of a few hundred µm. The near
IR background is not yet understood (see the review by Hauser and Dwek,
2001), but the far IR background is apparently produced by a previously un­
known population of very bright dusty galaxies at redshifts of a few (2–3).
   To get to this result, the DIRBE team had to go through a much more com­
plex process than was required for the other two instruments, because the
main foreground faced by DIRBE is variable in time and space. It is produced
by the interplanetary dust, which is smoothly distributed in a thick disk orbit­
ing the Sun. This disk is not so simple though. It has several sources, in colli­
sions among asteroids, in the disintegration of comets, and in the migration
of small particles from the outer solar system. From the IRAS data, we know
that there are at least three rings of dust orbiting as though they are collision
debris from certain families of asteroids. Also, these particles move under the
influence of gravity, radiation pressure and the Poynting-Robertson drag, and
electromagnetic forces for those particles with electric charges. The drag force
makes the particles spiral in towards the sun over time scales of thousands to
millions of years, depending on size, and the particles may experience close
encounters with the planets, and repeated gravitational impulses when their
orbital periods are commensurate with the planets. Some become locked in
orbital resonances for long periods of time, as the gravitational forces over­
come the Poynting-Robertson drag. Some even become locked in orbital
resonance with the Earth, producing leading and trailing blobs that were

90


seen in the DIRBE data. This phenomenon, an annoyance for those seeking
the cosmic IR background radiation, is of great interest for those hunting for
planets around other stars. Indeed, it has already been seen in the dust clouds
of bright stars such as Fomalhaut, where a large planet is presumed to be
organi­zing the dust into a ring (Kalas, Graham, and Clampin, 2005).
   In addition, the Earth, and the COBE with it, move through the dust
cloud. The major effects are that the plane of the Earth’s orbit is not the sym­
metry plane of the dust cloud, which feels greater forces from Jupiter, and
that the Earth’s orbit is not circular, so the Earth moves in and out as well as
up and down in the cloud. Moreover, the dust cloud is not centered on the
Sun, since it feels the strong pull of Jupiter.
   The model for this dust was built in a heuristic way, and contains many
free parameters, adjusted to fit the time and spatial variations of the sky ob­
served by the DIRBE. Full documentation of the model is given by Kelsall
et al., 1998. The parameters include the dust temperature and its power-law
variation with distance from the Sun, the dust number density and its power-
law variation with distance, the emissivity and reflectivity at each wavelength,
and the phase function of the scattering. There is a model of the particle
resonances with the Earth, to explain the leading and trailing blobs. There
are parameters to describe the thickness of the dust disk, and the shape of its
density distribution near the ecliptic plane, and parameters for the tilt and
forced eccentricity of the dust disk presumed to be due to Jupiter. Even the
symmetry plane of the dust distribution is warped, presumably by the compet­
ing gravitational perturbations of nearby planets. Even with all this complex­
ity, there are significant residuals from the model, and Kelsall believes there
are real time variations at the level of a percent that are not explained.
   Understanding the foreground emission from the Galaxy was also difficult
and done in a heuristic fashion. The majority of the sky at most wavelengths
has detectable stars and dust clouds, the brightest of which can be masked
out and ignored. The fainter ones are not resolved by the large DIRBE beam
and can be modeled based on a priori Galactic models with no free param­
eters (Arendt et al., 1998).
   The result of all this subtraction is that there are a few favored directions
where the Galactic foregrounds are least, possibly due to supernovae which
have cleared out the dust and gas for large distances. As any true cosmic
background must be roughly isotropic, it was important that observations in
these favored directions must give the same answers.
   The DIRBE results were essential to both the FIRAS and DMR interpreta­
tions. First, they showed that the local universe was well understood, so that
the FIRAS and DMR observations really do represent the distant Big Bang.
This was important, for instance, in arguing that it is only a coincidence that
the cosmic dipole due to the Earth’s motion lies in the Ecliptic Plane. Also,
the DIRBE maps of Galactic dust agreed with the FIRAS maps, showing that
there were no new and strange effects. Conversely, after the DIRBE team de­
termined that there is a far IR cosmic background field, the FIRAS data were
used to confirm it and measure its spectrum (Fixsen et al., 1998).

                                                                             91


VI. SUMMARY: COBE’S PLACE IN HISTORY AND WHERE ARE WE NOW?
The COBE mission, started in an era when slide rules were common and
aerospace designers used pencils and large sheets of paper, led to a revolu­
tion in our understanding of the universe. It confirmed the Big Bang theory,
and discovered the primordial density fluctuations that formed the large-
scale structure of the universe. It found that the universe is twice as bright
as previously thought. It led to a series of ever more powerful instruments
to measure the CMBR, one of which (the WMAP) has already tested the
idea that the earliest times in the universe included an exponential expan­
sion called inflation. We now have precise values (especially from WMAP) of
many cosmic parameters, and CMBR studies now in preparation could reveal
the nature of the forces in the Big Bang by discovering the primordial grav­
ity waves. The Planck mission, a project of the European Space Agency with
NASA participation, is due for launch in 2008 and will extend the WMAP
results to smaller angular scales by using shorter wavelengths. It will also have
greater sensitivity, using bolometric detectors, and has a chance to measure
the cosmic polarization signals even better than WMAP.
   Our team members have continued on with many other projects. Rainer
Weiss is one of the leaders of the LIGO project, the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory. George Smoot is a full professor at the
University of California at Berkeley. Charles Bennett, now at Johns Hopkins
University, and David Wilkinson (who died in 2002), led the WMAP, with
many of the engineers and scientists who built the COBE. Edward Wright is
Principal Investigator for the WISE mission, the Wide-field Infrared Survey
Explorer, which will survey the entire sky with 1,000 times the sensitivity of
the IRAS. Michael Hauser is Deputy Director of the Space Telescope Science
Institute, which operates the Hubble Space Telescope and will operate
the James Webb Space Telescope. Edward Cheng started a small company,
Analytical Concepts, and Stephan Meyer is Deputy Director of the Enrico
Fermi Institute and Associate Director of the Kavli Institute for Cosmological
Physics at the University of Chicago. Most of the senior project managers and
engineers have retired.
   The COBE observations also lead on to new missions to observe the first
stars and galaxies, such as the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST). This is
my current project, for which I serve as the senior project scientist. The JWST
is a deployable 6.5 m infrared telescope, to be launched in 2013 to an orbit
around the Sun-Earth Lagrange point L2. With its protected environment
and the latest in modern infrared detectors and instruments, it could also
produce stunning discoveries. Theory confidently predicts that star forma­
tion began at very high redshifts (> 20), and that some of the first proto-gal­
axies and supernovae may be observable at redshifts of 15 or more.




92


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The COBE mission was first proposed in 1974, and our team owes tremen­
dous thanks to those who read our thin booklets and recognized their
importance. Dr. Nancy Boggess, Program Scientist for infrared astronomy
at NASA Headquarters, was one of those people. She advocated the COBE
even when many astronomers were not interested, and she backed other in­
frared astronomy missions like the IRAS, the Kuiper Airborne Observatory,
the SOFIA (the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy) and the
Spitzer Space Telescope. After the COBE was started, we benefited from
strong and steady support from a series of managers at NASA Headquarters
and Goddard Space Flight Center, who had patience and faith in our work.
Our team was large, and most of the team members (not quite all) are listed
in the books by Mather and Boslough (1996) and by Smoot and Davidson
(1993). We also thank the taxpayers, who, whether they knew it or not, were
funding the COBE mission. Benjamin Franklin, one of the greatest scientists
of his day, and Thomas Jefferson, the first US president to support a major
scientific research project, would be proud to see that the country they
helped to found has carried on with its support of science for the public
good.
   We also thank our families, who were participants in the COBE mission
whether they knew it or not, and supported or at least tolerated the long
hours and weekends that we worked to make the mission a success. For
myself I thank especially my wife Jane, who has known me since before the
COBE was imagined in 1974, and who has taken a keen interest all along. My
parents sent me to school, led by example (my father was a geneticist work­
ing with dairy cattle, and my mother was a teacher), and paid astronomical
sums for tuition. My teachers showed me the way and encouraged my curios­
ity. I especially thank my thesis advisor Paul L. Richards, who started our bal­
loon payload, and my fellow graduate student David Woody, who made the
balloon payload work after all. For sponsoring and participating in the 1974
COBE proposal, my postdoctoral advisor Patrick Thaddeus gets the credit
– without his influence, there would not have been a COBE, or at least not
this one. Within the COBE team I owe special thanks to our project manager
Roger Mattson and his deputy Dennis McCarthy, and to the instrument man­
ager for the FIRAS, Robert Maichle, the FIRAS instrument engineer, Michael
Roberto, and to Richard A. Shafer, deputy principal investigator. Dale Fixsen
was the architect of the FIRAS calibration, and Richard Isaacman and Shirley
Read led the two software teams for the FIRAS. I also thank my co-author
John Boslough, without whom our book “The Very First Light” would not
have been written.
   With the funds from the Nobel Prize and the Peter Gruber Foundation
prize in cosmology, and the concurrence of my wife Jane, I have started the
John and Jane Mather Foundation for Science and the Arts. George Smoot
has also set up a foundation with similar purposes. This is one way of giving
thanks to the many people who contributed to the COBE project.


                                                                             93


REFERENCES
The COBE project archive is now located at http://lambda.gsfc.nasa.gov/ and in­
cludes project information, images, data files, and documentation. Ned Wright’s online
Cosmology Tutorial, http://www.astro.ucla.edu/~wright/cosmolog.htm includes a history
of the COBE project, with online images of early versions of the COBE. The Wikipedia en­
try on COBE is well-written (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COBE) and Richard A. Muller’s
summary of the history of the Berkeley anisotropy measurements is at http://muller.lbl.
gov/COBE-early_history/preCOBEhistory.html. My favorite textbook on cosmology is by
Peebles (1993). An excellent recent summary of cosmology is given by Bennett (2006).

1.	Alpher, R. A., Bethe, H. and Gamow, G. 1948, Phys. Rev. 73, 803.
2.	Arendt, R. G. et al., 1998, Ap. J. 508, 74.
3. Bennett, C. L., 2006, Nature 440, 1126-1131.
4. Bennett, C. L. et al., 1992, Ap. J. Letters 396, L7-L12.
5. Bennett, C. L. et al., 1994, Ap. J. 434, 587-598.
6. Dwek, E. et al., 1998, Ap. J. 508, 106.
7. Fixsen, D. J., Cheng, E. S., and Wilkinson, D. T., 1983, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 620-622.
8. Fixsen, D. J., Dwek, E. , Mather, J.C., Bennett, C. L., and Shafer, R. A. 1998, Ap. J. 508, 123.
9. Fixsen, D. J., and Mather, J. C. 2002, Ap. J. 581, 817-822.
10. Fixsen, D. J. et al., 1994, Ap. J. 420, 445-449.
11. Fixsen, D. J., Hinshaw, G., Bennett, C. L., and Mather, J. C. 1997, Ap. J. 486, 623.
12. Fixsen, D. J., and Mather, J. C. 2002, Ap. J. 581, 817-822.
13.	Gamow, G., 1947, “One, Two, Three… Infinity”, Viking Press.
14.	Ganga, K., Cheng, E., Meyer, S., and Page, L. 1993, Ap. J. Lett. 410, L57.
15.	Gush, H. P., Halpern, M., and Wishnow, E. 1990, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 537.
16.	Guth, A. H., 1981, Phys. Rev. 347, D23.
17.	Harrison, E. R., 1970, Phys. Rev. D1, 2726.
18.	Hauser, M. G., and Dwek, E. 2001, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 39, 249.
19.	Hauser, M. G. et al., 1998, Ap. J. 508, 25.
20. Hemmati, H., Mather, J. C., and Eichhorn, W. L. 1985, Appl. Opt. 24, 4489.
21.	Hubble, E., 1929, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 15, 168–173.
22. Kalas, P., Graham, J., and Clampin, M., 2005, Nature 435, 1067.
23. Keller, J., 1962, J. Optical Soc. Am. 52, 116-130.
24. Kelsall, T. et al., 1998, Ap. J. 508, 44K.
25. Kogut, A. et al., 2004, Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 154, 493–499.
26.	Lemaître, G., 1927, Annals of the Scientific Society of Brussels 47A: 41. Translated in:
    (1931) MNRAS 91: 483–490. Primeval atom: Lemaître, G., 1931, Nature 128 Suppl.:
    704.
27. Mather, J. C., 1984, Appl. Opt. 23, 584-88.
28.	Mather, J. C., 1981, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. AP-29, 967.
29.	Mather, J. C., and Boslough, J. 1996, “The Very First Light,” Basic Books, New York.
30. Mather, J. C., Toral, M., and Hemmati, H., 1986, Appl. Opt. 25, 2826-30.
31. Mather, J. C., Richards, P. L., and Werner, M. W. 1971, Astrophys. J. Lett. 170, L59.
32. Mather, J. C., Fixsen, D.J., Shafer, R.A., Mosier, C., and Wilkinson, D.T. 1998, Ap. J. 512,
    511-520.
33.	Mather, J. C., Woody, D. P., and Richards, P. L. 1974, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
    Tech. 22, 1046.
34. Peebles, P. J. E., and Yu, J. T. 1970, Ap. J. 162, 815.
35. Puplett, E., and Martin, D. H. 1970, Infrared Phys. 10, 105-109.
36. Sachs, R. K., and Wolfe, A. M. 1967, Ap. J. 147, 73.
37. Shivanandan, K., Houck, J. R., and Harwit, M. O., 1968, Phys. Rev. Lett. 21, 1460–1462.
38. Smoot, G., and Davidson, K. “Wrinkles in Time,” Avon Books, 1993.
39.	Thaddeus, P., 1972, Ann. Rev. Astron. Ap. 10, 305.
40. Wright, E. L. et al., 1994, Ap. J. 420, 450-456.


94


41. Woody, D. P., Mather, J. C., Nishioka, N. S. and Richards, P. L. 1975, Phys. Rev. Lett. 34,
    1036.
42.	Zeldovich, Ya. B., 1972, MNRAS, 160, 1.
43.	Zeldovich, Ya. B. and Sunyaev, R. A., 1969, Astrophysics and Space Science, 4, 301.
44. Sunyaev, R. A., and Zeldovich, Ya. B., 1970. Astrophysics and Space Science 7: 3.




                                                                                            95


APPENDIX – COBE TEAM MEMBERS
SCIENCE TEAM
Charles L. Bennett, Deputy Principal Investigator, DMR
Nancy W. Boggess, Deputy Project Scientist for Data; formerly Program Scientist for
     Infrared Astronomy, NASA Headquarters
Edward S. Cheng
Eli Dwek
Samuel Gulkis
Michael G. Hauser, Principal Investigator, DIRBE
Michael A. Janssen
Thomas Kelsall, Deputy Principal Investigator, DIRBE
Philip M. Lubin
John C. Mather, Project Scientist, and Principal Investigator for FIRAS
Stephan S. Meyer
S. Harvey Moseley, Jr.
Thomas L. Murdock
Richard Arrick Shafer, Deputy Principal Investigator, FIRAS
Robert F. Silverberg
George F. Smoot, Principal Investigator, DMR
Rainer Weiss, Chairman, Science Working Group
David T. Wilkinson
Edward L. Wright, Data Team Leader


ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT TEAM
Donald F. Crosby, Instrument Engineer, DIRBE
Ernest C. Doutrich, Flight Assurance Manager
Irene K. Ferber, Project Secretary
Anthony D. Fragomeni, Observatory Manager
Thomas J. Greenwell, Integration and Test Manager
David Gilman, Program Manager, NASA Headquarters
William D. Hoggard, Delta Liaison/Launch Operations Manager
Charles Katz, Systems Engineer, Instruments
Bernard J. Klein, Instrument Engineer, DMR
Loren R. Linstrom, Systems Engineer, DIRBE
Robert J. Maichle, Instrument Engineer, FIRAS
Roger A. Mattson, Project Manager
Dennis K. McCarthy, Deputy Project Manager
Maureen J. Menton, Secretary
Herbert J. Mittelman, Resources Officer
Stephen Servin-Leete, Systems Engineer, DMR
Earnestine Smart, Project Support Specialist
Pierce L. Smith, Ground Data Processing Systems Manager
Jack W. Peddicord, Deputy Project Manager (Resources)
Michael Roberto, Systems Engineer, FIRAS
Robert G. Sanford, Mission Operations Manager
Robert T. Schools, Project Support Manager
Joseph F. Turtil, Systems Engineer
John L. Wolfgang, Software Systems Manager
Earle W. Young, Instruments Manager

Portrait photo of Dr. Mather by photographer Pasco Izzo.




96
