                         KA R L F E R D I N A N D B R A U N


     Electrical oscillations and wireless telegraphy
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1909



In accepting, today, the great honour and privilege of addressing the mem-
bers of an Academy which though of venerable age is constantly renewed
and invigorated by the contribution of fresh strength and energy, I hope for
your indulgence and understanding when I conceive my task not to be that
of talking about wireless telegraphy in general. I have felt it more fitting to
limit myself to the narrower field of the activities in which I have been suc-
cessful in taking some part in the development of the whole.
   I shall ignore my experiments on the propagation of electrical waves
through water which I carried out in the summer of 1898, and shall turn at
once to the experiments which were described and conceived at that time as
being transmission through the air.
   The following should first be mentioned: Marconi, as far as I know, had
begun his experiments on his father’s estate in 1895, and continued them in
England in 1896. His experiments in Spezia harbour were, with other ones,
carried out in 1897, and a distance of 15 km was attained. In the autumn of the
same year, Slaby, using much the same arrangement, reached 21 km over
land but only by means of balloons to which were attached wires of 300 m
in length. Why, must one ask, was it so difficult to increase the range? If the
whole arrangement functioned satisfactorily over a distance of 15 km, why
could not double and more the distance be attained by increasing the initial
voltage, the means of doing which was available? It seemed, however, as if
ever larger antennae were necessary. It was with this impression - whether
the papers had correctly reported the experiments or not, I shall let pass -
that I turned my attention to the subject in the autumn of 1898. I set myself
the task of obtaining stronger effects from the transmitter.
   If I am to give you the general thoughts and concepts which guided me I
must ask you to carry yourselves back with me to the standpoint of our
knowledge at that time. What facts were at our disposal and what conclu-
sions could be drawn from them? It was known how sensitive the Hertzian
oscillations were to the quality of the spark, and also that lengthening the
spark led to definitely deleterious effects whereby the spark became "in-


ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                         227

active". Hertz had already, in his first work, called attention to the strong
damping of the oscillators and compared their electrical oscillations with the
ill-defined acoustic oscillations of wooden rods. Bjerknes, in 1891, had suc-
cessfully measured the damping and found the logarithmic decrement (as
well known the measure for damping) for a linear oscillator to be 0.26,
when he used only a minute spark gap. When, however, the spark gap was
increased to 5 mm, the decrement rose to 0.40. This, and a series of other
facts, indicated the existence of strong spark damping. All known facts be-
came understandable if one assumed that at low capacities the spark con-
sumed a great part of the energy, and the longer the spark was, the larger was
the part of energy it consumed. On the other hand, it had long been known
that the discharge of bigger capacities in the customary arcs was always
oscillatory, and (in radiation-free paths) was obviously much less attenuated.
In fact Feddersen had already directly photographed up to 20 half-cycles of
oscillations in 1862. I took hold of this fact.
    Considering the greater amounts of energy which can be collected and
stored in suitable experimental form in capacitors, one could expect to deliv-
er radiated energy for some time from them. Taken all-in-all, I concluded
that if a sparkless antenna could be excited, from a closed Leyden-jar circuit
of large capacity, into potential oscillations whose average value was that




                                    Fig. 1 .


228                              1909 K.F.BRAUN

of the initial charge in a Marconi transmitter, then one would possess a more
effective transmitter. There was some doubt as to whether this could be at-
tained. And further, it was necessary to decide, by experiments on effects at
a distance, whether any disturbing factor had been overlooked in these con-
siderations. By suitable dimensioning of the exciter circuit it was found pos-
sible to fulfil the first requirement, and comparative experiments on long-
distance effects were in favour of the new arrangement.




   Three circuits arose from this, which I described as inductive and direct
transmitter excitation, together with a mixed circuit derived from both. In
Fig. 1 is shown the direct circuit. The transmitter is earthed. In Fig. 2 is shown
the inductive circuit, in which Marconi’s direct earthing is replaced by a
"symmetry wire". This name would be entirely suitable if the complete
transmitter were floating in free space (e.g., in a balloon). The transmitter
would then form a half-wavelength and the excitation point, which should
lie at the antinode of the current, would be in the middle. Fig. 2 shows how
this circuit is adapted to a mobile station. The set-up is now unsymmetrical
due to the proximity of earth. The symmetry wire can be shortened by load-
ing its end with capacity. This arrangement is then known as a counterpoise.
It disappears entirely if the connected capacity is infinitely large, that is to
say, when the excitation point is on well-conducting earth.


  ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                         229

   By a suitable design of the Leyden-jar circuit, significantly higher voltages
are attained in the transmitter than the charging voltage of the Leyden-jar
circuit. There was some suspicion in my mind that large capacities with
bigger spark lengths would behave in the same way as small capacities. At
that time, little was known about this. The results of later experiments
have, in part, contradicted each other, since other losses appearing with high
voltages were overlooked. But as far as the spark resistance was concerned
my fears, as M. Wien has recently shown, were without foundation. Since
I wanted, however, to be prepared for every eventuality, I asked myself
whether it might not still be possible to increase the power, for instance by
connecting several circuits of the same frequency of oscillation into the ex-
citation circuit of the transmitter. The difficulty was to so couple circuits of
this kind together that they would all start to discharge at the same moment,
for example within exactly 1/10 of a millionth of a second. This task occupied
me on repeated occasions. One solution, attained in a somewhat different
way and to which I was led in the course of my experiments, is given here
(Fig. 3). It has been described as an "energy coupling". I will touch later upon
the advantages possessed by this arrangement, which remain despite the re-
sults obtained by Wien.
   The experiments were to be carried further under practical conditions af-
ter Easter of 1899. The choice of location for the tests fell upon Cuxhaven.
In addition to the main task there was an almost overwhelming pressure of




                                     Fig. 3.


230                              1909 K.F.BRAUN

other allied tests and problems, e.g., how does the coherer work, particularly
under the practical conditions occurring? Is it a resistance or does it behave
like a capacitance or both? Can it be replaced by something better-defined,
and if possible, more quantitatively informative? How do nearby buildings
or metal masses such as masts and stays, which play such an important part
in practice, affect the antenna ? And there was a further multitude of prob-
lems with respect to the particular receiving apparatus. And all these prob-
lems affected the overall solution so that they all needed to be solved nearly
simultaneously. Owing to my professional duties I could devote but little
time to the tests, and they were carried on by two of my assistants until the
autumn of 1900. The way in which the most favourable conditions were
discovered in practice by systematic methods has been described by me
elsewhere.
   On November 16, 1900, I gave my first public lecture on this subject
to the Natural Sciences Society in Strasbourg. There I described, among other
matters, the advantages offered by my circuits for tuned telegraphy, advan-
tages which Marconi had by then also recognized. On the following Febru-
ary 1, I demonstrated before the same Society the methods on which I had
based the tuning of a receiver. I carried out more or less the same experiments
before the Assembly of Research Workers in Natural Sciences in Hamburg
during the autumn of the same year, as well as demonstrating the practical
results on the station at Heligoland.
   In the receiver, too, the most important feature was the capacitor circuit




                                    Fig. 4.


 ELECTRIAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                             231

which was directly coupled to the antenna, and which, as I expressed it, col-
lects the energy radiated towards the receiver into the best possible loss-
free paths, localizes it and thus passes it onwards in the most suitable form
for the detector.
    By my arrangements, so-called coupled systems were introduced through-
out in the wireless telegraphy system, and at this point we might briefly
examine their properties. For preference I have used Oberbeck’s pendulum
model for illustration although it does not correspond completely to the elec-
trical conditions. I produce it here (Fig. 4). Two pendulums of identical fre-
quency are "coupled" through a loaded thread. I draw the first pendulum
away from the position of rest and release it. It transmits its energy to the
second pendulum and the latter increases its energy at the cost of the first,
exciting pendulum. After some time the whole of the energy appears in the
second pendulum. At this point, however, the process repeats itself in the op-
posite sequence. If I make the first pendulum heavy and the second one light,
 I can make the oscillation amplitude of the second greater than that of the
first. The first pendulum represents the Leyden-jar circuit, the second the
transmitter to which - in this case - the whole of the energy of the Leyden-jar
circuit is passed. According to the ratio of the capacities the voltage can be
amplified (or, if desired, reduced).
    Now Oberbeck in 1895 demonstrated the following by calculation. If a
capacitor circuit is allowed to operate inductively upon a second circuit of
the same natural frequency there appear - most strikingly - two oscillations
in both circuits, one higher and one lower than the natural frequency of
oscillation. The closer the coupling, i.e., the quicker the energy transference
from the first to the second circuit becomes the further apart lie the fre-
quencies. Only for the case of infinitely loose coupling do the two oscillations
approximate to the natural frequency, that is to say, become equal to each
other.
    This result holds also for mechanical systems, which includes our pen-
dulums. If our two equally-tuned pendulums are coupled, then each should
 exhibit two different frequencies of oscillation. The result loses its surprise,
 when the phenomenon, I would like to say, is not treated mathematically but
 actually takes place before our eyes. The characteristic is this: the oscillations
 of the second pendulum increase steadily from zero upwards, then again de-
 crease, and vice versa. We note from each pendulum what is known in
 acoustics as "beating". I shall recall now a method of representing graph-
ically the acoustic beating (Fig. 5). An oscillating tuning fork carries a glass


      1909 K. F. BRAUN
232




         Fig. 5.




           Fig. 7.


  ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                                233

plate covered in soot (carbon black). A second tuning fork writes upon
this oscillating glass plate by means of a small pin whilst it itself is drawn
across the plate. One tuning fork would describe a curve of constant ampli-
tude (Fig. 6). The oscillations of both forks are added algebraically. And
when both forks have different frequencies, as is here the case, a curve as in
Fig. 7 results.
   I shall call them briefly "beating (or pulsating) oscillations". Just such
curves would arise if we allowed our pendulum to write upon a moving plate.
If the exciting pendulum gave the upper curve, a, then the excited pendulum
would give the lower curve, b.
   Each such beating oscillation can be considered - from the elementary laws
of trigonometry - as arising from the superposition of two harmonic oscil-
lations of different frequency, say n1 and n 2.
   Although this is mathematically possible, however, experience teaches us
that if this pulsating oscillation is applied to a structure capable of oscillation
whose natural frequency fits in with one or other of the frequencies n 1or n2,
then it will be excited in its own natural frequency of oscillation. It selects
one of the fictitious harmonic components and endows it thereby with an
independent existence. A body so excited is called a resonator, and the phe-
nomenon itself is known as resonance.
   The thing is clear to the mind in the case of the tuning fork example. In
space we would observe the beats, but resonators would separate the two
tuning-fork tones. The application to our pendulum model is also obvious.
Each part of the system performs pulsating oscillations, resonators react to two
different harmonic oscillations.* If we wish (and here I return to the elec-
trical example), to record, by means of resonators, oscillations from the ra-
diation sent into space by the antenna, then we have to adjust the resonator
to one of the two oscillations.
   These electrical oscillations can be separated by means of a variable capaci-
tor circuit, the so-called resonance Leyden-jar circuit (to which I will return
later), so long as care is taken that as far as possible the circuit has no feed-back
into the system being investigated. Oberbeck’s result was concerned with
the case where both system components had closed current circuits (with
quasi-stationary flow) and were inductively coupled. It can now be easily

* If time allowed, I would be able to demonstrate both these oscillations "analytically"
by means of the pendulum model. This second model, introduced by Dr. Mandelstam,
and representing direct coupling through its correct mechanical analogue, allows every
detail to be recognized.


234                              1909 K. F. BRAUN

shown that both oscillations also exist in the open current path of an antenna,
whether it is excited directly or inductively (I am ignoring higher harmonics).
   In the summer of 1902 I was able to erect two experimental stations on
two forts at Strasbourg for the purpose of closer study. The task which I had
set for us was to determine the most favourable conditions in the receiver.
We adopted the resonant circuit, in which known capacitances were com-
bined with calculated self-inductances, so as to bring both parts of the trans-
mitter system into the same natural frequency of oscillation. We fixed like-
wise the two oscillations arising from the coupling and searched for these
with the receiver. The result of the test was, for that time, surprising, as an
example will show. If, by means of a coil in the receiver circuit, the oscilla-
tions were transferred inductively into a second coil located in a tuned cir-
cuit containing the indicator (parallel to a small capacitor), not only was the
sharpness of the resonance but also - and here was the surprise - the intensity
of the excitation was raised as soon as the two coils were moved away from
one another. The intensity increased with increasing distance between the
coils, though naturally beyond a certain limit there was again a decrease.
Described in the customary expression, the effectiveness increased with looser
coupling. This result in the receiver was not subject to a similar loose coup-
ling in the transmitter.
   There were two important results from these experiments: (a) greater free-
dom from disturbance in the receiver; and (b) a valuable measuring in-
strument for wireless engineering. When Dr. Franke of Siemens & Halske
(who were working with us) saw the tests he proposed to base technically-
useable equipment on them. Until then the resonance circuit had been as-
sembled from existing parts to suit the particular requirements, and from
whatever came to hand. Through the combination of a Köpsel’s calibrated
variable rotating capacitor and a number of calculated self-inductances, an
apparatus was constructed which covered a large range of wavelengths both
conveniently and continuously. The "current effect" was measured by means
of a Riess’s air thermometer which I had long used for intensity measure-
ments of oscillations. The technical preparation fell to Mr. Dönitz. So arose
the wave-meter, described by him and generally named after him, an appara-
tus which, using the theory already developed by Bjerknes in 1891, permit-
ted simultaneously the damping or attenuation of electrical waves to be meas-
ured, a quantity whose numerical value was ever more needed. There are
other wave-meters with open current paths; these are simpler, but despite this
the closed-circuit apparatus has because of its other advantages held the field.


 ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                            235

By means of this instrument the foundation of measuring techniques for wire-
less telegraphy were laid. It soon displaced our cumbersome laboratory equip-
ment and gave us great help in our scientific investigations, whilst it became
indispensible for rational technical work in the field of electrical oscillations.
   In the summer of 1902 came the publication of a theoretical study of the
coupled transmitter by Max Wien. This particularly concerned the effect of
damping. Wien showed by calculation the versatility of the coupled trans-
mitter. He summed up the qualitative results of his work as follows: "Ac-
cording to the kind of coupling, a powerful but quickly attenuated excitation
can be attained which reaches far into the distance, or alternatively a slowly
decreasing wave-train which is capable of exciting a similarly-tuned resona-
tor while passing all others by - a cannon shot to be heard afar, or a soft,
slowly declining tuning-fork tone".
   This theoretical investigation was most effective in clarifying the problem
basically, and it will remain the foundation. It remains to be seen, however,
how closely the data chosen for the numerical examples correspond to actual
practice. Some calculated figures and a few laboratory figures were all that
were available on the subject of damping. The field of measurements in rela-
tion to practice was beginning to be opened up. From then on, the work
spread further and further outwards, branching into that of the scientific lab-
oratories on the one hand, and the conversion of their results into practice
with its complicated conditions and extensive requirements on the other.
Success in the latter connection is due to Count Arco and Mr. Rendahl.
   The circumstances which led me, more than ten years ago, to introduce
the capacitor circuit, have altered greatly in the meantime. The Leyden-jar
circuit is still to-day indispensible in wireless telegraphy. Two properties
should be mentioned which I have not yet touched upon:
(I) For equal powers it is easier to design an inductor for use with high
charging capacities and low voltages than vice versa. This was a determining
factor at the time for the energy circuit mentioned earlier and remained so
for this set-up.
(2) Insulation difficulties are practically non-existent in the Leyden-jar cir-
cuit, but the contrary is the case in the antenna circuit. If, for example, the
insulators in a coupled transmitter are damp, the transmitter still works,
whilst it can become impossible to charge it statically or with low frequency.
   I illustrated the latter point in my lecture in November of 1900 by means
of the following experiment. I allowed the transmitter to operate inductively
upon a neighbouring receiver and so produced current in the latter which


236                               1909 K.F.BRAUN

brightly lit up an incandescent bulb. I touched the transmitter wire with a
moist binding thread which was connected to earth. This had no effect on the
operation in the case of the coupled transmitter, but the transmitter with
direct inductor charging could not be operated once the damp thread was
placed in contact with it.

Before I leave the subject of the coupled system I might perhaps recall an
accessory which was of great use to me and other experimenters. I mean the
cathode-ray tube which I described in 1897. It provided a visual picture of
current- and voltage-waveforms up to 100kc/s, and was the means by which
investigations of period, waveform, intensity and thereby damping, as well
as relative phases, could be made.
   One of the first applications of this tube was Knut Ångström’s neat meth-
od of showing directly the hysteresis curve. In a similar way, the permeabil-
ity of iron up to 130kc/s was investigated at the Strasbourg Institute, and a
number of other problems concerned with electrical oscillations were also
studied.
   Three oscillograms made with the tube will serve to show its application.
They illustrate the primary current pattern in the inductor, which interests
us, and the significance of the capacitor therein.




                                     Fig. 8.

   In Fig. 8 the primary current in the non-capacitative circuit falls away rela-
tively slowly when the circuit is broken. On the other hand, if a capacitor
(Fig. 9) is switched in, oscillations occur on breaking the circuit. The current
falls much more steeply and by nearly twice the value. The secondary coil
was open. If this coil circuit is closed (Fig. 10), the oscillations are faster and
 are attenuated more strongly.
   Many applications of the tube are given in Zenneck’s well-known book.


  ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                      237

I will show you now only the current oscillations in two coupled (but
strongly damped) capacitor circuits. You will see that the tubes do in fact
show actual beating or pulsating oscillations (Fig. 11).

In still another place, wireless telegraphy brought me into contact with ear-
lier investigations which I had made, this time in connection with work in
my youth. I found in 1874 that materials such as galena, pyrite, pyrolusite,




                                   Fig. 9.




                                   Fig. 10.




                                     Fig. 11.1


238                              1909 K.F.BRAUN

tetrahedrite, etc., departed from Ohm’s Law, particularly when an electrode
made contact over a small surface area. These materials greatly interested me
since they conduct without electrolysis although they are binary com-
pounds. The resistance appeared to be dependent upon the direction and in-
tensity of the current and I could, for instance, separate the opening and clos-
ing currents of a small inductor by means of such materials, in a similar way
to that of a Geisler’s tube. I did not succeed in finding an "explanation" for
the phenomena, for instance to what material unsymmetry the electrical un-
symmetries (which without doubt existed) corresponded. I had to content
myself with showing that the observed phenomena were not brought about
through secondary effects such as heating. I was able to demonstrate that it
appeared - at least qualitatively - even in 1/500 second, and I was convinced
that - perhaps at the furthest limits - an inertialess process was concerned, a
view which was supported by E. Cohn whilst carrying out some other experi-
ments, when he found that the unsymmetrical d.c. resistance could follow
current oscillations of 25kc/s. But always there remained with me a feeling
of dissatisfaction, and with it, a faint memory which had obviously never
died, but remained half-somnolent at the back of my mind. Instinctively I
was driven back to this valve effect (with which I had repeatedly, though in
vain, attempted to obtain direct current from oscillations of light) when I
began to occupy myself with wireless telegraphy in 1898. The elements
showed the expected detector effect, but at that time offered no advantages
over the coherer. As the swing to aural reception of messages took place, I
came back to these materials, and recognized their usefulness for this purpose
in 1901. In 1905 the Gesellschaft für drahtlose Telegraphie (Wireless Telegraphy
Co.) decided, on my recommendation, to start up a technical project in this
sphere of activity. Today, these detectors - including other combinations of
a similar nature - are extensively used. Pierce, by means of the cathode-ray
tube, has demonstrated for slow oscillations an almost complete separation
of positive and negative current components in the case of molybdenite. It
seems to me that it is still an open question whether this will hold also for
rapid oscillations.

I will turn now to another series of experiments.
  It had always seemed most desirable to me to transmit the waves, in the
main, in one direction only. I will not concern myself with the successful
experiments of this kind made at the Strasbourg Forts in 1901, since it came
out later that similar proposals had already been made by others.


  ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                         239
   I found in 1902 that an antenna, inclined at somewhat less than 10 o to the
horizon, formed a kind of directional receiver. The receptivity showed a
clearly defined maximum for waves passing through the vertical plane in
which the antenna was situated. The results were published in March of 1903.
   A directional transmitter is made up in the following way (Fig. 12). It is
assumed that the antennae A and B, located at corners of an equilateral trian-
gle, are equal in phase, but are delayed by a quarter of a cycle of oscillation
relative to antenna C, which is in the third comer. The height CD of the
triangle is to be a quarter wavelength. The radiation will then prefer the
direction CD. The wave emanating from C will reach AB at the moment
that A and B start to oscillate.




                                  A
                                      Fig. 12.


  The task arose to attain this kind of phase difference for rapid oscillations,
and prior to this, to measure such differences. A measuring method came
easily to hand, one which has also proved itself in practical experiments.
The solution of the other task did not go well using the scheme which I
had thought out. On the other hand, two of my assistants found an inge-
nious solution when they took up the work, at my suggestion, in the Stras-
bourg Institute. Experiments were carried out on a big parade-ground in the
vicinity of Strasbourg (spring of 1905).
   In Fig. 13 is shown, schematically, the layout used. The field was meas-
ured at a fair distance away, that is to say, in the so-called wave-zone. There
was satisfactory agreement between theory and observation, and the results
were checked in various ways. It was further shown that the experimental
layout functioned in the desired sense. By suitable distribution of the am-
plitudes in the three transmitters, a field as in Fig. 14 was calculated (the


240                              1909 K.F.BRAUN




                                    Fig. 13.




                                     Fig. 14.

 singly dotted curve is the measured field). The radial vectors represent the
 range. If the roles of the three transmitters are exchanged - by simply tripping
 a change-over switch - the preferred direction can be rotated through 120 o
 or 60o.


  ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                           241

   It would appear to be of general interest to remark that one is led to the
conclusion that the radiation of a transmitter is reduced here by the oscilla-
tions in its neighbour, which are shifted in position and phase, a conclusion
which could be proved experimentally.
   If nowadays optical phenomena are ascribed to electrical molecular resona-
tors, then electrical processes, as demonstrated here by a single example, can
also be linked up with optical phenomena, though this can hardly be experi-
mentally verified in this field.
   Here, the study of electrical oscillations supplements that of optical oscilla-
tions, and since we are in the position to tackle a problem in either field by
analogy with a phenomenon which is comprehended in the other field, the
first attack on the problem can be made from the electrical or the optical
standpoint according to whichever presents the easier concept to realize. I
can perhaps illustrate this by means of two worked-out examples.
   Elementary considerations led me to the conclusion that a medium, com-
posed of layers of different dielectric constants, must behave as a uniaxial
crystal if it is assumed that the layer thicknesses are only a fraction of a wave-
length. I was able to confirm this conclusion in the following way (Fig. 15).
A beam of practically parallel electrical rays emerges from the Hertzian re-
flector. It strikes a structure made of bricks in layers having the same breadth
of air layers. These layers lie open to short waves, but if the wavelength is 12
times, or so, longer than the layer thickness, then the brick grating behaves
towards it as a body which homogeneously occupies the space but exhibits
double refraction. The electrical oscillations are linearly polarized and inci-
dent at an azimuth of 45o upon the brick layers. A brick structure which is




                                     Fig.15.


242                                1909 K.F.BRAUN

about 2 1/2 times the thickness of a single brick has the effect of a quarter-wave
foil of mica, and the linearly-incident ray emerges circularly polarized as we
deduce from the investigations with a Righi’s resonator. Assume it is right-
handed circular. If the layer thickness is now doubled, the emergent wave is
again linearly polarized, though in the other quadrant. And so we can trans-
form the ray, by continuous addition of further thicknesses, into a left-
handed circular one, and finally back into a ray which is linearly polarized
parallel to the incident ray. The double refraction of the brick grating surpas-
ses that of calcite. Optically, this brick structure would correspond to a tiny
crystal of a few thousandths of a millimetre length of edge, but electrically it
is 2 1/2 metres thick, weighs 4000 kg, and its raw material is worth about 200
marks. The analogue of a corresponding optical phenomenon was also dem-
onstrated by me at a later date.
   This phenomenon of double refraction does not depend upon the use of
rigid materials. Whether the double refraction occurring in cross-striated
muscle results from a similar layer structure is thus a closely related question.
   We have so far studied an electrically unknown, but optically conjectured
phenomenon and both have been discovered to exist. The following exam-
ple is concerned with demonstrating the unknown optical phenomenon cor-
responding to a known electrical phenomenon. It seemed to me to be of
interest to reproduce the Hertzian grid experiment in the field of visible rays.
For this to be realized, a very fine grating of metal wires was necessary and
from 10,000 to 100,000 tiny wires, separated by air gaps, had to be located
within a width of 1 mm. Mechanical methods of manufacture are impos-
sible, but a Hertzian grid could be made in the following way. If a powerful
discharge is passed through a thin metal wire on a glass plate, or between two
such plates, the well-known sputtering or vaporization effect occurs, as you
can see from Fig. 16. The metal wire vaporizes (temperatures of up to 30,000o




                                    Fig. 16.


 ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                             243

are calculated). The metal vapour is driven outwards by the pressure arising
from the explosive effect (Fig. 17) and is then again precipitated obviously
in a kind of grid structure on the glass. If we allow linearly polarized light
to fall upon the prepared surface, it will, if the oscillations are parallel to the
lines of the grid, be strongly reflected and strongly absorbed-the prepara-
tion appears dark (Fig. 18). If the plane of the oscillations is turned so that it
is perpendicular to the lines of the grid, the metal layer becomes transparent




                                     Fig. 17.




                                      Fig. 18.

(Fig. 19). We have the complete optical analogue to a Hertzian grid made
out of moderately good conductors.
   This experiment permits a further development. If we imagine that in an
organized fabric such as muscle tissue, plant fibres, etc. there exists a similar
fine grating structure somewhat in the form of the finest possible channels,
then if we could succeed in filling these with metal, the preparation would
have the optical effect of a Hertzian grid. H. Ambronn, in 1896, treating the


244                             1909 K.F.BRAUN




                                   Fig. 19.


above mentioned substances with gold or silver salts, discovered phenomena
which I explained in this way. In an exhaustive investigation into this matter
I have everywhere found confirmation of my concept, and nowhere a con-
tradiction. Yet a direct and incontrovertible proof would be extremely desira-
ble because of the importance of its consequences. For if my idea is, as I be-
lieve, correct, then we would in this way not only discover sub-microscopic
gratings, but, as a result of electrical imitation, we would even be able to
some extent to make a picture of the material structure which is as yet in-
visible to the human eye. This method would augment those so far available
in a most valuable manner, for it takes its place just where the microscope
and - because of the density of the particles - even the ultramicroscope, reach
the limit of their capacity.
   I must now finish this address. The sputtering experiments led me back to
the Leyden-jar circuit. I pursued for a long time the aim of automatically
switching out the Leyden-jar circuit from the oscillating system as soon as it
had given up its energy to the secondary conductor. I attempted this in the
following way. A thin wire was connected into the Leyden-jar circuit, and
I hoped that, at the right moment, the primary circuit would be switched
 out as a result of vaporization of the wire. The experiment was not success-
ful, at any rate at the frequencies which I used, apparently because the highly
heated metal vapour remained ionized for too long a time. The problem was
solved, however, by Max Wien using the so-called quenched spark, and by
Rendahl using the mercury spark-gap. Practical experience has augmented


  ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY                         245

Wien’s discovery. Arising from this and through the agency of Rendahl and
Arco, came the so-called tone-spark. The small hissing or quenched sparks of
Wien of itself meet the conditions which I had hoped to produce artificially.
The Leyden-jar circuit cuts itself out at the most suitable moment, and the
greater part of the primary energy then oscillates in the highly conductive
paths in the transmitter at its own natural frequency.
   On the occasion of my first lecture in November 1900 I closed with the
following words:
   "Sometimes, wireless telegraphy has been described as spark telegraphy,
and so far a spark in one place or another has been unavoidable. Here, how-
ever, it has been made as harmless as possible. This is important. For the spark
which produces the waves also destroys them again as Saturn destroyed his
own children. What was pursued here could be truthfully described as
sparkless telegraphy."
   Finishing as I did with these words at that time, I feel happy to think that
with the means I have described we have come appreciably nearer to this
target, and have thereby made the coupled transmitter still more effective.
