         GRAPHENE: MATERIALS IN THE FLATLAND

         Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2010
         by
         KONSTANTIN S. NOVOSELOV
         School of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Manchester, Oxford
         Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK.




                                                               “I call our world Flatland…”
                               Edwin Abbott Abbott, Flatland. A Romance of Many Dimensions


         Much like the world described in Abbott’s Flatland, graphene is a two-dimensional
         object. And, as ‘Flatland’ is “a romance of many dimensions”, graphene is much
         more than just a ﬂat crystal. It possesses a number of unusual properties which
         are often unique or superior to those in other materials. In this brief lecture I would
         like to explain the reason for my (and many other people’s) fascination with
         this material, and invite the reader to share some of the excitement I have
         experienced while researching it.



         GRAPHENE AND ITS UNUSUAL PROPERTIES
         Graphene is a two-dimensional (2D) atomic crystal which consists of carbon
         atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice (Fig. 1). Although sporadic attempts
         to study it can be traced back to 1859 [1], active and focused investigation
         of this material started only a few years ago, after a simple and effective way
         to produce relatively large isolated graphene samples was found [2–3]. The
         original ‘Scotch tape method’ [2–3] appeared to be so simple and effective
         that this area of science grew extremely quickly, and now hundreds of labo-
         ratories around the world deal with different aspects of graphene research.
         Also known as the micromechanical cleavage technique, the Scotch tape
         method has a low barrier to entry in that it does not require large investments
         or complicated equipment, which has helped considerably to broaden the
         geography of graphene science.




         106




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 2                                                                       2011-09-01 08:17:41


                        Figure 1. The crystal structure of graphene – carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb
                        lattice.




                        Another source of graphene’s widespread popularity is that it appeals to
                        researchers from a myriad of different backgrounds. It is the ﬁrst example
                        of 2D atomic crystals, whose properties from the thermodynamics point of
                        view are signiﬁcantly different from those of 3D objects. It is also a novel
                        electronic system with unprecedented characteristics [4]. It can be thought
                        of as a giant molecule which is available for chemical modiﬁcation [5-6]
                        and is promising for applications [7–8] ranging from electronics [7–9] to
                        composite materials [8, 10–11]. These factors allow for true multi- and
                        cross-disciplinary research. Thanks to these attributes, within seven years
                        of the ﬁrst isolation of graphene we have accumulated as many results and
                        approached the problem from as many different perspectives as other areas
                        of science would more commonly achieve over several decades.
                           The major draw to people in the ﬁeld, though, is graphene’s unique
                        properties, each of which seems to be superior to its rivals. This material
                        is the ﬁrst 2D atomic crystal ever known to us [3]; the thinnest object ever
                        obtained; the world’s strongest material [12]; its charge carriers are massless
                        Dirac fermions [7, 13–14]; it is extremely electrically [15] and thermally [16]
                        conductive; very elastic; and impermeable to any molecules [17] – the list
                        goes on. Even a simple inventory of graphene’s superlative qualities would
                        require several pages, and new entries are being added on a monthly basis.
                           As it is not possible to give a comprehensive overview of all of graphene’s
                        properties in one lecture, I will limit myself to just three, which, in my opinion,
                        give the best possible impression of graphene: (i) it is the ﬁrst example of
                        2D atomic crystals, (ii) it demonstrates unique electronic properties, thanks
                        to charge carriers which mimic massless relativistic particles, and (iii) it has
                        promise for a number of applications.

                                                                                                       107




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 3                                                                           2011-09-01 08:17:59


         I) TWO-DIMENSIONAL CRYSTALS


         Stability of 2D crystals
         Intuitively one can easily discern the difference between two- and three-
         dimensional objects: restrict the size or motion of an object to its width
         and length and forget (or reduce to zero) its height and you will arrive in
         ‘ﬂatland’. The consequences of subtracting one (or more) dimensions from
         our 3D world are often severe and dramatic. To give just a few examples:
         there are no knots in 2D space; the probability of reaching any point in
         d-dimensional space by random walking is exactly unity, for d=1 and d=2
         and smaller than 1 in higher dimensions [18]; the problem of bosons with
         repulsive potential in 1D is exactly equivalent to that of fermions, since
         particles cannot penetrate each other and cannot be swapped [19–20] (the
         Tonks–Girardeau gas and fermionisation of bosons in 1D problem); and it is
         impossible to have thermodynamic equilibrium between different phases in
         1D systems [21].
            Many of the peculiar properties that one can expect in 2D systems are
         present due to so-called ‘logarithmic divergences’, with the most well-known
         example being the weak localisation quantum corrections to the conductivity
         in 2D. In particular, a series of works by Peierls [22–23], Landau [21, 24],
         Mermin [25] and Wagner [26] demonstrated the theoretical impossibility
         of long-range ordering (crystallographic or magnetic) in 2D at any ﬁnite
         temperatures. The stability of 2D crystals (here the theory has to be expanded
         to take ﬂexural phonons or out-of-plane displacements into account
         [27–29]) is a simple consequence of divergences at low k-vectors, when the
         integration of the atomic displacements is taken over the whole 2D k-space.
            It is important to mention that such instabilities are the result of thermal
         ﬂuctuations and disappear at T = 0. Also, strictly speaking, at any ﬁnite tem-
         perature the ﬂuctuations diverge only for inﬁnitely large 2D crystals (k o 0);
         as the divergences are weak (logarithmic), crystals of limited sizes might
         exhibit inﬁnitely small ﬂuctuations at least at low temperatures.
            These ﬂuctuations place a fundamental restriction on the existence and
         synthesis of low-dimensional crystals. Growth or synthesis generally requires
         elevated temperatures – at which only crystallites of very limited size can be
         stable in the ﬂat form – and, as the bending rigidity of such crystals is usually
         low, they would generally crumple and fold easily and form 3D structures
         (which might also help in reducing the energy of unsaturated dangling
         bonds at the perimeter). Therefore the largest ﬂat molecule synthesised to
         date is C222 [30], and the method used to create it is the low (room) temperature
         cyclodehydrogenation of a 3D precursor molecule.
            A possible way around the problem of 2D crystals’ instability is synthesis
         as part of a 3D structure, with subsequent extraction of the 2D part of the
         system at low temperatures (in fact, such a strategy is the basis of all methods
         of graphene synthesising available to date) [7]. The ﬂuctuations, which
         might diverge at high temperatures, are quenched during the synthesis due

         108




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 4                                                                 2011-09-01 10:51:10


                        to the interaction with the 3D matrix (substrate) whenever the extraction
                        of 2D crystals can be done at low temperatures where the ﬂuctuations are
                        suppressed.

                        Graphene creation
                        The simplest implementation of this method for graphitic materials is to use
                        bulk graphite and exfoliate it into individual planes. Graphite is a layered
                        material and can be considered as a stack of individual graphene layers.
                        High-quality graphite typically requires growth temperatures of above 3000K,
                        but exfoliation can be done at room temperatures – an order of magnitude
                        lower than the growth temperatures. In fact, many of us have performed this
                        procedure numerous times while using pencils, as drawing with a pencil
                        relies on exfoliation of graphite (though not up to the monolayer limit,
                        which would be practically invisible to the naked eye).




                        Figure 2. The micromechanical cleavage technique (‘Scotch tape’ method) for producing
                        graphene. Top row: Adhesive tape is used to cleave the top few layers of graphite from
                        a bulk crystal of the material. Bottom left: The tape with graphitic ﬂakes is then pressed
                        against the substrate of choice. Bottom right: Some ﬂakes stay on the substrate, even on
                        removal of the tape.


                        Graphite exfoliation techniques slightly more elaborate than writing with
                        a pencil have been attempted by several groups [31–37] and thin graphitic
                        ﬁlms obtained. But even graphitic ﬁlms only 20 layers thick would generally
                        behave similarly to bulk graphite, so the real breakthrough came when
                        monolayer ﬁlms of graphene, large enough to be studied by conventional
                        techniques, were obtained [2–3]. The technique used in those cases is known
                        as the micromechanical cleavage or ‘Scotch-tape’ method (Fig. 2). The top
                        layer of the high-quality graphite crystal is removed by a piece of adhesive tape,
                        which – with its graphitic crystallites – is then pressed against the substrate
                        of choice. If the adhesion of the bottom graphene layer to the substrate is

                                                                                                             109




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 5                                                                                 2011-08-29 09:25:03


         stronger than that between the layers of graphene, a layer of graphene can
         be transferred onto the surface of the substrate, producing extremely high-
         quality graphene crystallites via an amazingly simple procedure. In principle,
         this technique works with practically any surface which has reasonable
         adhesion to graphene.




         Figure 3. Thin graphitic ﬂakes on a surface of Si/SiO2 wafer (300 nm of SiO2, purple
         colour). The different colours correspond to ﬂakes of differing thicknesses, from a100 nm
         (the pale yellow ones) to a few nanometres (a few graphene layers – the most purple ones).
         The scale is given by the distance between the lithography marks (200 μm).




         However, especially in the ﬁrst experiments, the yield of the process was
         extremely low, and one would have to scan macroscopically large areas to
         ﬁnd a micrometer-sized graphene ﬂake (Fig. 3). Needless to say, this search
         is a practically impossible task for conventional microscopy methods like
         Atomic Force Microscopy or Scanning Electron Microscopy; realistically only
         optical microscopy, which relies on the high-sensitivity, speed and processing
         power of the human eye and brain, can do the job. So it came as a pleasant
         surprise that monolayers of graphite on some substrates (Si/SiO2 with a
         300 nm SiO2 layer, for instance) can produce an optical contrast of up to
         15% for some wavelengths of incoming light. The phenomenon is now well
         understood [38–39] and made Si/SiO2 with an oxide layer either 100 nm
         or 300 nm thick the substrate of choice for a number of years for most
         experimental groups relying on the micromechanical cleavage method of
         graphene production.

         110




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 6                                                                          2011-08-29 09:25:03


                           Similar techniques (growth at high temperatures as a part of 3D system,
                        with subsequent extraction of the 2D part at low temperatures) have been
                        used in other graphene preparation methods. Probably the closest to the
                        micromechanical exfoliation method is chemical exfoliation, which can be
                        traced back to the original work of Professor Brodie[1] who treated graphite
                        with acids and arrived at ‘Graphon’ (or graphite oxide as we now know
                        it). Graphite oxide can be thought of as graphite intercalated with oxygen
                        and hydroxyl groups, which makes it a hydrophilic material and easily
                        dispersible in water. This technique produces extremely thin, sometimes
                        even monolayer, ﬂakes of this material [40–44], which can then subsequently
                        be reduced, producing low quality graphene [5, 10, 45–47].
                           One can imagine an even simpler path for chemical exfoliation. Although
                        graphene is hydrophobic, it can be dispersed in other, mostly organic,
                        solvents [48–49]. By repeating the exfoliation and puriﬁcation (centrifugation)
                        process several times one can obtain 50% and higher fractions of graphene
                        in suspension.
                           There are also well-known graphene-growing recipes from surface science.
                        Catalytic cracking of hydrocarbons, or precipitation of dissolved carbon on
                        a metal surface with subsequent graphitisation, has long been known to
                        produce high-quality graphene layers [50–57]. A similar process is the
                        graphitisation of excess carbon atoms after sublimation of silicon from
                        the surface of silicon carbide [58–59]. One should note that it is also true
                        in these cases that graphene must be a part of the 3D structure, as the
                        underlying substrate aids in quenching the diverging ﬂuctuations at high
                        temperatures.

                        Other 2D crystals
                        Thus far we have been talking mainly about graphene, but the 2D materials
                        family is of course not limited to carbonic crystals, although similar problems
                        are faced when attempts are made to synthesise other 2D materials. At least
                        two possible methods of obtaining other 2D crystals come immediately to
                        mind.
                          One possibility is to apply the same recipes we saw working for graphene to
                        other chemical compounds.




                                                                                                   111




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 7                                                                       2011-08-29 09:25:03


         Figure 4. Optical micrographs of various 2D crystals (top) and their crystal structures
         (bottom). Left: Flakes of boron-nitride on top of an oxidised Si wafer (290 nm of SiO2, the
         image taken using narrow band yellow ﬁlter, O =590 nm). The central crystal is a monolayer.
         Centre: A device prepared from mono- and bi-layer NbSe2 crystals on an oxidised Si wafer
         (290 nm of SiO2). Right: Flakes of MoS2 on top of an oxidised Si wafer (90 nm of SiO2).
         The piece at the bottom-right corner is a monolayer. Colour coding for the crystal structures at
         the bottom: yellow spheres = boron, purple = nitrogen; large white spheres = niobium, red =
         selenide, blue = molybdenum, small white spheres = sulfur.




         Micromechanical or chemical exfoliation can be successfully applied to
         other layered materials (Fig. 4) such as Bi2Sr2CaCu2Ox [3], NbSe2 [3], BN
         [3], MoS2 [3, 60], Bi2Te3 [61] and other dichalcogenides, and epitaxial growth
         has been applied to grow monolayers of boron-nitride [62–63]. As with
         graphene, the crystal quality of the obtained monolayer samples is very high.
         Many of the 2D materials conduct and even demonstrate ﬁeld effects (changes
         of the resistance with gating). The properties of the obtained 2D materials
         might be very different from those of their 3D precursors. For example,
         the overlapping between the valence and conduction bands in graphene is
         exactly zero while it is ﬁnite in graphite [2], and a monolayer of molybdenum
         disulphide is a direct band semiconductor while the bulk material has got an
         indirect band gap [60].
            A second approach is to start with an existing 2D crystal and modify
         it chemically to obtain a new material. One can think of graphene, for
         instance, as a giant molecule. All the atoms of this molecule are, in principle,
         accessible for chemical reaction (as opposed to the 3D case, where atoms in
         the interior of the crystal cannot participate in such reactions).
            Graphene, due to the versatility of carbon atoms, is a particularly good
         candidate for such modiﬁcation. Depending on the environment, the
         electron conﬁguration of a carbon atom (which has four electrons in the
         outer shell) might change dramatically, allowing it to bond to two, three or
         four other atoms. Bonding between the carbon atoms is exceptionally strong
         (the strongest materials on Earth are all carbon-based), whereas bonding to
         other species, though stable, can be changed by chemical reactions. To give
         an example of such versatility: a backbone of two carbon atoms each can
         accept one, two or three hydrogen atoms, forming ethyne (also known as
         acetylene), ethene (a.k.a. ethylene) or ethane respectively. It is possible to

         112




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 8                                                                                2011-09-01 10:50:07


                        convert any one of those into another by adding or removing hydrogen, thus
                        changing the electron conﬁguration of carbon atoms between so-called sp,
                        sp2 and sp3 hybridisations.
                          Carbon atoms in graphene are sp2-hybridised, meaning that only three
                        electrons form the strong V-bonds and the fourth has a communal use forming
                        the so-called S-bonds. So, graphene is a zero-overlap semimetal and conducts
                        electricity very well (in contrast to diamond, where each carbon atom is in
                        sp3-hybridisation and therefore has four neighbours. In that case all four
                        electrons in the outer shell are involved in forming V-bonds, so a huge gap
                        appears in the electronic band structure, making diamond an insulator). The
                        versatility of carbon atoms, then, gives us an idea of how to create novel 2D
                        crystals: one can attach something to carbon atoms, creating a new material
                        with a different chemical composition and exciting properties.




                        Figure 5. Chemically modiﬁed graphene. One can add different species (like hydrogen or
                        ﬂuorine) to graphene scaffolding. Carbon atoms are represented by blue spheres.



                        A wide variety of chemicals can be attached to graphene. So far only two
                        crystallographically-ordered chemical modiﬁcations of graphene have been
                        predicted and achieved: graphane (when one hydrogen atom is attached to
                        each of the carbon atoms) [64–65] and ﬂuorographene (Fig. 5) [66–69].
                        Both derivatives are insulators (exhibiting large band-gaps) of very high
                        crystallographic quality and very stable at ambient temperatures (though it
                        should be mentioned that ﬂuorographene generally exhibits more robust
                        properties, probably due to stronger C-F bonding in comparison to C-H).
                        Graphane and ﬂuorographene open the ﬂoodgates for the chemical modiﬁ-
                        cation of graphene and for the appearance of novel two-dimensional atomic
                        crystals with predetermined properties. It would be interesting to see other
                        derivatives, probably ﬁlling the gap between graphene and graphane in
                        terms of electrical conductance (the size of the band gap).
                           Clearly then, the importance of graphene is not only that it has unique
                        properties but also that it has paved the way for, and promoted interest in,
                        the isolation and synthesis of many other 2D materials. We can now talk
                        about a whole new class of materials, 2D atomic crystals, and already have
                        examples with a large variety of properties (from large band-gap insulators
                        to the very best conductors, the extremely mechanically strong to the soft
                        and fragile, and the chemically active to the very inert). Further, many of the
                        properties of these 2D materials are very different from those of their 3D
                        counterparts. Given that, even after seven years’ intensive research, graphene
                        still regularly delivers surprises, it seems reasonable to expect a huge inﬂux
                        of breathtakingly interesting results from the ﬁeld of 2D atomic crystals.

                                                                                                         113




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 9                                                                              2011-08-29 09:25:04


         Out to Spaceland: 2D-based heterostructures
         As mentioned earlier, the properties of 2D crystals can be very different from
         their 3D counterparts. Even bilayer graphene [70–71] (two graphene layers
         stacked on top of each other in special, so-called Bernal- or A–B, stacking),
         is remarkably different from graphene. The latter is a zero-overlap semi-
         metal, with linear dispersion relations whenever the bands are parabolic in
         bilayer graphene, and a gap can be opened in the spectrum if the symmetry
         between the layers is broken (say, by applying electric ﬁeld between the
         layers) [72–75]. However, the properties of multilayered materials depend
         not only on the number of layers [2, 76] but also on how those layers are
         stacked. For instance, in the case of graphite, consider Bernal stacking versus
         rhombohedral versus hexagonal versus turbostratic, and, in bilayer, a small
         rotation between the individual layers leads to the appearance of van Hove
         singularities at low energies [77–80].
            As we have full control over the 2D crystals, we can also create stacks
         of these crystals according to our requirements. Here, we are not merely
         talking about stacks of the same material: we can combine several different
         2D crystals in one stack. Insulating, conducting, probably superconducting
         and magnetic layers can all be combined in one layered material as we wish,
         the properties of such heterostructures depending on the stacking order and
         easily tuneable.
            Thus a completely new world of ‘materials on demand’ is opening up to
         us. Because the pool of the original 2D crystals is very rich, the properties
         of such heterostructures can cover a huge parameter space, combining
         characteristics which previously we would not even dare to think of being
         found together in one material.




         Figure 6. 2D-based heterostructures. Blue spheres = carbon atoms, yellow = boron, purple =
         nitrogen, white = niobium, and red = selenide.


         The ﬁrst members of this huge family are already there. By combining
         (alternating) monolayers of insulating boron-nitride and graphene, one
         can get weakly coupled graphene layers whose coupling would depend on
         the number of BN layers between the graphene planes (Fig. 6). The level of
         interaction between the graphene planes ranges from tunnelling (for single
         or double BN layers in between) to purely Coulomb (for thicker BN spacers).

         114




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 10                                                                         2011-08-29 09:25:05


                        Figure 7. The low-energy band structure of graphene.


                        II) CHIRAL QUASIPARTICLES AND THE ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES
                        OF GRAPHENE


                        Linear dispersion relation and chirality
                        What really makes graphene special is its electronic properties. Graphene
                        is a zero-overlap semimetal, with valence and conduction bands touching at
                        two points (K and K’) of the Brillouin zone [81–83] (Fig. 7). This is a conse-
                        quence of the hexagonal symmetry of graphene’s lattice (which is not one of
                        the Bravais lattices): it has two atoms per unit cell and can be conceptualised
                        as two interpenetrating triangular lattices. The pz-orbitals from the carbon
                        atoms hybridise to form S and S* bands, whose crossing at the K and K’
                        points guarantees a gapless spectrum with linear dispersion relation. Thus,
                        the absence of a gap between the valence and the conduction bands in
                        graphene makes for a very robust phenomenon and is a consequence of the
                        symmetry between the sub-lattices [83] (in boron-nitride, where the symmetry
                        between the sub-lattices is broken [one consists of boron, another of nitro-
                        gen], a large gap is opened in the electronic spectrum [84]).
                           Linear dispersion relation already makes graphene special, but there is
                        more to it than that. States in the valence and conduction bands are essentially
                        described by the same spinor wave function, so electrons and holes are linked
                        via charge conjugation. This link implies that quasiparticles in graphene
                        obey chiral symmetry, similar to that which exists between particles and
                        antiparticles in quantum electrodynamics (QED). This analogy between
                        relativistic particles and quasiparticles in graphene is extremely useful and
                        often leads to interesting interpretations of many phenomena observed in
                        experiments [85].

                        The Klein paradox
                        Probably the most striking result of the quasiparticles’ chiral symmetry is the
                        prediction [86] and observation [87–88] of the Klein paradox in graphene

                                                                                                    115




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 11                                                                       2011-08-29 09:25:06


         (to explore it, the p-n junction is a natural venue [89]). The paradox refers
         [90–91] to the enhanced tunnelling probability of a relativistic particle,
         which approaches unity as the height of the potential barrier exceeds 2m0c2
         (where m0 is the rest mass of the particle and c is the speed of light) and is
         exactly 1 for massless particles. It can be seen as a result of suppressed back-
         scattering (massless relativistic particles, like photons, always move with
         constant velocity – the speed of light – whereas backscattering requires velocity
         to become zero at the turning point) or as particle-antiparticle pair produc-
         tion and annihilation due to the Schwinger [92] mechanism in the areas of
         high electric ﬁeld.
            The Klein paradox for chiral quasiparticles in graphene leads to perfect
         electron-to-hole conversion at a potential barrier, and an equal to unity prob-
         ability of tunnelling through such a barrier at least for the normal incidence
         [86, 89, 93–94]. This guarantees the absence of localisation [95–96] and
         ﬁnite minimum conductivity [7], even in relatively disordered graphene,
         which – in the limit of nominally zero carrier concentration – splits into
         electron-hole puddles [97]. The absence of backscattering, which leads to
         the Klein paradox, also ensures that quantum (interference) corrections to
         the conductivity are positive (at least if we neglect the inter-valley scattering
         and the effect of trigonal warping) [4, 98], resulting in weak anti-localisation
         which has indeed been observed experimentally [99–100].

         Half-integer quantum Hall effect
         The charge conjugation symmetry between electrons and holes also guarantees
         that there should always be an energy level exactly at E = 0. In the magnetic
         ﬁeld this symmetry results in a sequence of the Landau levels as
                    2
         En r 2e!v B(n  12 r 12 ) (here e is an electron charge, ʄ the Planck constant, B
         the magnetic ﬁeld, v the Fermi velocity and n = 0,1,2…), rather different from
         that for normal massive particles. The ± 1/2 term is related to the chirality
         of the quasiparticles and ensures the existence of two energy levels (one
         electron- and one hole-like) at exactly zero energy, each with degeneracy
         two times smaller than that of all the other Landau levels [101–107].




                                                      Figure 8. Hall conductivity as a function
                                                      of the carrier concentration.




         116




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 12                                                                     2011-08-29 09:25:08


                        Experimentally such a ladder of Landau levels exhibits itself in the observa-
                        tion of a ‘half-integer’ quantum Hall effect [13–14] (Fig. 8). The two times
                        smaller degeneracy of the zero Landau level is revealed by the ± ½(4e2/h)
                        plateaus in Hall conductivity at ﬁlling factors ± 2. Furthermore, due to the
                        linear dispersion relation and the relatively high value of the Fermi velocity
                        (v | 106 m/s), the separation between the zero and ﬁrst Landau levels is
                        unusually large (it exceeds the room temperature even in a modest magnetic
                        ﬁeld of 1T). This, in conjunction with the low broadening of the zero Landau
                        level [108], makes it possible to observe the quantum Hall effect even at
                        room temperatures [109]. This is rather exciting news for people working in
                        metrology, as it should allow much simpler realisation of quantum resistance
                        standard (no need for ultra-low temperatures), an idea which has recently
                        been supported by several experiments [110–111].

                        Effect of mechanical deformation
                        It is important to remember that graphene is not just another 2D electronic sys-
                        tem, similar to electrons on the surface of silicon MOSFET or in 2D quantum
                        wells in GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures. Graphene is a truly 2D atomic crystal
                        as well as having electronic properties as in 2D. Essentially the thinnest
                        possible fabric, it can be easily deformed mechanically and can be stretched
                        [12, 17, 112–116], compressed [117], folded [80, 118], rippled [119] – even
                        torn into pieces [120]. Needless to say, each of these mechanical manipula-
                        tions would result in strong changes to the electronic structure [121–123].
                            Furthermore, it can be demonstrated that strain is equivalent to the
                        local magnetic ﬁeld (of opposite directions for quasiparticles in the K and
                        K’ valleys, to preserve the time-reversal symmetry) – a phenomenon used
                        to explain the suppression of the weak localisation [99, 124] and addi-
                        tional broadening of all but zeroth Landau levels [108]. In principle, one can
                        imagine engineering strain distribution of a special geometry so that the
                        electronic band-structure would be modiﬁed as if a constant magnetic
                        ﬁeld was being applied to a particular area of the sample [125–126]. Since
                        graphene is mechanically strong and very elastic [12], the strains applied
                        (and thus the pseudomagnetic ﬁelds which would be generated) can
                        be extremely large, resulting in the opening of sizeable gaps in the elec-
                        tronic spectrum [127]. This allows us to talk about a completely new and
                        unexplored direction in electronics: strain engineering of electronic
                        structure [123] and valleytronics [128–130].

                        Graphene optics
                        Can one expect anything interesting from the optical properties of graphene?
                        Rather counterintuitively, despite being only one atom thick, graphene
                        absorbs quite a large fraction of light. In the infrared limit the absorption
                        coefﬁcient is exactly Pa | 2.3% (where a = e2/ʄc is the ﬁne structure constant),
                        and the corrections to this number in the visible range of the spectrum are
                        less than 3% [131–134]. Such a signiﬁcant absorption coefﬁcient makes
                        it possible to see graphene without the use of a microscope; thus, one can

                                                                                                    117




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 13                                                                       2011-08-29 09:25:08


         observe (literally) the most fundamental constant of this universe with the
         naked eye. At higher frequencies the absorption becomes even larger, reach-
         ing 10% due to the presence of the van Hove singularities at the zone edge
         [135–136].
            By changing the carrier concentration, one can shift the position of the
         Fermi level and change graphene’s optical absorption due to Pauli blocking
         [133]. Since the density of states in graphene is relatively low (at least in the
         vicinity of the Dirac point), even electrostatic gating can be enough to shift
         the Fermi level as high as few hundred meV [137], so Pauli blocking happens
         in the visible range of the spectrum. By executing such strong gating on
         several tens of graphene layers in series, it would be possible to control the
         light transmission in such structures to a large extent, an observation which
         might be promising for novel photonic devices.




         Figure 9. Crystal structure of bilayer graphene.



         Bilayer graphene
         Although the addition of one layer on top of graphene is all that is needed
         to arrive at bilayer graphene, the properties of the latter are not simply twice
         those of the monolayer crystal; this is one of those cases where ‘one plus one
         is greater than two’. Bilayer graphene is remarkably different – sometimes
         even richer in its properties than its monolayer cousin – and fully deserves to
         be called a different material in its own right.
            Two graphene layers, when placed together, do not like to lie exactly one
         on top of each other with each atom having a couterpart in the adjacent layer
         (unlike boron-nitride, which does exactly that). Instead, bilayer graphene is
         mostly found [78] in so-called A–B or Bernal stacking [138] (named after the
         famous British scientist John Desmond Bernal, one of the founders of X-ray
         crystallography, who determined the structure of graphite in 1924). In such
         an arrangement, only half of the carbon atoms have a neighbour in another
         layer and the other half do not (and so are projected right into the middle of
         the hexagon) (Fig. 9). The quantum-mechanical hopping integral between
         the interacting atoms (generally called J1) is in the order of 300 meV, which

         118




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 14                                                                2011-08-29 09:25:09


                        gives rise to a pair of high-energy electronic sub-bands [70–71, 139]. The offset
                        from the zero energy (the position of the Fermi level in undoped bilayer gra-
                        phene) is exactly J1, so these sub-bands do not contribute to electronic trans-
                        port unless a very high level of doping is achieved (though these sub-bands
                        can be easily observed in optical experiments [140–141]) (Fig. 10).




                        Figure 10. The band structure of bilayer graphene in the vicinity of the K point.




                        The non-interacting atoms give rise to low-energy bands which are still
                        crossing at zero energy (as in graphene), but are parabolic, Fig. 10. The
                        symmetry between the layers is analogous to the sub-lattice symmetry in
                        monolayer graphene, and it guarantees the chiral symmetry between
                        electrons and holes. Thus we have a new type of quasiparticle in graphene –
                        massive chiral fermions – which does not have an analogy in QED [70–71].
                        Similarly to graphene, the chirality reveals itself in the unusual quantum
                        Hall effect. The sequence of the Landau levels in the magnetic ﬁeld is now
                        EN r!Z c N(N  1) ; here Wc = eB/m* is the cyclotron frequency and m* = G1/2v2
                        is the cyclotron mass. It is easy to see that two Landau levels exist at zero en-
                        ergy (N = 0 and N = 1), which again ensures a peculiar sequence of the Hall
                        plateaus and metallic behaviour in the limit of zero ﬁlling factor (at least if
                        we neglect the many-body effects) [70–71].

                                                                                                            119




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 15                                                                               2011-08-29 09:25:11


            As has been said, the chiral symmetry in mono- and bi-layer graphene is
         protected by the symmetry between the sub-lattices. In the case of graphene
         it is rather difﬁcult to break this symmetry – one would have to diligently
         apply a certain potential to atoms which belong to one sub-lattice only, while
         applying different potential to another sub-lattice – but in bilayer graphene it
         is possible to do just that. By applying a gate voltage or by chemically doping
         from only one side, we can discriminate between the layers and thus between
         the sub-lattices (breaking the inversion symmetry). This results in lifting the
         chiral symmetry and opening a gap in the spectrum. Both strategies have
         been implemented in experiments and yielded a rather striking result: a gap
         as large as 0.5 eV could be opened [72–74, 140–143]. Thus bilayer graphene
         is a rare case of a material where the band-gap can be directly controlled
         by (and its size directly propotional to) the electric ﬁeld applied across the
         layers.
            As the quality of bilayer graphene samples improves [144–146], we will
         see more and more interesting properties in them. Topological transitions
         at low electron energies [146], excitonic effects [147] and topological one-
         dimensional states [130] are among those which can be expected.


         III) GRAPHENE APPLICATIONS
         Fans of the American sitcom The Big Bang Theory (splendidly produced
         by Chuck Lorre) might recall the episode ‘The Einstein Approximation’
         in which string theorist Sheldon Cooper tries to resolve ‘the graphene problem’:
         why do quasiparticles in graphene behave like massless Dirac fermions?
         (Fig. 11) The whole crew is great as usual, particularly actor Jim Parsons’
         grotesquely brilliant depiction of the tough but enjoyable process of searching
         for a solution to a scientiﬁc problem. It is also probably the best episode
         from a physics point of view (thanks to Chuck Lorre, other writers and the
         scientiﬁc advisor David Saltzberg), as – unusually – the whole plot hinges
         on the scientiﬁc problem, rather than this serving merely to link its parts
         (the only other example I can recall of such an episode is the one about the
         paper on supersolids). I’d like to think that the reason for this is the simple
         and appealing physics of graphene, which is Sheldon sophisticated, Penny
         beautiful, Raj exotic, Leonard practical and Howard intrusive. On the day
         the episode was shot, Professor Saltzberg wrote in his blog, “…graphene has
         captured the imagination of physicists with its potential applications,” and, in
         fact, graphene applications are already here.
            The point of this paragraph is not to advertise The Big Bang Theory but
         to demonstrate the kind of applications we are expecting from graphene.
         The fact that one of the ﬁrst practical uses of this material was not in a high-
         expectation, predictable ﬁeld like transistors or photonics, but instead in the
         entertainment industry indicates its great potential and versatility. Indeed, in
         graphene we have a unique combination of properties, which are not seen
         together anywhere else: conductivity and transparency, mechanical strength
         and elasticity. Graphene can successfully replace many materials in a great

         120




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 16                                                               2011-08-29 09:25:12


                        Figure 11. Dr Sheldon Cooper (Jim Parsons) “…either isolating the terms of his formula
                        and examining them individually or looking for the alligator that swallowed his hand
                        after Peter Pan cut it off.” From The Big Bang Theory, series 3, episode 14 ‘The Einstein
                        Approximation’. Photo: Sonja Flemming/CBS ©2010 CBS Broadcasting Inc.




                        number of existing applications, but I would also like to see things going
                        in the other direction, with the unique combination of properties found in
                        graphene inspiring completely new applications.

                        Graphene support
                        I would like to start by talking about relatively simple graphene devices for
                        quite a minute market: graphene support to study biological and other samples
                        in transmission electron microscopy (TEM) [148–150]. It is appealing for the
                        simple reason that graphene membranes are already available on the market
                        and are sold by several companies in both Europe and the US.
                           Graphene is an ultimately thin, ultimately conductive, ultimately mechani-
                        cally strong and crystallographically ordered material, and it would be strong-
                        ly beneﬁcial to use it as a support for nano-objects when observing them in
                        TEM. Its mechanical strength provides rigidity and ease in sample prepara-
                        tion, and it has a very high radiation damage threshold (in the order of
                        80 keV). High conductivity eliminates the problem of charging of the support.
                        As it is only one atom thick (and also made of a very light element),
                        graphene ensures the highest possible contrast (one can only go higher in
                        contrast if suspending the object). Finally, because it is highly crystallographi-

                                                                                                            121




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 17                                                                                2011-08-29 09:25:13


         cally ordered, graphene produces few diffraction spots, and those that do
         appear can be easily ﬁltered out, leaving the image completely unperturbed
         by the presence of support. Although graphene is already quite compatible
         with biomolecules, it could also be functionalised to achieve a certain surface
         potential (for example, changed from being hydrophobic to hydrophilic).
         Chemical modiﬁcation of graphene is already well developed, but there are
         still a large number of opportunities available in this area [5–6].




         Figure 12. Production of graphene membranes for TEM support application. Graphene,
         grown on metal (a) is covered with a layer of plastic (b). The sacriﬁcial metal layer is
         etched away and graphene on plastic is ﬁshed on a standard TEM grid (c). Upon the
         removal of the plastic layer (d) the graphene membrane can be exposed to a solution of
         biomolecules (e) which adsorb on the surface of graphene (f) and can be studied in a
         TEM.




         Initially, free-standing graphene membranes were produced from exfoliated
         graphene [151–152] and required several lithography steps during their
         manufacture. With the availability of chemical vapor deposition (CVD) –
         grown graphene [153–154], the technique became dramatically simpler,
         enabling production on an industrial scale. Graphene, epitaxially grown on
         the surface of a metal (either by precipitation of the dissolved carbon upon
         cooling or by direct catalytic cracking of the hydrocarbons on the hot sur-
         face of the metal, with subsequent graphitisation), is covered by a sacriﬁcial
         layer of plastic. The underlying metal is then removed by etching and the
         plastic ﬁlm (with graphene attached) can be transferred onto practically any
         surface. It can be placed, for example, on a metal grid with holes typically
         the size of few microns, where – upon the removal of the sacriﬁcial plastic
         ﬁlm – a free standing graphene membrane is formed (Fig. 12). This entire
         process is very reproducible and can result in a large total area of graphene
         membranes.

         122




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 18                                                                       2011-08-29 09:25:14


                        Transparent conductive coating

                        Another area, which should beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from the availability of CVD-
                        grown graphene, is transparent conductive coating. Graphene is unusually
                        optically active [131–133, 135] and for a monolayer absorbs a rather large
                        fraction of incoming light (2.3%), but this is still signiﬁcantly smaller than
                        the typical absorption coefﬁcient which could be achieved with a more
                        traditional transparent conductive coating materials [155]. In conjunction
                        with its low electrical resistivity, high chemical stability and mechanical
                        strength, this absorption coefﬁcient makes graphene an attractive material
                        for optoelectronic devices.
                           Transparent conductors are an essential part of many optical devices, from
                        solar cells to liquid crystal displays and touch screens. Traditionally metal
                        oxides or thin metallic ﬁlms have been used for these purposes [155], but
                        with existing technologies often complicated (thin metallic ﬁlms require
                        anti-reﬂection coating for example) and expensive (often using noble or
                        rare metals), there has been an ongoing search for new types of conductive
                        thin ﬁlms. Furthermore, many of the widely used metal oxides exhibit non-
                        uniform absorption across the visible spectrum and are chemically unstable;
                        the commonly used indium tin oxide (ITO, In2O3:Sn), for instance, is known
                        to inject oxygen and indium ions into the active media of a device.
                           Graphene avoids all of these disadvantages. Moreover, it has recently been
                        demonstrated that large areas of graphene can be grown by the CVD method
                        [115, 153–154] and transferred onto practically any surface. Initial prototype
                        devices (solar cells and liquid crystal displays), which use graphene as a
                        transparent conductive coating have already been created [48, 156].

                        Graphene transistors
                        Even the very ﬁrst graphene ﬁeld effect transistors demonstrated remark-
                        able quality: prepared using rather humble methods in poorly controlled
                        environments, they still showed reasonably high quasiparticle mobility (up
                        to 20,000 cm2/Vs) [2–3] (Fig. 13). Although the role of different scattering
                        mechanisms is still debated [95, 107, 157–168] the careful elimination of
                        Coulomb and resonant scatterers, as well as ripples, has allowed the achieve-
                        ment of mobilities of over 106 cm2/Vs at low temperatures [169] in free-
                        standing devices [144–145], and offers hope that values above 105 cm2/Vs
                        can be achieved even at ambient temperatures [170].




                                                                                                  123




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 19                                                                     2011-08-29 09:25:14


         Figure 13. Ambipolar ﬁeld effect in graphene.




         Such characteristics make graphene ﬁeld effect transistors extremely promis-
         ing for high-frequency applications [171–172]. Additional beneﬁts are also
         emerging from very favourable electrostatics of 2D ﬁlms and high Fermi
         velocity (which is important in ballistic regimes). Even when using graphene
         with rather modest mobility (a103 cm2/Vs) current gain has been achieved
         at frequencies as high as 100 GHz for 240 nm gate length transistors (power
         gain for similar devices was achieved below 14 GHz) [173], which is better
         than for Si metal–oxide-semiconductor FETs of the same gate length.
            The situation is not as bright for integrated circuits. The Klein paradox
         ensures a ﬁnite minimum conductivity for graphene (of the order of
         4 e2/h) even within the limit of nominally zero carrier concentration. This
         is deﬁnitely too high for applications in logic elements, as it leads to high
         ‘leakage’ current in the ‘off’ state and limits the possible on/off ratio of such
         transistors to about 103 even in very favourable circumstances.
            There are several possible tricks one can play to increase the on/off ratio
         of graphene transistors, however. One is to utilise low-dimensional graphene
         nanostructures such as graphene nanoribbons [174], quantum dots [175]
         and single electron transistors [175–176] where a band gap can be engi-
         neered due to quantum conﬁnement or Coulomb blockade. The smallest
         quantum dots (a few nanometres in size) demonstrate a signiﬁcant gap in the
         order of few hundred meV, which is enough for such transistors to achieve

         124




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 20                                                                2011-08-29 09:25:15


                        an on/off ratio in the order of 105 even at room temperatures [175]. The
                        strong carbon-carbon bonds ensure the mechanical and chemical stability
                        of such devices, which also can pass a signiﬁcant current without diminishing
                        their properties. Basically, we can think of it as top-down molecular electronics
                        – one nanometre-sized graphene quantum dot contains only a102 atoms.
                        The major problem with implementing such quantum dots would be the
                        limits of modern lithographic techniques, which do not currently allow
                        true nanometre resolution. Also, one would have to control the roughness
                        and chemistry of the edges with atomic precision, which is also beyond the
                        capabilities of modern technology.
                           Although modern microelectronics relies on lithographic techniques, one
                        can imagine using other approaches to form nanostructures, which would
                        eventually allow reproduction of ﬁne details far beyond the resolution of
                        lithography. One promising method would be the use of the self-organisation
                        properties of chemical reactions. Graphene nanostructures could be formed,
                        for instance, by ﬂuorination of the supposed-to-be-insulating parts. Partial
                        ﬂuorination or hydrogenation can result in the formation of self-organised
                        structures on a graphene surface [177–178], which, in principle, could be
                        used to modify its transport and optical properties.
                           The other possible way to open a gap in the spectrum of quasiparticles
                        in graphene is to use chemically modiﬁed graphene [65–69], where the
                        S-electrons are participating in the covalent bond with foreign atoms
                        attached to the carbon scaffolding. One could also use bilayer graphene, as a
                        gap can be opened by applying a potential difference between the two layers
                        [72–74, 140–143]. An on/off ratio of 2000 has recently been achieved in
                        dual-gated devices at low temperatures [179].

                        Graphene composites
                        The unique combination of graphene’s electronic, chemical, mechanical
                        and optical properties can be utilised in full in composite materials. It is also
                        relatively easy to prepare graphene for such an application: one can either
                        use the direct chemical exfoliation of graphene [48–49], which allows a
                        rather high yield of graphene ﬂakes in a number of organic solvents or go
                        through an oxidation process to prepare graphite oxide – which can be easily
                        exfoliated in water – with subsequent reduction in a number of reducing
                        media [10].
                          The strongest and simultaneously one of the stiffest known materials,
                        with a Young’s modulus of 1 TPa, graphene is an ideal candidate for use
                        as a reinforcement in high-performance composites [11]. There is a huge
                        advantage in its being exactly one atom thick: it cannot cleave, giving it the
                        maximum possible strength in the out-of-plane direction. Its high aspect
                        ratio also allows graphene to act as an ideal stopper for crack propagation.
                        As for interaction with the matrix – the central issue for all nanocomposite
                        ﬁllers like carbon ﬁbre or carbon nanotubes – chemical modiﬁcation of
                        the surface or edges may signiﬁcantly strengthen the interface between the
                        graphene and a polymer.

                                                                                                     125




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 21                                                                        2011-08-29 09:25:15


            Using chemical derivatives of graphene would not only broaden the range of
         possible matrices but also widen the functionality of the possible composites.
         Given that the mechanical strength of ﬂuorographene is only slightly smaller
         than that of pristine graphene [66], one can obtain composites with similar
         mechanical properties but a range of other characteristics, from optically
         transparent to opaque, and from electrically conductive to insulating.
            We should also beneﬁt strongly from the possibility of optically monitoring
         the strain in graphene [11, 112–114]. The Raman spectrum of graphene
         [180–182] changes signiﬁcantly with strain, so even mechanical distortions of
         a fraction of a percent can be easily detected. As the stress transfer between
         graphene and polymer is reasonably good[11], and graphene’s Raman signal
         is very strong (the strongest peaks in the Raman spectrum of graphene are
         due to either single or double resonant processes), one can easily detect
         stress build-up in the composite material under investigation by monitoring
         the position of the Raman peaks.

         Other applications
         It is impossible to review all the potential applications of graphene in one
         lecture: with practically all the properties of this 2D crystal superior to those
         in other materials, and the combination of these properties unique, we are
         limited only by our own imaginations. In terms of electronic properties it
         is worth mentioning ultimately-sensitive gas detectors [183] (graphene,
         being surface without bulk, can detect a single foreign molecule attached
         to it) and variable quantum capacitors [184–185]. In photonics, ultrafast
         photodetectors [186] (utilising the high mobility and high Fermi velocity of
         quasiparticles in graphene) and extremely efﬁcient mode lockers [187] must
         be noted. Additionally, its unprecedented mechanical strength and high
         crystallographic quality allow one to use graphene to provide the perfect gas
         barrier [17] and strain gauges [115].


         ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
         The huge diversity of graphene properties researched and experiments
         undertaken was only possible thanks to a large and friendly community,
         which is still growing day by day. I would really like to thank each and every
         member for their interaction, for teaching me new techniques and for
         the excitement I feel every morning opening cond-mat (often tinged with
         disappointment, admittedly, that I haven’t done it ﬁrst!). Unfortunately
         it is impossible to name everybody, so I will limit myself to just my closest
         collaborators and the leaders of the groups.
            I am most grateful to Andre Geim, who has been a teacher, colleague and
         friend to me over the years. Universities teach us physics, maths, chemistry
         and tens of other disciplines, but each of us has to work out for himself how
         to do science. I feel extremely lucky to have worked for all these years along-
         side such a fantastic and dedicated scientist and researcher.
            I have also learned a lot from my colleagues in the condensed matter

         126




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 22                                                                2011-08-29 09:25:15


                        group, the Centre of Mesoscience & Nanotechnology and Chernogolovka:
                        Irina Grigorieva, Ernie Hill, Sasha Grigorenko, Fred Schedin, Alexander
                        Zhukov, Yuan Zhang, Cinzia Casiraghi, Ursel Bangert, Ian Kinloch, Bob
                        Young, Helen Gleeson, Stan Gillot, Mark Sellers, Oleg Shkliarevskii, Yurij
                        Dubrovskii, Zhenia Vdovin, Yurii Khanin, Sergey Dubonos and Vsevolod
                        Gantmacher. Special appreciation goes to Sergey Morozov, one of the key
                        ﬁgures in graphene research and a fantastic friend.
                           It is impossible to overstate the contribution of our research students
                        and postdocs: their ingenious, creative, and active research often opening
                        new directions of study. I would like to mention Peter Blake, Rahul Nair,
                        Da Jiang, Leonid Ponomarenko, Daniel Elias, Roman Gorbachev, Sasha
                        Mayorov, Tolik Firsov, Soeren Neubeck, Irina Barbolina, Zhenhua Ni, Ibtsam
                        Riaz, Rahul Jalil, Tariq Mohiuddin, Rui Yang, Tim Booth, Liam Britnell,
                        Sveta Anissimova, Frank Freitag, Vasil Kravets, Paul Brimicombe, Margherita
                        Sepioni and Thanasis Georgiou.
                           The theoretical support provided by a number of condensed matter theorists
                        around the globe was most valuable, and I only hope that the process was
                        reciprocal and that we guided (and misguided) each other equally. The
                        long list of theorists who contributed strongly to our research includes (but
                        is not limited to): Misha Katsnelson, Antonio Castro Neto, Paco Guinea,
                        Nuno Peres, Volodia Falko, Ed McCann, Leonid Levitov, Dima Abanin, Tim
                        Wehling, Allan MacDonald, Sasha Mirlin, Sankar Das Sarma.
                           Finally, as I have mentioned already, we beneﬁted enormously from
                        collaboration and competition with and information from the other experi-
                        mental groups. Primarily I must mention Philip Kim – a great physicist and
                        a very good collaborator. Other experimentalists whose results inﬂuenced us
                        include (unfortunately only partial list) Andrea Ferrari, Eva Andrei, Jannik
                        Meyer, Alexey Kuzmenko, Uli Zeitler, Jan Kees Maan, Jos Giesbers, Robin
                        Nicholas, Michal Fuhrer, Tatiana Latychevskaia, Mildred Dresselhaus, Alberto
                        Morpurgo, Lieven Vandersypen, Klaus Ensslin and Jonathan Coleman.




                                                                                                 127




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 23                                                                    2011-09-01 08:53:51


         REFERENCES
          1.    B. C. Brodie, Philos. T. Roy. Soc. 149, 249 (1859).
          2.    K. S. Novoselov et al., Science 306, 666 (2004).
          3.    K. S. Novoselov et al., P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 10451 (2005).
          4.    A. H. Castro Neto et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 109 (2009).
          5.    R. Ruoff, Nature Nanotechnology 3, 10 (2008).
          6.    K. P. Loh et al., J. Mater. Chem. 20, 2277 (2010).
          7.    A. K. Geim, and K. S. Novoselov, Nature Mater. 6, 183 (2007).
          8.    A. K. Geim, Science 324, 1530 (2009).
          9.    F. Schwierz, Nature Nanotech. 5, 487 (2010).
         10.    S. Stankovich et al., Nature 442, 282 (2006).
         11.    L. Gong et al., Adv. Mater. 22, 2694 (2010).
         12.    C. Lee et al., Science 321, 385 (2008).
         13.    K. S. Novoselov et al., Nature 438, 197 (2005).
         14.    Y. B. Zhang et al., Nature 438, 201 (2005).
         15.    I. Meric et al., Nature Nanotech. 3, 654 (2008).
         16.    A. A. Balandin et al., Nano Lett. 8, 902 (2008).
         17.    J. S. Bunch et al., Nano Lett. 8, 2458 (2008).
         18.    G. Pólya, Mat. Ann. 84, 149 (1921).
         19.    M. Girardeau, Journal of Mathematical Physics 1, 516 (1960).
         20.    E. H. Lieb, and W. Liniger, Phys. Rev. 130, 1605 (1963).
         21.    L. D. Landau, and E. M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, Part I (Pergamon, Oxford, UK,
                1980), Vol. 1.
         22.    R. E. Peierls, Helv. Phys. Acta 7, 81 (1934).
         23.    R. E. Peierls, Ann. I. H. Poincare 5, 177 (1935).
         24.    L. D. Landau, Phys. Z. Sowjetunion 11, 26 (1937).
         25.    N. D. Mermin, Phys. Rev. 176, 250 (1968).
         26.    N. D. Mermin, and H. Wagner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 1133 (1966).
         27.    P. Chaikin, and T. C. Lubensky, Introduction to Condensed Matter Physics (Cambridge
                University Press, Cambridge, 1995).
         28.    D. Nelson, D. R. Piran, and S. Weinberg, Statistical Mechanics of Membranes and Surfaces
                (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2004).
         29.    A. Fasolino, J. H. Los, and M. I. Katsnelson, Nature Mater. 6, 858 (2007).
         30.    C. D. Simpson et al., Chem.- Eur. J. 8, 1424 (2002).
         31.    S. Mizushima, Y. Fujibayashi, and K. Shiiki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 30, 299 (1971).
         32.    Y. Fujibayashi, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 34, 989 (1973).
         33.    Y. Fujibayashi, and S. Mizushima, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 34, 281 (1973).
         34.    T. W. Ebbesen, and H. Hiura, Adv. Mater. 7, 582 (1995).
         35.    Y. Ohashi et al., Tanso 180, 235 (1997).
         36.    X. K. Lu et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 193 (1999).
         37.    Y. Gan, W. Y. Chu, and L. J. Qiao, Surf. Sci. 539, 120 (2003).
         38.    P. Blake et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 063124 (2007).
         39.    D. S. L. Abergel, A. Russell, and V. I. Fal’ko, Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 063125 (2007).
         40.    G. Ruess, and F. Vogt, Monatsh. Chem. 78, 222 (1948).
         41.    H. P. Boehm, A. Clauss, and U. Hofmann, J. Chim. Phys. PCB 58, 141 (1961).
         42.    H. P. Boehm et al., Z. Naturforsch. Pt. B B 17, 150 (1962).
         43.    H. P. Boehm et al., Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 316, 119 (1962).
         44.    S. Horiuchi et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 2403 (2004).
         45.    D. A. Dikin et al., Nature 448, 457 (2007).
         46.    S. Park, and R. S. Ruoff, Nature Nanotech. 4, 217 (2009).
         47.    C. Gomez-Navarro et al., Nano Lett. 7, 3499 (2007).
         48.    P. Blake et al., Nano Lett. 8, 1704 (2008).
         49.    Y. Hernandez et al., Nature Nanotech. 3, 563 (2008).
         50.    J. T. Grant, and T. W. Haas, Surf. Sci. 21, 76 (1970).


         128




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 24                                                                              2011-08-29 09:25:15


                        51.     N. R. Gall et al., Fiz. Tverd. Tela 27, 2351 (1985).
                        52.     N. R. Gall et al., Surf. Sci. 191, 185 (1987).
                        53.     N. R. Gall, E. V. Rutkov, and A. Y. Tontegode, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 11, 1865 (1997).
                        54.     A. Nagashima et al., Surf. Sci. 291, 93 (1993).
                        55.     I. Forbeaux et al., Surf. Rev. Lett. 5, 193 (1998).
                        56.     A. M. Affoune et al., Chem. Phys. Lett. 348, 17 (2001).
                        57.     K. Harigaya, and T. Enoki, Chem. Phys. Lett. 351, 128 (2002).
                        58.     A. J. van Bommel, J. E. Crombeen, and A. van Tooren, Surf. Sci. 48, 463 (1975).
                        59.     C. Berger et al., J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 19912 (2004).
                        60.     K. F. Mak et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 136805 (2010).
                        61.     D. Teweldebrhan, V. Goyal, and A. A. Balandin, Nano Lett. 10, 1209 (2010).
                        62.     A. Nagashima et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3918 (1995).
                        63.     A. Nagashima et al., Surf. Sci. 357, 307 (1996).
                        64.     J. O. Sofo, A. S. Chaudhari, and G. D. Barber, Phys. Rev. B 75, 153401 (2007).
                        65.     D. C. Elias et al., Science 323, 610 (2009).
                        66.     R. R. Nair et al., Small 6, 2877 (2010).
                        67.     K. A. Worsley et al., Chem. Phys. Lett. 445, 51 (2007).
                        68.     S. H. Cheng et al., Phys. Rev. B 81, 205435 (2010).
                        69.     F. Withers, M. Dubois, and A. K. Savchenko, Phys. Rev. B 82, 073403 (2010).
                        70.     K. S. Novoselov et al., Nature Phys. 2, 177 (2006).
                        71.     E. McCann, and V. I. Fal’ko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 086805 (2006).
                        72.     E. V. Castro et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 216802 (2007).
                        73.     J. B. Oostinga et al., Nature Mater. 7, 151 (2008).
                        74.     T. Ohta et al., Science 313, 951 (2006).
                        75.     E. McCann, Phys. Rev. B 74, 161403 (2006).
                        76.     S. V. Morozov et al., Phys. Rev. B 72, 201401 (2005).
                        77.     M. Aoki, and H. Amawashi, Solid State Commun. 142, 123 (2007).
                        78.     K. F. Mak, J. Shan, and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 176404 (2010).
                        79.     J. dos Santos, N. M. R. Peres, and A. H. Castro, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 256802 (2007).
                        80.     G. H. Li et al., Nature Phys. 6, 109 (2010).
                        81.     P. R. Wallace, Phys. Rev. 71, 622 (1947).
                        82.     J. W. McClure, Phys. Rev. 108, 612 (1957).
                        83.     J. C. Slonczewski, and P. R. Weiss, Phys. Rev. 109, 272 (1958).
                        84.     K. Novoselov, Nature Mater. 6, 720 (2007).
                        85.     A. C. Neto, F. Guinea, and N. M. R. Peres, Physics World 19, 33 (2006).
                        86.     M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, and A. K. Geim, Nature Phys. 2, 620 (2006).
                        87.     A. F. Young, and P. Kim, Nature Phys. 5, 222 (2009).
                        88.     R. V. Gorbachev et al., Nano Lett. 8, 1995 (2008).
                        89.     V. V. Cheianov, and V. I. Fal’ko, Phys. Rev. B 74, 041403 (2006).
                        90.     O. Klein, Z. Phys. A – Hadron Nucl. 53, 157 (1929).
                        91.     F. Sauter, Z. Phys. A – Handron Nucl. 73, 547 (1932).
                        92.     J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82, 664 (1951).
                        93.     V. V. Cheianov, V. Fal’ko, and B. L. Altshuler, Science 315, 1252 (2007).
                        94.     C. W. J. Beenakker, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 1337 (2008).
                        95.     P. M. Ostrovsky, I. V. Gornyi, and A. D. Mirlin, Phys. Rev. B 74, 235443 (2006).
                        96.     J. H. Bardarson et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 106801 (2007).
                        97.     J. Martin et al., Nature Phys. 4, 144 (2008).
                        98.     E. McCann et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 146805 (2006).
                        99.     S. V. Morozov et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 016801 (2006).
                        100.    F. V. Tikhonenko et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 056802 (2008).
                        101.    J. W. McClure, Phys. Rev. 119, 606 (1960).
                        102.    G. W. Semenoff, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 2449 (1984).
                        103.    N. H. Shon, and T. Ando, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 67, 2421 (1998).
                        104.    F. D. M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2015 (1988).



                                                                                                                   129




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 25                                                                                      2011-08-29 09:25:15


         105.   Y. Zheng, and T. Ando, Phys. Rev. B 65, 245420 (2002).
         106.   V. P. Gusynin, and S. G. Sharapov, Phys. Rev. B 71, 125124 (2005).
         107.   N. M. R. Peres, F. Guinea, and A. H. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. B 73, 125411 (2006).
         108.   A. J. M. Giesbers et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 206803 (2007).
         109.   K. S. Novoselov et al., Science 315, 1379 (2007).
         110.   A. J. M. Giesbers et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 222109 (2008).
         111.   A. Tzalenchuk et al., Nature Nanotech. 5, 186 (2010).
         112.   Z. H. Ni et al., ACS Nano 2, 2301 (2008).
         113.   T. M. G. Mohiuddin et al., Phys. Rev. B 79, 205433 (2009).
         114.   M. Y. Huang et al., P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 7304 (2009).
         115.   K. S. Kim et al., Nature 457, 706 (2009).
         116.   J. S. Bunch et al., Science 315, 490 (2007).
         117.   G. Tsoukleri et al., Small 5, 2397 (2009).
         118.   H. Hiura et al., Nature 367, 148 (1994).
         119.   W. Z. Bao et al., Nature Nanotech. 4, 562 (2009).
         120.   D. Sen et al., Small 6, 1108 (2010).
         121.   E. A. Kim, and A. H. C. Neto, Europhys. Lett. 84, 57007 (2008).
         122.   V. M. Pereira, A. H. C. Neto, and N. M. R. Peres, Phys. Rev. B 80, 045401 (2009).
         123.   V. M. Pereira, and A. H. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 046801 (2009).
         124.   A. F. Morpurgo, and F. Guinea, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 196804 (2006).
         125.   F. Guinea, M. I. Katsnelson, and A. K. Geim, Nature Phys. 6, 30 (2010).
         126.   F. Guinea et al., Phys. Rev. B 81, 035408 (2010).
         127.   N. Levy et al., Science 329, 544 (2010).
         128.   T. Low, and F. Guinea, Nano Lett. 10, 3551 (2010).
         129.   A. Rycerz, J. Tworzydlo, and C. W. J. Beenakker, Nature Phys. 3, 172 (2007).
         130.   I. Martin, Y. M. Blanter, and A. F. Morpurgo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 196804 (2008).
         131.   A. B. Kuzmenko et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 117401 (2008).
         132.   R. R. Nair et al., Science 320, 1308 (2008).
         133.   Z. Q. Li et al., Nature Phys. 4, 532 (2008).
         134.   K. F. Mak et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 196405 (2008).
         135.   V. G. Kravets et al., Phys. Rev. B 81, 155413 (2010).
         136.   L. Yang et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 186802 (2009).
         137.   A. Pachoud et al., Europhys. Lett. 92, 27001 (2010).
         138.   J. D. Bernal, P. Roy. Soc. A 106, 749 (1924).
         139.   M. S. Dresselhaus, and G. Dresselhaus, Adv. Phys. 51, 1 (2002).
         140.   A. B. Kuzmenko et al., Phys. Rev. B 80, 165406 (2009).
         141.   A. B. Kuzmenko et al., Phys. Rev. B 79, 115441 (2009).
         142.   E. V. Castro et al., J. Phys. – Condens. Mat. 22, 175503 (2010).
         143.   Y. B. Zhang et al., Nature 459, 820 (2009).
         144.   X. Du et al., Nature Nanotech. 3, 491 (2008).
         145.   K. I. Bolotin et al., Solid State Commun. 146, 351 (2008).
         146.   B. E. Feldman, J. Martin, and A. Yacoby, Nature Phys. 5, 889 (2009).
         147.   H. K. Min et al., Phys. Rev. B 78, 121401 (2008).
         148.   R. S. Pantelic et al., J. Struct. Biol. 170, 152 (2010).
         149.   N. R. Wilson et al., ACS Nano 3, 2547 (2009).
         150.   R. R. Nair et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 153102 (2010).
         151.   J. C. Meyer et al., Nature 446, 60 (2007).
         152.   J. C. Meyer et al., Solid State Commun. 143, 101 (2007).
         153.   A. Reina et al., Nano Lett. 9, 30 (2009).
         154.   X. S. Li et al., Science 324, 1312 (2009).
         155.   C. G. Granqvist, Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 91, 1529 (2007).
         156.   X. Wang, L. J. Zhi, and K. Mullen, Nano Lett. 8, 323 (2008).
         157.   T. Ando, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 75, 074716 (2006).
         158.   T. Ando, and T. Nakanishi, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 67, 1704 (1998).



         130




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 26                                                                        2011-08-29 09:25:15


                        159.    S. V. Morozov et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 016602 (2008).
                        160.    L. A. Ponomarenko et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 206603 (2009).
                        161.    J. H. Chen et al., Nature Phys. 4, 377 (2008).
                        162.    Z. H. Ni et al., Nano Lett. 10, 3868 (2010).
                        163.    T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres, and F. Guinea, Phys. Rev. B 76, 205423 (2007).
                        164.    V. V. Cheianov, and V. I. Fal’ko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 226801 (2006).
                        165.    K. Nomura, and A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 256602 (2006).
                        166.    K. Nomura, and A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 076602 (2007).
                        167.    S. Adam et al., P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 18392 (2007).
                        168.    M. I. Katsnelson, and A. K. Geim, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A – Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 366,
                                195 (2008).
                        169.    E. V. Castro et al., arxiv.org, arXiv:1008.2522v1 (2010).
                        170.    C. R. Dean et al., Nature Nanotech. 5, 722 (2010).
                        171.    J. S. Moon et al., IEEE Electron Device Letters 30, 650 (2009).
                        172.    Y. M. Lin et al., Nano Lett. 9, 422 (2009).
                        173.    Y. M. Lin et al., Science 327, 662 (2010).
                        174.    M. Y. Han et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 206805 (2007).
                        175.    L. A. Ponomarenko et al., Science 320, 356 (2008).
                        176.    C. Stampfer et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 012102 (2008).
                        177.    L. A. Chernozatonskii, P. B. Sorokin, and J. W. Bruning, Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 183103
                                (2007).
                        178.    A. V. Shytov, D. A. Abanin, and L. S. Levitov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 016806 (2009).
                        179.    F. N. Xia et al., Nano Lett. 10, 715 (2010).
                        180.    A. C. Ferrari et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 187401 (2006).
                        181.    A. C. Ferrari, Solid State Commun. 143, 47 (2007).
                        182.    L. M. Malard et al., Physics Reports-Review Section of Physics Letters 473, 51 (2009).
                        183.    F. Schedin et al., Nature Mater. 6, 652 (2007).
                        184.    Z. Chen, and J. Appenzeller, in Ieee International Electron Devices Meeting 2008, Technical
                                Digest (2008), pp. 509.
                        185.    L. A. Ponomarenko et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 136801 (2010).
                        186.    F. N. Xia et al., Nature Nanotech. 4, 839 (2009).
                        187.    H. Zhang et al., Optics Express 17, 17630 (2009).

                        Portrait photo of Professor Novoselov by photographer Ulla Montan.




                                                                                                                      131




voselov_lect_s106_131.indd 27                                                                                         2011-08-29 09:25:15
