OBSERVATIONS IN PARTICLE PHYSICS FROM
TWO NEUTRINOS TO THE STANDARD MODEL

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1988

by
LEON M. LEDERMAN
The Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory




I. Introduction
My colleagues Melvin Schwartz and Jack Steinberger and I, sharing the
1988 Nobel Award, were faced with a dilemma. We could, in Rashomon -like
fashion, each describe the two-neutrino experiment (as it became known) in
his own style, with his own recollections, in the totally objective manner of
true scientists. Whereas this could be of some interest to sociologists and
anthropologists, this definitely would run the risk of inducing boredom and
so we decided on a logical division of effort. Dr. Schwartz, having left the
field of physics a decade ago, would concentrate on the origins and on the
details of the original experiment. Dr. Steinberger would concentrate on
the exploitation of neutrino beams, a field in which he has been an out-
standing leader for many years. I volunteered to discuss “the rest,” a hasty
decision which eventually crystallized into a core theme-how the two-
neutrino discovery was a crucial early step in assembling the current world
view of particle physics which we call “the Standard Model.” Obviously,
even a “first step” rests on a pre-existing body of knowledge that could also
be addressed. My selection of topics will not only be subjective, but it will
also be obsessively personal as befits the awesome occasion of this award
ceremony.
   I will relate a sequence of experiments which eventually, perhaps even
tortuously contributed to the Standard Model, that elegant but still incom-
plete summary of all subnuclear knowledge. This model describes the 12
basic fermion particles, six quarks and six leptons, arranged in three gen-
erations and subject to the forces of nature carried by 12-gauge bosons. My
own experimental work brought me to such accelerators as the Nevis
Synchrocyclotron (SC); the Cosmotron and Alternate Gradient Synchro-
tron (AGS) at the Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL); the Berkeley
Bevatron and the Princeton-Penn Synchrotron; the (SC), Proton Synchro-
tron (PS), and Intersecting Storage Ring (ISR) machines at CERN; the
Fermilab 400-GeV accelerator; and the electron-positron collider Cornell
Electron Storage Rings (CESR) at Cornell. I can only hint of the tremen-


512                              Physics 1988


dous creativity which brought these magnificent scientific tools into being.
   One must also have some direct experience with the parallel development
of instrumentation. This equally bright record made available to me and my
colleagues a remarkable evolution of the ability to record particular subnu-
clear events with ever finer spatial detail and even finer definition in time.
My own experience began with Wilson cloud chambers, paused at photo-
graphic nuclear emulsions, exploited the advances of the diffusion cloud
chamber, graduated to small arrays of scintillation counters, then spark
chambers, lead-glass high-resolution Cerenkov counters, scintillation ho-
doscopes and eventually the increasingly complex arrays of multiwire pro-
portional chambers, calorimeters, ring imaging counters, and scintillators,
all operating into electronic data acquisition systems of exquisite complex-
ity.
   Experimentalists are often specialists in reactions initiated by particular
particles. I have heard it said that there are some physicists, well along in
years, who only observe electron collisions! In reviewing my own bibliogra-
phy, I can recognize distinct periods, not too different from artists’ phases,
e.g., Picasso’s Blue Period. My earliest work was with pions which exploded
into the world of physics (in 1947) at about the time I made my quiet entry.
Later, I turned to muons mostly to study their properties and to address
questions of their curious similarity to electrons, e.g., in order to answer
Richard Feynman’s question, “Why does the muon weigh?” or Rabi’s
parallel reaction, “Who ordered that?” Muons, in the intense beams from
the AGS, turned out to be a powerful probe of subnuclear happenings not
only in rather classical scattering experiments (one muon in, one muon
out), but also in a decidedly non-classical technique (no muons in, two
muons out). A brief sojourn with neutral kaons preceded the neutrino
program, which my colleagues will have discussed in detail. This led finally
to studies of collisions with protons of the highest energy possible, in which
leptons are produced. This last phase began in 1968 and was still going on
in the 1980’s.
   Accelerators and detection instruments are essentials in particle research,
but there also needs to be some kind of guiding philosophy. My own
approach was formed by a specific experience as a graduate student.
   My thesis research at Columbia University involved the construction of a
Wilson cloud chamber designed to be used with the brand new 400-MeV
synchrocyclotron under construction at the Nevis Laboratory about 20
miles north of the Columbia campus in New York City.
   I. I. Rabi was the Physics Department Chairman, maestro, teacher of us
all. He was intensely interested in the new physics that the highest energy
accelerator in the world was producing. At one point I described some
curious events observed in the chamber which excited Rabi very much.
Realizing that the data was very unconvincing, I tried to explain that we
were a long way from a definitive measurement. Rabi’s comment, “First
comes the observation, then comes the measurement,” served to clarify for
me the fairly sharp distinction between “observation” and “measurement.”


                                   L. M. Lederman                             513


Both experimental approaches are necessary to progress in physics. Obser-
vations are experiments which open new fields. Measurements are subse-
quently needed to advance these. Observations may be qualitative and may
require an apparatus which sacrifices detail. Measurement is more usually
concerned with the full panoply of relevant instruments. And of course,
there are blurred boundaries. In the course of the next 30 or so years I have
been concerned with measurements of great precision, e.g., the magnetic
                          1                                                  2
moment of the muon , or the mass, charge and lifetime of the muon ,
measurements of moderate precision like the rho value in muon decay, the
                                3
elastic scattering of muons , or the lifetimes of the lambda and kaon
particles 4. I have also been involved in observations, which are attempts to
see entirely new phenomena. These “observations” have, since 1956, been
so labelled in the titles of papers, some of which are listed in chronological
order in Table I and as references 5 - 11. I selected these because 1) I loved
each one; and 2) they were reasonably important in the evolution of particle
physics in the amazing period from the 1950’s to the 1980’s.



TABLE I. MAJOR OBSERVATIONS
   Observation of Long-Lived Neutral V Particles (1956) Ref. 5.
   Observation of the Failure of Conservation of Parity and Charge Conju-
    gation in Meson Decays: The Magnetic Moment of the Free Muon(1957)
    Ref. 6.
   Observation of the High-Energy Neutrino Reactions and the Existence of
    Two Kinds of Neutrinos (1962) Ref. 7.
   Observation of Massive Muon Pairs in Hadron Collisions (1970) Ref. 8.
   Observation of π Mesons with Large Transverse Momentum in High-
    Energy Proton-Proton Collisions (1973) Ref. 9.
   Observation of a Dimuon Resonance at 9.5 GeV in 400-GeV Proton-
    Nucleus Collisions (1977) Ref. 10.
   Observation of the Upsilon 4-Prime at CESR (1980) Ref. 11.


                                                                               5
II. Long-Lived Neutral Kaons Observation of a Long-Lived Neutral V Particle
In 1955, Pais and Gell-Mann” noted that the neutral K meson presented a
unique situation in particle physics. In contrast to, e.g., the π0, the K0 is not
 identical to its antiparticle, even though they cannot be distinguished
by their decay. Using chargeconjugation invariance, the bizarre particle mix-
ture scheme emerges: K0 and         are appropriate descriptions of particle
states produced with the well-defined quantum number, strangeness, but
two other states, KL. and KS, have well-defined decay properties and life-
times.
   The essence of the theoretical point, given in a Columbia University
lecture by Abraham Pais in the spring of 1955, was that there should exist,
in equal abundance with the already observed Ks (lifetime 10-10 sec), a


514                                    Physics 1988


particle with much longer lifetime, forbidden by C-invariance from decay-
ing, as did KS, into two pions. The clarity of the lecture stimulated what
appeared to me to be an equally clear experimental approach, using the
cloud chamber which had been invented back in 1896 by the Scottish
physicist C.T.R. Wilson. The cloud chamber was first used for making
visible the tracks of subatomic particles from nuclear disintegrations in
1911. Supplemented with strong magnetic fields or filled with lead plates, it
became the workhorse of cosmic ray and early accelerator research, and was
 used in many discoveries, e.g., those of the positron, the muon, the lambda, the
 “θ” (now Ks ) and K+. As an instrument, it was more biological than
 physical, subject to poisons, track distortions, and an interminable period of
about one minute. To obtain precise momentum and angle measurements
with cloud chambers required luck, old-world craftsmanship, and a large,
not-to-be-questioned burden of folklore and recipes. Their slow repetition
rate was a particular handicap in accelerator science. Donald Glaser’s
 invention of the bubble chamber and Luis Alvarez’s rapid exploitation of it
 offered a superior instrument for the most purposes and by the mid-50’s, very
few cloud chambers were still operating at accelerators. At Columbia I had
some success with the 11“-diameter chamber built at the Nevis Synchrocy-
clotron for my thesis, a comparison of the lifetimes of negative and positive
pions 13. In a stirring finale to this thesis, I had concluded (wrongly as it
turned out) that the equality of lifetimes implied that charge conjugation
was invariant in weak interactions!
   In its history at Nevis, the cloud chamber produced results on the decay
                                                                    15
of pions14, on the mass of the neutrino born in pion decay (enter the
muon neutrino; it would be almost a decade before this number was
improved), on the scattering of pions16, including the first suggestions of




Figure 1. Experimental arrangements for lifetime study.


                                      L. M. Lederman                                 515


strong backward scattering that was later found by E. Fermi to be the
indicator of the “3,3” resonance, and on the Coulombnuclear interference
 of π+ and π− scattering in carbon. The carbon scattering led to analysis in terms
of complex optical-model parameters which now, over 30 years later,
are still a dominating subject in medium-energy physics convocations.
   When the Cosmotron began operating in BNL about 1953, we had built a
36”-diameter chamber, equipped with a magnetic field of 10,000 gauss, to
study the new           and     which were copiously produced by pions of ~ 1
GeV. The chamber seemed ideal to use in a search for long-lived kaons.
Figure 1 shows the two arrangements that were eventually used and Figure
2 shows a KL event in the 36” cloud chamber. The Cosmotron produced




Figure 2. Example of K0 +x+ + π − neutral particle. + is shown to be a pion by ionization
measurements. PA is a proton track used in the ionization calibration.


516                                Physics 1988


ample quantities of 3-GeV protons and access to targets was particularly
convenient because of the magnetic structure of the machine. The trick was
to sweep all charged particles away from the chamber and reduce the
sensitivity to neutrons by thinning the chamber wall and using helium as
chamber gas. By mid-1956, our group of five had established the existence
of KL, and had observed its principal three-body decay modes. Our discus-
sion of alternative interpretations of the “V” events seen in the chamber
was exhaustive and definitive. In the next year we measured the lifetime by
changing the flight time from target to chamber (both the cloud chamber
and the accelerator were immovable). This lifetime, so crudely measured,
agrees well with the 1988 handbook value. The K L was the last discovery
made by the now venerable Wilson cloud chamber.
   In 1958, we made a careful search of the data for the possibility of a two-
body decay mode of KL. This search was a reflection of the rapid pace of
events in the 1956 - 58 period. Whereas C-invariance was the key argument
used by Pais and Gell-Mann to generate the neutral K mixture scheme, the
events of 1957 (see below) proved that, in fact, C-invariance was strongly
violated in weak decays. Since the predictions turned out to be correct, the
                                                              17
improved argument, supplied by Lee, Oehme and Yang , replaced C-
invariance by CP-invariance, and in fact, also CPT invariance. CP invariance
would strictly forbid the decay


                               K   I   π+ + π −


and, in our 1958 paper based upon 186 K L, events, we concluded: "... only
two events had zero total transverse momentum within errors ... and none
of these could be a two-body decay of the        An upper limit to           +π−
was set at 0.6% . . . the absence of the two-pion final state is consistent with
the predictions of time reversal invariance.”
    Six years later, at the much more powerful AGS accelerator, V. Fitch and
J. Cronin’s, capitalizing on progress in spark chamber detectors, were able
 to vastly increase the number of observed K L decays. They found clear
evidence for the two-pion decay mode at the level of 0.22 % establishing the
fact that CP is, after all, not an absolute symmetry of nature.
    The K0 research eventually provided a major constraint on the Standard
Model. On the one hand, it served to refine the properties of the strange
quark proposed in 1963 by Gell-Mann. On the other hand, the famous
Kobayashi-Maskawa (KM) quark mixing matrix with three generations of
quarks was an economical proposal to accommodate the data generated by
the K0 structure and the observation of CP violation. Finally, the neutral K-
meson problem (essentially the Ks decay modes) led to the next major
observation, that of charge conjugation (C) and parity (P) violation and,
together, a major advance in the understanding of the weak interactions. In
1988, neutral K research remains a leading component of the fixed-target
measurements at Fermilab, BNL, and CERN.


                                  L. M. Lederman                            517


III. Observation of the Failure of Conservation of Parity and Charge Conjugation
in Meson Decays6
In the summer of 1956 at BNL, Lee and Yang had discussed the puzzle of
the K’s      puzzle) and were led to propose a number of reactions where
possible P violation could be tested in weak interactions19. At first glance
these all seemed quite difficult experimentally, since one was thinking of
relatively small effects. Only C. S. Wu, our Columbia colleague, attempted,
with her collaborators at the National Bureau of Standards, the difficult
problem of polarizing a radioactive source. When, at a Christmas party in
1956, Wu reported that early results indicated large parity-violating effects
in the decay of Co60, it became conceivable that the chain of parity violating
reactions: π      µ + v and then µ→ e + 2v would not reduce the parity
violating effect to unobservability. The “effect” here was the asymmetry in
the emission of electrons around the incident, stopped, and spinning polar-
ized muon.
   Experience in two key areas set in course a series of events which would
convert a Friday Chinese-lunch discussion, just after New Year, 1957, into
a Tuesday morning major experimental observation. One was that I knew a
lot about the way pion and muon beams were formed at the Nevis cyclotron.
In 1950, John Tinlot and I had been pondering how to get pions into the
cloud chamber. Until that time, external beams of pions were unknown at
the existing cyclotrons such as those at Berkeley, Rochester, and Liverpool.
We plotted the trajectories of pions produced by 400-MeV protons hitting a
target inside the machine, near the outer limit of orbiting protons, and we
discovered fringe field focussing. Negative pions would actually emerge
from the accelerator into a well-collimated beam. It remained only to invent
a target holder and to modify the thick concrete shield so as to “let them
out.” In about a month, we had achieved the first external pion beam and
had seen more pions in the cloud chamber than had ever been seen
anywhere.
   The second key area had to do with my student, Marcel Weinrich, who
had been studying the lifetime of negative muons in various materials. To
prepare his beam we had reviewed the process of pions converting to muons
by decay-in-flight. What was more subtle, but easy to play back during the
30-minute Friday evening drive from Columbia to Nevis, was that a correla-
tion of the muon spin relative to its CM momentum would, in fact, be
preserved in the kinematics of pion decay-in-flight, resulting in a polarized
muon beam. One totally unclear issue was whether the muon would retain
its polarization as it slowed from ~ 50 MeV to rest in a solid material.
Opportunities to pick up an electron and depolarize seemed very large, but
I recalled Rabi’s dictum:“A spin is a slippery thing” and decided - why not
try it?
   Preempting Weinrich’s apparatus and enlisting Richard Garwin, an ex-
pert on spin precession experiments (as well as on almost everything else),
we began the Friday night activities which culminated, Tuesday morning, in
a 50 standard deviation parity violating asymmetry in the distribution of


518                                  Physics 1988




Figure 3. Experimental arrangement. The magnetizing coil was close wound directly on the
carbon to provide a uniform vertical field of 79 gauss per ampere.


decay electrons relative to muon spin. Figure 3 shows the very simple
arrangement and Fig. 4 shows the data. The following 10 conclusions were
contained in the publication of our results:
 1. The large asymmetry seen in the CL+        e+ + 2v decay establishes that
     the µ beam is strongly polarized.
          +



 2. The angular distribution of the electrons is given by
             1 + a cos where a = - l/3 to a precision of 10 %.
 3. In reactions p+       v and            + 2v parity is not conserved.
 4. By a theorem of Lee, Oehme, and Yang, the observed asymmetry
     proves that invariance under charge conjugation is violated.
 5. The g-value of the free µ + is found to be +2.00 ± 0.10.
 6. The measured g-value and the angular distribution in muon decay lead
     to the strong probability that the spin of the µ + is 1/2.
 7. The energy dependence of the observed asymmetry is not Strong.
 8. Negative muons stopped in carbon show an asymmetry (also peaked
     backwards) of a = -l/20, i.e., about 15 % of that for µ +.


                                       L. M. Lederman




               Amperes- Precession Field Current

Figure 4. Variation of gated 3-4 counting rate with magnetizing current. The solid curve is
computed from an assumed electron angular distribution 1-1/3        with counter and gate-
width resolution folded in.


 9. The magnetic moment of the µ - bound in carbon is found to be
    negative and agrees within limited accuracy with that of µ +.
10. Large asymmetries are found for the e+ from polarized µ+ stopped in
    polyethylene and calcium. Nuclear emulsions yield an asymmetry half
    that of carbon.
Not bad for a long weekend of work.
   This large effect established the two-component neutrinos and this,
together with details of the decay parameters as they emerged over the next
year, established the V-A structure of the weak interactions. A major crisis
emerged from the application of this theory to high energy where the weak
cross section threatened to violate unitarity. Theoretical attempts to pre-
vent this catastrophe ran into the absence of evidence for the reaction:


The rate calculated by Columbia colleague G. Feinberg20 was 104 times
larger than that of the data. This crisis, as perceived by Feinberg, by T. D.
Lee, and by Bruno Pontecorvo, provided motivation for the two-neutrino
experiment. The stage was also set for increasingly sharp considerations of
the intermediate vector boson hypothesis and, indeed, ultimately the
electroweak unification.
   The 1957 discovery of parity violation in pion and muon decay proved to
be a powerful tool for additional research and, indeed, it kept the “pion-
factories” at Columbia, Chicago, Liverpool, CERN, and Dubna going for


520                                Physics 1988


decades, largely pursuing the physics that polarized muons enabled one to
do. The earliest application was the precise magnetic resonance measure-
ment of the muon magnetic moment at Nevis in 1957 1. The high level of
precision in such measurements had been unknown to particle physicists
who had to learn about precisely measured magnetic fields and spin flip-
ping. A more profound follow-up on this early measurement was the multi-
decade obsession at CERN with the g-value of the muon. This measurement
provides one of the most exacting tests of Quantum Electrodynamics and is
a very strong constraint on the existence of hypothetical particles whose
coupling to muons would spoil the current excellent agreement between
theory and experiment.
   One conclusion of the 1957 parity paper states hopefully that, "... it
seems possible that polarized positive and negative muons will become a
powerful tool for exploring magnetic fields in nuclei, atoms, and interatom-
ic regions.” Today “µSR” (muon spin resonance) has become a widespread
tool in solid-state and chemical physics, meriting annual conferences devot-
ed to this technique.

IV. Observation of High-Energy Neutrino Reactions and the Existence of Two
Kind of Neutrinos 7
 Since this is the subject of Melvin Schwartz’ paper I will not review the
 details of this research.
     The two-neutrino road (a better metaphor would perhaps be; piece of the
jigsaw puzzle) to the Standard Model passed through a major milestone with
 the 1963 quark hypothesis. In its early formulation by both Gell-Mann and
 George Zweig, three quarks, i.e., a triplet, were believed adequate along the
  lines of other attempts at constituent explanations (e.g., the Sakata model) of
  the family groupings of hadrons.
     Before the quark hypothesis, a feeling for baryon-lepton symmetry had
 motivated many theorists, one even opposing the two-neutrino hypothesis
 before the experiment because "... two types of neutrinos would imply two
 types of protons.” However, after the quark flavor model, Bjorken and
 Glashow, in 196421, transformed the baryon-lepton symmetry idea to quark-
 lepton symmetry and introduced the name “charm”. They predicted the
 existence of a new family of particles carrying the charm quantum number.
 This development, and its enlargement by the Glashow, Illiopolis, Maiami
 (GIM) mechanism in 1970, was another important ingredient in establishing
 the Standard Model22.
     In GIM, the quark family structure and weak interaction universality
 explains the absence of strangeness changing neutral weak decays. This is
 done by assuming a charmed quark counterpart to the second neutrino v .       µ


 With the 1974 discovery of the           at BNL/Stanford Linear Accelerator
 Center (SLAC) and subsequent experiments establishing the c-quark, the
 Standard Model, at least with two generations, was experimentally estab-
lished. Included in this model was the doublet structure of quarks and
leptons, e.g.,(u,d),(c,s),(eVe),


                                 L. M. Lederman                            521

   The measurements which followed from this observation are given in
detail in Jack Steinberger’s paper. Major neutrino facilities were established
at BNL, CERN, Serpukhov, and Fermilab. Out of these came a rich yield of
information on the properties of the weak interaction including neutral as
well as charged currents, on the structure functions of quarks and gluons
within protons and neutrons, and on the purely leptonic neutrino-electron
scattering.

V. Partons and Dynamical Quarks
                                                     8
A. Observation of Dimuons in 30 GeV Proton Collisions
The two-neutrino experiment moved, in its follow-up phase at BNL, to a
much more massive detector and into a far more potent neutrino beam. To
provide for this, the AGS proton beam was extracted from the accelerator,
not at all an easy thing to do because an extraction efficiency of only 95 %
would leave an unacceptably large amount of radiation in the machine.
   However, the ability to take pions off at 00 to the beam rather than at the
70 of the original experiment, represented a very significant gain in pions,
hence in neutrinos. Thus, the second neutrino experiment, now with
healthy competition from CERN, could look forward to thousands of events
instead of the original 50.
   The major motivation was to find the W particle. The weak interaction
 theory could predict the cross section for any given mass. The W production
was


                                                  +A*.

Since W will immediately decay, and often into a charged lepton and
neutrino, two opposite-sign leptons appear in the final state at one vertex.
Figures 5a, 5b show W candidates. The relatively low energy of the BNL and
CERN neutrino beams produced by 30-GeV protons             ~ 1 GeV) made this
a relatively insensitive way of searching for W’s but both groups were able to
set limits
                               Mw > 2 GeV.

We were then stimulated to try to find W's produced directly with 30-GeV
protons, the signature being a high transverse momentum muon emerging
from W-decay (~ M w/2). The experiment found no large momentum
muons and yielded23 an improved upper limit for the W mass of about 5
GeV which, however, was burdened by theoretical uncertainties of how W’s
are produced by protons. The technique led, serendipitously, to the open-
ing of a new field of high-energy probes.
   To look for W’s, the neutrino-producing target was removed and the
beam of protons was transported across the former flight path of 22 m (for
pions) and buried in the thick neutrino shield. The massive W could show
itself by the appearance of high transverse momentum muons. This beam


                                       Physics 1988




Figure 5a. Neutrino event with long muon and possible second µ-meson




Figure 5b. Neutrino event with long muon and possible electron.



dump approach was recognized in 1964 to be sensitive to short-lived neu-
trino sources24, e.g., heavy leptons produced by 30 GeV protons. However,
the single muon produced by a hypothetical W could also have been a
member of a pair produced by a virtual photon. This criticism, pointed out
by Y. Yamaguchi and L. Okun24, presented us with the idea for a new small-
distance probe: virtual photons.
   We promptly began designing an experiment to look for the virtual
photon decay into muon pairs with the hope that the decreasing yield as a
function of effective mass of the observed pair is a measure of small-distance


                                     L. M. Lederman                           523




Figure 6. Brookhaven dimuon setup.


 physics and that this slope could be interrupted by as yet undiscovered
vector mesons. Observation here would be using the illumination of virtual
 photons whose parameters could be determined from the two-muon final
 state. In 1967, we organized a relatively simple exploration of the yield of
 muon pairs from 30-GeV proton collisions. Emilio Zavattini from CERN,
Jim Christenson, a graduate of the Fitch-Cronin experiment from Prince-
ton, and Peter Limon, a postdoc from Wisconsin, joined the proposal.
Figure 6 shows the apparatus and Figure 7 shows the data. Later we were
taught (by Richard Feynman) that this was an inclusive experiment:
                        p + U                 + anything.
The yield of muon pairs decreased rapidly from 1 GeV to the kinematic limit
of nearly 6 GeV with the exception of a curious shoulder near 3 GeV. The
measurement of muons was by range as determined by liquid and plastic
scintillation counters interspersed with steel shielding. Each angular bin
(there were 18) had four range bins and for two muons this made a total of
only 5000 mass bins into which to sort the data. Multiple scattering in the
minimum of 10 feet of steel made finer binning useless. Thus, we could only
note that: “Indeed, in the mass region near 3.5 GeV, the observed spectrum
may be reproduced by a composite of a resonance and a steeper conti-
nuum.” This 1968 - 69 experiment was repeated in 1974 by Aubert et al. 25,
with a magnetic spectrometer based upon multiwire proportional cham-
bers. The shoulder was refined by the superior resolution into a towering
peak (see Fig. 7 a) called the "J" particle.
   Our huge flux of 1011 protons/pulse made the experiment very sensitive
to small yields and, in fact, signals were recorded at the level of 10 -12 of the
total cross section. A crucial development of this class of super-high-rate
experiments was a foolproof way of subtracting accidentals.
  The second outcome of this research was its interpretation by S. Drell and
T-M Yan. They postulated the production of virtual photons by the annihi-


524                                Physics 1988




      Data on yield of dimuons vs. mass att 30 GeV.


                                      L. M. Ledman                                   525




Figure 7b. Dielectron data from the BNL experiment showing the peak at 3.1 GeV which was
named “J”.



lation of a quark and antiquark in the colliding particles. The application of
the now firmly named Drell-Yan process (this is how theorists get all the
credit!) in the unraveling of quark dynamics has become increasingly inci-
sive. It lagged behind the deeply inelastic scattering (DIS) analysis by
Bjorken and others, in which electrons, muons, and neutrinos were scat-
tered from nucleons with large energy loss. The Drell-Yan process is more
dependent upon the strong interaction processes in the initial state and is
more subject to the difficult problem of higher-order corrections. However,


526                               Physics 1988


the dileption kinematics gives direct access to the constituent structure of
hadrons with the possibility of experimental control of important pa-
rameters of the parton distribution function. Indeed, a very large Drell-Yan
industry now flourishes in all the proton accelerators. Drell-Yan processes
also allow one to study structure functions of pions, kaons, and antiprotons.
   A major consequence of this experimental activity, accompanied by a
much greater theoretical flood (our first results stimulated over 100 theoretical
papers!), was a parameter-free fit of fairly precise (timelike) data 26 of
“two leptons out” to nucleon structure functions determined by probing
the nuclear constituent with incident leptons. Some of the most precise data
here were collected by the CDHS group of Jack Steinberger and he has
covered this in his paper. The agreement of such diverse experiments on the
behavior of quark-gluon constituents went a long way toward giving quarks
the reality of other elementary particles, despite the confinement restric-
tion.


B.    Observation of π Mesons with Large Transverse Momentum in High-Energy
Proton-Proton Collisions9
The dynamics of quark-parton constituents were first convincingly demon-
strated by James Bjorken’s analysis and interpretation of the DIS experi-
ments at SLAC in 1970. Feynman’s parton approach must, of course, also
be mentioned. The Berman-Bjorken-Kogut (BBK) paper27 became the Bible
of hard collisionists. In 1971, the brand new ISR at CERN began operations
and experimenters were able to observe head-on collisions of 30-GeV
protons on 30-GeV protons. The ISR, as the highest-energy machine in the
 1970’s, was a superb place to practice observation strategy. Impressed by
the power of the dilepton proble at BNL and by its hints of structure,
Rodney Cool of Rockefeller University and I cooped Luigi DiLella from
CERN to help us design an approach which would trade luminosity for
resolution. Recall that with the “beam dump” philosophy at BNL we had
been able to observe dimuon yields as low as 10 -12 of the total cross section.
However, the penalty was a resolution roughly analogous to using the
bottom of a Coca-Cola bottle as the lens for a Nikon. The balance of
resolution and luminosity would be a crucial element in the increasing
power of the dilepton process.
   We learned from Carlo Rubbia about the excellent properties of lead
glass as an electromagnetic spectrometer. Photons or electrons would mul-
tiply in the high Z medium and dissipate all of their energy in a relatively
short length. Improved manufacturing techniques had yielded a dense but
transparent glass in which Cerenkov light could be efficiently coupled to
good quality photomultiplier tubes. The relatively small response of lead
glass to pions and kaons compared to electrons and photons is its great
advantage. Six months of hard work in Brookhaven test beams gave us a
good command of and respect for this technique and its essential weakness,
the calibration process.


                                     L. M. Lederman                       527




Figure 8. CCR apparatus, CERN ISR.


  The idea then was to have two arrays, on opposite sides of the interaction
point, each subtending about one steradian of solid angle. Figure 8 shows
the CCR apparatus and Figure 9 the data.
  The CERN-Columbia-Rockefeller (CCR) team was assembled in 1971 to
follow up on the BNI, dilepton results, but now electron pairs where the
particles of choice and a large lead-glass array was in place around the
interaction point of this very first hadron collider. Here again, the discovery
of the      was frustrated by an interesting background that was totally
unexpected but, here again, a new technique for probing small distances
was discovered - the emission of high transverse momentum hadrons.
   Before the ISR research, a handy rule was that hadron production would
fall exponentially with transverse momentum. The CCR result had, at a Pt of


528                                       Physics 1988




                                                         23.5
                                                         30.6




Figure 9. Data from the yield of inclusive π°,s


                                   L. M. Lederman                              529


3 GeV, orders of magnitude higher yield of single         well detected by the
high-resolution lead-glass array. The production rate was observed to be:
                             ~      at    = 62 GeV
which provided a stringent test of the quark-parton model in the early 70’s
and QCD some few years later. Other ISR experiments quickly confirmed
the CCR result, but only CCR had the quality and quantity of data to
provide a phenomenological fit. It turned out that one could eventually go
directly from these data to parton-parton (or quark-quark, etc.) hard scat-
tering processes. The study of “single inclusive    at high Pt” evolved into
study of the more typical jet structure which now shows up so spectacularly
in proton-antiproton collider data. See Figure 10.
  Thus, the dilepton adventure using scintillation counters at BNL and the
lead-glass exposures to the ISR, initiated independent programs to contri-
bute to the conviction that protons and pions are bound states of confined
quarks interacting strongly via the exchange of gluons which are themselves
capable of becoming virtual      pairs.


VI. The Third Generation: Observation of a Dimuon Resonance at 9.5 GeV in
400-GeV Proton-Nucleus Collisions’o
 In 1969-1970, the BNL dimuon result had not only stimulated the ISR
 proposal but also a proposal to the Fermilab (then known as NAL and still a
 large hole-in-the-ground) to do a high-resolution lepton pair experiment.
 By the time the machine came on in 1972/3, a single-arm lepton detector
 had been installed, using the very powerful combination of magnetic mea-
 surement and lead-glass in order to identify electrons with a pion contami-
 nation of      10-5. Such rejection is needed when only one particle is
 involved.
    While the study of “direct” electrons fully occupied the Columbia-Fermi-
 lab-Stony Brook collaboration in 1974, the              was being cheerfully
 discovered at BNL and SLAC. The single-lepton effects turned out to be relatively
 unfruitful, and the originally proposed pair experiment got underway in
 1975. In a series of runs the number of events with pair masses above 4 GeV
 gradually increased and eventually grew to a few hundred. During this
 phase hints of resonant peaks appeared and then disappeared. The group
was learning how to do those difficult experiments. In early 1977, the key to
a vastly improved dilepton experiment was finally discovered. The senior
 Ph. D.s on the collaboration, Steve Herb, Walter Innes, Charles Brown, and
John Yoh, constituted a rare combination of experience, energy, and in-
sight. A new rearrangement of target, shielding, and detector elements
concentrated on muon pairs but with hadronic absorption being carried out
 in beryllium, actually 30 feet of beryllium. The decreased multiple scattering
 of the surviving muons reduced the mass resolution to 2%, a respectable
 improvement over the 10 - 15 % of the 1968 BNL experiment. The filter-
 ing of all hadrons permitted over 1000 times as many protons to hit the


530                                    Physics 1988




      Movable
      Absorber
         or Be)




m




Figure 11a. Plan view of the apparatus. Each spectrometer arm includes 11 PWC’s P1-P11, 7
scintillating counter hodoscopes H1-H7, a drift chamber Dl, and a gas-filled threshold Ceren-
kov counter C.




                                                                        Iron
                                                         Solid          Absorber
                                                         Iron            \
                   Iron
                   Wall,




                                             Detectors
Figure 11b. Schematic sketch of Fermilab dimuon experiment which led to the discovery of the
Upsilon particle.


                                      L. M. Lederman                       531


target as compared to open geometry. The compromise between luminosity
and resolution was optimized by meticulous attention to the removal of
cracks and careful arrangement of the shielding. Recall that this kind of
observation can call on as many protons as the detector can stand, typically 1
percent of the available protons. The multiwire proportional chambers and
triggering scintillators were crowded in towards the target to get maximum
acceptance. Muon-ness was certified before and after bending in iron
toroids to redetermine the muon momentum and discourage punch-
throughs. Figures 11 a, 11 b show the apparatus.
   In a month of data taking in the spring of 1977, some 7000 pairs were
recorded with masses greater than 4 GeV and a curious, asymmetric, and
wide bump appeared to interrupt the Drell-Yan continuum near 9.5 GeV.




Figure 12a. Peaks on Drell-Yan continuum.


532                                   Physics 1988




                                    Mass (GeV)
Figure 12b. Peaks with continuum subracted.




With 800 events in the bump, a very clean Drell-Yan continuum under it
and practically no background as measured by looking (simultaneously) for
same-sign muons, the resonance was absolutely clear. It was named upsilon
and a paper was sent off in August of 1977. By September, with 30,000
events, the enhancement was resolved into three clearly separated peaks,
 the third “peak” being a well-defined shoulder. See Figures 12a, 12b.
These states were called           and      Shortly afterwards, the DORIS
accelerator in DESY produced the upsilon in e+e - collisions and also
served to confirm the only plausible interpretation of the upsilon as a
 bound state of a new quark b with its antiparticle       The and       were
the 2S and 3S states of this non-relativistic “atom”. In the Standard Model,
we had a choice of charge, + 2/3 (up-like) or - l/3 (down-like) for the
b-quark. The Fermilab data favored - l/3.
   Fallout was relatively swift. Taken together with the discovery by Martin
Perl and his colleague?” of the τ lepton at SLAC slightly earlier, a third
generation was added to the Standard Model with the b quark at 5 GeV and
the τ -lepton at 2 GeV. This fully confirmed the KM speculation that CP
violation may require a third generation. (Clearly we are vastly oversimplify-
ing the theoretical efforts here.)


                                  L M. Lederman                             533


   The bb system was a beautiful addition to (charmonium) as a measure-
ment laboratory for the study of potential models for the strong quark-
quark force. To get in on the fun, I organized a group from Columbia and
Stony Brook to design a lead-glass, sodium iodide spectrometer to be used
at the CESR machine, ideally suitable for y-spectroscopy. This Columbia,
Stony Brook collaboration (CUSB) began taking data in 1979 and soon
assisted in the identification of the 4S state11. The 4S state is especially
important because it is above threshold for hadronic decay to B-states, i.e.,
mesons having one b quark and a lighter antiquark. Follow-up experiments
to learn more about the upsilons were also carried out at Fermilab.
These used a number of tricks to even further advance the resolving power
without losing luminosity - see Figure 13. By now many other states, includ-
ing p-states, have been identified in this new heavy-quark spectroscopy.
    Recent studies of the B-states in electron-positron colliders indicate that
the B system may be far richer in physics than the charm equivalent, the D
system.         mix like the K0 and      particles. Quoting one of CERN’s
leading phenomenologists, G. Altarelli: “The observation by Argus at DESY
of a relatively large amount of            mixing ... was the most important
experimental result of the year [1987] in particle physics.” There is the
strong possibility that CP violation, seen to date only in the K 0 system, may
possibly be observable in the B0 system. B-factories, usually high-intensity
e +e - machines, are being proposed in various labs around the world. The
Cornell machine is being upgraded to produce of the order of 106          pairs
a year. Meanwhile the hadron machines are trying hard to solve the very
difficult experimental problem of detecting B’s (e.g., at the 800-GeV Fermi-
lab fixed target) in a background of 106 times as many inelastic collisions.
An ambitious detector is being proposed for the Fermilab collider, with the
goal of obtaining 10 10     pairs/year. Judgingfrom 1988 activity, measure-
ments in B-physics will play an increasingly important role in particle
research over the next decade. The driving force is the recognition that the
third generation seems to be needed to account for CP violation. Taken
together with baryon non-conservation, CP violation plays a key role in our
understanding of the evolution of the universe, including why we are here.
For physicists with a less grandiose view, the quark mixing matrix para-
meters are part of the basis of our Standard Model and b-physics is the key
to these crucial parameters.
   The third generation still needs a top quark and as we speak here,
searches for this are going on now at the CERN            machine and at the
Fermilab collider.
   Both machines are operating at very good intensities averaging 200 - 400
nb- per week. The Fermilab machine has a decided advantage of 1.8 TeV
as compared to CERN’s 0.63 TeV, but everything depends on the quality of
data, the wisdom invested in the design of the detectors and, of course, the
mass of the top quark. It does seem safe to predict that a paper will soon
appear, perhaps entitled: “Observation of the Top Quark.”


                                  Physics 1988




Figure 13. Fermilab E-605 data.




VII. Crucial Issues in Neutrino Physics Today
I conclude this paper with a brief resume of our ignorance about neutrinos.
Neutrino interaction data are in good agreement with electroweak theory of
the SM and so they will continue to be used to improve our knowledge of
quark structure functions, the crucial Weinberg angle, etc. However, we
have not yet seen the     we do not know if there is a fourth neutrino, we
cannot answer urgent questions about the possibility of neutrino mass, and
mixing of different flavors, of the stability of the neutrino, whether it has a
magnetic moment, and, finally, the nature of the antineutrino, e.g., wheth-
er of the Dirac or Majorana type. What makes all of this intensely interest-


                                   L. M. Lederman                             535


ing are two factors: 1) the astrophysical implications of the answers to these
questions are awesome; and 2) the view as expressed by Weinberg that ". . .
neutrino mass illuminates some of the deepest questions in particle phys-
ics.” This is because, in the Standard Model, with the usual quarks, leptons,
and gauge bosons, there is no possible renormalizable interaction that can
violate lepton number conservation and give the neutrino a mass. Thus, the
observation of mass would very likely be a sign of new physics far beyond the
Standard Model, perhaps as far as 10 15 GeV, the scale of Grand Unification.

A. The Third Neutrino,
The “three-neutrino” experiment has not been done. Although data from
the decay of τ lepton are very strongly suggestive of the existence of direct
evidence for has yet to appear.
  The technical problem is to move the target as close to the detector as
possible but to divert the now unstoppable muons by magnetic sweeping.
The flux of v‘s cannot be predicted with confidence and the shielding
configuration is very expensive. This is primarily why the experiment has
not yet been done.

B. A Fourth Neutrino?
This question is a shorthand for the issue of the number of generations.
 Searches for heavier quarks and/or leptons are the sine qua non of new
 accelerators and these have all been negative so far, although the results simply
 give limits MQ > 40 GeV (same as top quark) and ML > 20 - 40 GeV
depending upon the kind of heavy lepton and upon assumptions as to the
                                        29
mass of its accompanying neutrino . Important constraints come from
astrophysics where the abundance of helium has been related to the number of
low-mass neutrinos29. Probably one more low-mass neutrino could still be
accommodated within the Big Bang nucleosynthesis arguments. The con-
nection between the cosmological model of creation in the Big Bang and the
number of generations in the Standard Model is one of the more romantic
episodes in the marriage of particle physics and (early universe) cosmology.
In fact, one of the strongest supports of Big Bang cosmology is primordial
nucleosynthesis; the cooking of the light elements in the caldron beginning
at t 1 sec. The astrophysicists manage to get it right: the abundances of
deuterium, helium, and lithium. The key is helium 4; its abundance is a
sensitive indicator of the total radiation density at formation time. Contri-
buting to this are all the low-mass, relativistic particles, i.e., photons,
electrons, and the three neutrinos plus their antiparticles. Another genera-
tion containing a low-mass neutrino would probably not destroy the agree-
ment but it would begin to stretch the agreement. Conclusion: there may
be a fourth generation, but a fifth generation which included low-mass
particles would provide a major problem for our astrophysical colleagues.
Of course, there could be something out there which is outside of the
generational structure. One experiment soon to yield results is being carried
out at the e+e - machines at CERN’s Large Electron Positron Collider


536                              Physics 1988


(LEP) and the Stanford Linear Collider (SLC) where the width of the Z0 will
give some indication of the number of neutrino pairs into which it can
decay. The residual and dominant current interest in the neutrinos comes
from astrophysical arguments related to dark matter. This in turn puts the
spotlight on the neutrino mass measurements to which we now turn.

C. Neutrino Masses and Oscillation
In the Standard Model, neutrino masses are set to zero and both total
lepton number L and lepton flavor number Li (i = e, µ, τ) are conserved.
Neutrino masses “provide a window on the world beyond the SM" and have
become one of the outstanding concerns of present-day particle physics.
The possibility of oscillation is a statement that           is not rigorously
forbidden as suggested by our two-neutrino experiment. The issue is given
great emphasis by the cosmologists, who are increasingly impinging on the
orderly development of particle physics (and what a joy that is!) and by the
solar neutrino crisis, which has been around for decades. This is the
discrepancy between the number of V ‘S observed to be coming from the sun
                                       e


and the flux that our best knowledge would predict. The detection of V
signals from Supernova 1987a has added to the intensity of interest.
   The oscillation possibility was first suggested by B. Pontecorvo in 1967 30.
The neutrino flavor mixing is analogous to the quark mixing as given in the
KM matrix. Today, we see many attempts to observe oscillations. These are
at the high-energy accelerator labs, at meson factories, at reactors, and
indeed in the solar environment. There, the problem is a theoretical one, to
understand the lack of neutrinos from the processes that are known to keep
the Sun shining. The solar neutrino crisis alone is receiving the attention of
at least 14 large experimental groups around the world and many times that
number of theorists!
   As of this date, no convincing evidence for oscillations or for neutrino
masses has been observed. These indirect evidences for mass differences
and other experiments which look directly for neutrino masses are summa-
rized by:

                              m(v e) < ~ 20 eV
                              m(v µ) < 0.25 MeV
                                     < 35 MeV
Oscillation limits are more conventionally given in terms of limits on the
mass differences, ∆ , and the coupled limits on the phase angle,       that
defines the mixing strength. Slowly and inexorably the space on the two-
dimensional plot        vs sin 28) is being reduced to the lower left hand
corner, although logarithmic scales will encourage experimenters to design
ever more sensitive tests.
  Cosmologists assure us that we live in a universe whose primary compo-
nent of mass density is dark (non-luminous) and is presently unidentified.
Much of this is probably (they say) non-baryonic and some kind of weakly
interacting particle carrying some mass (WIMP) is a likely candidate. The


                                   L. M. Lederman                             537


principle of minimum complexity would have these be neutrinos and the
condition is      ~ 20 eV            This brings the forward, as empha-
sized by Harari who proposes as a matter of urgency a renewed search for
     vτ.
   Other experiments occupying the new pion factories (SIN, TRIUMF, and
LAMPF) look for (small) violations of lepton flavor conservation via ex-
tremely sensitive searches for such reactions as
                             (again but now at B ~ 10-11!)
                        and µ +          (B < 10-12 ) .
The improvements in experimental techniques and machines conspire to
improve these observations by about an order of magnitude every seven
years. For completeness we must also list the search for rare decay modes of
K-mesons in "kaon factories.” Pion, kaon, and B-factories clearly indicate
the industrialization of particle physics. The physics objectives of all of these
researches are to seek out the tiny influences of presumed new physics
which is taking place at the TeV level and higher. For a mature experiment-
er, these are fun experiments combining the payoff of observations (if and
when) with the attention to detail of precise measurements.
   To all of the above we should add the new generation structure function
research with neutrino beams, probably tagged. Taken together, the 1962
two-neutrino experiment, honored at this meeting, has given rise to a set of
activities which, in 1988, continues to play a dominating role in particle
physics and its new branches, astrophysics and early universe cosmology.


VIII. Find Comments
I would like to conclude this history of the Standard Model, which is not a
history at all. From time to time it follows the main road, e.g., when the two-
neutrino experiment pointed to flavor and the generational organization of
the Standard Model. More often it takes side trails because my own experi-
ments were down those paths. So we have neglected such milestones as the
discovery of neutral currents, the τ lepton, the W and Z bosons, charmon-
ium, etc. We have also been crushingly neglectful of the essential theoretical
contributions and blitzed through quarks, color, symmetry-breaking, etc.
   However, I regret most not having the space to speak more of the
accelerators, the detectors, and the people who brought these to be. The
Nevis cyclotron was built under the leadership of Eugene Booth and James
Rainwater; the AGS, most successful machine ever, led by Ken Green,
Ernest Courant, Stanley Livingston, and Hartland Snyder; Fermilab, of
course, by Robert Wilson and his outstanding staff. My own detector
experience owes much to Georges Charpak of CERN and William Sippach
of Columbia. In neglecting these details I am reminded of my teacher,
friend, and thesis professor, Gilberto Bernardini, who, when being shown
the Nevis cyclotron’s innards, exclaimed: “Just show me where the beam
comes out.” Finally, I make amends to the theorists who are obviously


538                                    Physics 1988


crucial to the entire enterprise. I have enjoyed and profited from many
physicists of the theoretical persuasion, but most especially T. D. Lee, M.
Veltman, and J. D. Bjorken.



REFERENCES
 1. T. Coffin, R. L. Garwin, I.. M. Lederman, S. Penman, A. M. Sachs, Phys. Rev.
     106, 1108 (1957).
 2. S. Devons, G. Gidal, L. M. Lederman, G. Shapiro, Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 330
     (1960). S. Meyer et al. Phys. Rev. 132, 2963 (1963).
 3. R. W. Ellsworth, A. C. Melissinos, J. H. Tinlot, H. von Briesen, Jr., T. Yamanouchi,
      L. M. Lederman, T. Tannenbaum, R. L., Cool, A. Maschke, Phys. Rev. 165,
      1449 (1968).
     C. P. Sargent, M. Rinehart, I,. M. I.ederman, K. C. Rogers, Phys. Rev. 99, 885
     (1955).
 4. H. Blumenfeld, W. Chinowsky, L. M. Lederman, Nuovo Cimento 8, 296 (1958).
 5. K. Lande, E. T. Booth, J. Impeduglia, L. M. Lederman, Phys. Rev. 103, 1901
     (1956).
 6. R. 1.. Garwin, L. M. Lederman, M. Weinrich, Phys. Rev. 105, 1415 (1957).
 7. G. Danby, J-M. Gaillard, K. Goulianos, L. M. Lederman, N. Mistry, M.
     Schwartz, J. Steinberger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 9, 36 (1962).
 8. J. H. Christenson, G. S. Hicks, L. M. Lederman, P. J. Limon, B. G. Pope, E,.
     Zavattini, Phys. Rev. Lett. 25, 1523 (1970).
 9. F. W. Büsser, L. Camilleri, L. DiLella, G. Gladding, A. Placci, B. G. Pope, A. M.
     Smith, J. K. Yoh, E. Zavattini, B. J. Blumenfeld, L. M. Lederman, R. L. Cool, I,. Litt,
     S. L. Segler, Phys. Lett. 46B, 471 (1973).
10. S. W. Herb, D. C. Horn, 1,. M. I.ederman, J. C. Sens, H. D. Snyder, J. K. Yoh, J.
     A. Appel, B. C. Brown, C. N. Brown, W. R. lnnes, K. Ueno. T. Yamanouchi, A.
     S. Ito, H. Jostlein, D. M. Kaplan, R. D. Kephart, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 252 (1977).
11. G. Finocchiaro, G. Giannini, J. Lee-Franzini, R. D. Schamberger Jr., M. Siverta,
     L,. J. Spencer, P. M. Tuts, T. Bohringer, F. Costantini, J. Dobbins, P. Franzini,
     K. Han, S. W. Herb, D. M. Kaplan, L. M. Lederman, G. Mageras, D. Peterson,
     E. Rice, J. K. Yoh, G. Levman, Phys. Lett. 45, 222 (1980).
12. M. Gell-Mann, A. Pais, Phys. Rev. 97, 1387 (1955).
13. L,. Lederman, E. T. Booth, H. Byfield, J. Kessler, Phys. Rev. 83, 685 (1951).
14. L. Lederman, J. Tinlot, E. Booth, Phys. Rev. 81, (1951).
15. L. M. Lederman, Thesis Columbia U, 1951 (unpublished).
16. H. Byfield, J. Kessler, L. M. Lederman, Phys. Rev. 86, 17 (1952).
17. T. D. Lee, Reinhard Oehne, C. N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 106, 340 (1957).
18. J. H. Christenson, J. W. Cronin, V. L. Fitch, R. Turlay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 138
     (1964).
19. T. D. Lee, C. N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 104, 254 (1956).
20. G. Feinberg, Phys. Rev. 110, 1482 (1958).
21. J. D. Bjorken, S. L. Glashow, Phys. Lett. 11, 255 (1964).
22. S. L. Glashow, J. Iliopoulos, L. Maiani, Phys. Rev. D2, 1285 (1970).
23. R. Burns, G. Danby, E. Heyman, L. M. Lederman, W. Lee, J. Rettberg, and J.
     Sunderland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 15, 830 (1965).
24. Y. Yamaguchi, Nuovo Cimento 43A, 193 (1966). L. Okun, unpublished (1966).
25. J. J. Aubert, U. Becker, P. J. Biggs, J. Burger, M. Chen, G. Everhart, P.
     Goldhagen, J. Leong, T. McCorriston, T. G. Rhoades, M. Rohde, Samuel C. C.
     Ting, Sau Lan Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 1404 (1974).
26. D. M. Kaplan, R. J. Fisk, A. S. Ito, H. Jostlein, J. A. Appel, B. C. Brown, C. N.
     Brown, W. R. Innes, R. D. Kephart, K. Ueno, T. Yamanouchi, S. W. Herb, D. C.


       Horn, L. M. Lederman, J. C. Sens, H. D. Snyder, J. K. Yoh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40,
       435 (1978) and A. S. Ito et al., Phys. Rev. D 23, 604 (1981).
27.   S. M. Berman, J. D. Bjorken, J. B. Kogut, Phys. Rev. D4, 3388 (1971).
28.   Martin Perl: Heavy Leptons in 1986. Proceedings of the XXIII International
       Conference on High Energy Physics, Berkeley, 1986, p. 596.
29.   Gary Steigman, David N. Schramm and James E. Gunn, Phys. Lett. 66B 202
       (1977).
30.   B. Pontecorvo, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 53, 1717 (1967) [Soviet Physics JETP 26,984
       (1968)].
