                           L OUIS   DE   BROGLIE

               The wave nature of the electron
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1929


When in 1920 I resumed my studies of theoretical physics which had long
been interrupted by circumstances beyond my control, I was far from the
idea that my studies would bring me several years later to receive such a high
and envied prize as that awarded by the Swedish Academy of Sciences each
year to a scientist: the Nobel Prize for Physics. What at that time drew me
towards theoretical physics was not the hope that such a high distinction
would ever crown my work; I was attracted to theoretical physics by the
mystery enshrouding the structure of matter and the structure of radiations,
a mystery which deepened as the strange quantum concept introduced by
Planck in 1900 in his research on black-body radiation continued to encroach
on the whole domain of physics.
     To assist you to understand how my studies developed, I must first
depict for you the crisis which physics had then been passing through for
some twenty years.

For a long time physicists had been wondering whether light was composed
of small, rapidly moving corpuscles. This idea was put forward by the phi-
losophers of antiquity and upheld by Newton in the 18th century. After
Thomas Young’s discovery of interference phenomena and following the
admirable work of Augustin Fresnel, the hypothesis of a granular structure
of light was entirely abandoned and the wave theory unanimously adopted.
Thus the physicists of last century spurned absolutely the idea of an atomic
structure of light. Although rejected by optics, the atomic theories began
making great headway not only in chemistry, where they provided a simple
interpretation of the laws of definite proportions, but also in the physics of
matter where they made possible an interpretation of a large number of prop-
erties of solids, liquids, and gases. In particular they were instrumental in the
elaboration of that admirable kinetic theory of gases which, generalized un-
der the name of statistical mechanics, enables a clear meaning to be given to
the abstract concepts of thermodynamics. Experiment also yielded decisive
proof in favour of an atomic constitution of electricity; the concept of the


                        WAVE NATURE OF ELECTRON                              245
electricity corpuscle owes its appearance to Sir J. J. Thomson and you will
all be familiar with H. A. Lorentz’s use of it in his theory of electrons.
   Some thirty years ago, physics was hence divided into two: firstly the
physics of matter based on the concept of corpuscles and atoms which were
supposed to obey Newton’s classical laws of mechanics, and secondly radia-
tion physics based on the concept of wave propagation in a hypothetical
continuous medium, i.e. the light ether or electromagnetic ether. But these
two physics could not remain alien one to the other; they had to be fused
together by devising a theory to explain the energy exchanges between mat-
ter and radiation - and that is where the difficulties arose. While seeking to
link these two physics together, imprecise and even inadmissible conclu-
sions were in fact arrived at in respect of the energy equilibrium between
matter and radiation in a thermally insulated medium: matter, it came to be
said, must yield all its energy to the radiation and so tend of its own accord
to absolute zero temperature! This absurd conclusion had at all costs to be
avoided. By an intuition of his genius Planck realized the way of avoiding
it: instead of assuming, in common with the classical wave theory, that a
light source emits its radiation continuously, it had to be assumed on the
contrary that it emits equal and finite quantities, quanta. The energy of each
quantum has, moreover, a value proportional to the frequency v of the ra-
diation. It is equal to hv, h being a universal constant since referred to as
Planck’s constant.
    The success of Planck’s ideas entailed serious consequences. If light is emit-
ted as quanta, ought it not, once emitted, to have a granular structure? The
existence of radiation quanta thus implies the corpuscular concept of light.
On the other hand, as shown by Jeans and H. Poincaré, it is demonstrable
that if the motion of the material particles in light sources obeyed the laws of
classical mechanics it would be impossible to derive the exact law of black-
body radiation, Planck’s law. It must therefore be assumed that traditional
dynamics, even as modified by Einstein’s theory of relativity, is incapable of
accounting for motion on a very small scale.
    The existence of a granular structure of light and of other radiations was
confirmed by the discovery of the photoelectric effect. If a beam of light or
of X-rays falls on a piece of matter, the latter will emit rapidly moving elec-
trons. The kinetic energy of these electrons increases linearly with the fre-
quency of the incident radiation and is independent of its intensity. This
phenomenon can be explained simply by assuming that the radiation is com-
posed of quanta hv capable of yielding all their energy to an electron of the


246                           1929 L.DE BROGLIE

irradiated body: one is thus led to the theory of light quanta proposed by
 Einstein in 1905 and which is, after all, a reversion to Newton’s corpuscular
 theory, completed by the relation for the proportionality between the en-
 ergy of the corpuscles and the frequency. A number of arguments were put
 forward by Einstein in support of his viewpoint and in 1922 the discovery
 by A. H. Compton of the X-ray scattering phenomenon which bears his
name confirmed it. Nevertheless, it was still necessary to adopt the wave
 theory to account for interference and diffraction phenomena and no way
 whatsoever of reconciling the wave theory with the existence of light cor-
 puscles could be visualized.
    As stated, Planck’s investigations cast doubts on the validity of very small
 scale mechanics. Let us consider a material point which describes a small tra-
jectory which is closed or else turning back on itself. According to classical
 dynamics there are numberless motions of this type which are possible com-
 plying with the initial conditions, and the possible values for the energy of
 the moving body form a continuous sequence. On the other hand Planck
 was led to assume that only certain preferred motions, quantized motions, are
 possible or at least stable, since energy can only assume values forming a
 discontinuous sequence. This concept seemed rather strange at first but its
 value had to be recognized because it was this concept which brought Planck
 to the correct law of black-body radiation and because it then proved its
 fruitfulness in many other fields. Lastly, it was on the concept of atomic mo-
 tion quantization that Bohr based his famous theory of the atom; it is SO
 familiar to scientists that I shall not summarize it here.
    The necessity of assuming for light two contradictory theories-that of
 waves and that of corpuscles - and the inability to understand why, among
  the infinity of motions which an electron ought to be able to have in the
  atom according to classical concepts, only certain ones were possible: such
  were the enigmas confronting physicists at the time I resumed my studies of
  theoretical physics.

When I started to ponder these difficulties two things struck me in the main.
Firstly the light-quantum theory cannot be regarded as satisfactory since it
defines the energy of a light corpuscle by the relation W = hv which con-
tains a frequency v. Now a purely corpuscular theory does not contain any
element permitting the definition of a frequency. This reason alone renders
it necessary in the case of light to introduce simultaneously the corpuscle
concept and the concept of periodicity.


                     WAVE NATURE OF ELECTRON                                 247

  On the other hand the determination of the stable motions of the electrons
in the atom involves whole numbers, and so far the only phenomena in
which whole numbers were involved in physics were those of interference
and of eigenvibrations. That suggested the idea to me that electrons them-
selves could not be represented as simple corpuscles either, but that a peri-
odicity had also to be assigned to them too.
  I thus arrived at the following overall concept which guided my studies:
for both matter and radiations, light in particular, it is necessary to introduce
the corpuscle concept and the wave concept at the same time. In other words
the existence of corpuscles accompanied by waves has to be assumed in all
cases. However, since corpuscles and waves cannot be independent because,
according to Bohr’s expression, they constitute two complementary forces
of reality, it must be possible to establish a certain parallelism between the
motion of a corpuscle and the propagation of the associated wave. The first
objective to achieve had, therefore, to be to establish this correspondence.
  With that in view I started by considering the simplest case: that of an
isolated corpuscle, i.e. a corpuscle free from all outside influence. We wish
to associate a wave with it. Let us consider first of all a reference system
        in which the corpuscle is immobile: this is the "intrinsic" system
of the corpuscle in the sense of the relativity theory. In this system the
wave will be stationary since the corpuscle is immobile: its phase will be the
same at every point; it will be represented by an expression of the form
sin            ;   being the intrinsic time of the corpuscle and      a constant.
  In accordance with the principle of inertia in every Galilean system, the
corpuscle will have a rectilinear and uniform motion. Let us consider such
a Galilean system and let       =    be the velocity of the corpuscle in this
system; we shall not restrict generality by taking the direction of the motion
as the x-axis. In compliance with Lorentz’ transformation, the time         used
by an observer of this new system will be associated with the intrinsic time
  by the relation:




and hence for this observer the phase of the wave will be given by


248                            1929 L.DE BROGLIE

For him the wave will thus have a frequency:




and will propagate in the direction of the x-axis at the phase velocity:




By the elimination of between the two preceding formulae the following
relation can readily be derived which defines the refractive index of the
vacuum n for the waves considered:

                                                    2



A <<group velocity>> corresponds to this <<law of dispersion>>. You will be
aware that the group velocity is the velocity of the resultant amplitude of a
group of waves of very close frequencies. Lord Rayleigh showed that this
velocity U satisfies equation :

                                     I
                                     U

Here U = v, that is to say that the group velocity of the waves in the system
xyzt is equal to the velocity of the corpuscle in this system. This relation is
of very great importance for the development of the theory.
    The corpuscle is thus defined in the system xyzt by the frequency v and
t h e p h a s e v e l o c i t y V of its associated wave. To establish the parallelism of
which we have spoken, we must seek to link these parameters to the me-
chanical parameters, energy and quantity of motion. Since the proportion-
ality between energy and frequency is one of the most characteristic relations
of the quantum theory, and since, moreover, the frequency and the energy
transform in the same way when the Galilean reference system is changed,
we may simply write

                     energy = h x frequency,            or W = h v


                       WAVE NATURE OF ELECTRON                               249
where h is Planck’s constant. This relation must apply in all Galilean systems
and in the intrinsic system of the corpuscle where the energy of the corpuscle,
according to Einstein, reduces to its internal energy moc2 (m0 being the rest
mass) we have

                                  hvo = m oc 2


This relation defines the frequency v O as a function of the rest mass m o, or
inversely.
   The quantity of movement is a vector p equal to




and we have:




The quantity; λ is the distance between two consecutive peaks of the wave,
i.e. the "wavelength". Hence:




This is a fundamental relation of the theory.

The whole of the foregoing relates to the very simple case where there is no
field of force at all acting on the corpuscles. I shall show you very briefly how
to generalize the theory in the case of a corpuscle moving in a constant field
of force deriving from a potential function F(xyz). By reasoning which I
shall pass over, we are then led to assume that the propagation of the wave
corresponds to a refractive index which varies from point to point in space
in accordance with the formula:


250                           1929 L. DE BROGLIE

or to a first approximation if the corrections introduced by the theory of
relativity are negligible




with E = W        -         The constant energy W of the corpuscle is still as-
sociated with the constant frequency        of the wave by the relation




while the wavelength         which varies from one point to another of the force
field is associated with the equally variable quantity of motion p by the fol-
lowing relation




Here again it is demonstrated that the group velocity of the waves is equal
to the velocity of the corpuscle. The parallelism thus established between the
corpuscle and its wave enables us to identify Fermat’s principle for the waves
and the principle of least action for the corpuscles (constant fields). Fermat’s
principle states that the ray in the optical sense which passes through two
points A and B in a medium having an index n(xyz) varying from one

point to another but constant in time is such that the integral

taken along this ray is extreme. On the other hand Maupertuis’ principle of
least action teaches us the following: the trajectory of a corpuscle passing

through two points A and B in space is such that the integral

taken along the trajectory is extreme, provided, of course, that only the
motions corresponding to a given energy value are considered. From the
relations derived above between the mechanical and the wave parameters,
we have:


                     WAVE NATURE OF ELECTRON                                  251

since W is constant in a constant field. It follows that Fermat’s and Mauper-
tuis’ principles are each a translation of the other and the possible trajectories
of the corpuscle are identical to the possible rays of its wave.
  These concepts lead to an interpretation of the conditions of stability in-
troduced by the quantum theory. Actually, if we consider a closed trajectory
C in a constant field, it is very natural to assume that the phase of the asso-
ciated wave must be a uniform function along this trajectory. Hence we may
write :




This is precisely Planck’s condition of stability for periodic atomic motions.
The conditions of quantum stability thus emerge as analogous to resonance
phenomena and the appearance of integers becomes as natural here as in the
theory of vibrating cords and plates.


The general formulae which establish the parallelism between waves and
corpuscles may be applied to corpuscles of light on the assumption that here
the rest mass       is infinitely small. Actually, if for a given value of the
energy W,       is made to tend towards zero, v and V are both found to tend
towards c and at the limit the two fundamental formulae are obtained on
which Einstein had based his light-quantum theory




Such are the main ideas which I developed in my initial studies. They showed
clearly that it was possible to establish a correspondence between waves and
corpuscles such that the laws of mechanics correspond to the laws of geomet-
rical optics. In the wave theory, however, as you will know, geometrical
optics is only an approximation: this approximation has its limits of validity
and particularly when interference and diffraction phenomena are involved,
it is quite inadequate. This prompted the thought that classical mechanics
is also only an approximation relative to a vaster wave mechanics. I stated as
much almost at the outset of my studies, i.e. "A new mechanics must be
developed which is to classical mechanics what wave optics is to geomet-
rical optics". This new mechanics has since been developed, thanks mainly


252                           1929 L.DE BROGLIE

to the fine work done by Schrödinger. It is based on wave propagation
equations and strictly defines the evolution in time of the wave associated
with a corpuscle. It has in particular succeeded in giving a new and more
satisfactory form to the quantization conditions of intra-atomic motion since
the classical quantization conditions are justified, as we have seen, by the
application of geometrical optics to the waves associated with the intra-
atomic corpuscles, and this application is not strictly justified.
   I cannot attempt even briefly to sum up here the development of the new
mechanics. I merely wish to say that on examination it proved to be iden-
tical with a mechanics independently developed, first by Heisenberg, then
by Born, Jordan, Pauli, Dirac, etc.: quantum mechanics. The two mechan-
ics, wave and quantum, are equivalent from the mathematical point of
view.
   We shall content ourselves here by considering the general significance of
the results obtained. To sum up the meaning of wave mechanics it can be
stated that: "A wave must be associated with each corpuscle and only the
study of the wave’s propagation will yield information to us on the succes-
sive positions of the corpuscle in space". In conventional large-scale mechani-
cal phenomena the anticipated positions lie along a curve which is the trajec-
tory in the conventional meaning of the word. But what happens if the wave
does not propagate according to the laws of optical geometry, if, say, there
are interferences and diffraction? Then it is no longer possible to assign to the
corpuscle a motion complying with classical dynamics, that much is certain.
Is it even still possible to assume that at each moment the corpuscle occupies
a well-defined position in the wave and that the wave in its propagation car-
ries the corpuscle along in the same way as a wave would carry along a cork?
These are difficult questions and to discuss them would take us too far and
even to the confines of philosophy. All that I shall say about them here is that
nowadays the tendency in general is to assume that it is not constantly pos-
sible to assign to the corpuscle a well-defined position in the wave. I must
restrict myself to the assertion that when an observation is carried out en-
abling the localization of the corpuscle, the observer is invariably induced
to assign to the corpuscle a position in the interior of the wave and the
probability of it being at a particular point M of the wave is proportional to
the square of the amplitude, that is to say the intensity at M.
   This may be expressed in the following manner. If we consider a cloud of
corpuscles associated with the same wave, the intensity of the wave at each
point is proportional to the cloud density at that point (i.e. to the number of


                     WAVE NATURE OF ELECTRON                              253

corpuscles per unit volume around that point). This hypothesis is necessary
to explain how, in the case of light interferences, the light energy is con-
centrated at the points where the wave intensity is maximum: if in fact it is
assumed that the light energy is carried by light corpuscles, photons, then
the photon density in the wave must be proportional to the intensity.
  This rule in itselfwill enable us to understand how it was possible to verify
the wave theory of the electron by experiment.
  Let us in fact imagine an indefinite cloud of electrons all moving at the
same velocity in the same direction. In conformity with the fundamental
ideas of wave mechanics we must associate with this cloud an indefinite plane
wave of the form




where        are the cosines governing the propagation direction and where
the wavelength       is equal to h/p. With electrons which are not extremely
fast, we may write



and hence




where       is the rest mass of the electron.
   You will be aware that in practice, to obtain electrons moving at the same
velocity, they are made to undergo a drop in potential P and we have



Hence,




Numerically this gives


254                           1929 L-DE BROGLIE

 Since it is scarcely possible to use electrons other than such that have under-
 gone a voltage drop of at least some tens of volts, you will see that the wave-
length λ predicted by theory is at most of the order of 10 -8 cm, i.e. of the
 order of the Ångström unit. It is also the order of magnitude of X-ray wave-
lengths.
    Since the wavelength of the electron waves is of the order of that of X-
rays, it must be expected that crystals can cause diffraction of these waves
completely analogous to the Laue phenomenon. Allow me to refresh your
memories what is the Laue phenomenon. A natural crystal such as rock salt,
for example, contains nodes composed of the atoms of the substances making
up the crystal and which are regularly spaced at distances of the order of an
Ångström. These nodes act as diffusion centres for the waves and if the
crystal is impinged upon by a wave, the wavelength of which is also of the
order of an Ångström, the waves diffracted by the various nodes are in phase
agreement in certain well-defined directions and in these directions the total
diffracted intensity is a pronounced maximum. The arrangement of these
diffraction maxima is given by the nowadays well-known mathematical
theory developed by von Laue and Bragg which defines the position of the
maxima as a function of the spacing of the nodes in the crystal and of the
wavelength of the incident wave. For X-rays this theory has been admirably
confirmed by von Laue, Friedrich, and Knipping and thereafter the diffrac-
tion of X-rays in crystals has become a commonplace experience. The ac-
curate measurement of X-ray wavelengths is based on this diffraction: is
there any need to remind this in the country where Siegbahn and co-workers
are continuing their fine work?
   For X-rays the phenomenon of diffraction by crystals was a natural con-
sequence of the idea that X-rays are waves analogous to light and differ from
it only by having a smaller wavelength. For electrons nothing similar could
be foreseen as long as the electron was regarded as a simple small corpuscle.
However, if the electron is assumed to be associated with a wave and the
density of an electron cloud is measured by the intensity of the associated
wave, then a phenomenon analogous to the Laue phenomenon ought to be
expected for electrons. The electron wave will actually be diffracted in-
tensely in the directions which can be calculated by means of the Laue-Bragg
theory from the wavelength λ = h/mv, which corresponds to the known
velocity v of the electrons impinging on the crystal. Since, according to our
general principle, the intensity of the diffracted wave is a measure of the
density of the cloud of diffracted electrons, we must expect to find a great


                       WAVE NATURE OF ELECTRON                             255
many diffracted electrons in the directions of the maxima. If the phenom-
enon actually exists it should thus provide decisive experimental proof in
favour of the existence of a wave associated with the electron with wave-
length h/mv, and so the fundamental idea of wave mechanics will rest on
firm experimental foundations.
   Now, experiment which is the final judge of theories, has shown that the
phenomenon of electron diffraction by crystals actually exists and that it
obeys exactly and quantitatively the laws of wave mechanics. To Davisson
and Germer, working at the Bell Laboratories in New York, falls the honour
of being the first to observe the phenomenon by a method analogous to that
of von Laue for X-rays. By duplicating the same experiments but replacing
the single crystal by a crystalline powder in conformity with the method
introduced for X-rays by Debye and Scherrer, Professor G. P. Thomson of
Aberdeen, son of the famous Cambridge physicist Sir J. J. Thomson, found
the same phenomena. Then Rupp in Germany, Kikuchi in Japan, Ponte in
France and others reproduced them, varying the experimental conditions.
Today, the existence of the phenomenon is beyond doubt and the slight
difficulties of interpretation posed by the first experiments of Davisson and
Germer appear to have been satisfactorily solved.
   Rupp has even managed to bring about electron diffraction in a partic-
ularly striking form. You will be familiar with what are termed diffraction
gratings in optics: these are glass or metal surfaces, plane or slightly curved,
on which have been mechanically traced equidistant lines, the spacing be-
tween which is comparable in order of magnitude with the wavelengths of
light waves. The waves diffracted by these lines interfere, and the inter-
ferences give rise to maxima of diffracted light in certain directions depend-
ing on the interline spacing, on the direction of the light impinging on the
 grating, and on the wavelength of this light. For a long time it proved im-
 possible to achieve similar phenomena with this type of man-made diffrac-
tion grating using X-rays instead of light. The reason was that the wave-
length of X-rays is much smaller than that of light and no instrument can
 draw lines on a surface, the spacing between which is of the order of mag-
nitude of X-ray wavelengths. A number of ingenious physicists (Compton,
 J. Thibaud) found how to overcome the difficulty. Let us take an ordinary
 optical diffraction grating and observe it almost tangentially to its surface.
 The lines of the grating will appear to us much closer together than they
 actually are. For X-rays impinging at this almost skimming incidence on the
 grating the effect will be as if the lines were very closely set and diffraction


256                          1929 L-DE BROGLIE

phenomena analogous to those of light will occur. This is what the above-
mentioned physicists confirmed. But then, since the electron wavelengths
are of the order of X-ray wavelengths, it must also be possible to obtain
diffraction phenomena by directing a beam of electrons on to an optical
diffraction grating at a very low angle. Rupp succeeded in doing so and was
thus able to measure the wavelength of electron waves by comparing them
directly with the spacing of the mechanically traced lines on the grating.

Thus to describe the properties of matter as well as those of light, waves
and corpuscles have to be referred to at one and the same time. The electron
can no longer be conceived as a single, small granule of electricity; it must
be associated with a wave and this wave is no myth; its wavelength can be
measured and its interferences predicted. It has thus been possible to predict
a whole group of phenomena without their actually having been discov-
ered. And it is on this concept of the duality of waves and corpuscles in Na-
ture, expressed in a more or less abstract form, that the whole recent devel-
opment of theoretical physics has been founded and that all future devel-
opment of this science will apparently have to be founded.
