BIRTH OF NEUTRINO ASTROPHYSICS
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2002
by
MASATOSHI KOSHIBA
International Center for Elementary Particle Physics, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1-Hongo, Bunkjo-Ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.




In giving this talk I am very much helped by the preceding talk because I can
skip some of the topics. If you want further information, please refer to my re-
view article, “Observational Neutrino Astrophysics,” [1].
   I am to talk about the birth of the neutrino astrophysics, but before the
birth, there was a very important event, which was just described by Prof.
Davis. [2]. It was the radiochemical work using the reaction e + 37Cl going to
e + 37Ar. He found that the observed neutrino flux was only 1/3 of the theo-
retically expected. This could be considered as the conception of the neu-
trino astrophysics and was in fact the impetus for us to begin seriously work-
ing on the solar neutrinos.
   I will talk about two experiments. The first is the original KamiokaNDE,
which might be called an Imaging Water Cerenkov detector with a surface
coverage of 20% by photomultipliers and the total mass of the water inside
this detector is 3,000 tons. It costed about 3 million U.S. dollars. This, mind
you, was meant to be the feasibility experiment on the astrophysical detection
of solar neutrinos. The second experiment is called Super-KamiokaNDE, the
same type of detector but with a better light sensitivity, that is, 40% of the en-
tire surface was covered by the photocathode and the total mass of the water
was 50,000 tons. It costed about 100 million U.S. dollars. This was considered
to be the full-scale solar neutrino observatory.
   Both the experiments are situated about 1,000 meters underground in
Kamioka Mine. The capital letters NDE at the end of the two experiments
originally implied “Nucleon Decay Experiment.” However, because of our de-
tection of various neutrinos by these detectors, people started calling it,
“Neutrino Detection Experiment”.
   Fig.1 shows the interior of KamiokaNDE. You can see arrays of photomulti-
pliers on the sidewalls as well as on the top and at the bottom. When we were
preparing for this KamiokaNDE experiment, we heard that a much bigger, ex-
periment but of similar type, was being planned in the United States. [3]. We
had to think very seriously about the competition with this bigger detector.
Both experiments aimed at the detection of a certain type of proton decay,
i.e., e+ + 0 mode. If we were aiming only for the detection of such particular
types of proton decays, certainly the much bigger U.S. experiments would

84


Figure 1. The interior of KamiokaNDE.




Figure 2. The newly developed large photomultiplier.

                                                       85


Figure 3. The interior of S-K through fish-eye lens.




find it first. Then, what could we do with a smaller detector? We thought very
seriously about this competition and we came to the conclusion that the on-
ly possible way to compete with this bigger detector would be to make our de-
tector much more sensitive than the U.S. competitors so that we could not on-
ly detect the easiest proton decay mode, but also measure other types of
proton decays. Then eventually we could say that the proton decays into this
mode with this branching ratio and into that mode with that branching ratio
and so forth. Then our experiment would be able to point the way to the pos-
sible future, what is called the Grand Unified Theory, which is a new type of
theory combining strong forces, weak forces, and electromagnetic forces.
   Thanks to the cooperation of Hamamatsu Photonics Co., we jointly devel-
oped very large photomultiplier tubes [4]. I was so happy, as you can see in
Fig. 2 that this tube was successfully developed.
   Fig. 3 shows the fish-eye view of the Super-KamiokaNDE interior. You can
see many more phototubes, a total of about 11,000 big phototubes.
   Since I suppose that not many people are familiar with this type of detec-
tor, I want to show you the performance of Super-KamiokaNDE. The first ex-
ample is a very slow motion picture of a cosmic ray muon passing through the
detector.

86


Figure 4-1.  just entered S-K.            Figure 4-2. 50 nanoseconds later.



   As is well known, special relativity prohibits any particle to move faster than
the velocity of light in vacuum. However, in a media like water, the light ve-
locity itself is reduced to three-quarter of its value in vacuum. Therefore,
when the particle energy is very high, its velocity can exceed the velocity of
light in the water. Then, what happens is that such high energy, high velocity,
particles in water will generate, what might be called, a shock wave of light;
the Cerenkov light. It is emitted in a cone shape with the axis on the trajecto-
ry of the moving electrically charged particle.
   Fig. 4-1 shows the response of Super-KamiokaNDE when a muon just en-
tered the detector. The Super-KamiokaNDE detector is opened up here. The
sidewall is cut vertically at one point and is spread flat, the upper lid is
opened up, and the bottom lid is pulled down. Each dot here represents a
photomultiplier. Red light shows it received a large number of photoelec-
trons. The different colors indicate different numbers of received photoelec-
trons. At the right below is the time profile of the total number of photons re-
ceived. Fig. 4-2 shows the pattern 50 nanoseconds later. You can see that the
particle is moving faster than the Cerenkov light wave front. Fig. 4-3 , anoth-
er 50 nanoseconds later, shows that while the Cerenkov light is still on its way
the muon has already reached the bottom. You can see that the particle is
traveling faster than the light velocity in water. Figs. 4-4, 4-5, and 4-6 show the
subsequent development of the event. You can see that with this detector the
electrically charged particle can be observed in detail. Next figure, Fig. 5,
shows two events, e-event above and -event below. Looking at these two ex-
amples, one by an electron and the other by a muon, you can see the differ-
ence in the distribution of the detected photons, especially in the radial dis-
tribution of photons. Electrons and muons are very similar particles except
that their masses are different by a factor of about 200. It means that in tra-
versing water, the heavier -particle suffers much less scattering while the
lighter electron gets scattered much more. Not only that, the electron emits
-rays, which in turn get converted into electrons and positrons. Those low
energy electrons, and positrons, get scattered violently. Therefore, the

                                                                                87


Figure 4-3.  reached the bottom.         Figure 4-4.




Figure 4-5.                               Figure 4-6.



Cerenkov light emitted by those low energy particles is widely distributed as
you see in the upper event. By making a quantitative measurement of the ra-
dial distribution of those photons, you can make a very good distinction be-
tween a -event and an e-event with a mistaking probability of less than 1%.
This is a very nice feature of this detector and led us eventually to discover
what is called “the atmospheric neutrino anomaly.”
   The old KamiokaNDE produced four significant results.
   The first is the astrophysical observation of solar neutrinos by means of
e-e scattering with the electron in the water. [5]. By astrophysical observation
we mean that all the necessary information is available; i.e., the arrival direc-
tion, the arrival time and also the spectral information on the incoming neu-
trinos. In the case of e-e scattering, since the electron rest mass is only 0.5
MeV, for an incoming neutrino of, say, 10 MeV, the struck electron goes al-
most in the dead forward direction. By observing this recoil electron, you can
approximately infer the arrival direction of the neutrino. Also, the energy
spectrum of the recoil electrons has a one to one relation to the original neu-

88


Figure 5. e-event above and -event below.




trino energy spectrum. The timing is accurate to better than ten nanosec-
onds.
   The second is the observation of supernova neutrinos [6] by means of
anti-e on protons in water. This reaction produces an e+ and a neutron. The
e+ is observed by the Cerenkov light it emits.
   The third is the discovery of what is called the Atmospheric Neutrino
Anomaly. [7]. Since we can definitely separate -event and e-event, as I have
shown you before, we could measure the number ratio of  over e very ac-
curately by observing -event and e-event separately. It was the discovery of
slightly more than 4 significance, but this result was later firmly confirmed at
more than 9 by the data of Super-KamiokaNDE.
   Not many people are interested in proton decay any more but the non-ob-
servation of proton decay by the KamiokaNDE experiment killed the well-
known Grand Unified Theory based on SU[5].

                                                                             89


Figure 6.



   The previous speaker showed this diagram, Fig. 6, and I am not going into
the detail here but instead just ask you to notice the threshold energies of va-
rious experiments.
   Fig. 7 is to shows the feasibility for KamiokaNDE of observing solar neutri-
nos with directional information. You can see that above the isotropic back-
ground, the accumulation of events is in the direction from the sun to the
earth.
   Next one, Fig. 8, shows the energy spectrum as normalized to the theoret-
ical one. From the figure you can see that the shape is not very much differ-




Figure 7. The directional observation of Solar neutrinos.

90


Figure 8. The normalized energy spectrum.



ent from the expected theoretical anticipation, but the intensity is almost
one-half.
   I now go on to the observation of supernova neutrinos. Thanks to the col-
laboration of Pennsylvania State University led by Prof. A. K. Mann, we could
improve the performance of our detector very much by reducing the back-
ground, purifying the water, and so forth. At the very beginning of 1987; our
detector was already calm enough to start taking data on the solar neutrinos.
Two months later, we heard that there was a supernova explosion in the
southern sky. So we immediately looked at our data and then we found the su-
pernova neutrino signal very easily because our detector was already capable
of taking solar neutrino data, which are much more difficult to observe than
the supernova neutrinos; because the supernova neutrinos have considerably
higher energies than the solar neutrino and furthermore those supernova
neutrinos are bunched in a short period of time. It is shown in Fig. 9. You can
clearly see the supernova neutrino signal of about 17 photoelectrons above
the background events. This observation gave the confirmation of theoretical
ideas on the supernova explosion triggered by a gravitational collapse. For in-
stance, not only the average energy and the total number of these events
agreed with the theoretical expectations, but also the time duration of about
ten seconds implies that those neutrinos are emitted from a very, very dense
matter, like in a nucleus.
   If they were emitted from a tenuous stellar body, the time duration of the
signal would have been less than one millisecond. But those neutrinos had to
get diffused out of a very dense, nucleus-like, matter so that it took ten sec-
onds to get out of this surface; probably a neutron star is responsible.
   Now I come to the discussion of “the Atmospheric Neutrino Anomaly.”
When cosmic ray particles enter the atmosphere, they interact with the N and
O nuclei to produce -mesons and K-mesons. These mesons decay in tenuous
air into  and . So you get one muon and one  there. If the secondary 
also decayed then you get additional  and e. So if everything proceeded
this way, you get two  ’s against one e. The number ratio, N () / N (e) is

                                                                             91


Figure 9. The SN1987A neutrine “signal” in the computer print-out.



thus two. When you go to higher energy, a  of longer lifetime than a -me-
son cannot decay. Indeed, some ’s do reach our detector, as you have seen
before. In this case, you do not get additional  or e. So at high energies,
this ratio becomes larger than two.
   In Fig. 10 are shown the above number ratio observed by KamiokaNDE to-
gether with the results of other experiments.
   I now go on to the discussion of the neutrino oscillations, [9]. This may be
the most difficult part of my talk. I will try to make it understandable to a first
year undergraduate student.
   For the sake of simplicity, we consider there are only two kinds of neutrinos

92


Figure 10. The number ratio N () / N (e).




in nature. Then, for instance, the wave function describing the state of a neu-
trino can be described by a linear combination of two independent base func-
tions. For instance, you can take the mass matrix to be diagonal and then
choose the two basic vectors of mass m1 and mass m2, respectively. So any neu-
trino state can be described by a combination of m1 and m2.  = cos m1
+ sin m2. This is like two-dimensional geometry. A vector can be described
by its x component and y component. So the  state is a linear combination
of m1 state and m2 state with an angle parameter . The two states, m1 and
m2, oscillate with their characteristic frequencies. This frequency is propor-
tional to the total energy of the state. If the mass m is small, then for a given
momentum one can make the following approximation, E~p+m2/2p. E1 – E2,
which is proportional to the frequency difference of these two states, is then,
using this approximation, proportional to (m12-m22). This m-square differ-
ence between the two states is designated by m2. When there are two oscil-
lations of nearly equal frequencies coexist, there occurs a phenomenon
known as “beat” in which the amplitudes of the two oscillations change slow-
ly with the difference frequency. This change of the component amplitudes,
m1 and m2, induces the appearance of  -state in the original pure  state.
   By using these two parameters, m2 and , you can describe the oscillation
of neutrinos from one type to the other.
   In Fig. 11 is shown the result obtained by KamiokaNDE, [10] , on the at-
mospheric neutrino oscillations.
   We now proceed to the discussion of Super-KamiokaNDE.

                                                                              93


Figure 11. The allowed parameter region.     Figure 12. The directional observation.




   The Super-KamiokaNDE so far produced three significant results.
   The first is the astrophysical observation of the solar neutrinos with a com-
fortable statistics. In Fig. 12 you can see the peak of neutrinos in the direction
from the sun to the earth above the isotropic background. When you break
your hand you go to the doctor and get an X-ray picture taken. You then can
see the inside of your hand. A bone may be broken. When you use neutrinos,
with a much larger penetrability, you can see the inside of the sun. In Fig. 13




Figure 13. The neutrinograph of the sun.

94


Figure 14. The energy spectrum.



is shown the first neutrinograph, rather than photograph, of the sun. Below is
the orbit of the sun in the galactic coordinates as seen by the neutrinos.
    This sounds very nice, but if you look at this neutrinograph carefully, you
find the size of sun is much bigger than the size of sun as you see by your own
eyes. The reason is, of course, that the directional accuracy of the neutrino
observation is much worse than that of visible light. But you have to be pa-
tient. The neutrino astrophysics is just born. It is still in its infantile stage.
    Fig. 14 shows the observation of the solar neutrino energy spectrum as
compared to the theoretically expected from the Solar Standard Model.




Figure 15. The change of oscillation as a function of path length.

                                                                               95


Figure 16. The allowed regions of oscillations.    Figure 17. The allowed region for
                                                   the solar neutrino oscillation.




   Detailed comparison of this observed energy spectrum with the theoretical
expectation gives us better information on the solar neutrino oscillation.
   If the observed anomaly in the N () / N (e) is indeed due to the neu-
trino oscillation, then the degree of oscillation would be different depending
on the path lengths the neutrino had to traverse from its generation to our
detector. When it comes from vertically above, it is only 20 kilometers. When
it comes horizontally, it traveled some 1,000 kilometers. If it comes from the
bottom, it was produced 13,000 kilometers away. There is a big difference in
the path lengths (Fig. 15).
   In the case of e-events, due to e , there is no deviation from the no-oscilla-
tion expectation. Only in the case of -events, due to , one sees a large re-
duction in the direction from the bottom. Only in the case of muon, you see
this deficiency in the large distance direction. Fig. 16 shows the allowed re-
gions for the solar neutrino oscillations, painted yellow, and that of atmos-
pheric neutrino oscillations, painted red as determined by the data of Super-
KamiokaNDE ,[11].
   With the oscillation data described above of KamiokaNDE and of Super-
KamiokaNDE we go on to combine them with the other available data. Next
figure, Fig. 17, shows only one possible oscillation region for the solar neutri-
no oscillation. This was accomplished by combining all the solar neutrino ex-
periments. Super-KamiokaNDE, SNO and other radio-chemical results
[14–17].
   Now that the observed m2 ‘s are definitely not zero we have to admit

96


              1.4

              1.2

  Nobs/Nexp   1.0

              0.8
                          ILL
              0.6         Savannah River
                          Bugey
                          Rovno
              0.4         Goesgen
                          Krasnoyarsk
                          Palo Verde
              0.2         Chooz
                          KamLAND
              0.0
                    101         102      103       104        105
                                Distance to Reactor (m)
Figure 18. Results from KamLAND.




some non-zero masses for the neutrinos. This implies that the Standard
Theory of elementary particles have to be modified.
   Now, for the sake of giving proper credits, I give the author list of super-
nova neutrino detection in ref. [6] and the author list of the atmospheric
neutrino paper in [12].
   Lastly I show you the latest result from Kamioka. In Kamioka, there is a
third generation experiment now working. This KamLAND experiment is in-
stalled in the old cave of the original KamiokaNDE and this experiment uses
liquid scintillator to measure the anti-e‘s from the reactors about 200 kilo-
meters away. And this experiment published their first result [18] only two
days ago and I got this by e-mail. The experiment is measuring the anti-neu-
trino flux as well as the energy spectrum. The result is shown in Fig. 18. The
obtained oscillation parameters, sin2 =0.833 and m2=5.5x10-5 (eV)2, are in
good agreement with the solar neutrino result of Fig.18.
   Since this is a confirmation of the neutrino oscillation not for the electron
neutrino but for anti-electron-neutrino, the fact that it is giving the same os-
cillation parameters implies that the CPT theorem is not violated. Further da-
ta accumulation may lead to some interesting insight into the CP problem
within the framework of CPT invariance. Reference to this paper is given in
[18]. The interesting thing is that about two-thirds of the collaborators are
from the United States. Some say Kamioka is now considered as the “Mecca”
for neutrino research and this pleases me very much.
   Now that Neutrino Astrophysics is born, what should we do next? Of

                                                                             97


course the plan depends on whom we ask. There is a move to build a mega-
ton Hyper-KamiokaNDE. A world network of at least three Super-Kamioka-
NDE’s may be a good choice for supernova watching. The most challenging
problem will be the observation of the Cosmic Neutrino Background of 1.9K,
which would tell us the state of our universe 1 second after its birth. The non-
zero masses of neutrinos imply the total reflection at low temperature of low
energy neutrinos. This is a wonderful gift providing the possibility of para-
bolic mirror for focusing CNB. The detection, however, of such low energy
neutrinos is really a formidable task.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It is my pleasure to acknowledge the technical contribution of Hamamatsu
Photonics Co. for producing the 50cm photomultipliers. They were the es-
sential ingredient of the Kamioka experiments. The Ministry of Education,
Culture and Science of Japan gave generous support to the Kamioka experi-
ments, for which we are all grateful.


REFERENCES
 [1]   M. Koshiba, Phys. Rep. 220 (1992) 229.
 [2]   R. Davis, Jr., Nobel Lecture in Physics, Dec. 2002.
 [3]   R. M. Bionta et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (1983) 27.
 [4]   H. Kume et al., Nucl. Inst. and Meth. 205 (1983) 443.
 [5]   K.S. Hirata et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 (1989) 16.
 [6]   K. Hirata et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 (1987) 1490.
 [7]   K. S. Hirata et al., Phys. Lett. B 205 (1988) 416.
 [8]   H. Georgi and S.L. Glashow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32 (1974) 438.
 [9]   Z. Maki, N. Nakagawa, and S. Sakata, Prog. Theor. Phys. 28 (1962) 870.
[10]   S. Hatakeyama et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 2016.
[11]   S. Fukuda et al., Phys. Lett. B 539 (2002) 179.
[12]   Y. Fukuda et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 1562.
[13]   Q. R. Ahmad, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) 011301.
[14]   B. T. Cleveland et al., Astrophys. J. 496 (1998) 505.
[15]   W. Hampel et al., Phys. Lett. B 447 (1999) 364.
[16]   J. N. Abdurashitov et al., J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 95, (2002) 181.
[17]   M. Altmann et al., Phys. Lett. B 490 (2000) 16.
[18]   K. Eguchi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003) 021802.




98
