                             M AX   VON   LA U E

    Concerning the detection of X-ray interferences
                          Nobel Lecture, June 3, 1920



 If other Nobel Prize winners express their thanks for this high honour at this
juncture by recounting the history of their discovery they are able to report
 how, at the outset, they envisaged a high, but nevertheless attainable, objec-
 tive and how they strove toward that objective by many paths, most of
 which proved initially to be false and how then, after many years of pro-
 tracted endeavour, they finally achieved their objective. In my eyes the cred-
 it to which they are entitled increases in direct proportion to the magnitude
 of the difficulties which they finally surmounted. By comparison, what I
 have to say here differs somewhat from those examples. There is no doubt
 that I, also, had long been aware of the problem, i.e. producing X-ray inter-
 ferences, before the inherent difficulties had finally been surmounted. But I
 never believed that it would be my personal good fortune to make a contri-
 bution in that direction, and it was for that reason that I did not concern my-
 self unduly in that respect until suddenly I perceived the way which subse-
 quently proved to be the shortest path to success. I am not, therefore, able to
 recount many details in connection with my personal preparatory work, so I
 shall confine my comments to explaining the combination of scientific and
 personal circumstances from which the idea first arose.

In the case of X-rays their discoverer had already made efforts to locate
diffraction or interference phenomena in order to solve the question of wheth-
er or not they represent a wave phenomenon or the ejection of any small par-
ticles. But in this quest his research, which had otherwise been so successful,
met with failure. Nevertheless, from the outset there were supporters for the
former opinion; for Stokes and Wiechert could point out with complete jus-
tification that, according to Maxwell-Lorentz electrodynamics, electromag-
netic waves must be produced whenever electricity carriers alter their veloci-
ty; one was also aware that cathode rays, which induce X-rays on striking an
obstacle, are made up of electrons. W. Wien endeavoured to reconcile this
consideration with what was, at that time, the very young quantum theory
in order thus to arrive at an estimate of the relevant wavelengths. He arrived


348                               1914 M.VON LAUE
                                       -9
at a value lying between 10-10 a n d 10 cm, which was in accordance with the
fact that, if they were at all made up of waves, the X-rays could only have a
shorter wavelength than visible light. For in 1900 all electromagnetic radia-
tion of longer wavelengths was already known at least to the extent that one
could not seek in it the more striking characteristics of X-rays such as, for
example, the strong penetrating power.
    If diffraction or interference phenomena were to be sought it was therefore
necessary, in accordance with the basic principles of wave theory, to select
for the test arrangement far smaller decisive dimensions than those employed
in corresponding tests with visible light. Thus Haga and Wind, as well as
Walter and Pohl, selected a wedge-shaped pointed slit at the pointed end of
which they were able to prove a broadening of the transmitted X-ray bundles
which could be attributed to diffraction. The conclusive force of these tests
has frequently been a subject of dispute; for example there was one school
of thought which tried to explain the broadening as a subjective optical illu-
sion. However, the photometric measurement carried out by P. P. Koch on
the best photograms of this type and the estimated wavelength of 4 x 10-9
cm which Sommerfeld connected with those results would appear to prove
that there is an objective basis for the broadening theory. For now that the
relevant wavelengths have been confirmed we must regard this value as re-
presenting a very good determination for such tests.
    Further evidence in support of the wave theory of X-rays was provided by
Barkla’s discovery of polarisation. Barkla permits rays, such as those orig-
inating from the anticathode of an X-ray tube, to fall upon a substance such
as, for example, carbon, after which he then carries on working with those
secondary X-rays as result from scattering, which emanate from the substance
in question perpendicular to the original direction of radiation. If the secon-
dary radiation is again permitted to fall upon such a substance this causes
a production, as a result of repeated scattering, of a tertiary radiation of
X-rays; but this has, at the plane perpendicular to the secondary radia-
 tion, an intensity maximum in one direction, and perpendicular to that a
minimum at which it may even disappear completely. This indicates most
clearly that, for the secondary radiation, the direction of propagation is not
a symmetry axis and that it is thus polarised. This fact can be explained only
with extreme difficulty by a corpuscular theory - of this we are only too well
 aware from the history of optics. Conversely it is quite possible to explain this
by wave theory based upon the fact that all electromagnetic waves oscillate
transversally and are therefore generally polarised. This theory also readily


                     DETECTION OF X-RAY INTERFERENCES                          349
explains the further fact that the direction of the vanishing intensity is parallel
to the direction of the primary rays.
    Notwithstanding these major arguments the wave theory initially did not
meet with complete acceptance. For experts like W. H. Bragg maintained
until 1912 the corpuscular view and, in support of that view, they were able
to quote a series of phenomena which, in actual fact, have remained inacces-
sible to explanation by the wave theory. If X-rays do, in fact, fall upon a body,
they not only excite the aforementioned secondary X-rays, they also free
electrons. The velocities of these electrons do not now depend upon the tem-
perature and other conditions obtaining with the body in question and one
might therefore assume that their kinetic energy is derived from the incident
X-ray radiation. But this is where the difficulty is encountered. For the velo-
cities which have been observed are not dependent upon the intensity of radia-
tion but, in fact, upon their degree of hardness, and specifically in such a man-
ner that these velocities increase with increasing hardness. If the intensity is
weakened this will result in a decrease in the number of electrons released,
but it will have no effect upon their velocities. The greatest velocity which
occurs is always that which was possessed by the cathode radiation by which
the X-rays have been excited; it is almost as if X-ray radiation retains a
"memory" of the process of its creation and expresses this fact when, for its
part, it releases electrons.
    This would be quite easy to comprehend if the energy of the X-ray radia-
 tion were to accumulate and remain accumulated at certain points, as would,
for example, be the case with the motion of individual corpuscles. But in
agreement with the wave theory it expands progressively over increasing
areas. This poses us with a complete puzzle, which is merely rendered the more
 complex by the further observation that the electrons which have been re-
 leased would appear to prefer the direction taken by the incident X-rays.
 And it is a source of only qualified comfort if we make clear to ourselves
 that with the short-wave visible and ultraviolet light rays the same phenom-
  ena occur in the photoelectric effect. In this case also, where we most certainly
 have before us a wave process, they are simply incomprehensible.
    We can only understand the reasons why our understanding fails at this
juncture. Einstein has provided us with a rule on the dependency of the
 greatest existing electron velocity upon the frequency of light waves; in this
 the decisive role is played by the universal constant h, designated by Planck,
 its discoverer, as the elementary quantum of action. Conversely, more recent
 measurements - among which particular accuracy was achieved in those


350                             1914 M.VON LAUE

made by Ernst Wagner in Munich - have shown that with the reverse pro-
cess, specifically the excitation of X-rays by cathode rays, the same con-
stant appears. This same Einstein law, namely, also links the greatest frequency
in the X-ray spectrum with the kinetic energy of cathode rays. We are con-
fronted here with just one special case of the great quantum mystery, the so-
lution of which one may justly term the most important objective currently
confronting the entire field of physics. However, it was quite understandable
that before this relationship with the quantum theory had been ascertained
researchers had based their arguments against the wave theory on the facts
of electron emission.
    But let us turn once again to the situation which obtained before 1912.
For as far back as I can recall having had an interest in physics - and that goes
back to the days in which I was privileged to receive first-class instruction at
the famous old Protestant Gymnasium in Strassburg, Alsatia - my particular
attention was drawn to the field of optics, and within that field the wave
 theory of light. The lectures which I heard during my student days from
Voigt, Planck and Lummer provided me at that time, and especially in the
afore-mentioned field, with thorough experimental and theoretical know-
ledge; and as I had finally been able to cultivate what one could almost term
a special feeling or intuition for wave processes, it was quite natural that my
first independent work should be concerned with the propagation of natural
radiation in dispersing substances and the thermodynamics of interference
phenomena. It turned out to be a matter of great good fortune that Sommer-
feld passed to me the article "Wellenoptik" (Wave optics) at that time to
work upon for the Encyclopedia of Mathematical Sciences. For it was during that
project that I was obliged to seek a mathematical presentation of the lattice
 theory which - while it was not exactly what one might term an innovation -
 could be applied with considerable simplicity to lattice grids. Already at that
juncture I was devoting considerable thought to the further transfer to space-
 lattices; but I did not pursue the matter further owing to the fact that they do
 not, after all, play any actual part in the field of optics.
    On my arrival in Munich in 1909 my attention was drawn constantly -
 first owing to the influence of Röntgen’s work at this University and subse-
 quently by Sommerfeld’s active interest in X-rays and γ-rays, which he had
 also testified in several works-back to the question of their actual nature. To
 this was added a further important circumstance. Since the times of Hauy and
 Bravais the basic crystallographic law of rational indices had been explained
simply and visually by the mineralogists through space-lattice arrangement of


                      DETECTION OF X-RAY INTERFERENCES                      351
the atoms. Sohncke, Federow and Schoenflies had brought the mathematical
theory of possible space-lattices to the greatest possible degree of perfection.
But no more far-reaching physical conclusion had evolved from this line of
thought and thus, in the form of a questionable hypothesis, it remained a
somewhat unknown quantity to physicists. But in Munich, where models of
the Sohncke space-lattices were to be found in more than one university in-
stitute, it was P. Groth who expressed his defence of it, both orally and in
writing, and I, also, thus learned from him. My interest in the theories which
he was expounding increased progressively as, already at an early time, I had
made sure - and contrary to the doubts which, in my day, were maintained
by only a few philosophers concerning the reality of atoms - that there existed
no watertight epistemological arguments which might contradict this fact,
while practical experience was constantly providing fresh confirmation in
support of it.
    Such was the state of affairs as, one evening in February 1912, P. P. Ewald
came to visit me. On Sommerfeld’s instigation he was working on a math-
ematical investigation into the behaviour of long electromagnetic waves in
a space-lattice and subsequently he published a dissertation on the theory of
 crystal optics which was based upon that work. But he was faced at that time
with certain difficulties and came to me with a request for advice. Now it
was not, however, possible for me to assist him at that time. But during the
conversation I was suddenly struck by the obvious question of the behaviour
of waves which are short by comparison with the lattice-constants of the space-
lattice. And it was at that point that my intuition for optics suddenly gave me
 the answer: lattice spectra would have to ensue. The fact that the lattice-
 constant in crystals is of an order of 10-8 cm was sufficiently known from the
analogy with other interatomic distances in solid and liquid substances, and,
in addition, this could easily be argued from the density, molecular weight
 and the mass of the hydrogen atom which, just at that time, had been particu-
 larly well determined. The order of X-ray wavelengths was estimated by
 Wien and Sommerfeld at 10-9 cm. Thus the ratio of wavelengths and lattice-
 constants was extremely favourable if X-rays were to be transmitted through
 a crystal. I immediately told Ewald that I anticipated the occurrence of inter-
 ference phenomena with X-rays.
    It was not long before W. Friedrich also heard of this. While he imme-
 diately expressed his willingness to carry out a relevant test, the acknowledged
 masters of our science, to whom I had the opportunity of submitting it, enter-
 tained certain doubts about this viewpoint. A certain amount of diplomacy


352                               1914 M.VON LAUE

was necessary before Friedrich and Knipping were finally permitted to carry
out the experiment according to my plan, using very simple equipment at
the outset. Copper sulphate served as the crystal, since large and regular pieces
of it can easily be obtained. The irradiation direction was left to chance. Im-
mediately from the outset the photographic plate located behind the crystal
betrayed the presence of a considerable number of deflected rays, together
with a trace of the primary ray coming directly from the anticathode. These
were the lattice spectra which had been anticipated (Fig. 1).
   In continuation of the work, Friedrich and Knipping, with the aid of the
considerable amount of equipment then placed at their disposal by the In-
stitute of Theoretical Physics of the Munich University, substituted random
irradiation of triclinic copper sulphate with irradiation, in the crystallo-
graphically-indicated axial directions, of crystals of maximum possible sym-
metry, i.e. regular crystals. In principle the theory had already been com-
pleted by transfer from the ordinary and from the grid lattice, and, on June
8, 1912, Sommerfeld was able to submit to the Munich Academy the joint
work of Friedrich, Knipping, and myself on X-ray interferences, which work,
apart from the theory itself, also contained a series of very characteristic ex-
posures (Figs. 2 and 3). Four weeks later followed the first application of the
theory for interpreting the points of interference, produced by a regular crys-
tal after irradiation along a four-fold axis (Fig. 2). Each point of interference
corresponds with three integral numbers, originating from the three space-
lattice periodicities, the ratios of which determine its position. I have attributed
these numbers to the points of interference in the second publication which
appeared simultaneously with the first. And said numbers, or their ratios,
have proven thoroughly reliable, even after re-checking by the Braggs and
other researchers. Thus the initial probe into the rightness of the interference
theory proved favourable for this new phenomenon. This benefitted not
only the wave conception of X-rays but also the lattice theory of crystals.
   The wavelength can also be determined from the three specified numbers
and the latter publication contains therefore also information in that connec-
tion. Nevertheless I made no secret of the fact that I could not attribute to
these values the same degree of reliability as to the ratios of the numbers. For
this there were two reasons. On the hand there may occur in each interference
maximum - as has been adequately known in the science of optics - apart from
a basic wavelength, in addition its half, third, etc. For as long as one has no
further point of reference, apart from the position of the maximum, the
wavelength thus remains uncertain by an integral factor. The wavelengths


                 DETECTION OF X-RAY INTERFERENCES                         353




            Fig. 1.
                                                        Fig. 2.




                                    Fig. 3.

were then measured by the dimensions of the space-lattice. As has already
been mentioned, these could certainly be estimated by the order of magni-
tude; but in order to compute them with some degree of accuracy it would
be necessary to know the molecular structure of the crystals down to the last
detail. Instead of that one was aware, solely from the research carried out by
the mathematicians, that, apart from the simple space-lattices, many other
types of lattice were possible, for example, face- and body-centred lattices.
The type of structure which is found in certain crystals was first determined
by the Braggs after they had made a daring guess in producing an accurate


354                            1914 M.VON LAUE

hypothesis as to the structure of sodium chloride. And it was thus that only
they were also able to carry out the final measurements on the wavelengths.
   But in reference to the manner in which the mathematical theory is to be
generalised for such more complex types of structure, this I set forth almost
one year later, when the necessity of that step had been shown with all ur-
gency. The changes are minimal. The position of the points of interference
remains the same as with a simple lattice of identical lattice-constants; it is
only in the expression of their intensity that a new factor appears which is
now designated as the structural factor. However, this factor can occasional-
ly reduce to zero and then the relevant point is suppressed completely. It is
due to this factor when an irradiation exposure plate gives some indication
of the lower symmetry of the actual crystal instead of the full symmetry of
 the simple space-lattice.
    The considerable interest which had been caused by the initial investiga-
tions was soon reflected in a large number of subsequent works. At first cer-
 tain doubts were expressed as to whether, in this instance, an interference
 phenomenon really did exist. But these were soon overcome. In my opinion
 the most complete rebuff was embodied in the proof produced by Wagner
 and Glocker that the X-ray radiation at the points of interference contained
 only one wavelength, even if many of them should exist in the original ray.
 The experimental research diverged essentially into two branches. The crystals
 were either investigated with the aid of the interferences, which examined
 the crystals’ space-lattices, or they were employed in spectroscopy in the X-
 ray range. Since 1912 much has been done in both fields, and in both sectors
 W. L. Bragg and W. H. Bragg have taken the first important step beyond the
 investigations carried out at Munich. It would range far too wide if I were,
 at this juncture, to compile a fairly comprehensive list of all the researchers
 who have gained distinction in that research work. I can mention here only
 the transformation of the process, which proved to be of great importance
 for the further conduct of the experiments and in which Debye transferred
 the examination of beautiful, well-formed crystal fragments - which some-
 times are obtainable only with considerable difficulty - to research into the
 finest possible crystal powder. Mention should also be made here of the
 extremely painstaking and accurate determination of the characteristic spec-
 tra which, commenced by Moseley, have been carried on - especially here
 in Sweden by Manne Siegbahn and Stenström - on the great majority of
 chemical elements. This research, as is known, has become of fundamental
 importance for the further knowledge of the structure of the atom. Neither


                    DETECTION OF X-RAY INTERFERENCES                           355

 should I neglect to mention the fact that also the theory has been successfully
 extended. The important question as to why the thermal motion of the atoms
 does not result in any great amount of disturbance to the interference phe-
 nomena, has been settled by Debye, while H. A. Lorentz showed the manner
 in which the interference points which originate from the continuous spec-
 trum obtain their intensity from the energy of many neighbouring wave-
 lengths. For both reasons, owing to the thermal motion and to the working
 together of various wavelengths, factors arise which, in a similar manner to
 the structural factor, exert some influence upon the brightness of the inter-
 ference points but not upon their location.
    I would finally like to deal with a question which is still pending and to
 which, I trust, X-rays will shortly bring the answer. There are two contra-
 dictory opinions in respect of the mixed crystals. Opinions are united in
respect of the fact that atoms form space-lattices, as is the case with chem-
ically uniform crystals. There is also agreement in respect of the fact that in
a mixed crystal of, e.g., potassium chloride and rubidium chloride the chlo-
rine atoms lie in precisely the same position in relation to each other as in
pure potassium chloride or pure rubidium chloride. (From the work car-
ried out by the Braggs we are already aware of the fact that these two salts
have the identical space-lattice.) But how are the potassium and rubidium
atoms distributed over the positions reserved for the metal atoms? According
to the one viewpoint, which probably originated from Van ‘t Hoff, this oc-
curs entirely by chance, while the other viewpoint maintains that it occurs
regularly, thus permitting the space-lattices to be composed of equal-sized
parallelepipeds of molecular dimensions which are identical in every respect,
including the atomic occupation. For purely theoretical reasons the former
opinion would appear to me to be the more probable. If, as in the example
given, every mixing ratio is possible, it is indeed difficult to conceive, in every
case, of atomic distributions which observe crystallographic symmetry, and,
in addition, leave sufficiently small dimensions for the specified elementary
parallelepipeds. Also the irradiation tests conducted by Vegard and Skjeldrup
on the above-mentioned mixtures would appear to have resulted in an even
stronger contradiction of the second opinion than these researchers them-
selves had originally thought. Nevertheless during recent years Tammann has
conducted chemical tests on mixed crystals of various metals such as, for
example, copper and gold, which appear at first sight to support the second
view. This should provide a further field of endeavour for a new application
of X-ray interferences.
