THE FIRST HIGH ENERGY NEUTRINO
EXPERIMENT

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1988

by
MELVIN SCHWARTZ
Digital Pathways, Inc., 201 Ravendale Avenue, Mountain View, CA 94303,
USA.




In the first part of my lecture I would like to tell you a bit about the state of
knowledge in the field of Elementary Particle Physics as the decade of the
1960’s began with particular emphasis upon the Weak Interactions. In the
second part I will cover the planning, implementation and analysis of the
first high energy neutrino experiment. My colleagues, Jack Steinberger and
Leon Lederman, will discuss the evolution of the field of high energy
neutrino physics beyond this first experiment and the significance of this
effort when seen in the context of today’s view of elementary particle
structure.

I. HISTORICAL REVIEW
By the year 1960 the interaction of elementary particles had been classified
into four basic strengths. The weakest of these, the gravitational interaction
does not play a significant role in the laboratory study of elementary
particles and will be ignored. The others are:

1. Strong Interactions
This class covers the interactions among so-called hadrons. Among these
hadrons are the neutrons and protons that we are all familiar with along
with the pions and other mesons that serve to tie them together into nuclei.
Obviously, the interaction that ties two protons into a nucleus must over-
come the electrostatic repulsion which tends to push them apart. The
strong interactions are short range, typically acting over a distance of l0 -13
cm, but at that distance are some two orders of magnitude stronger than
electromagnetic interactions.
   In general, as presently understood, hadrons are combinations of the
most elementary strongly interacting particles, called quarks. You will hear
more about them later.


5468                                    Physics 1988


2 . Electromagnetic   Interacticms
You are all familiar with electromagnetic interactions from your daily
experience. Like charges repel one another. Opposite charges attract. The
earth acts like a giant magnet. Indeed matter itself is held together by the
electromagnetic interactions among electrons and nuclei. With the excep-
tion of the neutrinos, all elementary particles have electromagnetic interac-
tions either through charge, or magnetic property, or the ability to directly
interact with charge or magnetic moment. In 1960, the only known elemen-
tary particles apart from the hadrons were the three leptons        electron,
muon and neutrino with some suspicion that there might be two types of
neutrinos. Both the electron and muon are electromagnetically interacting.

3. Weak Interactions
Early in the century it was discovered that some nuclei are unstable against
decay into residual nuclei and electrons or positrons. There were two
important characteristics of these so-called decays.
   a. They were “slow”. That is to say, the lifetimes of the decaying nuclei
corresponded to an interaction which is much weaker than that characteris-
tic of electromagnetism.
   b. Energy and momentum were missing.
   If one examined the spectrum of the electrons which were emitted, then
it was clear that to preserve energy, momentum and angular momentum in
the decay it was necessary that there be another decay product present.
That decay product needed to be of nearly zero mass and have half integral
spin. This observation was first made by Pauli. Fermi later gave it the name
of neutrino.
   The development of the Fermi theory of weak interactions in fact made
the neutrino’s properties even more specific. The neutrino has a spin of l/2
and a very low probability of interacting in matter. The predicted cross-
                                                                          -43
section for the interaction of a decay neutrino with nucleons is about 10
   2
cm . Thus, one of these neutrinos would on the average pass through a light
year of lead without doing anything.
   The β-decay reactions can be simply written as:
                                     Z→ (Z+l)+e-+v
                                     Z→ (Z-1) + e+ + v
By the failure to detect neutrino-less double B decay, namely the process
     (Z+2) +           it was established that the neutrino and anti-neu-
trino were indeed different particles. In the 1950’s, by means of a series of
experiments associated with the discovery of parity violation it was also
established that the neutrinos and anti-neutrinos were produced in a state
of complete longitudinal polarization or helicity, with the neutrinos being
left-handed and anti-neutrinos right-handed.
   In the 1940’s and 1950’s, a number of other weak interactions were
discovered. The pion, mentioned earlier as the hadron which serves to hold
the nucleus together, can be produced in a free state. Its mass is about 273


                                  M. Schwartz                             469


times the electron mass and it decays in about 2.5 X 10 -8 seconds into a
muon and a particle with neutrino-like properties. The muon in turn
exhibits all of the properties of a heavy electron with a mass of about 207
times the electron mass. It decays in about 2.2 X 10-6 seconds into an
electron and two neutrinos. The presumed reactions, when they were
discovered, were written as:




It was also known by 1960 that these decays were parity violating and that
the neutrinos here had the same helicity as the neutrinos emitted in β decay.
   Needless to say, there was a general acceptance in 1959 that the neutrinos
associated with β decay were the same particles as those associated with pion
and muon decay. The only hint that this may not be so came from a paper by
G. Feinberg in 1958 in which he showed that the decay µ →e + should
occur with a branching ratio of about 10 - 4, if a charged intermediate boson
(W) moderated the weak interaction. Inasmuch as the experimental limit
was much lower (~ 10 -8) this paper was thought of as a proof that there was
no intermediate boson. Feinberg did point out, however, that a boson
might still exist if the muon neutrino and the electron neutrino were
different.
   One final historical note with respect to neutrinos. In the mid-nineteen
fifties Cowen and Reines in an extremely difficult pioneering experiment
were able to make a direct observation of the interaction of neutrinos in
matter. They used a reactor in which a large number of are produced and
observed the reaction +           + e+. The cross-section observed was con-
sistent with that which was required by the theory.

II. CONCEPTION, PLANNING AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EXPERIMENT
The first conception of the experiment was in late 1959. The Columbia
University Physics Department had a tradition of a coffee hour at which the
latest problems in the world of Physics came under intense discussions. At
one of these Professor T. D. Lee was leading such a discussion of the
possibilities for investigating weak interactions at high energies. A number
of experiments were considered and rejected as not feasible. As the meeting
broke up there was some sense of frustration as to what could ever be done
to disentangle the high energy weak interactions from the rest of what takes
place when energetic particles are allowed to collide with targets. The only
ray of hope was the expectation that the cross sections characteristic of the
weak interactions increased as the square of the center of mass energy at
least until such time as an intermediate boson or other damping mechanism
took hold.
   That evening the key notion came to me - perhaps the neutrinos from
pion decay could be produced in sufficient numbers to allow us to use them


470                              Physics 1988


in an experiment. A quick “back of the envelope” calculation indicated the
feasibility of doing this at one or another of the accelerators under con-
struction or being planned at that time. I called T. D. Lee at home with the
news and his enthusiasm was overwhelming. The next day planning for the
experiment began in earnest. Meanwhile Lee and Yang began a study of
what could be learned from the experiment and what the detailed cross-
sections were.
   Not long after this point we became aware that Bruno Pontecorvo had
also come up with many of the same ideas as we had. He had written up a
proposed experiment with neutrinos from stopped pions, but he had also
discussed the possibilities of using energetic pions at a conference in the
Soviet Union. His overall contribution to the field of neutrino physics was
certainly major.
    Leon Lederman, Jack Steinberger, Jean-Marc Gaillard and I spent a great
deal of time trying to decide on an ideal neutrino detector. Our first choice,
if it were feasible, would have been a large Freon bubble chamber that Jack
Steinberger had built. (In the end that would have given about a factor of 10
fewer events at the Brookhaven A.G.S. than the spark chamber which we
did use. Hence it was not used in this experiment).
    Fortunately for us, the spark chamber was invented at just about that
time. Gaillard, Lederman and I drove down to Princeton to see one at
Cronin’s laboratory. It was small, but the idea was clearly the right one. The
three of us decided to build the experiment around a ten ton spark chamber
design.
    In the summer of 1960, Lee and Yang again had a major impact on our
thinking. They pointed out that it was essentially impossible to explain the
absence of the decay         + without positing two types of neutrinos. Their
argument as presented in the 1960 Rochester Conference was more or less
as follows:
 1. The simple four-fermion point model which explains low energy weak
     interactions leads to a cross-section increasing as the square of the
     center of mass energy.
 2. At the same time, a point interaction must of necessity be S-wave and thus
      the cross-section cannot exceed λ2/4π without violating unitarity. This
     violation would take place at about 300 GeV.
 3. Thus, there must be a mechanism which damps the total cross-section
     before the energy reaches 300 GeV. This mechanism would imply a
     “size” to the interaction region which would in turn imply charges and
     currents which would couple to photons. This coupling would lead to
     the reaction       + through the diagram.


                                                                               471


4. The anticipated branding ratio for         + should not differ appreciably
    from 10-5. The fact that the branching ratio was known to be less than
    10-8 was then strong evidence for the two-neutrino hypothesis.
   With these observations in mind the experiment became highly motivated
toward investigating the question of whether              If there were only one
type of neutrino then the theory predicted that there should be equal
numbers of muons and electrons produced. If there were two types of
neutrinos then the production of electrons and muons should be different.
Indeed, if one followed the Lee-Yang argument for the absence of               +
then the muon neutrino should produce no electrons at all.
   We now come to the design of the experiment. The people involved in the
effort were Gordon Danby, Jean-Marc Gaillard, Konstantin Goulianos,
Nariman Mistry along with Leon Lederman, Jack Steinberger and myself.
The facility used to produce the pions was the newly completed Alternate
Gradient Synchrotron (A.G.S.) at the Brookhaven National Laboratory.
Although the maximum energy of the accelerator was 30 GeV, it was necessary
to run it at 15 GeV in order to minimize the background from
energetic muons.
   Pions were produced by means of collisions between the internal proton
beam and a beryllium target at the end of a 3-meter straight section (see
Figure 1). The detector was set at an angle of 7.5º to the proton direction
behind a 13.5-meter steel wall made of the deck-plates of a dismantled
cruiser. Additional concrete and lead were placed as shown.
   To minimize the amount of cosmic ray background it was important to
minimize the fraction of time during which the beam was actually hitting the
target. Any so-called “events ” which occurred outside of that window could
then be excluded as not being due to machine induced high energy radi-
ation.
  The A.G.S. at 15 GeV operator at a repetition rate of one pulse per I.2 seconds.
The beam RF structure consisted of 20 ns bursts every 220 ns.
The beam itself was deflected onto the target over the course of 20-30
for each cycle of the machine. Thus, the target was actually being bombard-
ed for only 2 × 10 -6 sec. for each second of real time.


472


    In order to make effective use of this beam structure it was necessary to
gate the detector on the bursts of pions which occurred when the target was
 actually being struck. This was done by means of a 30 ns time window which was
 triggered through the use of a Cerenkov counter in front of the
shielding wall. Phasing of the Cerenkov counter relative to the detector was
accomplished by raising the A.G.S. energy and allowing muons to penetrate
the shield.
   Incidentally, this tight timing also served to exclude 90 % of the backgro-
und induced by slow neutrons.
   The rate of production of pions and kaons was well known at the time and
it was quite straightforward to calculate the anticipated neutrino flux. In
Figure 2 we present an energy spectrum of the neutrino flux for a 15 GeV
proton beam making use of both pion and kaon decay. It is clear that kaon
decay is a major contributor for neutrino energies greater than about 1.2 GeV.
 (These neutrinos come from the reaction               +(
    Needless to say, the main shielding wall is thick enough to suppress all
 strongly interacting particles. Indeed, the only hadrons that were expected
 to emerge from that wall were due to neutrino interactions in the last meter
 or so. Muons entering the wall with up to 17 GeV would have been stopped by
 ionization loss. The only serious background was due to neutrons leaking
 through the concrete floor; these were effectively eliminated in the second
 half the experiment.




                            FROM PIONS




Figure 2. Energy spectrum of neutrinos as expected for A.G.S. running at 15 GeV.


                                        M. Schwartz




Figure 3. Spark chambcr and countcr arrangement. This is the front view with neutrinos
cntcring on the left. A arc the trigger counters. B, C and D are used in anti-coincidcnce.




Figure 4. A photograph of the chambers and counters


474                             Physics 1988


  The spark chamber is shown in Figure 3 and 4. It consisted of ten
modules, each of 9 aluminum plates, 44 in. x 44 in. x 1 in. thick separated
by 3/8 in. Lucite spacers. Anticoincidence counters covered the front, top
and rear of the assembly, as shown, to reduce the effect of cosmic rays and
muons which penetrate the shielding wall. Forty triggering counters were
inserted between modules and at the end of the assembly. Each triggering
counter consisted of two sheets of scintillator separated by 3/4 in. of
aluminum. The scintillators were put in electronic coincidence.


                                     M. Schwartz                                 475


   Events were selected for further study if they originated within a fiducial
volume which excluded the first two plates, two inches at top and bottom
and four inches at front and rear of the assembly. Single track events also
needed to stay within the fiducial volume if extrapolated back for two gaps.
Single tracks were not accepted unless their production angle relative to the
neutrino direction was less than 60º.
   A total of 113 events were found which satisfied these criteria. Of these,
49 were very short single tracks. All but three of these appeared in the first
half of the experiment before the shielding was improved and they were
considered to be background. In retrospect, some of these were presumably
neutral current events, but at the time it was impossible to distinguish them
from neutron induced interactions due to leakage over and under the
shield.
   The remaining events included the following categories.
a) 34 “single muons” of more than 300 MeV/c of visible momentum. Some
    of these are illustrated in Figure 5. Among them are some with one or
    two extraneous sparks at the vertex, presumably from nuclear recoils.
b) 22 “vertex” events. Some of these show substantial energy release. These
    events are presumably muons accompanied by pions in the collision. (See
    Figure 6)
c) 8 “shower” candidates. Of these 6 were selected so that their potential
    range, had they been muons would correspond to more than the 300 MeV/c.
    These were the only candidates for single electrons in the experiment.
    We will consider them in detail shortly.
   It was quite simple to demonstrate that the 56 events in categories (a) and
(b) were almost all of neutrino origin.
   By running the experiment with the accelerator off and triggering on
cosmic rays it was possible to place a limit of 5 ± 1 on the total number of
the single muon events which could be due to such background. Indeed, the
slight asymmetry in Figure 7 is consistent with this hypothesis.
   It was simple to demonstrate that these events were not neutron induced.
Referring to Figure 7 we see how they tend to point toward the target
through the main body of steel shielding. No more than 10 -4 events should
have arisen from neutrons penetrating the shield (other than from neutrino
induced events in the last foot of the shield itself). Indeed, removing four
feet of steel from the front would have increased the event rate by a factor
of 100; no such increase was seen. Futhermore, if the events were neutron
induced they would have clustered toward the first chambers. In fact they
were uniformly spread throughout the detector subject only to the 300 MeV/c
requirement.
    The evidence that the single particle tracks were primarily due to muons
 was based on the absence of interactions. If these tracks were pions we
 would have expected 8 interactions. Indeed, even if all of the stopping
 tracks were considered to be interacting, it would still lead to the conclusion that
 the mean free path of these tracks was 4 times that expected for hadrons.
    As a final check on the origin of these events we effectively replaced four


476


feet of the shield by an equivalent amount as close as possible to the beryllium
target. This reduced the decay distance by a factor of 8. The rate
of events decreased from 1.46 ± .02 to 0.3±0.2 per 1016 incident protons.
  All of the above arguments convinced us that we were in fact looking at
neutrino induced events and that 29 of the 34 single track events were
muons produced by neutrinos (The other five being background due to
cosmic rays). It is these events that will form the basis of our arguments as to




Figure 6. Some typical “vertex” events.


the identity of and        But, first we must see what electrons would look like
in passing through our spark chambers. An electron will on the average
radiate half of its energy in about four of the aluminum plates. This will lead
to gammas which will in turn convert to other electron - positron pairs. The
net result is called a “shower”. Typically an electron shower shows a number
of sparks in each gap between plates. The total number of sparks in the
 shower increases roughly linearly with electron energy in 400 MeV region.
    In order to calibrate the chambers we exposed them to a beam of 400 GeV
 electrons at the Brookhaven Cosmotron (See Figure 8). We noted that
the triggering system was 67 % efficient with respect to these electrons. We
then plotted the spark distribution as shown in Figure 9 for a sample of 2/3
× 29 expected showers. The 6 “shower” events were also plotted. Clearly,
the difference between the expected distribution, had there been only one
neutrino, and the observed distribution was substantial. We concluded that




          ONE EVENT                            VERTICAL PLANE
                                   I




+--DOWN
                               DEGREES

Figure 7. Projected angular distribution of the single track events. The neutrino direction is
taken as zero degrees.


478                                    Physics 1988


  As a further point, we compared the expected rate of neutrino events
with that predicted by the Fermi theory and found agreement within 30 %.
  The results of the experiment were described in an article in Physical
Review Letters Volume 9, pp. 36-44 (1962).




Figure 8. Typical 400 McV/c clectrons from the Cosmotron calibration run.


                                        M. Schwartz                                      479




Figure 9. Spark distribution for 400 MeV/c electrons normalized to expected number of showers
should be        Also shown are the observed “shower” events.
