                                 N IELS B O H R


                     The structure of the atom
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1922



 Ladies and Gentlemen. Today, as a consequence of the great honour the
 Swedish Academy of Sciences has done me in awarding me this year’s No-
 bel Prize for Physics for my work on the structure of the atom, it is my duty
 to give an account of the results of this work and I think that I shall be acting
 in accordance with the traditions of the Nobel Foundation if I give this
 report in the form of a survey of the development which has taken place
 in the last few years within the field of physics to which this work belongs.



                        The general picture of the atom

 The present state of atomic theory is characterized by the fact that we not
 only believe the existence of atoms to be proved beyond a doubt, but also
 we even believe that we have an intimate knowledge of the constituents of
 the individual atoms. I cannot on this occasion give a survey of the scientific
 developments that have led to this result; I will only recall the discovery of
 the electron towards the close of the last century, which furnished the direct
 verification and led to a conclusive formulation of the conception of the
 atomic nature of electricity which had evolved since the discovery by Fara-
day of the fundamental laws of electrolysis and Berzelius’s electrochemical
 theory, and had its greatest triumph in the electrolytic dissociation theory of
 Arrhenius. This discovery of the electron and elucidation of its properties
  was the result of the work of a large number of investigators, among whom
 Lenard and J. J. Thomson may be particularly mentioned. The latter espe-
 cially has made very important contributions to our subject by his ingenious
 attempts to develop ideas about atomic constitution on the basis of the electron
 theory. The present state of our knowledge of the elements of atomic struc-
 ture was reached, however, by the discovery of the atomic nucleus, which
 we owe to Rutherford, whose work on the radioactive substances discovered
 towards the close of the last century has much enriched physical and chem-
 ical science.




                                          7


8                                1922 N.BOHR

    According to our present conceptions, an atom of an element is built up
of a nucleus that has a positive electrical charge and is the seat of by far the
greatest part of the atomic mass, together with a number of electrons, all
having the same negative charge and mass, which move at distances from
the nucleus that are very great compared to the dimensions of the nucleus
or of the electrons themselves. In this picture we at once see a striking resem-
blance to a planetary system, such as we have in our own solar system. Just
as the simplicity of the laws that govern the motions of the solar system is
intimately connected with the circumstance that the dimensions of the mov-
ing bodies are small in relation to the orbits, so the corresponding relations
in atomic structure provide us with an explanation of an essential feature of
natural phenomena in so far as these depend on the properties of the ele-
ments. It makes clear at once that these properties can be divided into two
sharply distinguished classes.
    To the first class belong most of the ordinary physical and chemical prop-
 erties of substances, such as their state of aggregation, colour, and chemical
reactivity. These properties depend on the motion of the electron system
and the way in which this motion changes under the influence of different
 external actions. On account of the large mass of the nucleus relative to that
 of the electrons and its smallness in comparison to the electron orbits, the
 electronic motion will depend only to a very small extent on the nuclear
mass, and will be determined to a close approximation solely by the total
 electrical charge of the nucleus. Especially the inner structure of the nucleus
and the way in which the charges and masses are distributed among its
 separate particles will have a vanishingly small influence on the motion of
 the electron system surrounding the nucleus. On the other hand, the struc-
 ture of the nucleus will be responsible for the second class of properties that
 are shown in the radioactivity of substances. In the radioactive processes we
 meet with an explosion of the nucleus, whereby positive or negative par-
 ticles, the so-called α- and β-particles, are expelled with very great velocities.
    Our conceptions of atomic structure afford us, therefore, an immediate
 explanation of the complete lack of interdependence between the two classes
 of properties, which is most strikingly shown in the existence of substances
 which have to an extraordinarily close approximation the same ordinary
physical and chemical properties, even though the atomic weights are not
 the same, and the radioactive properties are completely different. Such sub-
stances, of the existence of which the first evidence was found in the work of
 Soddy and other investigators on the chemical properties of the radioactive


                      STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                   9
elements, are called isotopes, with reference to the classification of the ele-
ments according to ordinary physical and chemical properties. It is not nec-
essary for me to state here how it has been shown in recent years that iso-
topes are found not only among the radioactive elements, but also among
ordinary stable elements; in fact, a large number of the latter that were
previously supposed simple have been shown by Aston’s well-known in-
vestigations to consist of a mixture of isotopes with different atomic weights.
   The question of the inner structure of the nucleus is still but little under-
stood, although a method of attack is afforded by Rutherford’s experiments
on the disintegration of atomic nuclei by bombardment with a-particles.
Indeed, these experiments may be said to open up a new epoch in natural
philosophy in that for the first time the artificial transformation of one ele-
ment into another has been accomplished. In what follows, however, we
shall confine ourselves to a consideration of the ordinary physical and chem-
ical properties of the elements and the attempts which have been made to
explain them on the basis of the concepts just outlined.
   It is well known that the elements can be arranged as regards their ordinary
physical and chemical properties in a natural system which displays most sug-
gestively the peculiar relationships between the different elements. It was
recognized for the first time by Mendeleev and Lothar Meyer that when the
elements are arranged in an order which is practically that of their atomic
weights, their chemical and physical properties show a pronounced period-
icity. A diagrammatic representation of this so-called Periodic Table is given
 in Fig. 1, where, however, the elements are not arranged in the ordinary
way but in a somewhat modified form of a table first given by Julius Thom-
sen, who has also made important contributions to science in this domain.
In the figure the elements are denoted by their usual chemical symbols, and
the different vertical columns indicate the so-called periods. The elements in
successive columns which possess homologous chemical and physical proper-
ties are connected with lines. The meaning of the square brackets around
certain series of elements in the later periods, the properties of which exhibit
typical deviations from the simple periodicity in the first periods, will be
discussed later.
   In the development of the theory of atomic structure the characteristic
features of the natural system have found a surprisingly simple interpretation.
Thus we are led to assume that the ordinal number of an element in the
Periodic Table, the so-called atomic number, is just equal to the number of
electrons which move about the nucleus in the neutral atom. In an imperfect


IO                           1922 N.BOHR




                                  Fig. 1.

form, this law was first stated by Van den Broek; it was, however, fore-
shadowed by J. J. Thomson’s investigations of the number of electrons in the
atom, as well as by Rutherford’s measurements of the charge on the atomic
nucleus. As we shall see, convincing support for this law has since been ob-
tained in various ways, especially by Moseley’s famous investigations of the
X-ray spectra of the elements. We may perhaps also point out, how the
simple connexion between atomic number and nuclear charge offers an ex-
planation of the laws governing the changes in chemical properties of the
elements after expulsion of or β-particles, which found a simple formula-
tion in the so-called radioactive displacement law.


                Atomic stability ad electrodynamic theory

As soon as we try to trace a more intimate connexion between the properties
of the elements and atomic structure, we encounter profound difficulties, in


                       STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                 II

that essential differences between an atom and a planetary system show them-
selves here in spite of the analogy we have mentioned.
   The motions of the bodies in a planetary system, even though they obey
the general law of gravitation, will not be completely determined by this
law alone, but will depend largely on the previous history of the system.
Thus the length of the year is not determined by the masses of the sun and
the earth alone, but depends also on the conditions that existed during the
formation of the solar system, of which we have very little knowledge.
Should a sufficiently large foreign body some day traverse our solar system,
we might among other effects expect that from that day the length of the
year would be different from its present value.
   It is quite otherwise in the case of atoms. The definite and unchangeable
properties of the elements demand that the state of an atom cannot undergo
permanent changes due to external actions. As soon as the atom is left to
itself again, its constituent particles must arrange their motions in a manner
which is completely determined by the electric charges and masses of the
particles. We have the most convincing evidence of this in spectra, that is,
in the properties of the radiation emitted from substances in certain circum-
stances, which can be studied with such great precision. It is well known that
the wavelengths of the spectral lines of a substance, which can in many cases
be measured with an accuracy of more than one part in a million, are, in the
same external circumstances, always exactly the same within the limit of er-
ror of the measurements, and quite independent of the previous treatment
of this substance. It is just to this circumstance that we owe the great impor-
tance of spectral analysis, which has been such an invaluable aid to the chem-
ist in the search for new elements, and has also shown us that even on the
most distant bodies of the universe there occur elements with exactly the
same properties as on the earth.
   On the basis of our picture of the constitution of the atom it is thus im-
possible, so long as we restrict ourselves to the ordinary mechanical laws,
to account for the characteristic atomic stability which is required for an ex-
planation of the properties of the elements.
   The situation is by no means improved if we also rake into consideration
the well-known electrodynamic laws which Maxwell succeeded in formu-
lating on the basis of the great discoveries of Oersted and Faraday in the first
half of the last century. Maxwell’s theory has not only shown itself able to
account for the already known electric and magnetic phenomena in all their
details, but has also celebrated its greatest triumph in the prediction of the


12                              1922    N.BOHR

electromagnetic waves which were discovered by Hertz, and are now so
extensively used in wireless telegraphy.
   For a time it seemed as though this theory would also be able to furnish
a basis for an explanation of the details of the properties of the elements, after
it had been developed, chiefly by Lorentz and Larmor, into a form con-
sistent with the atomistic conception of electricity. I need only remind you
of the great interest that was aroused when Lorentz, shortly after the dis-
covery by Zeeman of the characteristic changes that spectral lines undergo
when the emitting substance is brought into a magnetic field, could give a
natural and simple explanation of the main features of the phenomenon. Lo-
rentz assumed that the radiation which we observe in a spectral line is sent
out from an electron executing simple harmonic vibrations about a position
of equilibrium, in precisely the same manner as the electromagnetic waves
in radiotelegraphy are sent out by the electric oscillations in the antenna.
He also pointed out how the alteration observed by Zeeman in the spectral
lines corresponded exactly to the alteration in the motion of the vibrating
electron which one would expect to be produced by the magnetic field.
   It was, however, impossible on this basis to give a closer explanation of
the spectra of the elements, or even of the general type of the laws holding
with great exactness for the wavelengths of lines in these spectra, which had
been established by Balmer, Rydberg, and Ritz. After we obtained details
as to the constitution of the atom, this difficulty became still more manifest;
in fact, so long as we confine ourselves to the classical electrodynamic theory
we cannot even understand why we obtain spectra consisting of sharp lines
at all. This theory can even be said to be incompatible with the assumption
of the existence of atoms possessing the structure we have described, in that
the motions of the electrons would claim a continuous radiation of energy
from the atom, which would cease only when the electrons had fallen into
the nucleus.


                      The origin of the quantum theory

It has, however, been possible to avoid the various difficulties of the electro-
dynamic theory by introducing concepts borrowed from the so-called quan-
tum theory, which marks a complete departure from the ideas that have
hitherto been used for the explanation of natural phenomena. This theory
was originated by Planck, in the year 1900, in his investigations on the law


                        STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                   13
of heat radiation, which, because of its independence of the individual prop
erties of substances, lent itself peculiarly well to a test of the applicability of
the laws of classical physics to atomic processes.
   Planck considered the equilibrium of radiation between a number of sys-
tems with the same properties as those on which Lorentz had based his theory
of the Zeeman effect, but he could now show not only that classical physics
could not account for the phenomena of heat radiation, but also that a com-
plete agreementwith the experimental law could be obtained if - in pro-
nounced contradiction to classical theory - it were assumed that the energy
of the vibrating electrons could not change continuously, but only in such
a way that the energy of the system always remained equal to a whole
number of so-called energy-quanta. The magnitude of this quantum was
found to be proportional to the frequency of oscillation of the particle,
which, in accordance with classical concepts, was supposed to be also the
frequency of the emitted radiation. The proportionality factor had to be
regarded as a new universal constant, since termed Planck’s constant, similar
to the velocity of light, and the charge and mass of the electron.
   Planck’s surprising result stood at first completely isolated in natural sci-
ence, but with Einstein’s significant contributions to this subject a few years
after, a great variety of applications was found. In the first place, Einstein
pointed out that the condition limiting the amount of vibrational energy of
the particles could be tested by investigation of the specific heat of crystalline
bodies, since in the case of these we have to do with similar vibrations, not
of a single electron, but of whole atoms about positions of equilibrium in the
crystal lattice. Einstein was able to show that the experiment confirmed
Planck’s theory, and through the work of later investigators this agreement
has proved quite complete. Furthermore, Einstein emphasized another con-
sequence of Planck’s results, namely, that radiant energy could only be emit-
 ted or absorbed by the oscillating particle in so-called           of radiation",
 the magnitude of each of which was equal to Planck’s constant multiplied
by the frequency.
   In his attempts to give an interpretation of this result, Einstein was led to
 the formulation of the so-called "hypothesis of light-quanta" according to
 which the radiant energy, in contradiction to Maxwell’s electromagnetic
 theory of light, would not be propagated as electromagnetic waves, but
rather as concrete light atoms, each with an energy equal to that of a quan-
 tum of radiation. This concept led Einstein to his well-known theory of the
photoelectric effect. This phenomenon, which had been entirely unexplain-


14                             1922 N.BOHR

able on the classical theory, was thereby placed in a quite different light, and
the predictions of Einstein’s theory have received such exact experimental
confirmation in recent years, that perhaps the most exact determination of
Planck’s constant is afforded by measurements on the photoelectric effect.
In spite of its heuristic value, however, the hypothesis of light-quanta, which
is quite irreconcilable with so-called interference phenomena, is not able to
throw light on the nature of radiation. I need only recall that these inter-
ference phenomena constitute our only means of investigating the properties
of radiation and therefore of assigning any closer meaning to the frequency
which in Einstein’s theory fixes the magnitude of the light-quantum.
   In the following years many efforts were made to apply the concepts of
the quantum theory to the question of atomic structure, and the principal
emphasis was sometimes placed on one and sometimes on the other of the
consequences deduced by Einstein from Planck’s result. As the best known
of the attempts in this direction, from which, however, no definite results
were obtained, I may mention the work of Stark, Sommerfeld, Hasenöhrl,
Haas, and Nicholson.
   From this period also dates an investigation by Bjerrum on infrared ab-
sorption bands, which, although it had no direct bearing on atomic structure,
proved significant for the development of the quantum theory. He directed
attention to the fact that the rotation of the molecules in a gas might be
investigated by means of the changes in certain absorption lines with tem-
perature. At the same time he emphasized the fact that the effect should not
consist of a continuous widening of the lines such as might be expected from
classical theory, which imposed no restrictions on the molecular rotations,
but in accordance with the quantum theory he predicted that the lines should
be split up into a number of components, corresponding to a sequence of
distinct possibilities of rotation. This prediction was confirmed a few years
later by Eva von Bahr, and the phenomenon may still be regarded as one
of the most striking evidences of the reality of the quantum theory, even
though from our present point of view the original explanation has under-
gone a modification in essential details.


                 The quantum theory of atomic constitution

The question of further development of the quantum theory was in the
meantime placed in a new light by Rutherford’s discovery of the atomic nu-


                       STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                 15

cleus (1911). As we have already seen, this discovery made it quite clear that
by classical conceptions alone it was quite impossible to understand the most
essential properties of atoms. One was therefore led to seek for a formulation
of the principles of the quantum theory that could immediately account for
the stability in atomic structure and the properties of the radiation sent out
from atoms, of which the observed properties of substances bear witness.
Such a formulation was proposed (1913) by the present lecturer in the form
of two postulates, which may be stated as follows:

(I). Among the conceivably possible states of motion in an atomic system
there exist a number of so-called stationary states which, in spite of the fact
that the motion of the particles in these states obeys the laws of classical me-
chanics to a considerable extent, possess a peculiar, mechanically unexplain-
able stability, of such a sort that every permanent change in the motion of
the system must consist in a complete transition from one stationary state
to another.

   While in contradiction to the classical electromagnetic theory no radia-
(2).
tion takes place from the atom in the stationary states themselves, a process
of transition between two stationary states can be accompanied by the emis-
sion of electromagnetic radiation, which will have the same properties as
that which would be sent out according to the classical theory from an electri-
fied particle executing an harmonic vibration with constant frequency. This
frequency v has, however, no simple relation to the motion of the particles
of the atom, but is given by the relation




where h is Planck’s constant, and E’ and E” are the values of the energy of
the atom in the two stationary states that form the initial and final state of
the radiation process. Conversely, irradiation of the atom with electromag-
netic waves of this frequency can lead to an absorption process, whereby the
atom is transformed back from the latter stationary state to the former.

While the first postulate has in view the general stability of the atom, the
second postulate has chiefly in view the existence of spectra with sharp lines.
Furthermore, the quantum-theory condition entering in the last postulate
affords a starting-point for the interpretation of the laws of series spectra.


16                            1922 N-BOHR

The most general of these laws, the combination principle enunciated by
Ritz, states that the frequency v for each of the lines in the spectrum of an
element can be represented by the formula




where T” and T’ are two so-called spectral terms belonging to a manifold
of such terms characteristic of the substance in question.
   According to our postulates, this law finds an immediate interpretation
in the assumption that the spectrum is emitted by transitions between a num-
ber of stationary states in which the numerical value of the energy of the
atom is equal to the value of the spectral term multiplied by Planck’s con-
stant. This explanation of the combination principle is seen to differ funda-
mentally from the usual ideas of electrodynamics, as soon as we consider that
there is no simple relation between the motion of the atom and the radiation
sent out. The departure of our considerations from the ordinary ideas of
natural philosophy becomes particularly evident, however, when we ob-
serve that the occurrence of two spectral lines, corresponding to combina-
tions of the same spectral term with two other different terms, implies that
the nature of the radiation sent out from the atom is not determined only
by the motion of the atom at the-beginning of the radiation process, but
also depends on the state to which the atom is transferred by the process.
   At first glance one might, therefore, think that it would scarcely be pos-
sible to bring our formal explanation of the combination principle into direct
relation with our views regarding the constitution of the atom, which, in-
deed, are based on experimental evidence interpreted on classical mechanics
and electrodynamics. A closer investigation, however, should make it clear
that a definite relation may be obtained between the spectra of the elements
and the structure of their atoms on the basis of the postulates.


                           The hydrogen spectrum

The simplest spectrum we know is that of hydrogen. The frequencies of its
lines may be represented with great accuracy by means of Balmer’s formula:


                      STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                 17
where K is a constant and n' and n'' are two integers. In the spectrum we
accordingly meet a single series of spectral terms of the form K/n 2, which
decrease regularly with increasing term number n. In accordance with the
postulates, we shall therefore assume that each of the hydrogen lines is emit-
ted by a transition between two states belonging to a series of stationary
states of the hydrogen atom in which the numerical value of the atom’s
energy is equal to hK/n .
                        2



   Following our picture of atomic structure, a hydrogen atom consists of a
positive nucleus and an electron which - SO far as ordinary mechanical con-
ceptions are applicable - will with great approximation describe a periodic
elliptical orbit with the nucleus at one focus. The major axis of the orbit is
inversely proportional to the work necessary completely to remove the elec-
tron from the nucleus, and, in accordance with the above, this work in the
stationary states is just equal to hK/n . We thus arrive at a manifold of
                                        2



stationary states for which the major axis of the electron orbit takes on a
series of discrete values proportional to the squares of the whole numbers.
The accompanying Fig. 2 shows these relations diagrammatically. For the
sake of simplicity the electron orbits in the stationary states are represented
by circles, although in reality the theory places no restriction on the eccen-
tricity of the orbit, but only determines the length of the major axis. The
arrows represent the transition processes that correspond to the red and




                                    Fig. 2.


18                             1922 N.BOHR

 green hydrogen lines,        and      the frequency of which is given by means
 of the Balmer formula when we put n'' = 2 and n' = 3 and 4 respectively.
 The transition processes are also represented which correspond to the first
 three lines of the series of ultraviolet lines found by Lyman in 1914, of which
 the frequencies are given by the formula when n is put equal to 1, as well
 as to the first line of the infrared series discovered some years previously by
 Paschen, which are given by the formula if n'' is put equal to 3.
    This explanation of the origin of the hydrogen spectrum leads us quite
naturally to interpret this spectrum as the manifestation of a process whereby
 the electron is bound to the nucleus. While the largest spectral term with
 term number I corresponds to the final stage in the binding process, the
 small spectral terms that have larger values of the term number correspond
 to stationary states which represent the initial states of the binding process,
 where the electron orbits still have large dimensions, and where the work
 required to remove an electron from the nucleus is still small. The final stage
in the binding process we may designate as the normal state of the atom,
and it is distinguished from the other stationary states by the property that,
in accordance with the postulates, the state of the atom can only be changed
by the addition of energy whereby the electron is transferred to an orbit of
larger dimensions corresponding to an earlier stage of the binding process.
    The size of the electron orbit in the normal state calculated on the basis
of the above interpretation of the spectrum agrees roughly with the value
for the dimensions of the atoms of the elements that have been calculated
by the kinetic theory of matter from the properties of gases. Since, however,
as an immediate consequence of the stability of the stationary states that is
claimed by the postulates, we must suppose that the interaction between two
atoms during a collision cannot be completely described with the aid of the
laws of classical mechanics, such a comparison as this cannot be carried fur-
ther on the basis of such considerations as those just outlined.
    A more intimate connexion between the spectra and the atomic model
has been revealed, however, by an investigation of the motion in those sta-
tionary states where the term number is large, and where the dimensions
of the electron orbit and the frequency of revolution in it vary relatively
little when we go from one stationary state to the next following. It was
possible to show that the frequency of the radiation sent out during the
transition between two stationary states, the difference of the term numbers
of which is small in comparison to these numbers themselves, tended to
coincide in frequency with one of the harmonic components into which the


                      STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                19
electron motion could be resolved, and accordingly also with the frequency
of one of the wave trams in the radiation which would be emitted according
to the laws of ordinary electrodynamics.
   The condition that such a coincidence should occur in this region where
the stationary states differ but little from one another proves to be that the
constant in the Balmer formula can be expressed by means of the relation




where e and m are respectively the charge and mass of the electron, while h
is Planck’s constant. This relation has been shown to hold to within the con-
siderable accuracy with which, especially through the beautiful investiga-
tions of Millikan, the quantities e, m, and h are known.
   This result shows that there exists a connexion between the hydrogen
spectrum and the model for the hydrogen atom which, on the whole, is as
close as we might hope considering the departure of the postulates from the
classical mechanical and electrodynamic laws. At the same time, it affords
some indication of how we may perceive in the quantum theory, in spite
of the fundamental character of this departure, a natural generalization of
the fundamental concepts of the classical electrodynamic theory. To this
most important question we shall return later, but first we will discuss how
the interpretation of the hydrogen spectrum on the basis of the postulates
has proved suitable in several ways, for elucidating the relation between the
properties of the different elements.



                    Relationships between the elements


The discussion above can be applied immediately to the process whereby
an electron is bound to a nucleus with any given charge. The calculations
show that, in the stationary state corresponding to a given value of the
number n, the size of the orbit will be inversely proportional to the nuclear
charge, while the work necessary to remove an electron will be directly
proportional to the square of the nuclear charge. The spectrum that is emit-
ted during the binding of an electron by a nucleus with charge N times that
of the hydrogen nucleus can therefore be represented by the formula:


20                            1922 N.BOHR




 If in this formula we put N = 2, we get a spectrum which contains a set of
 lines in the visible region which was observed many years ago in the spec-
 trum of certain stars. Rydberg assigned these lines to hydrogen because of
 the close analogy with the series of lines represented by the Balmer formula.
 It was never possible to produce these lines in pure hydrogen, but just
 before the theory for the hydrogen spectrum was put forward, Fowler suc-
 ceeded in observing the series in question by sending a strong discharge
 through a mixture of hydrogen and helium. This investigator also assumed
 that the lines were hydrogen lines, because there existed no experimental
evidence from which it might be inferred that two different substances could
show properties resembling each other so much as the spectrum in question
and that of hydrogen. After the theory was put forward, it became clear,
however, that the observed lines must belong to a spectrum of helium, but
that they were not like the ordinary helium spectrum emitted from the
neutral atom. They came from an ionized helium atom which consists of a
single electron moving about a nucleus with double charge. In this way there
was brought to light a new feature of the relationship between the elements,
which corresponds exactly with our present ideas of atomic structure, ac-
cording to which the physical and chemical properties of an element depend
in the first instance only on the electric charge of the atomic nucleus.
    Soon after this question was settled the existence of a similar general
relationship between the properties of the elements was brought to light by
Moseley’s well-known investigations on the characteristic X-ray spectra of
the elements, which was made possible by Laue’s discovery of the inter-
ference of X-rays in crystals and the investigations of W. H. and W. L. Bragg
on this subject. It appeared, in fact, that the X-ray spectra of the different
elements possessed a much simpler structure and a much greater mutual
resemblance than their optical spectra. In particular, it appeared that the
spectra changed from element to element in a manner that corresponded
closely to the formula given above for the spectrum emitted during the
binding of an electron to a nucleus, provided N was put equal to the atomic
number of the element concerned. This formula was even capable of ex-
pressing, with an approximation that could not be without significance, the
frequencies of the strongest X-ray lines, if small whole numbers were sub-
stituted for n' and n''.


                       STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                  21

  This discovery was of great importance in several respects. In the first
place, the relationship between the X-ray spectra ofdifferent elements proved
so simple that it became possible to fix without ambiguity the atomic num-
ber for all known substances, and in this way to predict with certainty the
atomic number of all such hitherto unknown elements for which there is a
place in the natural system. Fig. 3 shows how the square root of the fre-
quency for two characteristic X-ray lines depends on the atomic number.
These lines belong to the group of so-called K-lines, which are the most
penetrating of the characteristic rays. With very close approximation the
points lie on straight lines, and the fact that they do so is conditioned not
only by our taking account of known elements, but also by our leaving an
open place between molybdenum (42) and ruthenium (44), just as in Men-
deleev’s original scheme of the natural system of the elements.
   Further, the laws of X-ray spectra provide a confirmation of the general
theoretical conceptions, both with regard to the constitution of the atom
and the ideas that have served as a basis for the interpretation of spectra. Thus


2 2                            1922 N . B O H R

the similarity between X-ray spectra and the spectra emitted during the bind-
ing of a single electron to a nucleus may be simply interpreted from the fact
that the transitions between stationary states with which we are concerned in
X-ray spectra are accompanied by changes in the motion of an electron in
the inner part of the atom, where the influence of the attraction of the nu-
cleus is very great compared with the repulsive forces of the other electrons.
   The relations between other properties of the elements are of a much more
complicated character, which originates in the fact that we have to do with
processes concerning the motion of the electrons in the outer part of the
atom, where the forces that the electrons exert on one another are of the
same order of magnitude as the attraction towards the nucleus, and where,
therefore, the details of the interaction of the electrons play an important
part. A characteristic example of such a case is afforded by the spatial exten-
sion of the atoms of the elements. Lothar Meyer himself directed attention to
the characteristic periodic change exhibited by the ratio of the atomic weight
to the density, the so-called atomic volume, of the elements in the natural
system. An idea of these facts is given by Fig. 4, in which the atomic volume
is represented as a function of the atomic number. A greater difference be-


                         STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                      23
tween this and the previous figure could scarcely be imagined. While the
X-ray spectra vary uniformly with the atomic number, the atomic volumes
show a characteristic periodic change which corresponds exactly to the
change in the chemical properties of the elements.
   Ordinary optical spectra behave in an analogous way. In spite of the dis-
similarity between these spectra, Rydberg succeeded in tracing a certain
general relationship between the hydrogen spectrum and other spectra. Even
though the spectral lines of the elements with higher atomic number appear
as combinations of a more complicated manifold of spectral terms which is
not so simply co-ordinated with a series of whole numbers, still the spectral
terms can be arranged in series each of which shows a strong similarity to the
series of terms in the hydrogen spectrum. This similarity appears in the fact
that the terms in each series can, as Rydberg pointed out, be very accurately
represented by the formula             +       where K is the same constant that
occurs in the hydrogen spectrum, often called the Rydberg constant, while
n is the term number, and α a constant which is different for the different
series.
   This relationship with the hydrogen spectrum leads us immediately to re-
gard these spectra as the last step of a process whereby the neutral atom is built up
by the capture and binding of electrons to the nucleus, one by one. In fact, it is clear
that the last electron captured, so long as it is in that stage of the binding
process in which its orbit is still large compared to the orbits of the previously
bound electrons, will be subjected to a force from the nucleus and these elec-
trons, that differs but little from the force with which the electron in the
hydrogen atom is attracted towards the nucleus while it is moving in an
orbit of corresponding dimensions.
   The spectra so far considered, for which Rydberg’s laws hold, are excited
by means of electric discharge under ordinary conditions and are often called
arc spectra. The elements emit also another type of spectrum, the so-called
spark spectra, when they are subjected to an extremely powerful discharge.
Hitherto it was impossible to disentangle the spark spectra in the same way
as the arc spectra. Shortly after the above view on the origin of arc spectra
was brought forward, however, Fowler found (1914) that an empirical ex-
pression for the spark spectrum lines could be established which corresponds
exactly to Rydberg’s laws with the single difference that the constant K is
replaced by a constant four times as large. Since, as we have seen, the con-
stant that appears in the spectrum sent out during the binding of an electron
to a helium nucleus is exactly equal to K, it becomes evident that spark


24                               1922   N.BOHR

spectra are due to the ionized atom, and that their emission corresponds to
the last step but one in the formation of the neutral atom by the successive capture
and binding of electrons.



                  Absorption and excitation of spectral lines

The interpretation of the origin of the spectra was also able to explain the
characteristic laws that govern absorption spectra. As Kirchhoff and Bunsen
had already shown, there is a close relation between the selective absorption
of substances for radiation and their emission spectra, and it is on this that
the application of spectrum analysis to the heavenly bodies essentially rests.
Yet on the basis of the classical electromagnetic theory, it is impossible to
understand why substances in the form of vapour show absorption for cer-
tain lines in their emission spectrum and not for others.
   On the basis of the postulates given above we are, however, led to assume
that the absorption of radiation corresponding to a spectral line emitted by
a transition from one stationary state of the atom to a state of less energy is
brought about by the return of the atom from the last-named state to the
first. We thus understand immediately that in ordinary circumstances a gas
or vapour can only show selective absorption for spectral lines that are
produced by a transition from a state corresponding to an earlier stage in the
binding process to the normal state. Only at higher temperatures or under
the influence of electric discharges whereby an appreciable number of atoms
are being constantly disrupted from the normal state, can we expect absorp-
tion for other lines in the emission spectrum in agreement with the experi-
ments.
   A most direct confirmation for the general interpretation of spectra on the
basis of the postulates has also been obtained by investigations on the excita-
tion of spectral lines and ionization of atoms by means of impact of free
electrons with given velocities. A decided advance in this direction was
marked by the well-known investigations of Franck and Hertz (1914). It
appeared from their results that by means of electron impacts it was impos-
sible to impart to an atom an arbitrary amount of energy, but only such
amounts as corresponded to a transfer of the atom from its normal state to
another stationary state of the existence of which the spectra assure us, and
the energy of which can be inferred from the magnitude of the spectral term.
   Further, striking evidence was afforded of the independence that, accord-


                      STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                 25
ing to the postulates, must be attributed to the processes which give rise to
the emission of the different spectral lines of an element. Thus it could be
shown directly that atoms that were transferred in this manner to a station-
ary state of greater energy were able to return to the normal state with emis-
sion of radiation corresponding to a single spectral line.
   Continued investigations on electron impacts, in which a large number of
physicists have shared, have also produced a detailed confirmation of the
theory concerning the excitation of series spectra. Especially it has been pos-
sible to show that for the ionization of an atom by electron impact an amount
of energy is necessary that is exactly equal to the work required, according
to the theory, to remove the last electron captured from the atom. This work
can be determined directly as the product of Planck’s constant and the spec-
tral term corresponding to the normal state, which, as mentioned above, is
equal to the limiting value of the frequencies of the spectral series connected
with selective absorption.


             The quantum theory of multiply-periodic systems

While it was thus possible by means of the fundamental postulates of the
quantum. theory to account directly for certain general features of the proper-
ties of the elements, a closer development of the ideas of the quantum theory
was necessary in order to account for these properties in further detail. In
the course of the last few years a more general theoretical basis has been
attained through the development of formal methods that permit the fixa-
tion of the stationary states for electron motions of a more general type than
those WC have hitherto considered. For a simply periodic motion such as we
meet in the pure harmonic oscillator, and at least to a first approximation,
in the motion of an electron about a positive nucleus, the manifold of sta-
tionary states can be simply co-ordinated to a series of whole numbers. For
motions of the more general class mentioned above, the so-called multiply-
periodic motions, however, the stationary states compose a more complex
manifold, in which, according to these formal methods, each state is charac-
terized by several whole numbers, the so-called "quantum numbers".
   In the development of the theory a large number of physicists have taken
part, and the introduction of several quantum numbers can be traced back
to the work of Planck himself. But the definite step which gave the impetus
to further work was made by Sommerfeld (1915) in his explanation of the


26                             1922 N.BOHR

fine structure shown by the hydrogen lines when the spectrum is observed
with a spectroscope of high resolving power. The occurrence of this fine
structure must be ascribed to the circumstance that we have to deal, even in
hydrogen, with a motion which is not exactly simply periodic. In fact, as a
consequence of the change in the electron’s mass with velocity that is claimed
by the theory of relativity, the electron orbit will undergo a very slow pre-
cession in the orbital plane. The motion will therefore be doubly periodic,
and besides a number characterizing the term in the Balmer formula, which
we shall call the principal quantum number because it determines in the main
the energy of the atom, the fixation of the stationary states demands another
quantum number which we shall call the subordinate quantum number.
   A survey of the motion in the stationary states thus fixed is given in the
diagram (Fig. 5), which reproduces the relative size and form of the elec-
tron orbits. Each orbit is designated by a symbol      where n is the principal
quantum number and k the subordinate quantum number. All orbits with
the same principal quantum number have, to a first approximation, the
same major axis, while orbits with the same value of k have the same para-
meter, i.e. the same value for the shortest chord through the focus. Since the
energy values for different states with the same value of n but different values
of k differ a little from each other, we get for each hydrogen line corre-
sponding to definite values of n' and n'' in the Balmer formula a number of
different transition processes, for which the frequencies of the emitted radia-




                                    Fig. 5.


                       STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                  27
tion as calculated by the second postulate are not exactly the same. As Som-
merfeld was able to show, the components this gives for each hydrogen line
agree with the observations on the fine structure of hydrogen lines to within
the limits of experimental error. In the figure the arrows designate the pro-
cesses that give rise to the components of the red and green lines in the
hydrogen spectrum, the frequencies of which are obtained by putting n'' = 2
and n' = 3 or 4 respectively in the Balmer formula.
   In considering the figure it must not be forgotten that the description of
the orbit is there incomplete, in so much as with the scale used the slow pre-
cession does not show at all. In fact, this precession is so slow that even for
the orbits that rotate most rapidly the electron performs about 40,000 revo-
lutions before the perihelion has gone round once. Nevertheless, it is this
precession alone that is responsible for the multiplicity of the stationary
states characterized by the subordinate quantum number. If, for example,
the hydrogen atom is subjected to a small disturbing force which perturbs
the regular precession, the electron orbit in the stationary states will have a
form altogether d&rent from that given in the figure. This implies that the
fine structure will change its character completely, but the hydrogen spec-
trum will continue to consist of lines that are given to a close approximation
by the Balmer formula, due to the fact that the approximately periodic
character of the motion will be retained. Only when the disturbing forces
become so large that even during a single revolution of the electron the orbit
is appreciably disturbed, will the spectrum undergo essential changes. The
statement often advanced that the introduction of two quantum numbers
should be a necessary condition for the explanation of the Balmer formula
must therefore be considered as a misconception of the theory.
   Sommerfeld’s theory has proved itself able to account not only for the
fine structure of the hydrogen lines, but also for that of the lines in the he-
lium spark spectrum. Owing to the greater velocity of the electron, the in-
tervals between the components into which a line is split up are here much
greater and can be measured with much greater accuracy. The theory was
also able to account for certain features in the fine structure of X-ray spectra,
where we meet frequency differences that may even reach a value more than
a million times as great as those of the frequency differences for the com-
ponents of the hydrogen lines.
   Shortly after this result had been attained, Schwarzschild and Epstein
(1916) simultaneously succeeded, by means of similar considerations, in ac-
counting for the characteristic changes that the hydrogen lines undergo in


28                             1922    N.BOHR

an electric field, which had been discovered by Stark in the year 1914. Next,
an explanation of the essential features of the Zeeman effect for the hydrogen
lines was worked out at the same time by Sommerfeld and Debye (1917).
In this instance the application of the postulates involved the consequence
that only certain orientations of the atom relative to the magnetic field were
allowable, and this characteristic consequence of the quantum theory has
quite recently received a most direct confirmation in the beautiful researches
of Stern and Gerlach on the deflexion of swiftly moving silver atoms in a
nonhomogenous magnetic field.


                         The correspondence principle

While this development of the theory of spectra was based on the working
out of formal methods for the fixation of stationary states, the present lec-
turer succeeded shortly afterwards in throwing light on the theory from a
new viewpoint, by pursuing further the characteristic connexion between
the quantum theory and classical electrodynamics already traced out in the
hydrogen spectrum. In connexion with the important work of Ehrenfest
and Einstein these efforts led to the formulation of the so-called correspondence
principle, according to which the occurrence of transitions between the sta-
tionary states accompanied by emission of radiation is traced back to the
harmonic components into which the motion of the atom may be resolved
and which, according to the classical theory, determine the properties of
the radiation to which the motion of the particles gives rise.
   According to the correspondence principle, it is assumed that every tran-
sition process between two stationary states can be co-ordinated with a corre-
sponding harmonic vibration component in such a way that the probability
of the occurrence of the transition is dependent on the amplitude of the
vibration. The state of polarization of the radiation emitted during the
transition depends on the further characteristics of the vibration, in a manner
analogous to that in which on the classical theory the intensity and state of
polarization in the wave system emitted by the atom as a consequence of
the presence of this vibration component would be determined respectively
by the amplitude and further characteristics of the vibration.
   With the aid of the correspondence principle it has been possible to con-
firm and to extend the above-mentioned results. Thus it was possible to de-
velop a complete quantum theory explanation of the Zeeman effect for the


                      STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                 29
hydrogen lines, which, in spite of the essentially different character of the
assumptions that underlie the two theories, is very similar throughout to
Lorentz’s original explanation based on the classical theory. In the case of
the Stark effect, where, on the other hand, the classical theory was com-
pletely at a loss, the quantum theory explanation could be so extended with
the help of the correspondence principle as to account for the polarization
of the different components into which the lines are split, and also for the
characteristic intensity distribution exhibited by the components. This last
question has been more closely investigated by Kramers, and the accom-
panying figure will give some impression of how completely it is possible
to account for the phenomenon under consideration.




                                    Fig. 6.

   Fig. 6 reproduces one of Stark’s well-known photographs of the splitting
up of the hydrogen lines. The picture displays very well the varied nature
of the phenomenon, and shows in how peculiar a fashion the intensity varies
from component to component. The components below are polarized per-
pendicular to the field, while those above are polarized parallel to the field.
   Fig. 7 gives a diagrammatic representation of the experimental and theo-
retical results for the line   the frequency of which is given by the Balmer
formula with n'' = 2 and n’ = 5. The vertical lines denote the components
into which the line is split up, of which the picture on the right gives the
components which are polarized parallel to the field and that on the left
those that are polarized perpendicular to it. The experimental results are rep-
resented in the upper half of the diagram, the distances from the dotted line
representing the measured displacements of the components, and the lengths


30                              1922 N . B O H R

of the lines being proportional to the relative intensity as estimated by Stark
from the blackening of the photographic plate. In the lower half is given for
comparison a representation of the theoretical results from a drawing in
Kramers’ paper.




                   I I II I I




   The symbol                attached to the lines gives the transitions between
the stationary states of the atom in the electric field by which the compo-
nents are emitted. Besides the principal quantum integer n, the stationary
states are further characterized by a subordinate quantum integer s, which
can be negative as well as positive and has a meaning quite different from
that of the quantum number k occurring in the relativity theory of the fine
structure of the hydrogen lines, which fixed the form of the electron orbit
in the undisturbed atom. Under the influence of the electric field both the
form of the orbit and its position undergo large changes, but certain proper-
ties of the orbit remain unchanged, and the surbordinate quantum number s
is connected with these. In Fig. 7 the position of the components corresponds
to the frequencies calculated for the different transitions, and the lengths of
the lines are proportional to the probabilities as calculated on the basis of
the correspondence principle, by which also the polarization of the radiation
is determined. It is seen that the theory reproduces completely the main
feature of the experimental results, and in the light of the correspondence
principle we can say that the Stark effect reflects down to the smallest details
the action of the electric field on the orbit of the electron in the hydrogen
atom, even though in this case the reflection is so distorted that, in contrast
with the case of the Zeeman effect, it would scarcely be possible directly to


                      STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                 31
recognize the motion on the basis of the classical ideas of the origin of elec-
tromagnetic radiation.
   Results of interest were also obtained for the spectra of elements of higher
atomic number, the explanation of which in the meantime had made impor-
 tant progress through the work of Sommerfeld, who introduced several
 quantum numbers for the description of the electron orbits. Indeed, it was
possible, with the aid of the correspondence principle, to account completely
for the characteristic rules which govern the seemingly capricious occurrence
 of combination lines, and it is not too much to say that the quantum theory
has not only provided a simple interpretation of the combination principle,
but has further contributed materially to the clearing up of the mystery that
has long rested over the application of this principle.
   The same viewpoints have also proved fruitful in the investigation of the
so-called band spectra. These do not originate, as do series spectra, from
individual atoms, but from molecules; and the fact that these spectra are so
rich in lines is due to the complexity of the motion entailed by the vibrations
of the atomic nuclei relative to each other and the rotations of the molecule
as a whole. The first to apply the postulates to this problem was Schwarz-
schild, but the important work of Heurhnger especially has thrown much
light on the origin and structure of band spectra. The considerations em-
ployed here can be traced back directly to those discussed at the beginning
of this lecture in connexion with Bjerrum’s theory of the influence of mo-
lecular rotation on the infrared absorption lines of gases. It is true we no
longer think that the rotation is reflected in the spectra in the way claimed
by classical electrodynamics, but rather that the line components are due to
transitions between stationary states which differ as regards rotational mo-
tion. That the phenomenon retains its essential feature, however, is a typical
consequence of the correspondence principle.


                     The natural system of the elements

The ideas of the origin of spectra outlined in the preceding have furnished
the basis for a theory of the structure of the atoms of the elements which has
shown itself suitable for a general interpretation of the main features of the
properties of the elements, as exhibited in the natural system. This theory is
based primarily on considerations of the manner in which the atom can be
imagined to be built up by the capture and binding of electrons to the nu-


32                            1922 N . B O H R

cleus, one by one. As we have seen, the optical spectra of elements provide
us with evidence on the progress of the last steps in this building-up process.
   An insight into the kind of information that the closer investigation of
the spectra has provided in this respect may be obtained from Fig. 8, which
gives a diagrammatic representation of the orbital motion in the stationary
states corresponding to the emission of the arc-spectrum of potassium. The
curves show the form of the orbits described in the stationary states by the
last electron captured in the potassium atom, and they can be considered as
stages in the process whereby the 19th electron is bound after the 18 previous
electrons have already been bound in their normal orbits. In order not to
complicate the figure, no attempt has been made to draw any of the orbits
of these inner electrons, but the region in which they move is enclosed by
a dotted circle. In an atom with several electrons the orbits will, in general,
have a complicated character. Because of the symmetrical nature of the field
of force about the nucleus, however, the motion of each single electron can
be approximately described as a plane periodic motion on which is super-
imposed a uniform rotation in the plane of the orbit. The orbit of each
electron will therefore be to a first approximation doubly periodic, and will
be fixed by two quantum numbers, as are the stationary states in a hydrogen
atom when the relativity precession is taken into account.
   In Fig. 8, as in Fig. 5, the electron orbits are marked with the symbol n ,
                                                                             k




                                    Fig. 8.


                      STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                  33
where n is the principal quantum number and k the subordinate quantum
number. While for the initial states of the binding process, where the quan-
tum numbers are large, the orbit of the last electron captured lies completely
outside of those of the previously bound electrons, this is not the case for the
last stages. Thus, in the potassium atom, the electron orbits with subordinate
quantum numbers 2 and 1 will, as indicated in the figure, penetrate partly
into the inner region. Because of this circumstance, the orbits will deviate
very greatly from a simple Kepler motion, since they will consist of a series
of successive outer loops that have the same size and form, but each of which
is turned through an appreciable angle relative to the preceding one. Of
these outer loops only one is shown in the figure. Each of them coincides
very nearly with a piece of a Kepler ellipse, and they are connected, as in-
dicated, by a series of inner loops of a complicated character in which the
electron approaches the nucleus closely. This holds especially for the orbit
 with subordinate quantum number 1, which, as a closer investigation shows,
will approach nearer to the nucleus than any of the previously bound elec-
trons.
   On account of this penetration into the inner region, the strength with which
an electron in such an orbit is bound to the atom will - in spite of the fact
that for the most part it moves in a field of force of the same character as that
surrounding the hydrogen nucleus - be much greater than for an electron in
a hydrogen atom that moves in an orbit with the same principal quantum
number, the maximum distance of the electron from the nucleus at the same
time being considerably less than in such a hydrogen orbit. As we shall see,
this feature of the binding process in atoms with many electrons is of essen-
tial importance in order to understand the characteristic periodic way in
which many properties of the elements as displayed in the natural system
vary with the atomic number.
   In the accompanying table (Fig. 9) is given a summary of the results con-
cerning the structure of the atoms of the elements to which the author has been
led by a consideration of successive capture and binding of electrons to the
atomic nucleus. The figures before the different elements are the atomic
numbers, which give the total number of electrons in the neutral atom. The
figures in the different columns give the number of electrons in orbits corre-
sponding to the values of the principal and subordinate quantum numbers
standing at the top. In accordance with ordinary usage we will, for the sake
of brevity, designate an orbit with principal quantum number n as an n-
quantum orbit. The first electron bound in each atom moves in an orbit




                       STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                 35
that corresponds to the normal state of the hydrogen atom with quantum
symbol 11. In the hydrogen atom there is of course only one electron; but
we must assume that in the atoms of other elements the next electron also
will be bound in such a r-quantum orbit of type 11. As the table shows, the
 following electrons are bound in 2-quantum orbits. To begin with, the
binding will result in a 2 orbit, but later electrons will be bound in 2 2
                            I


orbits, until, after binding the first10 electrons in the atom, we reach a closed
configuration of the a-quantum orbits in which we assume there are four
orbits of each type. This configuration is met for the first time in the neutral
neon atom, which forms the conclusion of the second period in the system
 of the elements. When we proceed in this system, the following electrons
 are bound in 3-quantum orbits, until, after the conclusion of the third period
 of the system, we encounter for the first time, in elements of the fourth
 period, electrons in 4-quantum orbits, and so on.
    This picture of atomic structure contains many features that were brought
forward by the work of earlier investigators. Thus the attempt to interpret
 the relations between the elements in the natural system by the assumption
 of a division of the electrons into groups goes as far back as the work of
J. J. Thomson in 1904. Later, this viewpoint was developed chiefly by Kossel
 (1916), who, moreover, has connected such a grouping with the laws that
investigations of X-ray spectra have brought to light.
    Also G. R. Lewis and I. Langmuir have sought to account for the relations
 between the properties of the elements on the basis of a grouping inside the
 atom. These investigators, however, assumed that the electrons do not move
 about the nucleus, but occupy positions of equilibrium. In this way, though,
 no closer relation can be reached between the properties of the elements and
 the experimental results concerning the constituents of the atoms. Statical
 positions of equilibrium for the electrons are in fact not possible in cases in
 which the, forces between the electrons and the nucleus even approximately
 obey the laws that hold for the attractions and repulsions between electrical
 charges.
    The possibility of an interpretation of the properties of the elements on
 the basis of these latter laws is quite characteristic for the picture of atomic
 structure developed by means of the quantum theory. As regards this picture,
 the idea of connecting the grouping with a classification of electron orbits
 according to increasing quantum numbers was suggested by Moseley’s dis-
 covery of the laws of X-ray spectra, and by Sommerfeld’s work on the fine
 structure of these spectra. This has been principally emphasized by Vegard,


36                             I922 N.BOHR

who some years ago in connexion with investigations of X-ray spectra pro-
posed a grouping of electrons in the atoms of the elements, which in many
ways shows a likeness to that which is given in the above table.
   A satisfactory basis for the further development of this picture of atomic
structure has, however, only recently been created by the study of the bind-
ing processes of the electrons in the atom, of which we have experimental
evidence in optical spectra, and the characteristic features of which have
been elucidated principally by the correspondence principle. It is here an
essential circumstance that the restriction on the course of the binding pro-
cess, which is expressed by the presence of electron orbits with higher quan-
tum numbers in the normal state of the atom, can be naturally connected
with the general condition for the occurrence of transitions between station-
ary states, formulated in that principle.
   Another essential feature of the theory is the influence, on the strength
of binding and the dimensions of the orbits, of the penetration of the later
bound electrons into the region of the earlier bound ones, of which we have
seen an example in the discussion of the origin of the potassium spectrum.
Indeed, this circumstance may be regarded as the essential cause of the pro-
nounced periodicity in the properties of the elements, in that it implies that
the atomic dimensions and chemical properties of homologous substances in
the different periods, as, for example, the alkali-metals, show a much greater
similarity than that which might be expected from a direct comparison of
the orbit of the last electron hound with an orbit of the same quantum
number in the hydrogen atom.
   The increase of the principal quantum number which we meet when we
proceed in the series of the elements, affords also an immediate explanation
of the characteristic deviations from simple periodicity which are exhibited
by the natural system and are expressed in Fig. 1 by the bracketing of certain
series of elements in the later periods. The first time such a deviation is met
with is in the 4th period, and the reason for it can be simply illustrated by
means of our figure of the orbits of the last electron bound in the atom of
potassium, which is the first element in this period. Indeed, in potassium we
encounter for the first time in the sequence of the elements a case in which
the principal quantum number of the orbit of the last electron bound is, in
the normal state of the atom, larger than in one of the earlier stages of the
binding process. The normal state corresponds here to a 4 I orbit, which,
because of the penetration into the inner region, corresponds to a much
stronger binding of the electron than a 4-quantum orbit in the hydrogen


                       STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                  37
atom. The binding in question is indeed even stronger than for a 2-quantum
orbit in the hydrogen atom, and is therefore more than twice as strong as
in the circular 33 orbit which is situated completely outside the inner region,
and for which the strength of the binding differs but little from that for a
3-quantum orbit in hydrogen.
   This will not continue to be true, however, when we consider the binding
of the 19th electron in substances of higher atomic number, because of the
much smaller relative difference between the field of force outside and inside
the region of the first eighteen electrons bound. As is shown by the investi-
gation of the spark spectrum of calcium, the binding of the 19th electron
in the 4I orbit is here but little stronger than in 33 orbits, and as soon as we
reach scandium, we must assume that the 33 orbit will represent the orbit
of the 19th electron in the normal state, since this type of orbit will corre-
spond to a stronger binding than a 4I orbit. While the group of electrons
in 2-quantum orbits has been entirely completed at the end of the 2nd period,
the development that the group of 3-quantum orbits undergoes in the course
of the 3rd period can therefore only be described as a provisional comple-
tion, and, as shown in the table, this electron group will, in the bracketed
elements of the 4th period, undergo a stage of further development in which
electrons are added to it in 3-quantum orbits.
   This development brings in new features, in that the development of the
electron group with 4-quantum orbits comes to a standstill, so to speak, until
the 3-quantum group has reached its fmal closed form. Although we are not
yet in a position to account in all details for the steps in the gradual develop-
ment of the 3-quantum electron group, still we can say that with the help
of the quantum theory we see at once why it is in the 4th period of the system
of the elements that there occur for the first time successive elements with
properties that resemble each other as much as the properties of the iron
group; indeed, we can even understand why these elements show their well-
known paramagnetic properties. Without further reference to the quantum
 theory, Eadenburg had on a previous occasion already suggested the idea of
relating the chemical and magnetic properties of these elements with the
 development of an inner electron group in the atom.
   I will not enter into many more details, but only mention that the peculi-
arities we meet with in the 5th period are explained in much the same way
 as those in the 4th period. Thus the properties of the bracketed elements in
 the 5th period as it appears in the table, depend on a stage in the develop-
 ment of the 4-quantum electron group that is initiated by the entrance in the


38                              1922 N.BOHR

normal state of electrons in 43 orbits. In the 6th period, however, we meet
new features. In this period we encounter not only a stage of the develop-
ment of the electron groups with 5- and 6-quantum orbits, but also the final
completion of the development of the 4-quantum electron group, which is
initiated by the entrance for the first time of electron orbits of the 44 type
in the normal state of the atom. This development finds its characteristic
expression in the occurrence of the peculiar family of elements in the 6th
period, known as the rare-earths. These show, as we know, a still greater
mutual similarity in their chemical properties than the elements of the iron
family. This must be ascribed to the fact that we have here to do with the
development of an electron group that lies deeper in the atom. It is of interest
to note that the theory can also naturally account for the fact that these
elements, which resemble each other in so many ways, still show great dif-
ferences in their magnetic properties.
   The idea that the occurrence of the rare-earths depends on the develop-
ment of an inner electron group has been put forward from different sides.
Thus it is found in the work of Vegard, and at the same time as my own
work, it was proposed by Bury in connexion with considerations of the
systematic relation between the chemical properties and the grouping of the
electrons inside the atom from the point of view of Langmuir’s static atomic
model. While until now it has not been possible, however, to give any
theoretical basis for such a development of an inner group, we see that our
extension of the quantum theory provides us with an unforced explanation.
Indeed, it is scarcely an exaggeration to say that if the existence of the rare-
earths had not been established by direct chemical investigation, the occur-
rence of a family of elements of this character within the 6th period of the
natural system of the elements might have been theoretically predicted.
   When we proceed to the 7th period of the system, we meet for the first
time with 7-quantum orbits, and we shall expect to find within this period
features that are essentially similar to those in the 6th period, in that besides
the first stage in the development of the 7-quantum orbits, we must expect
to encounter further stages in the development of the group with 6- or 5-
quantum orbits. However, it has not been possible directly to confirm this
expectation, because only a few elements are known in the beginning of the
7th period. The latter circumstance may be supposed to be intimately con-
nected with the instability of atomic nuclei with large charges, which is
expressed in the prevalent radioactivity among elements with high atomic
number.


                       STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                  39
                    X-ray spectra and atomic constitution

In the discussion of the conceptions of atomic structure we have hitherto
placed the emphasis on the formation of the atom by successive capture of
electrons. Our picture would, however, be incomplete without some refer-
ence to the confirmation of the theory afforded by the study of X-ray spectra.
 Since the interruption of Moseley’s fundamental researches by his untimely
 death, the study of these spectra has been continued in a most admirable
 way by Prof. Siegbahn in Lund. On the basis of the large amount of ex-
perimental evidence adduced by him and his collaborators, it has been pos-
 sible recently to give a classification of X-ray spectra that allows an imme-
 diate interpretation on the quantum theory. In the first place it has been
 possible, just as in the case of the optical spectra, to represent the frequency
 of each of the X-ray lines as the difference between two out of a manifold
 of spectral terms characteristic of the element in question. Next, a direct
 connexion with the atomic theory is obtained by the assumption that each
 of these spectral terms multiplied by Planck’s constant is equal to the work
 which must be done on the atom to remove one of its inner electrons. In
 fact, the removal of one of the inner electrons from the completed atom
 may, in accordance with the above considerations on the formation of atoms
 by capture of electrons, give rise to transition processes by which the place
 of the electron removed is taken by an electron belonging to one of the
 more loosely bound electron groups of the atom, with the result that after
 the transition an electron will be lacking in this latter group.
    The X-ray lines may thus be considered as giving evidence of stages in a
 process by which the atom undergoes a reorganization after a disturbance in
 its interior. According to our views on the stability of the electronic con-
 figuration such a disturbance must consist in the removal of electrons from
 the atom, or at any rate in their transference from normal orbits to orbits
 of higher quantum numbers than those belonging to completed groups; a
 circumstance which is clearly illustrated in the characteristic difference be-
 tween selective absorption in the X-ray region, and that exhibited in the
 optical region.
    The classification of the X-ray spectra, to the achievement of which the
 above-mentioned work of Sommerfeld and Kossel has contributed mate-
 rially, has recently made it possible, by means of a closer examination of the
 manner in which the terms occurring in the X-ray spectra vary with the
 atomic number, to obtain a very direct test of a number of the theoretical


40                           1922 N.BOHR

conclusions as regards the structure of the atom. In Fig. 9 the abscissæ are
the atomic numbers and the ordinates are proportional to the square roots
of the spectral terms, while the symbols K, L, M, N, O, for the individual


                       STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                 41
terms refer to the characteristic discontinuities in the selective absorption of
the elements for X-rays; these were originally found by Barkla before the
discovery of the interference of X-rays in crystals had provided a means for
the closer investigation of X-ray spectra. Although the curves generally run
very uniformly, they exhibit a number of deviations from uniformity which
have been especially brought to light by the recent investigation of Coster,
who has for some years worked in Siegbahn’s laboratory.
   These deviations, the existence of which was not discovered until after the
publication of the theory of atomic structure discussed above, correspond
exactly to what one might expect from this theory. At the foot of the figure
the vertical lines indicate where, according to the theory, we should first
expect, in the normal state of the atom, the occurrence of n k orbits of the
type designated. We see how it has been possible to connect the occurrence
of every spectral term with the presence of an electron moving in an orbit
of a definite type, to the removal of which this term is supposed to corre-
spond. That in general there corresponds more than one curve to each type
of orbit n k is due to a complication in the spectra which would lead us too
far afield to enter into here, and may be attributed to the deviation from the
previously described simple type of motion of the electron arising from the
interaction of the different electrons within the same group.
   The intervals in the system of the elements, in which a further develop-
ment of an inner electron group takes place because of the entrance into the
normal atom of electron orbits of a certain type, are designated in the figure
by the horizontal lines, which are drawn between the vertical lines to which
the quantum symbols are affixed. It is clear that such a development of an
inner group is everywhere reflected in the curves. Particularly the course of
the N- and O-curves may be regarded as a direct indication of that stage in
the development of the electron groups with 4-quantum orbits of which
the occurrence of the rare-earths bears witness. Although the apparent com-
plete absence of a reflection in the X-ray spectra of the complicated relation-
ships exhibited by most other properties of the elements was the typical and
important feature of Moseley’s discovery, we can recognize, nevertheless, in
the light of the progress of the last years, an intimate connexion between the
X-ray spectra and the general relationships between the elements within
the natural system.
  Before concluding this lecture I should like to mention one further point
in which X-ray investigations have been of importance for the test of the
theory. This concerns the properties of the hitherto unknown element with


42                              1922 N.BOHR

atomic number 72 . On this question opinion has been divided in respect to
the conclusions that could be drawn from the relationships within the Peri-
odic Table, and in many representations of the table a place is left open for
this element in the rare-earth family. In Julius Thomsen’s representation of
the natural system, however, this hypothetical element was given a position
homologous to titanium and zirconium in much the same way as in our
representation in Fig. 1. Such a relationship must be considered as a neces-
sary consequence of the theory of atomic structure developed above, and is
expressed in the table (Fig. 9) by the fact that the electron configurations for
titanium and zirconium show the same sort of resemblances and differences as
the electron configurations for zirconium and the element with atomic num-
ber 72 . A corresponding view was proposed by Bury on the basis of his
above-mentioned systematic considerations of the connexion between the
grouping of the electrons in the atom and the properties of the elements.
   Recently, however, a communication was published by Dauvillier an-
nouncing the observation of some weak lines in the X-ray spectrum of a
preparation containing rare-earths. These were ascribed to an element with
atomic number 72 assumed to be identical with an element of the rare-earth
family, the existence of which in the preparation used had been presumed
by Urbain many years ago. This conclusion would, however, if it could be
maintained, place extraordinarily great, if not unsurmountable, difficulties
in the way of the theory, since it would claim a change in the strength of the
binding of the electrons with the atomic number which seems incompatible
with the conditions of the quantum theory. In these circumstances Dr. Coster
and Prof. Hevesy, who are both for the time working in Copenhagen, took
up a short time ago the problem of testing a preparation of zircon-bearing
minerals by X-ray spectroscopic analysis. These investigators have been able
to establish the existence in the minerals investigated of appreciable quantities
of an element with atomic number 72, the chemical properties of which
show a great similarity to those of zirconium and a decided difference from
those of the rare-earths.*
    I hope that I have succeeded in giving a summary of some of the most
important results that have been attained in recent years in the field of atomic
theory, and I should like, in concluding, to add a few general remarks con-
cerning the viewpoint from which these results may be judged, and par-
* For the result of the continued work of Coster and Hevesy with the new element,
for which they have proposed the name hafnium, the reader may be referred to their
letters in Nature of January 20, February IO and 24, and April 7.


                       STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                 43
ticularly concerning the question of how far, with these results, it is possible
to speak of an explanation, in the ordinary sense of the word. By a theoretical
explanation of natural phenomena we understand in general a classification
of the observations of a certain domain with the help of analogies pertaining
to other domains of observation, where one presumably has to do with
simpler phenomena. The most that one can demand of a theory is that this
classification can be pushed so far that it can contribute to the development
of the field of observation by the prediction of new phenomena.
   When we consider the atomic theory, we are, however, in the peculiar
position that there can be no question of an explanation in this last sense,
since here we have to do with phenomena which from the very nature of
the case are simpler than in any other field ofobservation, where the phenom-
ena are always conditioned by the combined action of a large number of
atoms. We are therefore obliged to be modest in our demands and content
ourselves with concepts which are formal in the sense that they do not
provide a visual picture of the sort one is accustomed to require of the ex-
planations with which natural philosophy deals. Bearing this in mind I have
sought to convey the impression that the results, on the other hand, fulfill,
at least in some degree, the expectations that are entertained of any theory;
in fact, I have attempted to show how the development of atomic theory
has contributed to the classification of extensive fields of observation, and
by its predictions has pointed out the way to the completion of this classifi-
cation. It is scarcely necessary, however, to emphasize that the theory is yet
in a very preliminary stage, and many fundamental questions still await
solution.
