                      OWEN CH A M B E R L A I N

                    The early antiproton work
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1959



It is a pleasure to have this opportunity of describing to you the early work
on the antiproton, particularly that part which led to our first paper on the
subject, in 1955, Observation of Antiprotons, by Professor Emilio Segrè, Dr.
Clyde Wiegand, Professor Thomas Ypsilantis, and myself1. At the same
time, I would like to convey my impressions of the conclusions that can be
drawn purely from the existence of the antiproton. The later experiments,
that have led to results quite unsuspected in the beginning, will be discussed
in Professor Segrè’s Nobel Lecture.
   The first inkling of the idea that each electrically charged particle might
have an oppositely charged counterpart may be seen in the theory of
P.A.M. Dirac 2, proposed in 1930. Perhaps you will allow me to over-
simplify the situation, and to refer to the relativistic equation relating mo-
mentum p to energy E, namely,

                                E 2 = p 2 c 2 + m2 c 4

where p = momentum, E = energy, m = mass, c = velocity of light.
  It is clear that this equation, as it stands, permits either negative or positive
values for the energy E. In everyday life we do not see particles of negative
energy. Nevertheless the theory of Dirac encompassed electrons of negative
energy. Dirac observed that an electron, which is electrically negative, if in
a negative-energy state, would have some of the properties of a positively
charged particle. In fact, at one time Dirac believed that the states of negative
energy might be somehow related to protons, which are electrically positive,
and not at all to electrons. As the Dirac equation was further studied, it be-
came apparent that the negative energy-states represented a new phenom-
enon, one rather difficult to understand.
   In Dirac’s theory the negative energy-states were assumed to exist, but
were taken to be completely filled with electrons normally. The Pauli ex-
clusion principle (which forbids that two electrons should occupy the same
state) was used to explain why an electron in a positive-energy state would


490                         1959 O.CHAMBERLAIN

not normally drop into a filled state of negative energy. Perhaps this situation
may be made clearer by reference to the following diagrams (see Fig. 1):




                           empty




Fig. I. Diagram of energy levels in the Dirac theory. Part (a) represents a vacuum, (b)
         a state with one electron present, and (c) a state with one positron.


   The sketch on the left shows an empty vacuum, with all the positive-en-
ergy states empty and all the negative-energy states filled. Notice that the
states of highest energy are represented as highest in the diagram. The second
view shows a state with only one electron present, the filled negative-energy
states being unobservable. The last view shows a state in which no positive-
energy electron is present, but one electron is missing from the states of nega-
tive energy. Experimentally, this would correspond to one positive charge
being present. This positive charge was shown to move exactly as if its mass
were the same as that of the electron.
   The Dirac theory was taken much more seriously after Professor C. D.
Anderson’s discovery of the positrons in 1932. This was the first of the anti-
particles to be found, for the positron was really the antielectron, and might
have been so named. The positron has the same mass as the electron, but has
an opposite charge. Electron and positron are sometimes born as a pair, as in
the process we call pair production by gamma rays. Electron and positron
die as a pair, in a process we call annihilation. The electron and positron eat
each other up, so to speak; what remains is energy in the form of gamma
rays.
   The Dirac theory was extremely successful in explaining electron and pos-


                       EARLY ANTIPROTON WORK                                   491
itron phenomena. Therefore, the question naturally arose: cannot the pro-
ton also be treated according to the Dirac theory? The proton, like the elec-
tron, has spin of one-half, and obeys the Pauli principle, i.e. two or more
protons are never found simultaneously in exactly the same state. Still, the
proton in some respects did not fit the Dirac pattern as well as the electron
did. For example, the magnetic moment of the proton was not in accord
with the theoretical value, while that of the electron was extremely close to
it. While Professor Pauli did introduce a form of the Dirac theory that al-
lowed agreement with the observed magnetic moment of the proton, still
the theory had lost some of its simplicity.
    If the Dirac theory were correct for describing protons as well as electrons,
then it clearly would call for the existence of antiprotons as well as of pro-
tons, just as it had demanded the existence of positrons as well as of elec-
trons.
    According to the Dirac theory, the antiproton should have the properties
indicated in Table 1.

                  Table 1 . Anticipated properties of the antiproton.

       Property                                Values expected

Mass                  Same as the proton mass
Electric charge       Negative, opposite to the proton, equal to the electron charge
Spin                  ½ unit, same as the proton
Magnetic moment       Equal in magnitude, opposite in direction to the proton
Statistics            Fermi statistics, like the proton
Intrinsic parity      Opposite to the proton


  Here, I would like to make a small digression. Physicists had asked them-
selves why neutrons and protons may turn into one another but are never
completely destroyed. For example, why cannot a reaction such as the one
shown here be observed?

                      proton      positron +   2   gamma rays

Although the answer in deeper terms was not forthcoming, it was generally
believed that there must be a fundamental rule specifically providing that the
heavy particles are never destroyed ( or created) singly. There remained the
possibility, however, that one might make a pair, proton and antiproton, at
the same time. Similarly, proton and antiproton might annihilate each other,


492                        1959 O. CHAMBERLAIN

thus dying in pairs, one particle (the proton) and one antiparticle (the anti-
proton).
   Thus it was expected that the creation of an antiproton would necessitate
 the simultaneous creation of a proton or a neutron. This meant that the en-
ergy necessary to produce a proton-antiproton pair would be twice the pro-
ton rest energy, or about 2 billion electron volts. It was also known that
high-energy collisions were necessary, such as those between high-energy
particles and particles at rest. A likely process might be one in which a very
fast proton struck a stationary neutron. The proton would have to have
about 6 billion electron volts of energy in order that 2 billion electron volts
might be available to make new particles.
   For many years physicists workin g with cosmic rays kept a sharp watch
for antiprotons, for it was known that there were particles in the cosmic
radiation with sufficient energy to produce antiprotons. Some events were
          4
observed which might have involved an antiproton, but it was not possible
to determine with certainty the presence of an antiproton. I should also
mention that the possible antiproton events were remarkably few. As the
years passed, people began to have serious doubts that the antiproton could
indeed be produced.
   I am told that the men responsible for the early design of the Bevatron,
the large accelerator in Berkeley, California, were well aware that about 6
billion electron volts were needed to produce antiprotons, and that this fact
was taken into consideration when the Bevatron energy, just 6 billion elec-
tron volts, was decided upon. Professor Edwin McMillan and the late Pro-
fessor Ernest Lawrence were among the men who selected the energy of the
Bevatron and were responsible for initiating its construction.
   During the years when the Bevatron was under construction, doubts as to
the existence of the antiproton tended to increase the interest in an experi-
mental demonstration of the antiproton. To make this demonstration, it was
necessary to show that after the Bevatron beam struck a piece of material,
there were present among the particles issuing from nuclear collisions some
particles of the same mass as that of the proton, but electrically negative, i.e.
with an electric charge opposite to that of the proton. It is not difficult to sort
out particles that are electrically negative, for in a magnetic field the negative
particles are deflected in one direction, while positive particles are deflected
in the opposite direction.
   From the start it was understood that at least two independent quantities
must be measured for the same particle, if the mass of the particle was to be


                      EARLY ANTIPROTON WORK                                    493




Fig. 2. Simple magnetic spectrograph for producing a beam of charged particles with
                                known momentum.


determined. Any two of the following quantities would be adequate: mo-
mentum, energy, velocity, range (distance of penetration into a substance
before coming to rest). For example, to measure only the momentum would
be insufficient, because particles with various masses may have the same mo-
mentum. However, if two quantities are measured, then the mass of the par-
ticle can be calculated. After several possibilities were considered, it was de-
cided that the two quantities to be measured should be momentum and
velocity.
   Perhaps I may remind you of the nonrelativistic relationship between mo-
mentum and velocity, namely

                                     p = mv


where p = momentum, m = mass, ν = velocity. Clearly, we may obtain
the mass of a particle by measuring momentum and velocity, obtaining the
mass as m =        For particles travelling at nearly the speed of light, the
expressions are not as simple as these; but it is still true that if momentum
and velocity are simultaneously measured, then the mass of the particle may
be determined. The relationships are


                                                   P


494                          1959 O.CHAMBERLAIN




                          Fig. 3. Optical spectrograph.


   The well-established method of measuring the momentum of atomic par-
ticles is to measure their deflection in a known magnetic field. In fact, one
may set up a system of magnets through which only particles of a certain
momentum interval pass. Such a system may be arranged as shown in the
diagram of Fig. 2.
   The high-energy proton beam strikes a target, which might be a piece of
copper. Fragments of nuclear collisions emerge from the target in all direc-
tions, some of which enter the region of the magnetic field, the rest being
wasted. For certain values of momentum, negative particles are deflected by
the correct amount and pass through the aperture in the collimator. Other
particles are stopped by the walls of the collimator.
   A lens is also shown in the same figure. The use of magnetic lenses was
suggested to us by Dr. Oreste Piccioni, who pointed out that a greater
number of useful particles would pass through the system if lenses were
 employed.
   I will not describe the lenses in detail, except to say that each lens is com-
posed of three quadrupole magnets. The lens action is very similar to the
action of a simple optical lens for light. In fact, the system of magnets we are
discussing acts, for charged particles, just as the system shown in Fig. 3 acts
for light.
   Here a light source replaces the target, and the analyzing magnet is re-
placed by a glass prism. Through the final slit, the system shown would only


                      EARLY ANTIPROTON WORK                                    495
allow light to pass in a narrow range of wavelengths or colors. I will refer to
this system as a spectrograph, whether it be for light or for charged particles.
   I have said that only negative particles would be present in the beam
formed by the magnetic spectrograph, since positive particles would be de-
flected in the opposite direction and would not pass through the collimator.
By reversing the magnetic field, however, we may use the same spectro-
graph to select positive particles, if these are desired.
   The final arrangement of magnets that we have used consists of two such
spectrographs, one following the other. It is shown in Fig. 4.
   The first spectrograph extends from the target to the first focus point. The
second spectrograph extends from the first to the second focus point. The
first spectrograph acted as a preliminary sorting device to provide a relatively
pure beam of particles for the second spectrograph, where the experiment
itself was performed.
   Now let us discuss the velocity of the antiprotons that may be found. The
most copious production of antiprotons was expected to be at a velocity
of 87 percent of the velocity of light, while the other background particles,
such as mesons, would be travelling at approximately 99 percent of the
velocity of light. To make the experiment somewhat easier, slightly slower
antiprotons were chosen, with υ, = 0.78 c, or 78 percent of the velocity
of light.




       Fig. 4. Final arrangement of magnets, represented in optical analogy.


496                        1959 O.CHAMBERLAIN

   One of the simplest means of determining velocity is to measure the time
of flight between two counters, and this was the method used. A counter
was placed at the first focus point, and another counter at the second focus
point. The spacing of these counters was 12 meters. Mesons, which travel
near the speed of light, would take 40 millimicroseconds (40 billionths of a
second) to pass over this distance, but antiprotons of the same momentum
would take 51 millimicroseconds. The difference of 11 millimicroseconds is
not great, but it is within the capability of modern electronic circuits to
distinguish with certainty between the two time intervals.
   Unfortunately, when many mesons are passing through the system in close
succession, it will sometimes happen that two mesons have exactly the right
spacing between them to imitate an antiproton, i.e. just 11 millimicrosec-
onds. We will call this the accidental coincidence of two mesons. To avoid
having the electronic circuits « fooled » by two mesons in close succession, it
was considered important to have another method of determining velocity
in use at the same time. For this purpose, a Cerenkov counter was con-
structed. In fact, the study of the Cerenkov counter was one of the first steps
taken in the preparation of the experiment. I would like to describe it here.
   The basic principles of the Cerenkov radiation are familiar, since Professor
Cerenkov must have been speaking from this rostrum just one year ago, but
those principles especially relevant to the Cerenkov counter used in the anti-
proton experiment should be reviewed here. In an optical medium such as




Fig. 5. Diagram of             radiation. The angle of emission of        light
                     depends on the speed of the charged particle.


                           EARLY ANTIPROTON WORK




   Fig. 6. Refraction of         radiation at the interface between glass and air.


glass, light moves more slowly than in a vacuum. Although no particle may
move faster than the speed of light in vacuum, a particle may move faster
than the speed of light in glass. When this happens with an electrically
charged particle,               light is emitted, at different angles for particles of
different velocity. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.
    When the               light passes out of the piece of glass into air, it is re-
fracted at the surface, but it continues to be true that the direction of the light
in air is dependent upon the velocity of the particle, as is shown in Fig. 6.
    A cylindrical mirror was arranged to reflect only light emitted in the right
direction. This light was then refocused within a small region where it could
be detected by a photomultiplier. The design of this counter is shown in
Fig. 7.
    For the purpose of understanding the action of the counter, we may think
 of one photomultiplier, placed along the axis of the instrument, catching the
             radiation emitted by particles travelling parallel to the axis with
 the correct velocity. In practice, the light was divided into three parts by
 three flat mirrors, to avoid having the beam of particles traverse the photo-
multiplier. In the first experiment the material of the                 radiator was
 fused quartz.
    At the time that I first designed one of these « velocity selecting » counters
 I thought that the design was original with me. I later realized, however,
 that the design is the same as that of Dr. Samuel Lindenbaum. I had heard


                          1959    O.CHAMBERLAIN




             Fig. 7. View of the velocity-selecting        counter.


discussion of the Lindenbaum counter, but had not then understood it.
   We assumed that our greatest difficulty in identifying antiprotons with
certainty would be the possibility of a mistake in the determination of veloc-
ity. Accordingly, we also used another                   counter, of a more con-
ventional design. It was a container of liquid, with an index of refraction of
1.28, viewed directly by a photomultiplier. Particles moving as slowly as our
hoped-for antiprotons would produce no                     light in this material,
since they would not be moving faster than light in that medium. However,
faster particles, such as mesons and electrons, would produce                light
in this material and would give rise to a pulse at the output of this counter.
 Since this counter was to serve as a warning against particles faster than anti-
protons, we may call it a guard counter. The liquid used in the guard counter
was a fluorocarbon.
    As the whole system was assembled, the plan of the apparatus looked as
follows (see Fig. 8) :
    Our electronic circuits gave out an electrical signal each time the following
 events occurred within a short time interval: the two counters indicated as
 S1 and S2 counted with a relative time delay of 51 ± 5 millimicroseconds,
 and the velocity-selecting counter C2 also gave a signal in at least two of its
three photomultipliers. Whenever these events occurred, it meant a potential


                        EARLY ANTIPROTON WORK                                       499
antiproton had been seen in the apparatus. This signal was used to start an
oscilloscope, from which a picture of the pulses in the counters S1, S2, and
the guard counter could be obtained.
   Three such pictures are shown in Fig. 9. The horizontal motion of the
dot on the oscilloscope screen is uniform, so the curve shown represents an
electrical signal as a function of time. The first pulse on each curve (oscillo-
scope trace) is due to the counter S1, the second is due to S2, and the third
(if present) to the guard counter C 1.
   The pulses themselves look rather broad in this figure, but by careful
measurement of the position of the pulse at its beginning, the difference in
time between pulses can be measured to an accuracy of about one milli-
microsecond.




Fig. 8. Plan view of the apparatus used in the discovery of antiprotons. T indicates the
target, QI and Q2 are magnetic lenses, CI is the guard counter, and C2 is the velocity-
 selecting             counter. The last two counters (C3 and S4) may be ignored.


500                             I959 O.CHAMBERLAIN




Fig. 9. Oscilloscope traces produced by (a) a meson, (b) an antiproton, (c) an acciden-
tal coincidence. The first two pulses are due to scintillation counters SI and S2. The
         separation is noticeably different for a meson and for an antiproton.


   Since the momentum is accurately known from the magnet arrangement,
and since each time measurement determines the velocity of the particle in
question, we have in effect a rough mass measurement of each antiproton.
   Fig. 10 (a) shows the distribution of the differences in time for mesons.
It was obtained when the system was adjusted to register mesons. Fig. 10
(b), the distribution of times of flight for antiprotons, was obtained when
the system was adjusted in the normal way, to accept antiprotons but reject
mesons. The distribution is well-peaked at the expected time of flight of
antiprotons. Fig. 10 (c) shows a representative group of accidental coinci-
dences.
   In the early stages of the experiment, we were in some danger of failing
to observe antiprotons, because we had set our apparatus for a slightly dif-
ferent mass than the proton mass, without our intending to do so. It was
essentially an error in the alignment of the apparatus. Fortunately, we were
able to reverse the magnetic fields in all the magnets and thus look for pro-
tons. Discovering very few, we soon found the error of alignment. After
suitable adjustments, protons were easily observed and, when the magnetic
fields were again reversed, possible antiproton events appeared.
   Following approximately twenty such possible events, the equipment was
subjected to a series of tests designed to determine whether the antiprotons
seen were completely real, or whether they might be due to some failure of
the apparatus. One effective test involved our intentionally tuning the sys-


                       EARLY ANTIPROTON WORK                                      501

tem to a somewhat different mass than the proton mass to test whether it was
true that the antiprotons no longer registered. This indicated that the appara-
tus really was sensitive to the mass of the particles. Another important test
entailed lowering the energy of the beam of the Bevatron, to make sure that
the supposed antiprotons disappeared when the beam energy was sufficiently
low.
   Fig. 11 shows the fraction of antiprotons in the beam as a function of the
energy of the original proton beam. Later calculations showed that this result
was reasonable, and that a few antiprotons should be produced at 5 BeV, as
was observed. These tests convinced us that we had indeed observed the
production of antiprotons.
   The methods I have described are now well-known to physicists working
in this field. One may ask, why is the present work considered such an ac-
complishment? The answer lies partly in the fact that the antiprotons are




Fig. 10 . (a) Histogram of times of flight for mesons; (b) histogram of times of flight
         for antiprotons; (c) apparent flight times for accidental coincidences.


502                           1959 O. CHAMBERLAIN




extremely rare in a beam of many other particles. Early rough estimates in-
dicated that an antiproton might be produced only once in each million
collisions within the Bevatron target. At the same time, it was estimated that
antiprotons would largely go in a forward direction with respect to the
beam, while to a great extent other particles would go in all directions. This
effect was estimated as giving a ten-fold enrichment in the forward direc-
tion, meaning that there would be conceivably one antiproton among each
100,000 of the other particles, which were mostly mesons. Fortunately the
antiprotons were slightly more numerous, being 1 in 30,000 particles in the
magnetically analyzed beam. If there had been appreciably fewer antipro-
tons, we might altogether have missed seeing them on the first try. As it was,
we saw only one antiproton every fifteen minutes with the first apparatus.
   In conjunction with the counter experiment I have described, we also col-
laborated in a related experiment5 using photographic emulsions. Within a
short time after the first counter experiments were completed, examples of
the annihilation phenomenon were seen, in which the antiproton and a pro-
ton or neutron from an ordinary nucleus die simultaneously. In their place
emerge about five π mesons.
   Fig. 12 shows how one of the annihilation events looked under the micro-
scope in the photographic emulsion.


                         EARLY ANTIPROTON WORK                                   503




Fig. 12. Reproduction of an antiproton star as seen in nuclear emulsion. L is the in-
coming antiproton track. Tracks a and b are due to mesons. The remaining tracks are
                          due to protons or alpha particles.


504                        1959 O.CHAMBERLAIN

   The work with photographic emulsions involved many people, among
whom I would like to mention especially Professor Gerson Goldhaber and
Professor Edoardo Amaldi from Rome. I would like to mention that it was
a young Swedish physicist, Dr. A. G. Ekspong, now at the University of
Uppsala but then working with us in Berkeley, who observed under the
microscope the first of the annihilation events with very large visible release
of energy. That star gave the final visual proof through the phenomenon of
annihilation that we were dealing with antiprotons, rather than with any
other similar particle. The large release of energy showed not only that the
incoming particle (antiproton) died in the production of the star, but that
additional energy must have been supplied by the death of an ordinary nu-
cleon (neutron or proton).
   By the conclusion of these early experiments, the existence of the antipro-
ton had been established beyond doubt; its charge was of course negative;
its mass was established as equal to the proton mass, to within 3 percent.
Furthermore, the data on production in the Bevatron at different proton-
beam energies clearly indicated that antiprotons are born in pairs with or-
dinary protons or neutrons. The emulsions showed that they die in the an-
nihilation process.
   Since the proton and neutron are close sisters, it was expected that the dis-
covery of the antineutron would quickly follow that of the antiproton. In
fact, it is natural to infer that antiparticles of all charged particles exist. This
inference also extends to the neutral particles that have some non-zero quan-
tum number analogous to electric charge. Today there is much experimental
 evidence, as well as strong theoretical suggestions, to confirm this.
   In conclusion, I would like to name some of the many people besides Pro-
fessor Segrè and myself who have been responsible for the success of this
work. Obviously, our co-authors, Dr. Clyde Wiegand and Professor Thom-
as Ypsilantis, have contributed heavily. I wish to mention particularly the
work of Dr. Wiegand, for his part was absolutely essential to our achieve-
 ment. For the very existence of the large accelerator, we owe a great debt to
 the late Professor Ernest O. Lawrence, to Professor Edwin M. McMillan,
now Director of the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, and especially to Dr.
Edward Lofgren, who has been responsible for the construction and opera-
tion of the Bevatron. I have mentioned Dr. Oreste Piccioni’s contribution
with respect to the use of quadrupole lenses. I should also cite the important
work of Dr. Herbert M. Steiner, who collaborated with us throughout the
whole experiment. Needless to say, we received wonderful cooperation


                        EARLY ANTIPROTON WORK                                      505
from the men who operate the Bevatron and from the engineers and tech-
nicians who aided us in many ways with the design, the construction, and
the installation of the apparatus. Our own work was built directly upon the
previous accomplishments of many eminent scientists, including especially
P. A. M. Dirac, C. D. Anderson, E. M. McMillan, and P. A. Cerenkov.
   Other important work closely related to the same subject has occupied
Professor Amaldi with his colleagues at the University of Rome, and Pro-
fessor Gerson Goldhaber with his collaborators in Berkeley. I think it is clear,
therefore, that the work of many people is being honored today.




1. O. Chamberlain, E. Segrè, C. E. Wiegand, and T. Ypsilantis, Phys. Rev., 100 (1955)
   947.
2. P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. SO c. London, A 126 (1930) 360; A 133 (1931) 60.
3. C. D. Anderson, Science, 76 (1932) 238.
4. E. Hayward, Phys. Rev., 72 (1947) 937; H. S. Bridge, H. Courant, H. DeStaebler,
   and B. Rossi, Phys. Rev., 95 (1954) 1101    ; E. Amaldi, C. Castagnoli, G. Cortini, C.
   Franzinetti, and A. Manfriedini, Nuovo Cimento, I (1955) 492.
5. O. Chamberlain. W. W. Chupp, G. Goldhaber,E. Segrè, C. E. Wiegand, E. Amaldi,
   G. Baroni, C. Castagnoli, C. Franzinetti, and A. Manfredini, Phys. Rev., 101 (1956)
   909; O. Chamberlain, W. W. Chupp, A. G. Ekspong, G. Goldhaber, S. Goldhaber,
   E. J. Lofgren, E. Segrè, C. E. Wiegand, E. Amaldi, G. Baroni, C. Castagnoli, C.
   Franzinetti, and A. Manfredini, Phys. Rev., 102 (1956) 921.
