PAUL A. M. DI R A C
Theory of electrons and positrons
Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1933
Matter has been found by experimental physicists to be made up of small
particles of various kinds, the particles of each kind being all exactly alike.
Some of these kinds have definitely been shown to be composite, that is,
to be composed of other particles of a simpler nature. But there are other
kinds which have not been shown to be composite and which one expects
will never be shown to be composite, so that one considers them as elementary and fundamental.
From general philosophical grounds one would at first sight like to have
as few kinds of elementary particles as possible, say only one kind, or at most
two, and to have all matter built up of these elementary kinds. It appears
from the experimental results, though, that there must be more than this. In
fact the number of kinds of elementary particle has shown a rather alarming
tendency to increase during recent years.
The situation is perhaps not so bad, though, because on closer investigation it appears that the distinction between elementary and composite particles cannot be made rigorous. To get an interpretation of some modern
experimental results one must suppose that particles can be created and annihilated. Thus if a particle is observed to come out from another particle, one
can no longer be sure that the latter is composite. The former may have been
created. The distinction between elementary particles and composite particles
now becomes a matter of convenience. This reason alone is sufficient to
compel one to give up the attractive philosophical idea that all matter is
made up of one kind, or perhaps two kinds of bricks.
I should like here to discuss the simpler kinds of particles and to consider
what can be inferred about them from purely theoretical arguments. The simpler
kinds of particle are:
(i) the photons or light-quanta, of which light is composed;
(ii) the electrons, and the recently discovered positrons (which appear to be
a sort of mirror image of the electrons, differing from them only in the
sign of their electric charge) ;
(iii) the heavier particles - protons and neutrons.
THEORY OF ELECTRONS AND POSITRONS 321
Of these, I shall deal almost entirely with the electrons and the positrons
- not because they are the most interesting ones, but because in their case
the theory has been developed further. There is, in fact, hardly anything that
can be inferred theoretically about the properties of the others. The photons,
on the one hand, are so simple that they can easily be fitted into any theoretical scheme, and the theory therefore does not put any restrictions on their
properties. The protons and neutrons, on the other hand, seem to be too
complicated and no reliable basis for a theory of them has yet been discovered.
The question that we must first consider is how theory can give any information at all about the properties of elementary particles. There exists
at the present time a general quantum mechanics which can be used to describe the motion of any kind of particle, no matter what its properties are.
The general quantum mechanics, however, is valid only when the particles
have small velocities and fails for velocities comparable with the velocity of
light, when effects of relativity come in. There exists no relativistic quantum
mechanics (that is, one valid for large velocities) which can be applied to
particles with arbitrary properties. Thus when one subjects quantum mechanics to relativistic requirements, one imposes restrictions on the properties of the particle. In this way one can deduce information about the particles
from purely theoretical considerations, based on general physical principles.
This procedure is successful in the case of electrons and positrons. It is to
be hoped that in the future some such procedure will be found for the case
of the other particles. I should like here to outline the method for electrons
and positrons, showing how one can deduce the spin properties of the electron, and then how one can infer the existence of positrons with similar spin
properties and with the possibility of being annihilated in collisions with
electrons.
We begin with the equation connecting the kinetic energy W and momentum = 1, 2, 3), of a particle in relativistic classical mechanics
From this we can get a wave equation of quantum mechanics, by letting the
left-hand side operate on the wave function and understanding W and 
to be the operators and With this understanding, the wave
equation reads
322 1933 P. A. M. DIRAC
Now it is a general requirement of quantum mechanics that its wave equations shall be linear in the operator W or so this equation will not do. We
must replace it by some equation linear in W, and in order that this equation
may have relativistic invariance it must also be linear in the p’s.
We are thus led to consider an equation of the type
This involves four new variables and which are operators that can
operate on We assume they satisfy the following conditions,
for
and also the α’s commute with the p’s and W. These special properties for
the α’s make Eq. (3) to a certain extent equivalent to Eq. (2), since if we
then multiply (3) on the left-hand side by + + we get exactly (2).
The new variables α, which we have to introduce to get a relativistic wave
equation linear in W, give rise to the spin of the electron. From the general
principles of quantum mechanics one can easily deduce that these variables a
give the electron a spin angular momentum of half a quantum and a magnetic moment of one Bohr magneton in the reverse direction to the angular
momentum. These results are in agreement with experiment. They were, in
fact, first obtained from the experimental evidence provided-by spectroscopy and afterwards confirmed by the theory,
The variables α also give rise to some rather unexpected phenomena concerning the motion of the electron. These have been fully worked out by
Schrödinger. It is found that an electron which seems to us to be moving
slowly, must actually have a very high frequency oscillatory motion of small
amplitude superposed on the regular motion which appears to us. As a result
of this oscillatory motion, the velocity of the electron at any time equals the
velocity of light. This is a prediction which cannot be directly verified by
experiment, since the frequency of the oscillatory motion is so high and its
 T H E O R Y O F E L E C T R O N S A N D P O S I T R O N S 323
amplitude is so small. But one must believe in this consequence of the theory,
since other consequences of the theory which are inseparably bound up with
this one, such as the law of scattering of light by an electron, are confirmed
by experiment.
There is one other feature of these equations which I should now like to
discuss, a feature which led to the prediction of the positron. If one looks at
Eq. (1), one sees that it allows the kinetic energy W to be either a positive
quantity greater than mc2 or a negative quantity less than - mc2
. This result
is preserved when one passes over to the quantum equation (2) or (3). These
quantum equations are such that, when interpreted according to the general
scheme of quantum dynamics, they allow as the possible results of a measurement of W either something greater than mc2 or something less than - mc2
.
Now in practice the kinetic energy of a particle is always positive. We
thus see that our equations allow of two kinds of motion for an electron, only
one of which corresponds to what we are familiar with. The other corresponds to electrons with a very peculiar motion such that the faster they
move, the less energy they have, and one must put energy into them to bring
them to rest.
One would thus be inclined to introduce, as a new assumption of the
theory, that only one of the two kinds of motion occurs in practice. But this
gives rise to a difficulty, since we find from the theory that if we disturb
the electron, we may cause a transition from a positive-energy state of motion to a negative-energy one, so that, even if we suppose all the electrons
in the world to be started off in positive-energy states, after a time some of
them would be in negative-energy states.
Thus in allowing negative-energy states, the theory gives something which
appears not to correspond to anything known experimentally, but which we
cannot simply reject by a new assumption. We must find some meaning for
these states.
An examination of the behaviour of these states in an electromagnetic field
shows that they correspond to the motion of an electron with a positive
charge instead of the usual negative one - what the experimenters now call
a positron. One might, therefore, be inclined to assume that electrons in
negative-energy states are just positrons, but this will not do, because the
observed positrons certainly do not have negative energies. We can, however, establish ‘a connection between electrons in negative-energy states and
positrons, in a rather more indirect way.
We make use of the exclusion principle of Pauli, according to which
324 1 9 3 3 P . A . M . D I R A C
there can be only one electron in any state of motion. We now make the
assumptions that in the world as we know it, nearly all the states of negative
energy for the electrons are occupied, with just one electron in each state,
and that a uniform filling of all the negative-energy states is completely unobservable to us. Further, any unoccupied negative-energy state, being a departure
from uniformity, is observable and is just a positron.
An unoccupied negative-energy state, or hole, as we may call it for brevity,
will have a positive energy, since it is a place where there is a shortage of
negative energy. A hole is, in fact, just like an ordinary particle, and its
identification with the positron seems the most reasonable way of getting
over the difficulty of the appearance of negative energies in our equations.
On this view the positron is just a mirror-image of the electron, having
exactly the same mass and opposite charge. This has already been roughly
confirmed by experiment. The positron should also have similar spin properties to the electron, but this has not yet been confirmed by experiment.
From our theoretical picture, we should expect an ordinary electron, with
positive energy, to be able to drop into a hole and fill up this hole, the energy
being liberated in the form of electromagnetic radiation. This would mean
a process in which an electron and a positron annihilate one another. The
converse process, namely the creation of an electron and a positron from
electromagnetic radiation, should also be able to take place. Such processes
appear to have been found experimentally, and are at present being more
closely investigated by experimenters.
The theory of electrons and positrons which I have just outlined is a selfconsistent theory which fits the experimental facts so far as is yet known.
One would like to have an equally satisfactory theory for protons. One
might perhaps think that the same theory could be applied to protons. This
would require the possibility of existence of negatively charged protons
forming a mirror-image of the usual positively charged ones. There is, however, some recent experimental evidence obtained by Stern about the spin
magnetic moment of the proton, which conflicts with this theory for the
proton. As the proton is so much heavier than the electron, it is quite likely
that it requires some more complicated theory, though one cannot at the
present time say what this theory is.
In any case I think it is probable that negative protons can exist, since as
far as the theory is yet definite, there is a complete and perfect symmetry
between positive and negative electric charge, and if this symmetry is really
fundamental in nature, it must be possible to reverse the charge on any kind
 T H E O R Y O F E L E C T R O N S A N D P O S I T I O N S 325
of particle. The negative protons would of course be much harder to produce experimentally, since a much larger energy would be required, corresponding to the larger mass.
If we accept the view of complete symmetry between positive and negative electric charge so far as concerns the fundamental laws of Nature, we
must regard it rather as an accident that the Earth (and presumably the
whole solar system), contains a preponderance of negative electrons and
positive protons. It is quite possible that for some of the stars it is the other
way about, these stars being built up mainly of positrons and negative protons. In fact, there may be half the stars of each kind. The two kinds of stars
would both show exactly the same spectra, and there would be no way
of distinguishing them by present astronomical methods