                           PERCY W . B RIDGMAN


     General survey of certain results in the field of
                 high-pressure physics
                        Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1946


In this lecture I shall attempt to present a general survey of those parts of the
field of high-pressure physics with which I have had direct contact, dealing
first with technical matters of producing and measuring high pressure, and
secondly with the physical phenomena which occur under high pressure.
   With regard to technique, several different ranges of pressure are to be
recognized. The first step was to devise a method of packing which should
be without leak, since leak had limited the range of previous experiments. A
packing was devised, shown in Fig. 1, which automatically becomes tighter
the higher the pressure, so that any pressure is accessible up to the strength
of the containing vessels. If the vessels are made of one-piece construction,




Fig. 1 . The general scheme of the packing by which pressure in the soft packing mate-
   rials is automatically maintained a fixed percentage higher than in the liquid.




                                           53


54                           1946 P.W.BRIDGMAN

from the best heat-treated alloy steels, it is possible to reach pressures of
I2,000 kg/cm 2 as a routine matter and on occasion for short intervals of time
as high as 20,000. For many years my work was confined to this range, and
in this range it proved feasible to measure nearly all the ordinary physical
properties of substances. The next step was to give the pressure vessel exter-
nal support which increases in magnitude at the same time the internal pres-
sure increases. A simple method of doing is to make the external surface of
the pressure vessel conical in shape, and to push it into a heavy collar with a
force which increases as the internal pressure increases, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
With apparatus of this kind it is possible to make routine experiments up
to 30,000 kg/cm2 with volumes of the order of 15 cm 3, to get electrically
insulated leads into the apparatus, and practically to repeat all the former
work in the range to 12,000. I am still engaged in carrying out this program.
An extension of the same technique on a smaller scale with capacities of the
order of 0.5 cm3 can be made up to 50,000 kg/cm2. In this range all ordinary
liquids freeze solid, electrically insulated leads cannot be got into the appara-
tus, and the phenomena which can be studied are limited to various volume
effects, such as compressibilities and phase changes, including fusions and
 polymorphic transitions.
   The external support of the vessel is only one of the factors that makes
possible the extension of range from 12,000 to 50,000. No steel piston will
support as much as 50,000; carboloy, however, the recently developed sub-
stance for tools formed by cementing a fine powder of tungsten carbide with




Fig. 2. Illustrating the general principle of the method for giving external support to
the pressure vessel in such a way that support increases automatically with the increase
                                    of internal pressure.


        CERTAIN       RESULTS      OF    HIGH-PRESSURE          PHYSICS     55
cobalt, fortunately proves to have a compressive strength high enough for
the purpose.
  The next step in extension of range, from 50,000 to 100,000 kg/cm2, de-
mands still more effective support of the pressure vessel. This is done by im-
mersing the entire pressure vessel in a fluid under pressures ranging up to




           Fig. 3. The miniature apparatus for reaching 100,000 kg/cm 2.


30,000 kg/cm 2. The pressure apparatus has to be made still smaller; the pis-
tons are only 1.6 mm in diameter, and the capacity is only a few cubic milli-
meters. The pressure cylinder itself, as well as the pistons, is now made of
carboloy with an external jacket of shrunk-on steel to give it greater strength.
The piezometer is illustrated in Fig. 3. Even with this type of construction
so great an extension of range as from 50,000 to 100,000 would not have
been possible if it were not for a fortunate change in the properties of metals
under pressure. At pressures of 25,000 kg/cm2 ordinary grades of steel be-
come capable of almost indefinite deformation without fracture, so greatly
has their ductility been increased, as shown in Fig. 4. Even carboloy loses
its normal brittleness and becomes capable of supporting without fracture
higher tensile stresses than steel.
   Up to the present, the compressibilities and polymorphic transitions of
some 30 elements and simple compounds have been studied in the range to
 100,000.
   Much higher pressures than 100,000 can be reached in very small regions


56                                 1946 P.W.BRIDGMAN




Fig. 4. Illustrating the effect of pressure in increasing the ductility of steel. On the left,
a piece of mild steel broken in tension at atmospheric pressure. On the right, the same
steel pulled to a much greater reduction of area without fracture in a liquid at 25,000
                                           kg/cm 2.

by constructing the apparatus entirely of carboloy, but up to the present no
particularly important physical results have been attained in this range.
  In addition to the problem of attaining the pressures, there is the problem
of measuring them and measuring the effects which they produce. This de-
mands in the first place the establishment of various fixed points. In the range
up to 30,000 a sufficient number of such points has been established to per-
mit measurements to an accuracy of about 0.1 per cent. A transition of bis-
muth in the neighborhood of 25,000 gives one such convenient point. An
essential part of the measuring technique is the utilization of the change of
resistance of manganin under pressure, first suggested by Lisell at Uppsala.
Above 30,000 the territory is not so well marked out; it is probable that the
measurements to 100,000 have an accuracy of about 2 per cent.
  It is natural to think of volume compression as the simplest and most fun-
damental of all the effects of hydrostatic pressure, and for that reason it will
be discussed first here. It is not, however, the simplest to measure exper-
imentally, because the measurements immediately obtained are relative to


         CERTAIN       RESULTS       OF    HIGH-PRESSURE          PHYSICS            57
the containing vessel, which is itself distorted. Elaborate procedures may be
necessary to eliminate the effect of such distortion.
   The compression of gases is outside the range of this work; at pressures of
1,000 kg/cm or more the densities of gases become of the same order of
                2



magnitude as those of their liquid phase, and there ceases to be any essential
difference between gas and liquid. If the volume of any ordinary liquid is
plotted as a function of pressure at constant temperature, a curve will be
obtained which at low pressures has a high degree of curvature and a steep
tangent, meaning a high compressibility, but as pressure increases the cur-
vature rapidly becomes less and the curve flattens off. In Fig. 5 the volume
of a typical liquid, ether, is shown as a function of pressure. For comparison,
the curve of the most compressible solid, caesium, is also shown. Two dif-
ferent physical mechanisms are primarily responsible for the different behav-
ior in the low and high pressure ranges. The low range of high compress-
ibility is the range in which the chief effect of pressure is to push the mol-




Fig. 5. Volume as a function of pressure for a typical liquid, ether. The corresponding
curve is also shown for caesium, the most compressible solid. The liquid is initially
 much more compressible than the solid, but at higher pressures is less compressible.


58                          1 9 4 6 P. W. BRIDGMAN

ecules into closer contact, eliminating the free spaces between them. In this
range individual substances may show large and characteristic individual dif-
 ferences. In the higher range the molecules have been pushed into effective
 contact, and the compressibility now arises from the decrease of volume of
 the molecules themselves. This effect persists with comparatively little de-
 crease over a wide range of pressure. This effect is of course present also in
 the lower range of pressure, but there it is masked by the much larger effect
 arising from squeezing out the free spaces between the molecules. If one at-
 tempts to set up a formula for the effect of pressure on volume on the basis of
 measurements in the low range only, one will be likely to neglect too much
 the contribution from the compressibility of the molecules, with the result
 that the actual volumes at high pressures will be found to be materially
 smaller than the volumes which would be extrapolated from the low-pres-
 sure formulas. This, as a matter of fact, has been a property of practically all
 the formulas that have been derived from low-pressure data.
    At high pressures, the volumes of ordinary organic liquids become sur-
 prisingly alike in spite of initial differences. To illustrate the rapid falling off
 of compressibility with pressure, the volume change in the first 5,000 kg/cm 2
 is roughly the same on the average as the volume change between 5,000 and
  50,000; the effect is accentuated by the fact that the volume decrement in the
latter range often includes the volume discontinuity on freezing.
    In the low-pressure range, in which the molecules are being pushed into
 effective contact, one might expect effects depending on the shapes of the
 molecules, and that these effects would be highly specific with the liquid.
 This is the case. In the low-pressure range a great variety of small-scale ab-
 normalities are superposed on the larger-scale uniformities, and these small-
 scale effects vary greatly from liquid to liquid. Thus there may be sub-ranges
 of an extent of a few thousand kg/cm in which the compressibility increases
                                           2



 with increasing pressure instead of decreasing as is normal, or the thermal
 expansion may also increase with increasing pressure instead of decreasing.
 Any satisfactory theory of liquids must ultimately give an account of these
 small-scale effects but for the present the large-scale effects must have first
 attention. When the theory of liquids does come to be written, the first step
 may well be to set up an idealized « perfect liquid » in analogy to the perfect
 gas which has played so important a role in the theory of gases. The exper-
 imental results at high pressures show sufficient uniformity in the behavior
 of all ordinary organic liquids to indicate that such an idealized perfect liquid
 is not too far from the actuality.


        CERTAIN       RESULTS      OF    HIGH-PRESSURE           PHYSICS       59

   The compressibility of solids varies over a much wider range than does
that of the ordinary liquids; caesium, for example, is 350 times more com-
pressible than diamond. The highest compressibilities among solids, judging
from indirect evidence, are probably to be found in solid hydrogen and he-
lium. As in the case of liquids, the compressibility of solids normally drops
off with increasing pressure. This would be expected in general because of
the operation of a law of « diminishing returns », and is obviously necessary
when pressure is raised indefinitely, because if volume continued to decrease
at its initial rate it would eventually become negative. For instance, the vol-
ume of caesium would become negative at a pressure of only 14,000 kg/cm 2
if it continued to decrease with pressure at the initial rate. In spite of the fact




                                                       Pressure. kg/cm2


 Fig. 6. The volume compression of several elements up to 100,000 kg/cm 2. The breaks
                in some of the curves indicate polymorphic transitions.


60                         1946 P.W.BRIDGMAN




Fig. 7. The deviations from linearity of the volume decrements of quartz glass for
pressure increments of 5,000 kg/cm2 plotted against pressure. The cusp in the curve
               marks the change from abnormal to normal behavior.


that the compressibility of solids on the average must decrease with increas-
ing pressure, there is a very marked qualitative difference as compared with
liquids. The initial phase of very rapid decrease is absent, and the decrease is
spread more uniformly over the entire pressure range. The difference is to
be accounted for by the lattice structure of solids; with increasing pressure
the atoms retain their position in the lattice with the result that a smaller part
of the free space between the atoms is available for occupancy as the centers
of the atoms are forced closer together.
   The volume decrements of a number of the more compressible solids are
shown as a function of pressure up to 100,000 kg/cm 2 in Fig. 6. The cur-
vature is in general very marked.
   There is no thermodynamic necessity that the compressibility should de-
crease with increasing pressure, although this opinion has sometimes been
expressed. Solid substances are known in which the compressibility may in-
crease with increasing pressure over a comparatively wide range of pressure.
The most striking example is quartz glass. The compressibility not only in-
creases with pressure, but increases at an accelerating rate. This continues
up to 35,000 kg/cm2 and then abruptly stops. At this pressure there is a dis-
continuity in the derivative, a transition of the « second kind » in the nomen-
clature of Ehrenfest, and from here on compressibility decreases with rising
pressure as is normal. The mechanism which is responsible for the low-pres-
sure effect abruptly ceases to act. Fig. 7 shows the relations.


         CERTAIN RESULTS OF HIGH-PRESSURE PHYSICS                            61

    So far we have been considering the effect of pressure on the volume of
isotropic substances; this includes substances like glass and all cubic crystals.
If the material crystallizes in some non-cubic system, the effects are more
complicated. The compressibility is not the same in all directions, so that the
shape of bodies composed of such crystals may change under pressure. The
differences of compressibility in different directions may be large; thus zinc
is eight times as compressible in the direction of the hexagonal axis as at right
angles to it. Some difference in this direction might be expected, because the
atomic spacing is greater along the axis than at right angles, but no simple
consideration would lead to the expectation of differences as large as this.
 There is even one substance, tellurium, which has a negative compressibility
 along the axis. That is, when a single crystal of tellurium is subjected to hy-
 drostatic pressure by a fluid in which it is completely immersed, it expands
along the axis.
    Considerable success has been achieved in calculating theoretically the ef-
 fect of pressure on the volume of simple solids. The first success was with
 simple ionic lattices of the type of NaCl by Max Born, who was able to get
 acceptable values for the lattice spacing and for the initial compressibility. He
 was not at first successful, however, in reproducing the change of compress-
 ibility with pressure, and even today complete success has not been attained
 in this regard. More complete results have recently been obtained for the
 alkali metals by applying the methods of wave mechanics. Bardeen has had
 surprising success in reproducing the entire volume curve over the exper-
 imental pressure range for the alkali metals. The calculations are particularly
 simple here because there is only one free electron per atom, and it turns out
 that the major part of the effect arises from the increase of kinetic energy of
 the free electrons arising from their decrease in effective wavelength when
 the volume is decreased. Other metals, with more free electrons, are more
 difficult to compute, but it is anticipated that the difficulties are merely dif-
 ficulties of the complexity of the calculation.
    Theory is apparently not yet in a position to attack with much success the
 problem of non-cubic crystals.
    We now consider the discontinuous volume effects arising from phase
 changes of various sorts. The simplest of these is the effect of pressure on
 melting. Historically the study of the effect of pressure on melting was ap-
 proached with the anticipation that the effects would be found to be similar
 to the effect of pressure on vaporization, and in particular that there would
 be critical phenomena, so that above a certain pressure and temperature con-


Fig. 8. Melting temperature against pressure for a number of substances. At 15,000
kg/cm 2 the order of substances, reading from top down, is chloroform, chlorobenzene,
chlorobenzene (second modification), water (ice VI), 4-butyl alcohol, carbon bisulfide,
      methylene chloride, n-propyl bromide, ethyl bromide, and ethyl alcohol.


tinuous passage would be possible between liquid and solid. It soon appeared,
however, that the pressure scale of any such effects must be much more ex-
tensive than the scale of the critical effects between liquid and vapor, and that
whereas pressures of a few hundred kg/cm were adequate in the latter case,
                                                  2



pressures of thousands of kg/cm would be required to produce analogous
                                    2



effects for solid and liquid, if indeed they could be produced at all. With
every extension of pressure range the probability of the existence of any such
critical phenomena has become increasingly remote. Melting curves have
now been followed up to 40,000 kg/cm2; a number of these are shown in
Fig. 8. The melting curves of all substances have certain qualitative features
in common, so that it is appropriate to speak, of the melting curve just as one
may speak of the vaporization curve. In other respects, however, the situa-


         CERTAIN     RESULTS      OF   HIGH-PRESSURE        PHYSICS           63
tion with regard to melting is qualitatively different from that with regard to
vaporization. In particular, all melting curves, that is, the curve of melting
temperature against pressure, are concave toward the pressure axis with a
curvature becoming less at higher pressures, and the curve of difference of
volume between liquid and solid as a function of pressure is convex toward
the pressure axis with a curvature decreasing with increasing pressure. No
critical point has ever been observed in the experimental range. If there were
such a point outside the range, the latent heats and the volume difference be-
tween liquid and solid would have to vanish at a common pressure and tem-
perature. Extrapolation of the curves for latent heat and volume difference
indicates that neither of them will vanish at any finite pressure or temperature,
to say nothing of both vanishing at the same pressure and temperature. The
probability at present seems overwhelming that there can be no critical point
between liquid and solid, at least for the type of substance investigated up to
now, which includes organic substances of various types and a few metals.
The same line of argument rules out the existence of other such features on
the melting curve as a maximum temperature or an asymptotic temperature.
In general, the melting curve rises to indefinitely high temperatures with
indefinitely increasing pressure but at a diminishing rate, the curve becoming
more nearly linear.
   It is possible to show thermodynamically that if a substance expands when
it melts, its melting temperature must rise with increasing pressure, and, con-
versely, it falls. There are only three substances which belong to the latter
category in the ordinary range, water, bismuth, and gallium. Consistent with
thermodynamics the melting curves of these three substances are found to
fall. Furthermore, the curvature increases and the curves drop more and more
rapidly as pressure increases. Such a state of affairs apparently cannot continue
indefinitely. Nature extricates itself from the dilemma by the « liquidating »
of such abnormal substances. Above a certain pressure the lattices in which
these substances initially crystallize become unstable, and the lattice col-
lapses into another lattice. The new lattice has a volume so much less than the
former lattice that the solid phase is now more dense than the liquid, and
from here on the melting curve rises as for other substances. The collapse of
the lattice occurs at a pressure of about 2,000 kg/cm2 for water, at 12,000 for
gallium, and at 25,000 for bismuth.
   The phase changes of these three substances afford a particular example of
polymorphism. The phase diagram of bismuth is shown in Fig. 9. Under
pressure, polymorphism is a very common phenomenon; the number of in-


64                           1946    P.W.BRIDGMAN




Fig. 9. The phase diagram of bismuth. The arrows on the transition line III-IV in-
dicate the pressure limits within which the transition runs with increasing or decreasing
                                        pressure.

 stances increases with increase in the experimental pressure range and with
increasing sensitiveness in the methods for detecting small discontinuities of
 volume. In the range from room temperature to 2oo°C and up to pressures
 of 5o,ooo kg/cm2, roughly one-third of the substances examined have proved
 to be polymorphic. In the much greater range of conditions encountered in
 the crust of the earth, the presumption seems to be that no substance exists in
 the lattice with which we are familiar under laboratory conditions, unless
 perhaps the lattice is of a particularly simple type. The importance of such a
 conclusion for geophysics is obvious.
    The thermodynamics of a polymorphic phase change is the same as the
 thermodynamics of melting, but beyond that there is little resemblance be-
 tween the two phenomena; there is no such thing as a polymorphic transi-
 tion curve as there is a melting curve. There are only three falling melting
 curves, and these disappear at higher pressures; there are many falling transi-
 tion curves, and they become increasingly numerous at higher pressures. Be-
 tween 12,000 and 50,000, 41 per cent of the new transition curves are of the
 falling type. Transition curves may have horizontal or vertical tangents;
 melting curves have neither. Transition curves may have upward or down-
 ward curvature; melting curves are always concave downward. The dif-


          CERTAIN RESULTS OF HIGH-PRESSURE PHYSICS                              65

 ference of volume of two polymorphic phases may increase or decrease in
 the direction of increasing temperature along the transition line; the differ-
 ence of volume between liquid and solid always decreases. The compress-
 ibility of the high-pressure phase may be g reater or less than that of the low-
 pressure phase; the compressibility of the liquid is always greater than that
 of the solid. Substances are capable of existing in a number of polymorphic
 forms, and the complete mapping of the transition temperatures and pres-
 sures for all the forms may result in phase diagrams of great complication.
 Thus bismuth has six different phases; water, which has some striking anal-
 ogies to bismuth, has seven phases. The most complicated phase diagram
 investigated to date is that of camphor, which has eleven phases.
    There are only two generalizations with regard to polymorphic transitions
 that stand to date. The first is that critical points and continuous transitions
 between different polymorphic forms do not occur. If there were such points
 this would demand a continuous transition from one type of lattice to an-
 other, and this seems highly improbable, although perhaps not logically in-
 conceivable. The second generalization is that transitions in the simple CsCl
 type of lattice in the direction of smaller volumes are not produced by pres-
 sure; this lattice seems to be of such a simplicity that it is not likely to be
disturbed. This second generalization naturally rests on a much smaller num-
 ber of examples than the first, and is correspondingly less secure.
    We have so far been discussing transitions which are thermodynamically
 reversible; when pressure is released the original form is resumed. In addition
 to these reversible transitions, the existence of irreversible transitions is to be
 recognized, that is, of changes effected by pressure which remain permanent
 when they have once taken place. Two well-marked examples of this have
 been found. The first was phosphorus. If ordinary yellow phosphorus is ex-
 posed to pressure above 12,000 kg/cm2 at temperatures above 200°C, it is
 permanently changed into a black solid much like graphite in appearance,
 and like it a conductor of electricity, although yellow phosphorus is a good
 insulator. This remained the only example for many years. Recently I have
 found that ordinary liquid CS2, may similarly be changed permanently into a
 black solid at temperatures in the neighborhood of 200ºC and by pressures of
 the order of 40,000 kg/cm 2. This black substance is definitely not a mixture
 of sulfur and carbon, which one might at first expect, but is apparently a
 unitary substance, truly a black solid form of carbon bisulfide. It has been
 suggested that the structure may be that of a single giant molecule like the
 known structure of SiO2, which from the atomic point of view is very sim-


66                          1946 P . W . B R I D G M A N




Fig. 10 . The relative resistances of the alkali metals up to 30,000 kg/cm2. The break in
the curve for caesium is due to a polymorphic transition. Potassium has a very flat
                                 minimum near 23,000.

ilar. It is fascinating to speculate that there may be many other common sub-
stances which may be pushed by sufficiently high pressures over a potential
hill of some kind permanently into some hitherto unknown form. Until we
have theoretical understanding of these two known permanent transitions,
we can not help attaching a certain reasonableness to the assumption of the
possible existence of other such substances. In fact, there is experimental evi-
dence that many other such transformations may be effected. In experiments
in which I combined high shearing stresses with high hydrostatic pressure I
have observed some cases of irreversible transitions to forms already known,
and have also observed a large number of color changes, which are the in-
dication of some sort of permanent change. It was not possible to establish
whether new substances were formed under these conditions because the
quantities of material involved were too small to permit satisfactory analysis.
   We pass now to other sorts of pressure effects. Perhaps the simplest of these
to measure are the effects of pressure on electrical resistance. Measurements


         CERTAIN RESULTS OF HIGH-PRESSURE PHYSICS                                  67
have been made at room temperature or higher up to 30,000 kg/cm and at       2



the temperature of liquid air to 7,000. At low temperatures there is a natural
limit to the pressure range imposed by the freezing of the medium transmit-
ting pressure, which in this case was gaseous nitrogen. Fig. 10 shows the
effect of pressure on the alkali metals at room temperature up to 30,000
k g / c m2 .
   In the first place, there is a specific effect of pressure on resistance; the pres-
sure coefficient of resistance is in general of the order of magnitude of ten
times greater than the volume compressibility. This would involve as a corol-
lary that the effect of pressure on the resistance of a highly compressible met-
al is greater than on a metal of low compressibility. This is indeed true in
general, but exceptions are common. The resistance of perhaps three-quar-
ters of the metals decreases with increasing pressure; as is to be expected, the
rate of decrease itself decreases with increasing pressure, that is, the curve of
resistance against pressure is convex toward the pressure axis. On the other
hand, there are several metals, of which lithium, strontium, and bismuth are
examples, whose resistance increases under pressure. For these metals, sur-
prisingly, there is a law of increasing returns, that is, the rate of increase of
resistance itself increases with increasing pressure. This means that for these
metals also the curve of resistance against pressure is concave upward. Fi-
nally, there are a few metals which combine both types of behavior, that is,
the resistance initially decreases, then passes through a minimum, and then
turns upward. Examples are caesium, rubidium, potassium, and barium. It
would appear, therefore, that the upward curvature is common to all metals,
and that all resistance curves may be regarded as pieces of one single curve,
the only difference for different metals being that what might be called the
intrinsic zero of pressure is differently situated with respect to atmospheric
pressure for different metals.
   Considerable success has been achieved by theoretical physicists in ex-
plaining theoretically the effect of pressure on resistance. As might be ex-
pected when effects departing so largely from linearity are concerned, we
can recognize the presence of at least two different mechanisms working in
opposite directions. There is in the first place an effect of pressure on what is
the analogue of the electron free path in the old gas electron theory of metal-
lic conduction. This is connected with the change of dimensions, and in gen-
eral works in the direction of an increase of free path, that is, a decrease of
resistance, with increasing pressure. In the second place, there is a rearrange-
ment of the energy levels, and this may, when the energy bands are nearly


 68                         1946   P.W.BRIDGMAN

  completely occupied, work in the direction of a change in the effective num-
 ber of free electrons. Depending on the details of the atomic relations, this
  effect may be either an increase or a decrease. The calculations have been
  carried through approximately in a few simple cases. It turns out that the in-
  crease of resistance of lithium with pressure is due to the preponderating ef-
  fect of a decrease in the effective number of free electrons.
     The effect of pressure on the electrical resistance of single crystals is some-
  times very complicated. If the crystal system is cubic, the material behaves
  electrically like an isotropic body, but if the system has lower symmetry,
  there may be differences in different directions. In antimony, for example,
  the sign of the pressure effect is different in different directions. There are
  directions in the crystal for which the resistance passes through a maximum
  with increasing pressure, whereas for other directions the resistance decreases
  with normal curvature.
     The resistance of some semi-conductors may be decreased by such large
  amounts that they approach the absolute resistance characteristic of the met-
  als. An early investigation in this field was made on selenium and silver sul-
  fide by Montén in Uppsala. At higher pressures, tellurium approaches the
  properties of a metallic conductor under 30,000 kg/cm 2. Not only does the
  absolute value of the resistance drop to a characteristically low figure, but
the temperature coefficient, which initially is negative, reverses sign under
  high pressure and becomes positive like that of the metals proper. Theory is
  as yet hardly in a position to explain these complicated effects, either in single
  crystals or in semi-conductors.
     Closely related to the electrical conductivity of metals is their thermal con-
  ductivity; the relationship is expressed by the approximate equality of the
  Wiedemann-Franz ratio of electrical to thermal conductivity for all metals.
  Under pressure, thermal conductivity changes as well as electrical conductiv-
  ity. It is much more difficult to measure than electrical conductivity, and
  satisfactory measurements have been made only for a few metals and those
  up to only 12,000 kg/cm2. It appears that for these metals the Wiedemann-
  Franz ratio is approximately independent of pressure.
     The effect of pressure on the thermal conductivity of liquids is much larger
  than on that of metals, and is much easier to measure. In general, the thermal
  conductivity increases for ordinary liquids under a pressure of 12,000 kg/
  c m2 by a factor varying between 2 and 3. The effect on water is smaller; at
   12,000 the increase for it is only 50 per cent. There is a close connection be-
  tween the effect of pressure on thermal conductivity of normal liquids and


        CERTAIN RESULTS OF HIGH-PRESSURE PHYSICS                                69

the effect of pressure on the velocity of sound in the liquid. That is, thermal
conductivity in a liquid is primarily a mechanical affair; heat is transferred by
microscopic mechanical waves travelling with the velocity determined in the
conventional way by the compressibility. The small effect in water is as-
sociated with the small change in the compressibility of water brought about
by pressure.
    Another property of metals obviously related to electrical and thermal
conductivity is the thermo-electric characteristics. These properties are also
affected by pressure. In general, a metal under pressure behaves thermo-elec-
trically differently from the same metal not under pressure, so that a thermo-
couple may be made with one branch of any ordinary metal and the other
branch of the same metal exposed to hydrostatic pressure. Under a pressure
of 12,000 kg/cm 2 the thermo-electric power of such couples may be as large




        Fig. 11. The effect of pressure on the viscosity of isobutyl alcohol.


70                        1946    P.W.BRIDGMAN

as that of ordinary couples composed of two entirely different metals. A
number of such « pressure couples » have been investigated. The effects are
complicated; there is not any universal rule with regard to the sign of the
effect. There may be reversals of sign and large departures from linearity. No
satisfactory theory of these effects has been formulated. At present one can
only draw the conclusion that the interplay of several different mechanisms
must be involved.
   The largest of all the pressure effects studied to date is on the viscosity of
liquids. In general, viscosity increases under pressure at a rate increasing rap-
idly with increasing pressure. The curve of viscosity against pressure usually
rises exponentially with pressure, and sometimes more rapidly than expo-
nentially. In Fig. 11 is shown the viscosity of isobutyl alcohol at 30° and 75°
at pressures up to 12,000 kg/cm 2. The total rise may be by as much as a factor
of 1 07 for a pressure increase of 10,000 kg/cm 2 (for eugenol). The rate of rise
is definitely linked with the complication of the molecule, and is greater the
more complicated the molecule. For the comparatively simple liquid water
the rise of viscosity under 10,000 kg/cm2 is by a factor of only 2 or 3 and for
monatomic mercury by only 30 per cent. For methyl alcohol the increase is
by a factor of 10 , for propyl alcohol by a factor of 100, and for amyl alcohol
by a factor of 1000. In the last few years the theoretical physicists have had
considerable success in accounting for the effect of pressure on the viscosity
of liquids.
