FROM SPINWAVES TO GIANT
MAGNETORESISTANCE (GMR) AND BEYOND

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2007
by

Peter A. Grünberg
Institut für Festkörperforschung, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany.




DISCOVERY OF LIGHTSCATTERING FROM DAMON ESHBACH
SURFACE SPINWAVES
The “Institute for Magnetism” within the department for solid state physics at
the research centre in Jülich, Germany, which I joined in 1972, was founded
in 1971 by Professor W. Zinn. The main research topic was the exploration of
the model magnetic semiconductors EuO and EuS with Curie temperatures
Tc=60 K and Tc=17 K, respectively. As I had been working with light scattering
(LS) techniques before I came to Jülich, I was very much interested in the
observation of spinwaves in magnetic materials by means of LS.




Figure 1. Right: Schematic of a Brillouin lightscattering (BLS) spectrometer used for the
detection of spinwaves. Spectra of scattering from bulk spinwaves (marked with green) and
DE surface spinwaves (red) are seen on the left. For the upper and lower part on the left,
the field B0 and magnetization M have been reversed. From [1].




92


   LS can be performed with grating spectrometers, which is called Raman
spectroscopy, and alternatively by Brillouin light scattering (BLS) spectros-
copy. In the latter case, a Fabry Perot (FP) interferometer is used for the
frequency analysis of the scattered light (see right-hand side of Figure 1.).
The central part consists of two FP mirrors whose distance is scanned during
operation. BLS spectroscopy is used when the frequency shift of the scattered
light is small (below 100GHz), as expected for spinwaves in ferromagnets.
   In the early 1970s, an interesting instrumental development took place
in BLS, namely the invention of the multipass operation, and later, the
combination of two multipass interferometers in tandem. The inventor was
Dr. J.A. Sandercock in Zürich. Since we had the opportunity to install a new
laboratory we decided in favour of BLS, initially using a single three-pass in-
strument as displayed on the right-hand side of Figure 1. With this, we started
investigating spinwaves in EuO.
   We indeed were able to find and identify the expected spinwaves as shown
by the peaks in Figure 1 (marked green). Different intensities on the Stokes
(S) and anti-Stokes (aS) side were known from other work to be due to the
magnetooptic interaction of light with the spinwaves.
   The peaks marked red remained a puzzle for some time until good luck
came to help us. Good luck in this case was a breakdown of the system, a
repair and unintentional interchange of the leads when reconnecting the
magnet to the power supply. To our surprise S and aS side were now reversed.
To understand what this means, one has to know that classically S and aS scat-
tering is related to the propagation direction of the observed mode which is
opposite for the two cases. This can be understood from the corresponding
Doppler shift which is to higher freqencies when the wave travels towards the
observer and down when away from him. The position of the observer here
would be the same as of the viewer in Figure 1. The appearance of the red
peak in the spectra on only either the S or the aS side can be explained by a
unidirectional propagation of the corresponding spinwave along the surface
of the sample. It can be reversed by reversing B0 and M.
   The unidirectional behaviour of the wave can be understood on the basis of
symmetry. For this, one has to know that axial vectors which appear in nature,
such as B and M on the left-hand side of Figure 1, reverse their sign under
time inversion and so does the sense of the propagation of the surface wave as
indicated. The upper and lower part of Figure 1 left-hand side therefore are
linked by time inversion symmetry which is valid without damping. Hence, the
unidirectional behaviour reflects the symmetry of the underlying system.
   Finally, the observed wave could be identified as the Damon Eshbach (DE)
surface mode known from theory and from microwave experiments.
   From the magnetic parameters of EuO, one predicts in the present case
that the penetration depth of the DE mode will be a few 100 Å. Sample
thickness d is of the order of mm. Therefore, for the present purpose, EuO
is opaque. In this case, the wave travelling on the back side of the sample in
the opposite direction to the wave on the front side cannot been seen in this
experiment. BLS is then either S or aS but not both at the same time. Due

                                                                            93


to all of these unique features, the results of Figure 1 have also been chosen
as examples for current research in magnetism in a textbook on “Solid State
Physics” (H. Ibach, H. Lüth, Springer 1995, p.186).


BLS FROM SPINWAVES IN SINGLE THIN MAGNETIC FILMS
We stick to the geometry of Figure 1 but with much smaller thickness d, of the
order of 200 Å. As material, we chose Fe. Bulk modes now split into a bunch
of standing modes and shift to higher frequencies. In the example in Figure
2, only the DE mode and the first standing mode are within the observable
frequency range. The mode patterns (left) represent amplitude distributions,
where the local precession is generally elliptical. DE modes with given propa-
gation direction have finite amplitudes on both surfaces and therefore both
directions are seen as S and aS scattering. As in Figure 1, the sample surface
from which most of the scattering is observed is shown in turquoise.




Figure 2. DE surface spinwave and 1st standing spinwave of a single thin film of Fe and its
experimental observation by means of BLS. Opposite propagation directions (black ar-
rows) correspond to S and aS scattering. Higher standing waves as indicated in the upper
part on the left-hand side are beyond the observed frequency range [2].


DIPOLAR COUPLED DE MODES IN MAGNETIC DOUBLE LAYERS
WITH PARALLEL AND ANTIPARALLEL MAGNETIC ALIGNMENT
Next, we consider magnetic double layers (sometimes also called trilayers)
as illustrated on the left-hand side of Figure 3 [2]. There are four magnetic
surfaces, each carrying a DE wave, which interact via the oscillating strayfields
that they produce. The calculation proceeds by using the Landau Lifshitz
equation after linearization and by applying the boundary conditions follow-
ing from Maxwells equations. The middle section of the Figure displays the
result for the mode frequencies as a function of the interlayer thickness d0
multiplied by the value of the wavevector q of the wave. q is determined by
the geometry of the BLS experiment, including the wavelength of the laser
light used. A typical value is q=1,73·10-2 nm-1. Hence qd0=1 corresponds to
d0=58nm. This is the decay length of the DE waves away from the surface.

94


Figure 3. Coupled DE modes in magnetic double layers for parallel (upper part) and an-
tiparallel (lower part) alignment of the magnetization M [2]. Calculation in the dipolar
limit. For the spectrum in antiparallel alignment, a sample showing AF coupling (to be
discussed later) was used. Peak positions are mainly due to the dipolar interaction with
small corrections due to exchange coupling.


   For the parallel alignment, the calculation predicts a symmetric graph,
i.e. the same frequencies for both signs of q. For the antialignment, the pre-
dicted branches are not symmetric as also revealed by the experiment.
   Figure 3 displays a few more details of the nature of these modes. The
middle part reveals that the upper branches 1+ and 1- are characterized by an
in-phase precession of the magnetizations M, whereas for the lower branches
2+ and 2- they are out of phase by 180°. In the middle part on the left-hand
side, this aspect is again illustrated by showing the amplitude distribution in-
side a cross-section, where the DE attenuation has been neglected. Note the
phase jump by 180° in the middle part of the structure.


DOUBLE LAYER WITH THE INCLUSION OF INTERLAYER EXCHANGE
Qualitatively, the behaviour of the dipolar modes due to the inclusion of fer-
romagnetic (F) interlayer exchange coupling (IEC) is easy to predict. This is
because the result of full F coupling is a single film of which we already know
the result as displayed in Figure 2. Why, in Figure 4, is it the lower dipolar
branch from which the first standing mode evolves and not the upper one?


                                                                                     95


It becomes clear from the nature of the modes as displayed in the middle
upper part of Figure 3 and has to do with the conservation of the symmetry
character. When IEC is “turned on”, the amplitude pattern with the 180°
phase jump is changed into the first standing mode under conservation of
parity. Note that a 180° phase jump would generate a very high exchange
energy which is avoided by the formation of a node (as in Figure 2).



     Stokes                        Anti-Stokes

                                                                                optic

                                                  uniform



                                                                                     uniform



                                              optic




                                                                -0.1       qd0           0.1

                                                                       0   J 1 max       0

                                                            Including interlayer exchange
      Interlayer dipole dipole interaction only
                                                            Here assumed ferromagnetic

Figure 4. The expected effect of ferromagnetic interlayer exchange on the branches rep-
resenting dipolar coupling (red). In the limit of full exchange for d0=0, the lower branch
is replaced by the green dot representing the first standing mode of the combined single
film. The general behaviour for small d0 is shown on the right-hand side. For the lower
branch, there is a transition from dipolar dominated (red) to interlayer exchange domi-
nated (green). The upper dipolar branch becomes the DE mode of the combined film. In
the displayed region of small d0, its frequency is practically constant (horizontal red line).


In Figure 3, we looked at the possibility of an antiparallel alignment and one
way of achieving it would be antiferromagnetic (AF) interlayer exchange coup-
ling. If we want to recognize this type of coupling from the behaviour of the
spinwaves, what do we expect? At this point, it is important to mention that
most of our experiments are performed in saturation. Hence, regardless of
whether the coupling is F or AF, we would apply a high enough field for the
BLS experiment to get parallel alignment (with an important exception as
seen below). This has the advantage of a well-defined experimental situation.
   The upper branch in the case of magnetic saturation is given by the uni-
form precession i.e. total moment and therefore independent of IEC.
   For the lower branch, one can argue as follows. For magnetizations aligned
in parallel, an external field as well as ferromagnetic IEC should increase the
restoring force and hence also the spinwave frequency. Opposite to this, AF
type IEC should weaken the effect of the external field and thus decrease
the frequency. In the present case, the dipolar interaction works in a similar

96


way. Hence, from these simple arguments one expects the frequency of the
lower branch to be further decreased for antiferromagnetic IEC and to be
increased as shown in Figure 4 for ferromagnetic IEC. On the other hand,
if IEC is antiferromagnetic, then for small enough external fields, we should
obtain antialignment. In this case, the branches presented in the lower part
of Figure 3 could be used to identify the antialignment.
   The concept just presented was later used and worked out in more detail by
us [3] and by Cochran and Dutcher [4]. From the latter work, we have adopt-
ed the term “uniform mode” for the in-phase precession and “optic mode” for
the 180° out of phase precession. The principle was also used by other groups
for the evaluation of exchange coupling from microwave experiments.
   Due to the insight just described, we became aware in the early 1980s that
we had a powerful tool in our hands, which could be used to investigate a
long-standing open question concerning coupling phenomena in layered
magnetic structures. At that time, it was suggested that ferromagnetic coup-
ling could be caused by pinholes and ferromagnetic bridges across the
interlayer. As Néel showed, it could also be due to meandering interlay-
ers. This effect was therefore called orange peel or Néel-type coupling.
Antiferromagnetic-type coupling could possibly occur due to edge effects,
such as flux closure. Real intrinsic types of interlayer coupling, similar to the
RKKY interaction in dilute magnetic alloys, was not yet known.
   The situation was further hampered by insufficient sample preparation. In
our first attempt to explore coupling and its dependence on the interlayer
material and thickness, we only found ferromagnetic-type coupling –presum-
ably resulting from pinholes.
   For various reasons, we now concentrated on Cr interlayers. First, Cr by
itself is an antiferromagnet. Based on its magnetic structure for thin enough
interlayers, one expects the coupling to oscillate between F and AF with a
period of two monolayers (ML). Second, Cr matches Fe very nicely both in its
crystallographic and thermodynamic properties, which is important for the
growth. Fe/Cr/Fe structures therefore appeared to be most promising.


DISCOVERY OF ANTIFERROMAGNETIC (AF) COUPLING
In this situation, I was very fortunate to have the opportunity to take sabbati-
cal leave and go to Argonne National Laboratories in the US. In the team
around M. Brodsky in Materials Sciences, I found a group with expertise in
preparing Fe/Cr/Fe samples on substrates of cleaved rocksalt. For compari-
son, we also prepared Fe/Au/Fe samples.




                                                                              97


                                                                                                         M1 M2
               Cr interlayer                           Au interlayer
                                interlayer thickness


      8 Å Cr                                   0 Å Au                                                                                         M1·M2
                                                                                                                              Eexch = -J1
                                                                                                                                             ⅠM1Ⅰ·ⅠM2|


                                                                                                                           Au or Cr


      4 Å Cr                                  12 Å Au                                              Fe   Fe




                                                                                              42
                                                                                                             opric mode
                                                                                              38




                                                                            Frequency (GHz)
      40 Å Cr                                 20 Å Au                                         34
                                                                                                                                         uniform mode
                                                                                              30

                                                                                              26
                                                                                                                          Fe/Cr/Fe
                                                                                              22

                                                                                              18
-30                 0                 30 -30                 0         30
                               Frequency shift (GHz)                                                0          1           2         3         4        5
                                                                                                                          J1 (erg/cm2)



Figure 5. Left-hand side: Representative BLS spectra from spinwaves in Fe/X/Fe, where
X=Cr and Au [5]. The plot on the right-hand side displays the mode frequencies as a func-
tion of the interlayer exchange parameter J1 [3] where the theory is represented by the
solid lines.


Spectra from both systems in strong enough fields for full saturation of the
samples are displayed on the left-hand side of Figure 5. The spectrum with
d0=0 represents the fully F-coupled limit, as in Figure 3. The two spectra at
the bottom represent pure dipolar coupling. From the Fe/Au/Fe data and
comparison with Figure 4, we concluded that the coupling for the Au inter-
layers is ferromagnetic. However, by looking at the spectrum in the upper
corner on the left-hand side for the Cr interlayers, the reader might share
with me the sensation I had at that time when I viewed a BLS spectrum rep-
resenting antiferromagnetic IEC for the first time.
   In a phenomenological approach, IEC is treated via the associated aerial
energy density Eexch, as quoted in the Figure. As already discussed, on physi-
cal grounds, the optic mode increases its frequency for F coupling (J1>0) and
decreases it for AF coupling (J1<0).




98


Figure 6. Remagnetization curves of samples with F-coupling (Fe/Au/Fe) and AF-coupling
(Fe/Cr/Fe).

  Figure 6 displays the effect of F and AF coupling on the remagnetization (so
called hysteresis) curve. Plotted is the magneto-optic Kerr effect (MOKE) sig-
nal, which is roughly proportional to the magnetization M, vs. the external field
B0. There is a strong shearing for the Fe/Cr/Fe sample, which was not observed
for the other (Fe/Au/Fe) sample, which displays the remagnetization of an
uncoupled or F-coupled sample with small coercivity. F-coupled and uncoupled
cannot be distinguished. Furthermore, one has to consider that shearing of
hysteresis curves is not very unique. It is a phenomenon that occurs very often
and can have many causes. The use of more sophisticated tools like BLS is not a
luxury for a first observation. Note also that the information given by the MOKE
curve is assisted by BLS spectra to make sure there is AF alignment at these
points. However, once it is certain that shearing comes from AF coupling, one
might as well employ this simpler method to obtain large amounts of data.
                                                                                             M1·M2
                                                                             Eexch = -J1
                                                                                           "M1"·"M2!


                       
                        
                                                                     
                                                         




                                                                     
                                                              




                                                            


                                                                     
                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                   


Figure 7. Left-hand side: First measurement of coupling for a wider range of Cr thick-
nesses, given in terms of spinwave frequencies. Note that the DE mode stays almost con-
stant whereas the optic (or exchange-) mode shows two minima, indicative of AF coupling.
Right-hand side: Evaluation of the frequencies for another sample not showing the second
minimum, with respect to the coupling parameter J1.

                                                                                                            99


In Figure 7, we see the result of a more extended investigation of the coup-
ling represented by mode frequencies as a function of the Cr interlayer thick-
ness given in Ångströms. This is the first rather complete result obtained
in May 1985, and is directly copied from the lab book. The minima of the
lower branch indicate AF coupling in that range. The second more shallow
minimum initially appeared to be not sufficiently reproducible and was not
communicated in our first publication. Furthermore, we were not very happy
with the NaCl substrates because of their sensitivity to humidity. Since mean-
while epipolished GaAs had become available, we switched to this substrate
material. Finally, AF coupling could reproducibly be observed where the
result of Figure 7 seemed generic instead of the expected period of 2ML.
However, years later due to improved growth, this and other theoretically
expected features caused by the noncommensurate spin density wave of Cr
could be observed [6].
   In 1986, when we published our results [5], there were two other publi-
cations on interlayer exchange coupling, namely of Dy and of Gd across Y
interlayers observed by means of neutron scattering (cited in ref. 7). For Gd
interlayers, it was reported to be oscillatory, as indicated by Figure 7 and for
many other examples which followed.


DISCOVERY OF GIANT MAGNETORESISTANCE
Sir Nevil Mott proposed a two-current model for the description of the elec-
trical resistivity of magnetic alloys. This model is based on the fact that the re-
sistivity is due to electron scattering. In magnetic materials, this is dependent
on spin orientation. Due to the quantum mechanical spatial quantization,
this orientation is only parallel or antiparallel with respect to the local mag-
netization. As spin flip processes occur seldom, each of the two orientations
defines a current.
   With this picture, one expects that there would be a strong resistivity
change if one could manage to change the direction of the local magnetiza-
tion within the mean free path of the electrons or on an even shorter scale.
In a case where the scattering rates are different, there is a better chance that
the total scattering rate is increased. As mean free paths are of the order of
10 nm, the 1 nm thickness by which the magnetic layers are separated in the
coupled structures perfectly fulfills this condition. We expect that if the rela-
tive orientation of the magnetizations changes from parallel to antiparallel
in a structure such as in Figure 8, left-hand side, the resistivity for the current
will increase.
   In order to have more experimental possibilities available, we used samples
grown epitaxially on (110) oriented GaAs. The film plane was parallel to a
(110) atomic plane and had an easy (EA) and a hard (HA) axis. For the
thickness d of the individual Fe films, we chose d =12 nm. The Cr thickness
was d0 =1 nm, which corresponds to the first maximum of AF coupling. As a
reference sample, we also made a single Fe film with thickness d=25 nm in


100


order to measure the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) effect for com-
parison. Laterally, the samples had the shape of a long strip with contacts at
both ends.




Figure 8. (a) and (b) MOKE curves and BLS spectra in order to identify magnetic align-
ment as shown by arrows. (c) and (d): relative resistance change corresponding to align-
ment [8].


In Figures 8(a) and 8(b), we can see the MOKE hysteresis loops from the
double layers with AF coupling for B0 along the EA and HA. The directions
of the magnetization are indicated by the encircled pairs of arrows. This
information is obtained from the MOKE intensities and the displayed LS
spectra. As an example, let us discuss the hysteresis loop shown in Figure 8(a)
in more detail. The field B0 is applied along the EA, which is the long axis
of the strip. It is clear that for a large enough B0, the samples saturate in the
field direction (parallel alignment). If we start with parallel alignment in the
positive field direction and reduce B0 then at a certain, but still positive value
of B0, the magnetization of one film reverses via domain-wall motion (point
1). Hence, in small fields we have antiparallel alignment. In a negative field,
at point 2, the other film also reverses, and we have saturation. Points 3 and 4
mark the magnetization reversals when B0 is scanned back.
   Magnetoresistance (MR) traces are shown in Figure 8(c) and 8(d). Here,
we have plotted the relative change of the resistivity (R —R↑↑)/R↑↑ as we scan
through the hysteresis loop. R↑↑ is the resistivity for saturation along the EA.
In Figure 8(d), we also show the MR of the single Fe film, taken for B0 along
the HA. Since for large B0, the magnetization is along [110] and for small B0,
along [100], the maximum change of R seen in this trace displays the aniso-
tropic MR= (R > -R||)/R|| of a 25-nm-thick Fe film. The value of - 0,13% is in
reasonable agreement with the literature value of - 0,2%. For the single film
and B0 along the EA, there was no measurable MR effect. The reason for this


                                                                                   101


is clear; the magnetization always stays aligned parallel to the EA and magne-
tization reversal takes place via domain-wall motion only. In Figure 8(d) for
the Fe-Cr-Fe film, we have an MR effect due to both the anisotropic effect
(negative values) and antiparallel alignment (positive values). The zero level
of this plot is defined by R=R||.
   At the time of the discovery of GMR, it was well known that leading com-
puter companies planned to develop AMR so it could be used for read heads
in hard disk drives (HDDs). The comparison between AMR and the new ef-
fect (later, the term GMR was widely accepted) encouraged us to file a patent
for using GMR in HDD.
(a)                 R / R(H=0)                      (b) 1.5
              1.0

                      30 x (Fe / Cr)                                      Fe / Cr / Fe
                                                    R/RP (%)
                                                           1.0


                             35 x (Fe / Cr)                0.5
                                                                            250 Å Fe
                                   60 x (Fe / Cr)

              0.5                                          0.0

  -40    -20     0         20          40                      -2   -1         0           1   2
           Magnetic field (kG)                                           Magnetic field (kG)

Figure 9. GMR effect (a) in a multilayer and (b) double layer of Fe interspaced by Cr. In
(b) the AMR effect of a 250-Å-thick film of Fe is also shown for comparison.

In Figure 9 [9], we can see a comparison of the measurements using a multi-
layer as in Orsay and a double layer as in Jülich. The value for the multilayer
of around 80% obtained in Orsay, which led to the term “giant” appears to
have been surpassed by far by the TMR value of 500% for systems with MgO
barriers. However, one has to be careful. There seems to be an important
difference between dealing with insulators, semiconductors and metals. The
magnetic semiconductor EuS, for example, changes its resistivity below its
Curie point by many orders of magnitude. If we restrict the discussion to
purely metallic systems, which has also some important implications for ap-
plications, the term “giant” is still justified.
    The value 1.5% for the double layer displayed in Figure 9 (b) is even
smaller but still large compared to the AMR effect of Fe (trace at the bot-
tom). In Figure 8, the effect was measured using various configurations of
external field relative to the axis of the crystal anisotropy to make sure that it
really is due to the relative orientation of the magnetizations. The low values
of the GMR effect as seen in Figure 8 and Figure 9 (b) is not a result of minor
sample quality but is typical for the chosen film thicknesses.
   GMR can be observed in the current in plane (CIP) and current perpen-
dicular plane (CPP) geometry. The conventional geometry is CIP and is for
most sensor applications (see below). The CPP configuration is expected to
be of interest for future sensor designs.
   As was already suggested in the first paper by Albert Fert and his group and
later established by numerical evaluations of experiments [11], the micro-

102


scopic explanation for the GMR effect is a dependence of the scattering rates
on the orientation (parallel or antiparallel) of the electron spins with respect
to the local magnetization.
   We will now consider the situation in Figure 10 a. Two structures are shown
− one with parallel and the other with antiparallel magnetization alignment.
In an ideal situation, we assume that electrons with spin parallel to the local
magnetization in their random walk are not scattered. In the figure, only
one passage from the left to the right surface is displayed as representative
for the entire motion. In this ideal picture, the electrons which are not scat-
tered would cause a short circuit. This short circuit is removed when one
magnetization is turned round and the electron with up spin enters this layer
and finds its spin to be opposite to the local magnetization. The equivalent
circuits for the various cases are shown at the bottom and display the in-
crease in the resistivity due to the removal of the short circuit. In reality of
course, both types of electrons are scattered. It is sufficient that one sort of
spin is scattered more than the other for the resistivity to increase due to the
antiparallel magnetization alignment. From symmetry for the CIP configura-
tion, spin-dependent interface reflectivity does not contribute to the effect.
The reason is that there is no change in momentum in the direction of the
current due to translational symmetry during reflection at interfaces. This is
different in the CPP geometry, where both spin-dependent scattering as well
as spin-dependent reflectivity contribute.




Figure 10. (a) Explanation of the CIP-GMR effect: spin-dependent electron scattering and
redistribution of scattering events upon anti-alignment of magnetizations. The antiparal-
lel alignment can be obtained by antiferromagnetic coupling, like in Figure 9, or due to
hysteresis effects, like in Figure 10 (b).

The largest difference in resistivity occurs when an AF alignment is changed
by an applied field into a F alignment. The AF alignment can be provided by

                                                                                    103


AF interlayer exchange as for the samples in Figure 9 or by different coercivi-
ties of successive magnetic layers, in particular by pinning the magnetization
using an antiferromagnetic material in direct contact, known as “exchange
biasing”. If GMR is obtained via one of the latter methods and not via AF
interlayer coupling, usually the term “spin valve system” is used in the lit-
erature, although there is no difference concerning the mechanism of the
GMR effect. Such a case is displayed in Figure 10 b (see also the review article
in ref. 9). The sample is a Co/Au/Co layered structure with one of the Co
films deposited directly onto the GaAs substrate. Since this Co film is more
strained than the one prepared on the Au interlayer, it has a higher coer-
civity. During magnetization reversal of the whole structure, it reverses later
than the other, resulting in a small field range with antiparallel alignment. In
Figure 10 (b) upper panel, this range is marked by antiparallel arrows. The
curve in Figure 10 (b) lower panel shows the associated electrical resistance
R(H) and its increase due to the antiparallel alignment. As will be seen in the
section on Applications, the two different methods for obtaining antiparallel
alignment lead to two different concepts for sensors based on GMR.

GMR: THE CAMLEY-BARNAS MODEL
At the time when the GMR effect was discovered, it was a coincidence that I
had two visiting scientists in my team at Jülich, Jozef Barnas from Poznan in
Poland and Bob Camley from Colorado Springs in the USA. Both are theore-
ticians whom I had been working with years before on spinwaves. Together,
they worked out a method for the description of GMR by means of suitable
parameters. Their method is based on Boltzmann’s diffusion equation within
the relaxation time approximation and soon became known as the Camley-
Barnas model [10].




Figure 11. Comparison of theory and experiment within the Camley-Barnas model. Top
right: resistance change vs. external field assuming AF coupling and cubic anisotropy.
Bottom right: resistance change vs mean free path for multilayered structures (n=number of
Cr layers). Left: assymetry of diffusive scattering parameters given by D↑ ≈0.45 and D↓≈ 0.08.


104


CIMS
Current-induced magnetic switching (CIMS) can be understood as an inverse
GMR effect. In a trilayer structure, one film is prepared with a fixed magne-
tization Mfixed and the other with a magnetization which can be easily rotated
(Mfree). Using electron beam lithography, the samples are prepared in such a
way that a strong current can be applied perpendicular to the sample plane.
Then it can be shown that – no matter what the initial conditions are – when
the current is such that the electron flow from the film with Mfixed to the film
with Mfree, Mfree switches into the parallel orientation. When the current is in
the opposite direction Mfree switches into the antiparallel orientation. The ef-
fect was predicted by J. Slonczewski and by L. Berger and observed by Katine
et al. for the first time. References to these works are given in [12], which also
shows an example for “inverse” CIMS where the role of the two current direc-
tions is interchanged.




Figure 12. Two-step CIMS in Fe/Ag/Fe. Four energetically nearly identical states give rise
to two-step switching [13].


Figure 12 displays an example for CIMS obtained recently in Jülich from
epitaxial samples of Fe/Ag/Fe with fourfold cubic inplane anisotropy. The
curves with the overall U shape display the resistivity of the sample in CPP
geometry. The strong increase on both sides is due to the heating of sample
by the strong current. The various steps in the curves are due to switching
between the various configurations as indicated and the associated change in
the CPP-GMR effect. The shamrock patterns in the middle part display the
cubic anisotropy. Magnetizations always switch between easy axis indicated by
minima in the polar plot.


APPLICATIONS
We now come to applications of the effects discussed. One can safely say that
GMR has received much attention due to its impact on magnetic storage, in

                                                                                     105


particular in hard disk drives (HDDs). Since the introduction of GMR-type
sensors as reading elements, in around 1997, storage capacities have increased
approximately 100 times. The introduction of GMR sensors into HDDs was
particularly fast because magnetoresistive sensors based on the Anisotropic
Magnetoresistivity Effect (AMR) had paved the way. Thanks to the fact that
GMR is at least partly an interface effect (note that in Figure 10, the scattering
events have been intentionally placed at the interfaces), one can make GMR
sensors thinner than those based on AMR. A thinner layer is subject to less
demagnetizing effects than a thicker one when one also wants to shrink the
lateral dimensions in order to read a narrower track. In other fields where a
small size is not as critical, AMR and GMR might still coexist for some time. It
is expected that GMR will save costs in the long run, alone from the trivial fact
that one can have more sensors on a wafer during production.




Figure 13. Working principle and data for GMR sensor with AF-coupled multilayer
(courtesy of NAOMI- Sensitech, Germany).

There are two basic concepts for GMR-type sensors, which are connected
with the two ways to obtain antiparallel alignment discussed in Figure 9
and Figure 10 b. For the sensor material in Figure 13, a Co/Cu multilayer
was used, where the Cu thickness was chosen to provide antiferromagnetic
coupling. Its strength and the associated properties can be chosen from the
empirical coupling curve, which is also displayed. Three different panels and
a table are displayed which present these properties, in particular saturation
field and sensitivity. This type of sensor has the advantage of a large signal
because multilayers can be used, but the disadvantage that it is unipolar
(positive and negative fields yield the same signal as also displayed by the
curves). They cannot be used for magnetic recording where the polarity of
the field contains the essential information. However, there are many other
applications in position and motion sensing of objects which are magnetic or
marked by attaching a little permanent magnet to them. These range from
tooth detection of rotating gear wheels to the detection of cars or even air-
planes for traffic control. In future car parks, each lot will be equipped with
a sensor and will give information regarding free lots to the customer via a
panel at the entrance.




106


                                object




                          permanent-
                          magnet




                                                         GMR
                                                         Sensor
              synthetic
              antiferromagnet
                                                        natural antiferro-
                                                        magnet



Figure 14. Working principle of a GMR- spinvalve-type sensor, used here for measurement
of rotational angles.


The other type of GMR sensor also available on the market is of the spin-
valve type (see above). It consists of a fixed layer (see Figure 14) and a free
layer which can follow the applied field. There are various ways to stabilize
the fixed layer, like the use of “synthetic antiferromagnets” with compen-
sated overall magnetization such that they do not react to the applied field.
They can be stabilized further by using natural antiferromagnets and the
well-known effect of “exchange anisotropy”. The disadvantage here is that
multilayers yield no improvement. GMR signals are hardly more than 10 %.
However the real advantage is that they are bipolar and thus can be used in
magnetic recording and in electronic compasses.
   Applications of antiferromagnetic coupling have already been indicated
(synthetic antiferromagnets). This would be for use in sensors. However,
magnetic storage media of HDDs have also benefited from the invention of
AFC (antiferromagnetically coupled) media with improved stability of stored
information.




                                                                                  107


REFERENCES
[1] P. Grünberg and F. Metawe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 1561 (1977), “Light Scattering from Bulk
     and Surface Spinwaves in EuO”.
[2] P. Grünberg, Appl. Phys. (1989) Vol. 66: “Light Scattering in Solids V”, ed. by M.
     Cardona and G. Güntherodt, “Light Scattering from Spinwaves in Layered Magnetic
     Structures” (review).
[3] J. Barnas, P. Grünberg, J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 82, 186 (1989), “Spin waves in exchange
     coupled epitaxial double layers”
[4] J. F. Cochran and J. R. Dutcher, J. Appl. Phys. 64(1988)6092, “Calculation of Brillouin
     light scattering intensities from pairs of exchange coupled films”.
[5] P. Grünberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Pang, M. B. Brodsky, H. Sowers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57,
     2442 (1986), “Layered Magnetic Structures: Evidence for antiferromagnetic coupling of Fe-
     layers across Cr-interlayer.
[6] J. Unguris, R. J. Celotta, and D. T. Pierce, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 140 (1991), Observation
     of two different oscillation periods in the exchange coupling of Fe/Cr/Fe(100).
[7] D. E. Bürgler, P. Grünberg, S. O. Demokritov, M. T. Johnson, Handbook of Magnetic
     Materials 13, Elsevier, ed. by K.H.J. Buschow, “Interlayer Exchange Coupling in Layered
     Magnetic Structures”(review).
[8] G. Binasch, P. Grünberg, F. Saurenbach, W. Zinn, Phys. Rev. B39, 4828 (1989),
     “Enhanced magnetoresistance in layered magnetic structures with antiferromagnetic interlayer
     exchange”.
[9] A. Fert, P. Grünberg, A. Barthelemy, F. Petroff, W. Zinn, JMMM 140-144, 1 (1995),
     “Layered magnetic structures: interlayer exchange coupling and giant magnetoresistance”.
[10] R. E. Camley and J. Barnas, Phys.Rev. Lett.63, 664, (1989),”Theory of Giant Magneto-
     resistance Effects in Magnetic Layered Structures with Antiferromagnetic Coupling”.
[11] J. Barnas, A. Fuß, R. E. Camley, P. Grünberg, W. Zinn, Phys. Rev. B42, 8110 (1990),
     “Novel magnetoresistance effect in layered magnetic structures: theory and experiment”.
[12] P. Grünberg, D. E. Bürgler, H. Dassow, A. D. Rata, C. M. Schneider, Acta Materialia
     55 (2007) 1171–1182, “Spin-transfer phenomena in layered magnetic structures:physical phe-
     nomena and materials aspects”.
[13] R. Lehndorff, M. Buchmeier, D. E. Bürgler, A. Kakay, R. Hertel, C. M. Schneider,
     ”Asymmetric spintransfer torque in single-crystalline Fe/Ag/Fe nanopillars” Phys. Rev. B76,
     214420 (2007).
Portrait photo of Peter Grünberg by photographer Ulla Montan.




108
