                        P H I L I P P E. A.   V O N   LENARD


                              On cathode rays
                            Nobel Lecture, May 28, 1906



I am pleased to fulfil my obligation as a Nobel Prize winner to talk to you
here on cathode rays. I assume that you would prefer me to tell you what
others could not tell you. I shall describe to you the development of the sub-
ject - which also embraces recent theories concerning electricity and matter
- as it has appeared to me, on the basis of my own experience.* This will
 give me a welcome opportunity of showing on the one hand how my work
has depended on that of others, and on the other how in one or two points
subsequent, or more or less contemporary, work by other investigators is
related to mine. Thus - using the simile which you, my esteemed colleagues
 of the Academy of Sciences, have used at the head of your member’s diplo-
 ma** - I shall now speak not only of the fruits but also of the trees which
 have borne them, and of those who planted these trees. This approach is the
 more suitable in my case, as I have by no means always been numbered
 among those who pluck the fruit; I have been repeatedly only one of those
 who planted or cared for the trees, or who helped to do this.
    In the time at my disposal I can deal at length with only a few aspects of
 my work in the field under discussion.
    The start takes me back 26 years to Crookes. I had read his lecture on
 "radiating matter" (5)*** - his term for cathode rays**** - and was greatly
 impressed by it. You are all acquainted with the tests he made. Here Fig. 1 is
 one as a reminder: the glass tubes with highly rarefied air; the negatively
 charged plate or cathode (a) on which the rays are produced; a cross (b) in
 the path of the rays, and here the shadow of the cross (d) thrown by the rays
 * In this paper I have tried hard to put into their historical perspective all the publica-
tions which in my opinion have made basic contributions to knowledge, even if they
came to my notice too late for them to influence my work.
 ** Coat of arms: gardener planting young trees, with the motto "For our descendants".
 *** The numbers in brackets refer to the bibliography at the end; here "p." gives the
page number in the case of voluminous publications.
**** After Faraday, Hittorf (2) and then Goldstein (4) had already produced and pro-
gressively studied "glow rays" or "cathode rays". But Crookes made more progress
than these workers, because he carried out experiments at a higher vacuum.


106




                                      Fig. 1.

onto the phosphorescent glass wall. The shadow moves when a magnet is
brought near; this is a sign that the cathode rays - unlike light rays - are bent
in a magnetic field.
   I have always attached great importance in my work to the problem of
isolating the phenomenon being studied from interference sources, irrespec-
tive of the difficulties that this entails, an approach already adhered to by
Crookes in his work. For it was he who produced these cathode rays in a pure
form as never reached before, and showed that the phenomena concerned
are of a very special type differing from other discharge phenomena through
their attractive simplicity. The real nature of "radiating matter" or "the
fourth state of aggregation", as he called it, was then beyond my compre-
hension, just as it must, we may now be sure, have been beyond his. But I
readily shared his enthusiasm when he said: "Here, I believe, are the ultimate
realities." And we were right: that is why I stand here today!
    My interest in these matters found no direct expression during my student
 days. Electrical gas discharges were not considered a suitable object of study
for beginners, and rightly so. But even mature investigators achieved noth-
ing really significant in this field in the years following Crookes’ work. They
 did not obtain any results that in themselves opened new vistas, and so far as
 purity of experimental conditions was concerned they hardly progressed be-
 yond Crookes’ work.
    It was only later, when I was assistant to Quincke in Heidelberg, that I had
 the opportunity and the facilities for building a mercury air pump capable
 of giving very high rarefaction - then by no means a standard item of equip-
 ment in physics institutes - and for carrying out tests myself on cathode rays.
 I wanted to advance as directly as possible, and thought how fine it would
 be, in particular, to bring these rays from the tube out into the open air; it
 would then be possible to carry out direct experiments with them. To do
 this it was necessary to fit into the wall of the tube an airtight seal that would


                               O N CATHODE RAYS                                       107
allow the rays to pass through. Now radiating matter would not readily pass
through airtight seals, but might not Eilhard Wiedemann be right in as-
suming that cathode rays were a form of ultra-ultraviolet light? Finally,
quartz appeared to me to be the most promising material, since it best trans-
mitted all the radiations that were then known. Here (Fig. 2) is the tube I
built at the time with the cathode plate, and at the top of it you will see the
opening sealed by a quartz plate 2.4 mm thick. The test was unsuccessful,
however; outside the quartz I found no phosphorescence nor even any elec-
trical* effects that could be ascribed with certainty to the light issuing from
the tube.




  It was four years later, in 1892, that another opportunity arose. Hertz,
whose assistant I then was, had found that thin metal leaf transmits cathode
rays (15). He used quite thin, very soft and porous gold, silver and aluminium
leaf used in bookbinding, but showed that the cathode rays not only pass
through the holes but through the material itself, the metal of the leaf. One
day he called me over - an event which to my great regret at the time did
not occur often - and showed me what he had just found: uranium glass
covered with aluminium leaf inside a discharge tube, glowed under the leaf
when irradiated from above. He said to me: "We ought - and I might sim-
ply do this for he was prevented - to separate two chambers with aluminium
leaf, and produce the rays as usual in one of the chambers. It should then be
possible to observe the rays in the other chamber more purely than has been
done so far and even though the difference in air pressure between the two
chambers is low because of the softness of the leaf, it might be possible to
completely evacuate the observation chamber and see whether this impedes
the spread of the cathode rays - in other words find out whether the rays are
* Hertz’ discovery of such effects of ultraviolet light had at that time just been made (8).


108                      1905 P.E.A.VON LENARD

phenomena in matter or phenomena in ether." He appeared to consider this
last question to be the most important one. I did carry out the test later;
but I was primarily interested in my earlier question, that of cathode rays in
the open air. I was not put off by the softness of the leaf used by Hertz. I laid
more and more of such leaves on top of each other in a suitable tube and
found that 10 and 15 layers still transmitted the rays fairly well. I then pro-
cured some pieces of aluminium foil of comparable thickness, to see whether
they would withstand the air pressure. Such was the case, provided that a
sufficiently small area of foil was used. Then, taking the old tube again, I
replaced the quartz by a metal plate containing a small hole sealed with
aluminium foil, spread a few small grains of alkaline-earth phosphor on
this small aluminium window, excited the tube and, lo and behold, the
grains glowed brightly! I then fixed them slightly above the aluminium
window and they glowed brightly there as well! Thus not only had the ca-
thode rays passed out of the interior of the discharge tube to which they had
been hitherto confined, in addition - and nobody could have predicted this -
they could pass through air of normal density. It thus became clear that a
vast new field of investigation had opened up in front of me, a field that not
 only embraced hitherto unseen phenomena but also gave promise of a break-
through into the unknown. Cathode rays, which had hitherto stubbornly
 eluded explanation, had yielded their secret and, more important, now for
 the first time tests of maximum purity could be carried out. Let us compare
 the position with that of another type of radiation, light: hitherto it was as if
it had been impossible to study light except in the interior of furnaces and
 flames where it is produced, like the cathode rays in the tube. Where then
 would the great and detailed science of optics have stopped? ! A window had
 now been built in the furnace through which pure light only could emerge,
 freed from the complex and still unexplained processes of its formation. Such
 processes remain confined to the interior of the discharge tube and, as has
 since been found, could not be understood until a sufficient study had been
 made of the cathode rays themselves. As we shall see in our historical survey,
 this study has also provided a great deal of other information, some of which
 is now general knowledge, on X-rays and radioactivity, as well as a deeper
 understanding of electricity and matter.
    It was now necessary above all to widen the inroad already made into the
 new field of knowledge. It was important to increase the intensity of the rays
 coming out of the window, and to improve the conditions of their produc-
 tion compared with the first tube. This led to the construction of the tube


                               ON CATHODE RAYS                              109




                  S
                                     Fig. 3.

illustrated in Fig3, which was used in a large number of experiments (18).
Here will be seen the production chamber with the anode (A) and the cath-
ode (C), the seal ( m m) with the window, and beyond it the observation
chamber into which the rays emerge. The number of phenomena possible
here is such that although the most obvious ones and also the slightly less
obvious ones have probably now all been discovered, so far the consequences
of all the phenomena have not yet been studied sufficiently.
   It must be noted that the rays are not directly visible; it would be useless
to put one’s eye to the window, as this organ is not receptive to cathode
rays. On the other hand, materials that are capable of becoming luminous
without heat, phosphorescent materials as they are called, are suitable for
making the rays visible. It is best to use sheets of paper coated with such
materials, e.g. a certain ketone, platinum cyanide, or an alkaline-earth phos-
phor and to hold them as a screen against the rays. If the screen glows, it
indicates that it has been hit by the rays. The rays can also be photographed
directly. These are the same methods that are used to make visible ultra-
violet light, at that time the only known example of such demonstrable in-
visible radiation.
   When we use the phosphorescent screen, we find it glowing brightly close
to the window; as the distance from the window increases, the intensity of
the rays progressively diminishes until at a distance of about 8 cm the screen
remains quite dark. Apparently air at full atmospheric pressure is not very
permeable to cathode rays, certainly far less permeable than it is to light. But
it was far more interesting to find that air is even a turbid medium for these
rays, just as milk is for light. If we place an impermeable wall with a hole


110                      1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

in it a suitable distance from the window and put the edge of the screen
against it, we then get this view (Fig. 4). Here the dotted lines indicate the
narrow pencil of rays that we should expect in the case of rectilinear prop-
agation; but it is the broad bent bunch of rays that we really see on the
screen in the open air, just as if we had passed light through the same hole
into a tank containing slightly diluted milk. What clouds the air? In milk it




                                     Fig. 4.

is numerous small suspended fat particles that make it turbid to light. Pure
air on the other hand contains nothing except molecules of the gases con-
tained in it, suspended in the ether. These molecules are extremely small,
10,000 times smaller than the fat particles, far too small to act individually on
light. But, as we see, the cathode rays are hindered by each of these mole-
cules. Thus these rays must be extremely fine, so fine that the molecular struc-
ture of matter, which is minute compared with the very fine light waves,
becomes pronounced in comparison with them. It may then be possible to
obtain data by means of these rays concerning the nature of molecules and
atoms.
   It is therefore particularly interesting to study the behaviour of a wide
variety of materials relative to cathode rays. The first point to be studied was
the permeability. Some idea of this can be obtained by holding a thin layer of
the material being studied, between the window and the screen. It is abun-
dantly clear that the permeability or impermeability of a material to light is
is not even slightly related to its behaviour in relation to cathode rays. Here
is an example (Fig. 5), a print of a direct photograph taken at the aluminium
window. In the top half will be seen the deep shadow of a completely light-
permeable ½ mm thick rectangular quartz plate, and in the left half, as a
very mat veil, the picture of an ordinary aluminium leaf, impermeable to
light and with somewhat irregular boundaries, laid over the whole of this


                              ON CATHODE RAYS                               111




                                     Fig. 5.

half. Great care must be taken in selecting the thickness of the layer throwing
the shadow. Thus, for example, the quartz plate used in this experiment is
impermeable simply because it is too thick, and the reason why metal leaf
was found to be the only example of permeable layers in Hertz’ tests lay in
the thinness at which metal leaf is available. We shall soon see that most other
materials, when of the same thickness, are even more permeable than gold
and silver. It is soon evident that the absorption of cathode rays in any sub-
stance is a very gradual process, just as in the case of light, where as we know,
gold is permeable when it is made sufficiently thin. Here (Fig. 6) we see the
shadow of leaves of aluminium laid stepwise on top of each other; the num-
bers on the left give the number of leaves, those on the right their total
thickness. Each increase in the number of leaves, and also any unevenness in




                                     Fig. 6.


112                     1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

the thickness of the individual leaves, can be noted, and it will be seen how
almost total permeability changes into almost total impermeability. Thus,
with each material it was not a question of simply deciding between "per-
meable" and "impermeable", but of finding a numerical measure of the de-
gree of absorption of cathode rays therein, of measuring its absorptive power,
and I did this for a large number of solid and gaseous materials.
   The result was astounding. All the great multiplicity of properties that we
associate with the different materials around us, disappeared. The sole deter-
mining characteristic was the weight of the materials (21). Everything of equal
weight absorbed equally, anything heavier absorbed more, anything lighter
absorbed less, and always in proportion to the weights or the masses. At a first
approximation, the chemical composition of the materials, their state of ag-
gregation and other properties, did not count at all - a quite unprecedented
finding that was not valid for any radiation known at the time. * At a second
approximation, on closer inspection it is seen that the chemical composition
has a slight effect: thus, e.g. hydrogen, and anything containing hydrogen,
absorbs slightly more than one would expect in proportion to its weight. I
must forbear to discuss these deviations and their significance in detail here.**
 As an illustration of the law of proportionality between mass and cathode
ray absorption, that is valid at a first approximation, let us see the direct
photographs of the shadows of layers of aluminium, silver and gold of equal
 thickness (Fig. 7). It will be seen that the heavy silver absorbs more than the
lighter aluminium, and that gold, which is the heaviest, absorbs the most. If
 on the other hand we take layers of equal weights of the three metals (Fig.
 8), we also get equal shadows and equal absorption, and the result would


         AIuminium

               Silver

                Gold



                            Fig. 7.               Fig. 8.

* Later X-rays were found to be a second example of radiation that is absorbed more
or less in proportion to the mass.
** Compare (21, 47, 52).


                                ON CATHODE RAYS                                   113
be the same if we had taken any other materials in layers of equal weight.
  In fact, in relation to cathode rays, not only the absorption, but also the
turbidity, which I also studied in relation to a number of different materials
(18b p. 257; 21, p. 265) was found to be related solely to the weight, the
mass of the material in question, the quantity of matter - as Newton put it -
and not the quality of the material.* If we now recall that cathode rays as they
spread in matter are simply affected by the individual molecules of the ma-
terial, we can conclude that the molecules of the most varied materials, and
thus also the atoms of the different chemical elements vary, not qualitatively
but only quantitatively, from each other, i.e. they all consist of the same basic
material but contain different amounts of it. This old but because of the lack
of valid data almost forgotten hypothesis of the alchemists was brought back
vividly to our mind, this time however not to disappear again but to be
proved; as evidence of this we can quote the recent results of Ramsay (54)
and Rutherford (51) concerning the amazing transformation of radium**
into other elements. But in order to use the law of proportionality between
 the mass and cathode ray absorption as a basis for drawing more detailed
conclusions on the constitution of matter, it was first necessary to know
something about the nature of cathode rays themselves. Let us now turn to
this problem, which I have also borne in mind throughout my work.

Straightway we can decide whether cathode rays are phenomena that take
place in matter or in the ether. When we completely evacuate a chamber by
means of an air pump, it then does not contain any matter, only the ether, as
present in the heavens. Now it has long been known for instance that sound
cannot pass through such evacuated chambers, while light, and electrical and
magnetic forces can. Thus there is no doubt that sound is a phenomenon in
matter while light and electrical and magnetic forces are phenomena in the
ether. We had been unable to carry out the corresponding test in relation to
cathode rays in the ordinary discharge tubes, because once all the air is re-
moved the production of the rays in such a tube ceases. But, without inter-
fering in the least with production, we were able to completely evacuate our
observation chamber on the other side of the window and see whether de-

* The diffuse reflection of cathode rays, which can be considered to be pronounced
backwards-directed scatter, is also determined by the mass, as can be clearly seen from
the measurements of A. Becker (52, p. 448).
** As evidence of the elementary nature of radium its spectrum and atomic weight
are given (38, 39).


114                              1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

spite this the cathode rays spread in this chamber. We found that the propaga-
tion of the rays is particularly good in an extreme vacuum; all absorption
and turbidity due to the gas molecules disappear, the rays attain lengths of
several meters and are of such rectilinear sharpness as we are accustomed to
find only in light rays (18). Thus cathode rays are phenomena in the ether. In
particular, on the basis of the hypotheses which we have mentioned, it could
be stated that cathode rays were not radiating matter, nor emitted gas mole-
cules, as they had come to be regarded, especially in England. * We were still
not clear as to what type of phenomena in the ether they were. Many of my
readers believed, very wrongly, that I had concluded beforehand that ca-
thode rays were "waves in the ether"; I had no desire to say this or in fact
anything unless it was shown to be so in my experiments and appeared to
provide an explanation. I had the means available to discover new things
daily from Nature herself, in further experiments. I hoped so or thought so,
at least. I greatly regretted, therefore, that at this stage my experiments
were interrupted for considerable time, first by a far-from-simple task that
devolved unexpectedly on me through the untimely death of Heinrich
Hertz - the publication of his Prinzipien der Mechanik (Principles of Mechan-
ics) and then when I was appointed to a theoretical professorship.
   It is barely worth mentioning, but not unimportant for the further devel-
opment of our subject, that even before this interruption I had designed a
new and far more convenient type of discharge tube. I had tested it as far as
possible, and had recommended its use and made it generally available (18b,
p. 228). Here (Fig. 9) the window seal is fitted to a platinum tube, which in
turn is fused into the glass; this means the large amount of puttying which
often made the tube very difficult to use, is avoided. This type of tube had
however a special advantage that could not be foreseen at the time. In it the




 * Even after the experiments with the aluminiumwindow had been reported, this
theory continued to be held for some time, and it was suggested that molecular col-
lisions actuated, via the window, the molecules of the outside air or molecules remain-
ing in the vacuum.


                               ON CATHODE RAYS                                115
intensive cathode rays impinge on the large area of platinum - the metal
which, as we now know, is most effective in turning the rays into the - then
undiscovered - X-rays. Thus X-rays are produced here in very large quan-
tities, and they are also able to pass through the window, either mixed with
or separate from the cathode rays, into the observation chamber. This was
not possible in the earlier tube because of the large thick metal cover located
in the path of the rays (27). The discovery soon after this of X-rays by Rönt-
gen (22), the first investigator to use the type of tube described above, is gen-
erally considered to be a good example of a lucky discovery. But, given the
tube, the fact that the attention of the observer was already turned from the
interior to the outside of the tube, and the presence of phosphorescent screens
outside the tube because of the purpose of the tube, it appeared to me that
this discovery had of necessity to be made at this stage of development.
    On resuming my experiments I soon occupied myself exclusively with an
idea already put forward by Hertz (7b, p. 275) and Schuster (13), which in
relation to the nature of the cathode rays had appeared to me to be very impor-
tant right from the start, and which I had already begun to pursue in the first
period of my experiments. It had been known since Hittorf’s days that cath-
 ode rays are deflected by magnets (2) ; similarly the deflection of cathode rays
noted by Goldstein (4) could be interpreted as being an influence of electrical
forces on the rays. Now both the magnetic and the electrical deflection of
 the rays suggest that the cathode rays consist of emitted negatively charged
 masses. Moreover, from experiments made to measure the magnitude of the
 magnetic and electrical effects on a ray it is even possible to calculate the ve-
locity of the supposed masses and also the electric charge per unit of mass
(the charge/mass ratio). This is what Hertz and Schuster had done, but their
 results had contradicted each other. Hertz found that his observations refuted
 the theory of ejected gas molecules, while Schuster found that his fitted in
 with it, and thus he took them as support for this theory.
    This contradiction did not surprise me. For both investigators had observed
 the interior of the discharge tube, and they might have been confused by the
 complications of the production process and the presence of the gas, as in
 fact they both admitted with reserve. It was now time to carry out these
 important tests under clearly-defined experimental conditions, i.e. outside
 the discharge tube and in a very high vacuum, and some excitement as to
 the result was permissible. For if we know already that the rays are ether,
 not material phenomena, it should be astonishing that their behaviour still
 resembled so deceptively that of ejected negatively charged gas molecules.


116                           1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

Nothing known so far had made solving this dilemma of the streaming mole-
cules and the ether phenomena possible; these experiments would do this,
and in any case therefore they would reveal something quite new.
   While I was still doing the preparatory work for the experiments* I heard
that others were already convinced of their importance. J.J. Thomson was
the first to publish a detailed publication on the subject (25). His experiments,
like those of Hertz and Schuster, were carried out in the discharge tube. He
sought to avoid the danger of confusion as a result of interaction of the pro-
duction discharge, by means of shielding devices, and to compensate the lack
of reliability due to the presence of the gas by greatly varying the test condi-
tions. It was clear to me that all that followed would have to rest on this
pillar which I had learned to distrust from the discrepancy between Hertz and
Schuster. It seemed to me that before it was made a part of the structure of
science it should be tested as directly and rigorously as was possible with the
means at our disposal. I therefore concluded my experiments, the results of
which were as follows (28).
   The velocity of the supposed masses was about one third the velocity of
light, and the ratio of the charge to the mass was about 1,000 times that of a
hydrogen atom in electrolysis, which atom is the lightest material carrier of
 electricity known to us. So, if the rays were streaming hydrogen atoms,
their charge would have to be taken as being 1,000 times that in electrolysis.
 This possibility had however been excluded by my previous tests, which had
 shown that the rays are not material bodies. It seemed evident that I had
 discovered hitherto unknown parts of the ether, representing electric charges
 and moving like inert masses. The smallness of the inertia determined -
 1/1,000 of the inertia of the hydrogen ion, at an equal charge - and the other
 behaviour (30) of these parts of the ether, made it easier to identify them with
 what had long been known as the "electrical fluidum". The solution to the
 dilemma was therefore as follows: The rays are not emitted electrically-
 charged molecules but simply streaming electricity. Thus, in cathode rays we
 have found under our very noses what we never believed we should see:
 electricity without material, electrical charges without charged bodies. We
 have, in a sense, discovered electricity itself, a thing whose existence or non-
 existence and whose properties have puzzled investigators since Gilbert and
 Franklin. Earlier workers, even Coulomb, had referred naively to electric-
* These were resumed at Aix under the direction of and with a grant from Wüllner’s
Institute (1896), and they had again been interrupted when I was appointed to another
professorship elsewhere.


                                ON CATHODE RAYS                                   117
ities as something that existed and could almost be grasped. But the num-
ber of electrical phenomena known grew steadily without anybody being
able to state that they had seen anything of the supposed electricity itself.
Thus it was that - about a generation after Coulomb - Faraday (1) and then
Maxwell (3) turned their attention completely away from the electricities to
concentrate on the electrical forces that could be observed. These forces -
thought of as states in the ether - appeared in fact in the famous experiments
 of Hertz (9) to be so likely to exist independently that from then on one felt
increasingly inclined to forget their centres, the electricities, that had former-
 ly been regarded as indispensible. Now - again about a generation after Fara-
 day and Maxwell - the picture has changed somewhat: it has become more
 complete. We have found in cathode rays just as good a way of studying
 electricity as we found earlier for the electrical forces alone; we can follow
 the motion of electricity to and fro in these rays over distances stretching
 several meters, at will and directly with our senses - without any intermediate
 theoretical conclusions; we can see how electricity behaves under different
 conditions, and what its properties are; we are now in a position to give to
 the old term "electricity" a new content based on experience.

This new content, of which we now know a great deal, appears quite dif-
ferent now in many ways from what could have been supposed earlier.
    Here it should be noted that all our remarks concerning electricity apply
only to negative electricity, not positive electricity, about which even today
little can be said that is concrete. We cannot claim to be acquainted with it;
we can only recognize positively-charged material, whether it be atoms,
molecules or groups of molecules.* We thus use the unitary means of expres-
sion, and say that a piece of material is positively charged when it has lost
negative electricity.
    Let us now therefore consider negative electricity, as it appears in our tests.
Here we are amazed by the freedom of its motion, which we hitherto be-
lieved was only present inside metallic conductors. Already in the discharge
tube, in the centre of the gas, we set this electricity in accelerated motion
 through the voltage applied to the electrodes, and immediately its velocity
becomes one third that of light, 100,000km/set, and it represents a cathode
ray. Now it impinges on the aluminium window. "It will adhere to it and
 flow to earth" one would have said on the basis of previous knowledge. Far
* Thus, for instance, canal rays and, so far as they have been studied, also the α-rays
of radium, have been found to be emitted positively charged molecules.


118                              1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

from it: it passes through the metal plate (28, p. 28) and, as I was able to
check, its velocity does not diminish appreciably (19; 46, p. 479). Beyond
the window it can enter a more or less total vacuum, in which it continues
its course linearly, representing an electric current in the empty ether, a phe-
nomenon which we had earlier also thought to be impossible. When it
finally hits a piece of metal of sufficient thickness, it penetrates it and sticks
there; finally, after following such unusual courses it appears as an ordinary
charge on the surface of the metal (28).
   The problem of whether electricity fills space continuously or not, of
whether it has a structure, is of particular interest. I have seen two cathode
rays pass through the same chamber in opposite directions, and found in a
quantitative investigation of the phenomena that the two rays did not inter-
fere with each other in the slightest (44, p. 165). This indicates that the elec-
tricity of these rays consists of discrete and very small parts separated by a
large volume of free space. We can represent the parts themselves as being
more or less impenetrable to each other, because according to Coulomb’s law,
as soon as two of the parts come very close to each other they must exert
enormous repulsive forces on each other. But the best indication of the struc-
ture of electricity comes from quite a different source, and is much older.
   Here we come to the connexion between our findings and earlier knowl-
edge. Such knowledge was very scanty, and was related to phenomena taking
place in and on individual atoms, i.e. phenomena that could not be studied
directly, but the connexion was a very good and fruitful one.
   Years earlier, Helmholtz in his lecture in memory of Faraday had noted
that electrolysis phenomena would suggest that electricity is split up into
pieces of constant size, just as matter is split up in atoms (6). This was the in-
dication already available concerning the structure of electricity, the exist-
ence of electrical atoms, electrical elementary quanta , as Helmholtz called them.*
   In the field of optics moreover, the theory already firmly supported by
Hertz’ famous experiments (9), that each luminous atom be regarded as an
electrical oscillator, had suddenly been given a tangible form by the discovery
of Zeeman, who in conjunction with Lorentz concluded from his observa-
tions that it is negative** - not positive - electrical mass that oscillates in the lu-

* I recall hearing him use this expression many times in his demonstration lecture in
the summer term of 1885.
 ** It is interesting that in Zeeman’s first publications the word "positive" - not "neg-
ative" - was printed (24, p. 18), so that there was some delay in recognizing the
relationship between his discovery and cathode rays.


                                 ON CATHODE RAYS                               119

minous atoms of a sodium or other metal flame, and that there is a definite
ratio between the charge and mass of the oscillating material (24). The ratio was
of the same magnitude as that found shortly afterwards, in the way described,
for cathode rays.
   It seemed likely that in all these cases, in the ions in electrolysis, in the lu-
minous metal atoms and in the cathode rays, and perhaps everywhere where
electricity plays a part, we might be concerned with the same electrical el-
ementary quanta, the existence of which had first been indicated by Fara-
day’s electrolysis law and which might be further elucidated by means of
cathode rays. This theory has been proved, so much so that it has engendered
a new branch of physics, so fruitful and already so vast that in this paper,
which is devoted primarily to my own work, I cannot say any more in gen-
eral on the subject. I would simply like to mention three points.
   First, as an important initial quantitative check on our conclusions, the di-
rect experimental measurement of the velocity of cathode rays carried out by
Wiechert, in which the figure obtained was the same as that obtained from
the electrical and magnetic deflections (see above) - about one third of the
velocity of light (29).
   Second, Kaufmann’s experimental result, obtained on the basis of the
work of J.J. Thomson and Heaviside (10), and concerning electrical elementary
quanta, namely that their mass and inertia are of a purely electromagnetic
nature (55), a result that we can interpret as follows : We have no evidence that
(negative) electricity is a special material with inertia; it appears to be simply a
state, the state of the ether which we were accustomed, after Faraday (1), Max-
well (3), and Hertz (9), to denote as the electric force field in the environ-
ment of electrified bodies, a state which according to Hertz (20) and Bjerknes
(33) might consist of latent motion of the ether. Thus, even with the pure
elementary quanta of electricity nothing else has been discovered except this
ether state in their area. These elementary quanta themselves appear to us in
Maxwell’s sense to be the probably empty and only purely geometric centres
of the electrical forces, except that we can now claim to be able successfully
to observe these centres individually, follow their courses and study the ge-
ometric proportions of their size and shape. According to this finding, cath-
ode rays, the streaming centres of state, appear to us, more than ever, to be
what they seemed to us to be from the beginning, pure ether phenomena.
   Thirdly, we must list the names given to these parts of electricity,
or centres of state: I have called them elementary quanta of electricity or
for short quanta, after Helmholtz; J.J. Thomson speaks of corpuscles, Lord


120                             1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

Kelvin of electrions; but the name preferred by Lorentz and Zeeman electrons
has become the everyday term.

So far we have spoken of cathode rays as such; we shall now discuss their
modes of formation, their generation.
   The oldest, and for a long time the only known method of generation
and the one which we have hitherto used to the exclusion of all others, is the
discharge tube. Here, as their name suggests, the rays originate at the cathode.
The gas molecules which are under the influence of the prevailing electrical
forces have an effect - the proximity effect as I call it (53) - on the electrode
metal, whereby quanta are withdrawn from the latter. Immediately they are
free they are subjected to the accelerating forces of the field between the
electrodes and thus move with increasing velocity away from the cathode;
the ray is complete. The ultimate velocity at which we allow it to leave the
tube through, say, a window is given by the size of the voltage used; and the
very fact that in effect this whole voltage and not just a fraction thereof is
determinative for the ultimate velocity proves that the origin of the ray must
be sought at the cathode surface and not, say, in the centre of the gas.* By
the magnitude of the voltage we can thus produce faster or slower cathode
rays and when we previously spoke of 1/3 the speed of light that applied only
to one particular voltage about 30,000 V, which I used generally throughout
my experiments.
   How would faster or slower rays behave? Some predictions could be
made on the basis of my first experiments in which the voltage, and hence
the velocity, was slightly varied (18b, p. 266; 19; 21, p. 261). Very fast rays
could be expected to have extremely slight absorbability (high penetrating
power) ** ; the slow rays on the other hand appeared best suited to yield in-
formation on the forces of atoms, the constitution of matter. For a long time,
however, it seemed impossible to carry out pure tests over a sufficiently wide


* To start with this was an arbitrary assumption made in many previous studies on
cathode rays; the proof of its correctness was supplied with increasing accuracy as
time went on, with most accuracy probably by A. Becker (52, p. 404).
* * When X-rays were discovered this expectation of them appeared to be fulfilled;
their first properties to become known agreed with those to be anticipated from my
tests for the fastest cathode rays (27). It was just at first Righi’s convincing observation
that the X-rays do not carry with them a negative charge (23) that had shown the untena-
bility of the theory that they were extremely fast cathode rays. They are nowadays consid-
ered to be short, transverse impulses in the ether, a kind of ultra-ultraviolet light. The fact


                             ON CATHODE RAYS                                     121

range of velocities since the glass of the discharge tube could not withstand
the heavy voltages needed for the very fast rays, and the slow rays, although
easy to produce in the tube, failed to emerge through the window; they
were too absorbable. Other arrangements failed, too.*
   Both problems, that of the slowest and that of the fastest rays, were finally
solved in quite novel ways.
   A discovery by Hertz as early as 1887(8) completed shortly afterwards by
Hallwachs (11), had shown that by mere exposure to ultraviolet light metal
plates give off negative electricity to the air. This remarkable fact - nowadays
usually referred to as the photo-electric effect - immediately captured my
interest at that time and has also continued to do so since. Experiments car-
ried out in collaboration with the astronomer Wolf showed me first of all
that ultraviolet light roughens substances or pulverizes them (12; 46, p.
490). Subsequent experiments, however, caused me to think it unlikely that
metal particles carried the negative charge off the plate. At the time I con-
ducted my first experiments on cathode rays, when I had discovered that the
air in front of the aluminium window becomes conductive (18) I formed the
idea that cathode rays could be driven from the plate into the air by ultra-
violet light. Both then and later I made repeated vain attempts to detect pos-
sible rays in the vacuum on fluorescent screens. Only my decision - based on
Righi’s work (14) - to use the electrometer instead of the fluorescent screen
revealed the existence of the rays. The apparatus used is illustrated in Fig. 10.
 U is the plate to be irradiated and is in a complete vacuum; the quartz seal at
B admits the ultraviolet light. The cathode rays start from U and a narrow
beam is separated out by the hole in the counterplate E. This beam impinges
on the small plate α which collects the negative charge brought by the beam
and thereby indicates the existence of the radiation on the electrometer. We
bring a magnet or the coil indicated by a broken line close to the tube in a
suitable manner and then find the charge on the plate β instead of on α, in-


that such impulses can actually occur side by side with heavy absorption of cathode
rays, such as e.g. in heavy platinum, follows, as first put forward by Heaviside, from
Maxwell’s theory (10). The fact that extremely short-wave ultraviolet light will pass
unrefracted through prisms was foreseen by Helmholtz in his dispersion theory (17c,
p. 517). The low-absorbability cathode rays forecast first became a reality in the rays
emitted by radium.
* Amongst other measures I had tried inserting, instead of the window, narrow chan-
nels between generating chamber and completely evacuated observation chamber, but
they allowed too much gas through.


122                            1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD




dicating that the invisible ray is actually deflected by the magnet and in
the appropriate direction for cathode rays. When carried out quantitatively,
the experiment showed that the deflection is also of the correct degree, and
that the same ratio obtains between charge and mass of the quanta as in the
case of the rays generated in discharge tubes (32; 44, p. 150; 46).
   Immediately it had been established beyond doubt in this way that ca-
thode rays are produced by ultraviolet light and that their behaviour had
become suffciently well known, I was soon able to detect them on fluores-
cent screens (44), then follow them further and use them. I shall refer to those
aspects later. The following should be noted as regards the actual generation.
   Firstly - an important point for pure experiments - it also occurs in a com-
plete vacuum where the usual method fails. A gas need not be present but it
does not interfere with the generation of the rays. What is involved is the
direct action of the light on the metal of the plate. The initial velocities with
which the quanta leave the plate are so slight that a negative charge of only
a few volts on the counterplate is sufficient to compel the rays to reverse be-
fore reaching it. They then return to the irradiated plate in the same way as
a stone thrown upwards falls black to the ground (32; 44).*

* My first detailed communication on the subject (32) appeared in the Sitzungsberichte der
Kaiserl. Akademie der Wiss. zu Wien for 19th October 1899. In the December issue of The
Philosophical Magazine of the same year J. J. Thomson published studies "On the mass of
the ions in gases at low pressures" in which the photo-electric effect is involved al-
though its centre is still sought in the gas adjacent to the irradiated plate, as the remarks
on p. 552 indicate. In the same author’s book Conduction of Electricity through Gases, 2nd.
ed., 1903, p. 109, my publication is dated one year later than that just mentioned since
a later reprint (Ann. Physik, 2 (1900) 359, where it is expressly marked as a reprint), and
not the original is cited.


                                  ON CATHODE RAYS                                    123
   Here, therefore, we obtain extremely slow cathode rays; faster ones can be
produced merely by charging the counterplate positively. The velocity of the
rays can be controlled freely by the level of the voltage of the counterplate.
   Secondly, considering the effect of the ultraviolet light on the plate, we
must imagine that the light waves cause the interior of the metal atoms in the
plate to vibrate. We have previously mentioned that Zeeman’s discovery has
proved atoms to contain negative electricity capable of vibration. If the co-
vibration of a negative quantum in the atom with the light waves becomes
too violent, the quantum escapes from the atom* and so from the plate; we
have a cathode ray.
   The velocity at escape we have already mentioned as very low. I have also
found that the velocity is independent of the ultraviolet light intensity (M), and
thus concluded that the energy at escape does not come from the light at all,
but from the interior of the particular atom. The light only has an initiating
action, rather like that of the fuse in firing a loaded gun. I find this conclusion
important since from it we learn that not only the atoms of radium - the
properties of which were just beginning to be discerned in more detail at that
time - contain reserves of energy, but also the atoms of the other elements;
these too are capable of emitting radiation and in doing so perhaps complete-
ly break down, corresponding to the disintegration and roughening of the
substances in ultraviolet light. This view has quite recently been corroborated
at the Kiel Institute by special experiments which also showed that the photo-
electric effect occurs with unchanged initial velocities even at the temper-
ature of liquid air.
   We cannot regard the action of the light as restricted only to the solid state
of aggregation. The molecules, or atoms of gases undergo a completely anal-
ogous effect under the action of ultraviolet light (35; 40); it is reasonable to
assume that quanta escape from them (49, p. 486); the gas thus becomes elec-
trically conductive in a manner which we shall discuss in detail later. If the
gas contains oxygen like the air, ozone is formed as a by-product (35).**

* This is a process which was earlier anticipated in Helmholtz’s comprehensive disper-
sion theory (17c, p. 518).
 ** In the light of subsequent studies by Warburg it can be assumed that the most
productive of current methods of producing ozone, i.e.those using what are termed
"silent electrical discharge" are wholly or largely effective owing to the ultraviolet
light of these discharges (48). The rich sources of ultraviolet light obtainable nowadays,
e.g.electrical mercury quartz lamps, propagate such a noticeable odour of ozone in
their environment that this effect of ultraviolet light has now became a commonplace.


124                             1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

   This same action of light, namely the production of cathode rays, the vibra-
tion of atoms and the releasing of quanta therefrom, is also involved in phos-
phorescence (50, p. 671) and hence probably also in fluorescence, perhaps,
too, in all photochemical effects. Bearing in mind that we have detected
transformation of energies from the interior of the atoms associated with the
photoelectric effect, we should not be surprised if in future perhaps we en-
counter phenomena of the same type acting as sources of energy not intro-
duced from outside.
   It should also be mentioned that the research carried out by Curie and
Sagnac (37) as well as that by Dom (42) indicates that in common with ultra-
violet light, X-rays too have the effect of generating cathode rays. This is con-
sistent with their ability to make gases electrically conductive and induce
phosphorescent and photochemical effects.
   Scarcely had ultraviolet light been shown suited for the generation
of the slowest rays when the solution was found to the problem of how the
fastest rays originate. The rays emitted by uranium and radium were al-
ready known; Becquerel, P. and M. Curie were engaged in pursuing further
these discoveries of theirs. By applying to these new rays the methods devel-
oped as described for the cathode rays from discharge tubes, it was shown
that the new rays are partly cathode rays (34; 36; 41)*, and amazingly ca-
thode rays of almost or entirely the speed of light (43). What no discharge tube
could withstand is thus achieved by the radium atom - and quite sponta-
neously - although admittedly not without being completely broken down
in the process (51; 54).

Once the entire range of velocities from rest to the speed of light was thus
available it was worthwhile re-examining in more detail the behaviour of
matter to irradiation.
  From the turbidity of all substances, including e.g. air, to cathode rays, we
had concluded that each molecule or atom acts as a separate obstacle to the
rays, an obstacle which deflects them from their path to a greater or lesser


Nevertheless, the meteorological significance of the action of ultraviolet sunlight in the
upper layers of the atmosphere (35, p. 504) still does not appear to have been sufficiently
appreciated. Whether the ionization by cathode rays first found at the aluminium
window (18) is also an effect of the light which occurs there, or else the direct effect of
the cathode rays, is still obscure.
* This is the part of the uranium or radium radiation normally designated as β.


                            ON CATHODE RAYS                              125
extent. How should we visualize this deflection? Let us first examine whether
perhaps the quanta of the rays are reflected from the molecules of the sub-
stance in the same way as the molecules of a gas are reflected on one another
when they collide. Were that so a cathode ray in the gas would be restricted
to that length which can readily and accurately be calculated as the mean free
path of very small particles between the gas molecules from the data of
the kinetic gas theory. These path lengths are, however, very small; in hy-
drogen at 40 mm pressure, for example, about two hundredths of a milli-
meter. Beyond this short length, a ray would not be able to develop at all in
this gas, that is to say almost instantaneous diffusion would ensue. However,
gases are by no means so turbid as my observations published in diagram-
matic form had earlier shown (18b). Even the air at full atmospheric pressure
proved much clearer, as we have already seen (Fig. 4), and the lighter hy-
drogen rarified to the specified pressure of 40 mm is much clearer still; Fig.
11 illustrates the path of the ray in hydrogen as observed on the fluorescent




                                  Fig. 11.


screen. The broken lines show the extent to which rectilinear light would
propagate under the same conditions. It will be seen that over a length of 10
cm the cathode ray still scarcely deviates from this rectilinear propagation,
and it becomes distinctly broader only beyond that length. The length of 10
cm is, however, 5,000-fold that of the free path length of 0.02 mm. It thus
follows that here the radiant quanta must have traversed 5,000 hydrogen
molecules before undergoing the first noticeable change of direction. We are
amazed to see that we have transcended the old impermeability of matter.
Each atom in the substance occupies a space which is impermeable to the


126                              1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

other atoms*; but vis-à-vis the fine quanta of electricity all types of atoms
are highly permeable structures as if built up of fine constituents with a great
many interstices.
   What are these fine constituents of atoms? That in all atoms they are the
same, only present in varying numbers, we have already concluded from the
law of proportionality between mass and absorption. We can now learn fur-
ther details. We can use the quanta of the cathode rays as small test particles
which we allow to traverse the interior of the atoms and thus provide us with
information thereon.
   The first and most noticeable thing to happen to them during this traverse,
i.e. deflection from the rectilinear path, we have just discussed as diffusion of
the rays. As far as we know, cathode rays experience such a deflection owing
only to electrical and magnetic forces. To assume magnetic forces within the
atoms would imply the assumption of mobile electricity in the atoms, thus
again electrical forces. We must therefore regard the diffusion of cathode rays
in matter as proof for the existence of electrical forces in the interior of the atoms.
The magnitude of these forces can be estimated by considering the extent of
the deflection together with the transit time, which latter depends on the
velocity of the quanta and, of course, on the size of the atoms. If we take
progressively slower rays, the transit times will become longer and corre-
spondingly the diffusions occurring will be stronger (19, p. 30; 46, p. 480).
In this way we find for the interior of the atoms electrical field intensities of
unusual magnitude such that we can never produce by any means known to
us owing to lack of sufficient resistance in even the best insulators: field in-
tensities compared with which those occurring during the most violent
 storms are insignificantly small (47). The force effects of the radium atom then
 cease to seem so surprising but we should be more amazed that most of the
 atoms around us behave so placidly, only revealing something of the force
 stored within them when subjected to the photoelectric action or through
 other similar causes.
    The further quantitative study of cathode-ray diffusion in the various mate-
 rials promises to yield valuable information on the precise nature of the
 electrical fields of atoms. For the present we must turn to a second phenom-

 * In any case at the normal velocities of the molecules. For very high velocities such
as occur with the α-particles of radium, mutual penetrability of even whole atoms, al-
though probably accompanied by their destruction, would not be impossible in the
light of the concepts which we have arrived at regarding the constitution of atoms.
Recent studies by Bragg and Kleemann promise to throw light on this subject.


                                 ON CATHODE R A Y S                           127
enon, somewhat more easy to determine numerically, which is apt to occur
in the course of such atom traverses. It can easily happen that the quantum,
after successfully passing thousands of atoms, finally stops in an atom and
does not emerge at once. This is the absorption of cathode rays. I have deter-
mined this effect quantitatively for the entire scale of available ray velocities
and found the following (47).
    The absorption increases with decreasing ray velocity, in common with
the diffusion. This is also to be expected if the absorption, like the diffusion,
is an effect of the electrical fields of force within the atoms and if these fields
of force concentrate about certain centres in the atoms in the vicinity of
which their intensity is greater than at longer range, in the same way as the
intensity of a magnetic field of force concentrates about the two poles. A
radiation quantum which traverses such fields with mobile centres is only
stopped when it enters sufficiently intense parts of these fields along its partic-
ular path; otherwise it will pass through and be deflected to a greater or les-
ser extent. The entire cross-section of the atom, the area which the atom
presents to a ray, thus consists of two parts, an absorbing and a transmitting
part, and the former - which I refer to briefly as the absorbing cross-section
 - is known in square centimetres from my measurements. It affords a meas-
ure for the size of those parts of the force fields of the atom, the intensity of
which is greater than the relevant level which is just sufficient to arrest the
particular velocity of the quantum. The slower the quantum, the larger the
parts of the atom’s force field which act as absorbing cross-sections. For the
slowest rays I have found that the absorbing cross-section not only becomes
equal to the entire cross-section of the atom or molecule - which entire cross-
section was known from the kinetic theory of gases - but even slightly
larger. This is tantamount to direct proof for the existence of electrical fields
 of forces both within the atoms and molecules and also for a certain distance
around them. It is probably correct to identify these external electrical forces
of the molecules with the forces of strength, elasticity, cohesion and adhe-
 sion, in short with the molecular forces in general which have long been known
although not immediately regarded as of an electrical nature. Berzelius’ view
that the chemical forces of atoms are of an electrical nature will now be held
 with all the more reason and as the research in progress continues it is to be
 hoped that concepts of the electrical force fields of the atoms will emerge
 which give a better and more complete picture of their chemical behaviour
 than the simple concept of a number of fixed valency positions equipped
 with electrical charges.


128                       1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

    Of equal interest to the transition to the lowest velocities was that to the
highest. As the ray velocity increases, the absorbing cross-section contracts;
ultimately only those quanta are stopped whose path lies through the highest
intensity parts of the internal force fields close to their centres. For that very
reason the fastest rays are also capable of supplying the answer to the ques-
tion whether perhaps these centres have a special, impenetrable proper vol-
ume, or in more general terms: whether apart from the force fields there is
something else in the atoms which holds back our test particles. What hap-
pens when the test is carried out with the fastest rays can best be illustrated by
means of an example. Let us imagine a cubic metre block of the most solid
and heavy substance known to us, say, platinum. In this block we find al-
together not more impenetrable proper volume than at most one cubic mil-
limetre. Apart from this pinhead-sized portion, we find the remainder of our
block as empty as the sky. We ought to be astounded at the insignificant
 degree to which the space in matter is actually filled! What we have found
in the space occupied by matter have only been fields of force such as can
 also form in the free ether. What are then the basic constituents of all atoms
 to which we have been led by the mass dependence of cathode-ray absorp-
 tion? Clearly they too are in the main only fields of force in common with
 the whole atoms. I have therefore termed these basic constituents of all mat-
 ter "dynamids".
    As constituents of electrically neutral atoms the dynamids will also be re-
 garded as electrically neutral, and hence possess the same amounts of neg-
 ative and positive electricity as the centres of their fields. We may then state :
 matter - all the tangible, ponderable substances around us - consists ul-
 timately of equal quantities of negative and positive electricity. The pre-
 viously mentioned findings derived from the Zeeman phenomenon, the
 photo-electric effect and the secondary cathode radiation, which will pre-
 sently be discussed, show that the negative electricity is contained in the
  atoms as precisely the same quanta which we found in the cathode rays, and
  which the research worker has since variously encountered in their own right,
  separate from matter. The positive electricity, on the other hand, appears to
  be something much more specifically proper to the atoms of matter; as has
  been previously stressed they have not been found with certainty other than
  in atoms. From our findings on the packing of space it follows that for nega-
  tive quanta the proper volume, impenetrable for things of the same kind,
  must then be extraordinarily small. This is consistent with the previously
  mentioned experiments by Kaufmann. The probable proper volume of the


                                    ON CATHODE RAYS                                    129
positive electricity, provided it too were not extremely small, should be re-
garded as completely penetrable for negative quanta.
   With this constitution of matter, the third phenomenon occurring during
atom traverses, and one which has still to be referred to, can readily be
understood. Owing to the repelling force which it exerts on the other neg-
ative quanta proper to the atom the traversing ray quantum will be capable
of setting up a tremendous disturbance within the atom and as a result of
this disturbance a quantum belonging to the atom can be flung out.*
The process is termed secondary cathode radiation. We have allowed one
cathode ray - the primary - to penetrate into the atom, against which two
emerge, the primary and the secondary** (46, p. 481).
   The velocity of the secondary rays - in common with that of the photo-
electrically generated cathode rays - is very low, even when that of the pri-
mary rays is high. The amount of the secondary radiation, i.e. the probability
of quanta emission from atoms during traverse, is largest at a given opti-
mum of the primary velocity; both faster and slower primary rays are less
effective and at quite a low primary velocity - below 1/200th of the speed
of light - the secondary radiation is absent altogether (44, p. 188 et seq.; 46,
p. 474 et seq.; 49). This is quite understandable for if the primary quantum
approaches too slowly, it has too little energy to cause adequate disturbance
of the interior of the atom, and if it approaches too quickly it will generally
remain for too short a time in the atom to have that effect.
   At its low velocity the secondary radiation must succumb to strong ab-
sorption in the surrounding molecules of the material. In gases where the
molecules are free, a molecule which has absorbed a secondary quantum will
act as a mobile carrier of negative electricity, while the molecule from which the
secondary quantum has escaped has an excess of positive electricity and is
thus a po sitive electricity carrier. The migrations of such carriers, however -
for which knowledge we are indebted to the unremitting efforts of Arrhe-
nius and after him to J. J. Thomson in particular - constitute the electrical
conductivity in gases*** and in the secondary cathode radiation we have thus

* Two and more quanta can also escape from the atom (46, p. 485).
** It seems often to be assumed that the secondary radiation is an exclusive result of
the absorption of the primary radiation; but this is not the conception which I have
formed from observation (46, p. 474 et seq.).
*** Three consecutive steps seem to me to substantiate the belief that molecules or
groups thereof carry the electrical conductivity in gases, notably: (i) the thorough study
of one of the first cases of gas electrification in which dust - which at first was regarded


130                               1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

found and, as I believe, adequately ascertained by thorough observations, the
mechanism whereby cathode rays cause a gas to become electrically con-
ductive (46, p. 474).* This case of conductivity induced and maintained by
cathode rays must also be a factor in all gas discharges where sufficiently fast
cathode rays occur; hence also in the normal discharge tube which we took
at the outset as our first generator of cathode rays.
   In other cases as well where gases become electrically conductive the
mechanism appears to be the same: escape of quanta from molecules, and re-
absorption by other molecules; this occurs under the influence of ultraviolet
light on gases, as aforementioned, and also in flames (45) but the cause un-
derlying the escape of quanta is apt to vary from case to case (53, p. 242).
   In conclusion, I wish to thank you for your attention.




as the sole or at any rate the main carrier of electrical discharges in gases - was found
definitely not to be involved. This was the case of waterfall electricity (16); (ii) the first
measurements of the migration speeds of gas carriers in various cases of conducting
gases, performed in rapid sequence by a number of different observers, first of all by
Rutherford (26) ; (iii) J. J. Thomson’s essentially irreproachable first measurements of the
absolute electrical charge of the individual gas carriers in different cases (31). - In the
light of simple considerations of gas kinetics the size of the gas carriers was calculated
from (ii) and (iii) as equal to that of molecules or groups of molecules.
 * This mechanism differs from that of ion formation in liquid electrolytes where it
consists in the splitting of electrically neutral molecules into two oppositely charged
atoms or groups of atoms. In other respects, too, the analogy between the conduction
of electricity in gases and in liquids breaks down precisely in the most characteristic
points. Magnitude and sign of the charge on a gas carrier are - quite unlike the case with
the ions in liquid electrolytes - not determined by the chemical nature of the carrier,
and electrolysis proper - that so typically chemical mode of decomposition - hence
does not occur at all in gases (53, p. 236). I therefore considered it better to emphasize
this analogy no longer, notwithstanding its heuristic usefulness at the outset, and for
that reason I have always avoided applying the name ions to the gas carriers, and calling
the conduction of electricity in gases electrolytic.


                                   ON CATHODE RAYS                                  131
                         Chronological list of publications*


(1860) 1. M. Faraday, Experimental Researches in Electricity (from 1820 onwards).
(1869) 2. W. Hittorf, "Über die Elektrizitätsleitung der Gase" (The electrical con-
   ductivity of gases), Pogg. Ann. Physik, Vol. 136.
(1873) 3. J. C. Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism.
(1876) 4. E. Goldstein, "Über elektrische Entladungen in verdünnten Gasen" (Elec-
   trical discharges in rarified gases), Monatsber. Berl. Akad. Also continued in the vo-
   lumes of the same journal for 1880 and 1881.
(1879) 5. W. Crookes, Strahlende Materie oder der vierte Aggregutzustand (Radiating
   matter or the fourth state of aggregation). (German translation published in Leip-
   zig.) Also Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., Vol. 170.
(1881) 6. H. Helmholtz, "On the modern development of Faraday’s conceptions of
   electricity" J. Chem. Soc., Vol. 39; Wiss. Abhandl., Vol. 3, p. 52.
(1883) 7. H. Hertz, "Versuche über die Glimmentladung". (Experiments on the glow
   discharge). (a) Wied. Ann. Physik, Vol. 19. Also (b) Ges. Werke (Collected works),
   Vol. 1, p. 242.
(1887) 8. H. Hertz, "Über einen Einfluss des ultravioletten Lichtes auf die elektrische
    Entladung" (An effect of ultraviolet light on electrical discharge), Sitz.-ber. Berl.
   Akad., 9th June. In more detail in Wied. Ann. Physik, Vol. 31.
(1887-1888) 9. H. Hertz, Untersuchungen über die Ausbreitung der elektrischen Kraft (Re-
   searches on the propagation of electrical force).
 (1888) 10. O. Heaviside, "On electromagnetic waves", Phil. Mag., Ser. 5, Vols. 25 and
   26. Further: "On the electromagnetic effects due to the motion of electrification
   through a dielectric", Phil. Mag., Ser. 5, Vol. 27 (1889); "A charge suddenly jerked
   into motion", "Sudden stoppage of charge", The Electrician, May 1, 1891. Also
   Electrical Papers, Vol. 2, pp. 375, 504, and Electromagnetic Theory, Vol. 1, p.54.
   - 11. W. Hallwachs, "Über den Einfluss des Lichtes auf elektrostatisch geladene Kör-
   per" (The effect of light on electrostatically charged substances), Wied. Ann. Physik,
   Vol. 33.
(1889) 12. P. Lenard and M. Wolf, "Zersduben der Körper durch das ultraviolette
   Licht" (Pulverization of substances under the action of ultraviolet light), Wied. Ann.
   Physik, Vol. 37.
 (1890) 13. A. Schuster, "The discharge of electricity through gases", Proc. Roy. SOc,
   Vol. 47. (Received 20th March.)
   - 14. A Righi, "Sulle traiettorie percorse nella convezione foto-electrica, ..." (The
    trajectories described in photoelectric convection), Atti Accad. Naz. Lincei, Vol. 6
    [2]. (Received 3rd August.)
(1892) 15. H. Hertz, "Über den Durchgang von Kathodenstrahlen durch dünne Me-

* The position of a publication in this sequence has been determined by its date of
submission to a learned societyor by its date of receipt by a journal editor. Where no
such dates were available, the date of publication, as far as can be determined, has been
taken.


132                              1905 P.E.A. VON LENARD

   tallschichten" (The passage of cathode rays through thin metal layers), Wied. Ann.
   Phys, Vol. 45. Also Ges. Werke (Collected works), Vol. 1, p. 355.
- 16. P. Lenard, "Über die Elektricität der Wasserfälle" (Waterfall electricity), Wied.
   Ann. Physik, Vol. 46.
- 17. H. Helmholtz, "Elektromagnetische Theorie der Farbenzerstreuung" (Electro-
   magnetic theory of colour dispersion). (a) Sitz.-ber. Berl. Akad., 15th December
   - (b) Wied. Ann. Physik, Vol. 48. - (c) Wiss. Abhandl., Vol. 3, p. 505.
(1894) 18. P. Lenard, "Uber Kathodenstrahlen in Gasen von atmosphärischem Druck
   und im äussersten Vakuum" (Cathode rays in gases at atmospheric pressure and in
   the highest vacuum). (a) Sitz.-ber. Berl. Akad. for 12th January 1893. - (b) In more
   detail, Wied. Ann. Physik, Vol. 51.
- 19. P. Lenard, "Über die magnetische Ablenkung der Kathodenstrahlen" (The
   magnetic deflection of cathode rays), Wied. Ann. Physik, Vol.52.
- 20. H. Hertz, Die Principien der Mechanik in neuem Zusammenhange dargestellt (The
   principles of mechanics displayed in a new context.)
(1895) 21. P. Lenard, "Über die Absorption der Kathodenstrahlen" (The absorption
    of cathode rays), Wied. Ann. Physik, Vol. 56. (Published in October issue.)
- 22. W. C. Röntgen, "Über eine neue Art von Strahlen" (A new type of ray),
    Sitz.-ber. Würzburger Phys. Med. Ges., for December. Reprinted in Wied. Ann. Physik,
   Vol. 64.
(1896) 23. A. Righi, "Sulla propagazione dell’elettricità nei gas attraversati dai raggi
   di Röntgens" (The propagation of electricity in gases traversed by X-rays), Mem.
    Accad. Sci. Bologna, Ser. 5, Vol. 6 (Submitted 31st May.)
- 24. P. Zeeman, "On the influence of magnetism on the nature of the light emitted
    by a substance", Comm. Phys. Lab. Leiden, transl. from: Verslag. Kongl. Ned. Akad.
    Wetenschap., 31st October.
(1897) 25. J. J. Thomson, "Cathode rays", Phil. Mag., Ser. 5, Vol. 44. (Published in
    October issue.)
- 26. E. Rutherford, "The velocity and rate of recombination of the ions of gases
    exposed to Röntgen radiation"., Phil. Mag., Ser. 5, Vol. 44. (Published in November
   issue.)
- 27. P. Lenard, "Über die elektrische Wirkung der Kathodenstrahlen auf atmos-
    phärische Luft" (The electrical effect of cathode rays on the air of the atmosphere),
    Wied. Ann. Physik, Vol. 63. (Published 11th December.)
(1898) 28. P. Lenard, "Über die elektrostatischen Eigenschafen der Kathodenstrah-
    len" (The electrostatic properties of cathode rays), Wied. Ann., Vol. 64. (Received
     2nd January.)
- 29. E. Wiechert, "Experimentelle Untersuchungen über die Geschwindigkeit und
    die magnetische Ablenlbarkeit der Kathodenstrahlen" (Experimental studies on the
    velocity and magnetic deflectability of cathode rays), Nachr. Kgl. Ges. Wiss. Göttin-
    gen (Submitted on 19th March.)
- 30. P. Lenard, "Über das Verhalten von Kathodenstrahlen parallel zu elektrischer
    Kraft" (The behaviour of cathode rays parallel to electrical force), Wied. Ann. Physik,
    Vol. 65. (Received 1st May.) Also published in Math. Naturw. Ber. Ungarn, Vol. 16.
 - 31. J. J. Thomson, "On the charge of electricity carried by the ions produced by


                                   ON CATHODE RAYS                                       I33
    Röntgen rays" Phil. Mag., Ser. 5, Vol. 46. (Published in December issue.) Continued
    and subsequently corrected in Phil. Mag., December issue 1899, and March issue
    1903.
(1899) 32. P. Lenard, "Erzeugung von Kathodenstrahlen durch ultraviolettes Licht"
    (Production of cathode rays by ultraviolet light), Sitz.-ber. Kaiserl. Akad. Wiss. Wien
    for 19th October. Reprinted in Ann. Physik, Vol. 2.
(1900) 33. V. Bjerknes, Vorlesungen über hydrodynamische Fernkräfte nach C. A. Bjerknes’
     Theorie (Lectures on the hydrodynamic distant forces in accordance with C. A.
    Bjerknes’ theory).
- 34. H. Becquerel, "Contribution à l’étude du rayonnement du radium" (Contribu-
    tion to the study of the radiation from radium), and "Déviation du rayonnement du
    radium dans un champ électrique" (Deflection of radium radiation in an electrical
    field), Compt. Rend. (Paris) for 29th January and 26th March, respectively.
 - 35. P. Lenard, "Über Wirkungen des ultravioletten Lichtes auf gasförmige Körper"
     (Effects of ultraviolet light on gaseous substances), Ann. Physik, Vol. 1. (Received
     6th February.)
 - 36. P. and M. Curie, "Sur la charge électrique des rayons déviables du radium" (The
     electrical charge of deflectable radium rays), Compt. Rend. (Paris) for 5th March.
 - 37. P. Curie and G. Sagnac, "Électrisation negative des rayons secondaires produits
     au moyen des rayons Röntgen" (Negative electrification of secondary rays produced
     by means of X-rays), Compt. Rend. (Paris) 130, for 9th April.
 - 38. E. Demarcay, "Sur le spectre du radium" (The radium spectrum), Compt. Rend.
     (Paris) 131, for 25th July.
 - 39. M. Curie, "Sur le poids atomique du baryum radifère" (The atomic weight of
     radiferous barium), Compt. Rend. (Paris) 131, for 6th August. Also "Sur le poids atom-
     ique du radium" (The atomic weight of radium), same journal 21st July, 1902.
 - 40. P. Lenard, "Über die Elektrizitätszerstreuung in ultraviolet durchstrahler Luft"
     (Scattering of electricity in air irradiated with ultraviolet light), Ann. Physik, Vol.3.
     (Received 17th August.)
 - 41. E. Dorn, "Elektrostatische Ablenkung der Radiumstrahlen" (Electrostatic deflec-
     tion of radium rays), Abhandl. Naturforsch. Ges. Halle, Vol.22.
  - 42. E. Dorn, "Versuche über Sekundärstrahlen" (Experiments on secondary rays),
      Arch. Néerl. Sci. (Haarlem), Ser. 2, Vol. 5.
 (1901) 43. W. Kaufmann, "Die magnetische und elektrische Ablenkbarkeit der Bec-
      querelstrahlen und die scheinbare Masse der Elektronen" (The magnetic and electrical
      deflectability of Becquerel rays and the apparent mass of electrons), Nachr. Kgl. Ges.
      Wiss. Göttingen, Vol. 8, for 8th November.
 (1902) 44. P. Lenard, "Über die lichtelektrische Wirkung" (The photoelectric effect),
      Ann. Physik, Vol. 8. (Received 17th March.)
  - 45. P. Lenard, "Über die Elektrizitätsleitung in Flammen" (Electrical conductivity
      in flames), Ann. Physik, Vol. 9. (Received 18th August.)
  (1903) 46. P. Lenard, "Über die Beobachtung langsamer Kathodenstrahlen mit Hilfe
      der Phosphoreszenz und über Sekundärentstehung von Kathodenstrahlen" (The ob-
      servation of slow cathode rays by means of phosphorescence, and the secondary
      occurrence of cathode rays), Ann. Physik, Vol. 12. (Received 28th June.)


 r die Ozonisierung des Sauerstoffs durch stille elektrische Ent-
 nization of oxygen by silent electrical discharges), Sitz.-ber.
  November.
 Über sekundäre Kathodenstrahlung in gasförmigen und festen
 cathode radiation in gaseous and solid substances), Ann. Physik,
 2nd August.)
V. Klatt, "Über die Erdalkaliphosphore" (The alkaline-earth
hysik, Vol. 15. (Received 22nd August.) Extracts also published
  Ber. Ungarn, Vol. 22.
 low transformation products of radium", Phil. Mag., Ser. 6,
 n November issue.)
Messungen an Kathodensstrahlen" (Measurements on cathode
Vol. 17. (Inaugural dissertation submitted to the Kiel Philosoph-
March.)
r die Lichtemissionen der Alkalimetalldämpfe und Salze und
 ser Emissionen" (The photo-emissions of alkaline metal vapours
 entres of these emissions), Ann. Physik, Vol. 17. (Received 13th

d G. Meyer, "Über die Bildung von Helium aus der Radium-
mation of helium from the emanation of radium), Ber. Natur-
 i. B., for May. Also Ann. Physik, Vol. 17.
nn, "Über die Konstitution des Elektrons" (The constitution
n. Physik, Vol. 19. (Received 3rd January.)




rest to see from this list how, during the years 1887-1894, the
on has suddenly, as it were, become the field of more abundant
activity. The years prior to that period, with the exception of
k by Faraday and Maxwell, are marked by only sporadic and
 that activity, the years thereafter and down to the present by
ul pursuit.
