SOFT MATTER
Nobel Lecture, December 9, 1991

by
P I E R R E -G ILLES   DE   G ENNES

College de France, Paris, France


What do we mean by soft matter? Americans prefer to call it “complex
fluids”. This is a rather ugly name, which tends to discourage the young
students. But it does indeed bring in two of the major features:
   I) Complexity. We may, in a certain primitive sense, say that modern
biology has proceeded from studies on simple model systems (bacterias) to
complex multicellular organisms (plants, invertebrates, vertebrates...). Simi-
larly, from the explosion of atomic physics in the first half of this century,
one of the outgrowths is soft matter, based on polymers, surfactants, liquid
crystals, and also on colloidal grains.
   2) Flexibility. I like to explain this through one early polymer experiment,
which has been initiated by the Indians of the Amazon basin: they collected
the sap from the hevea tree, put it on their foot, let it “dry” for a short time.
And, behold, they have a boot. From a microscopic point of view, the starting
point is a set of independent, flexible polymer chains. The oxygen from the
air builds in a few bridges between the chains, and this brings in a spectacu-
lar change: we shift from a liquid to a network structure which can resist
tension - what we now call a rubber (in French: caoutchouc, a direct
transcription of the Indian word). What is striking in this experiment, is the
fact that a very mild chemical action has induced a drastic change in
mechanical properties: a typical feature of soft matter.
   Of course, with some other polymer systems, we tend to build more rigid
structures. An important example is an enzyme. This is a long sequence of
aminoacids, which folds up into a compact globule. A few of these amino-
acids play a critical role: they build up the “active site” which is built to
perform a specific form of catalysis (or recognition). An interesting ques-
tion, raised long ago by Jacques Monod, is the following: we have a choice
of twenty aminoacids at each point in the sequence, and we want to build a
receptor site where the active units are positioned in space in some strict
way. We cannot just put in these active units, because, if linked directly,
they would not realise the correct orientations and positions. So, in between
two active units, we need a “spacer”, a sequence of aminoacids which has
enough variability to allow a good relative positioning of the active sites at
both ends of the spacer. Monod’s question was; what is the minimum length
of spacers?
   It turns out that the answer is rather sharply defined(l). The magic
number is around 13-14. Below 14 units, you will not usually succeed in
getting the desired conformation. Above 14, you will have many sequences


                                 Pierre Gilles de Gennes                           9

which can make it. The argument is primitive; it takes into account excluded
volume effects, but it does not recognise another need for a stable enzyme
 - namely that the interior should be built preferably with hydrophobic
units, while the outer surface must be hydrophilic. My guess is that this
cannot change the magic number by much more than one unit. Indeed,
when we look at the spacer sizes in a simple globular protein like myosin, we
see that they are not far from the magic number.
   Let me return now to flexible polymers in solution, and sketch some of
their strange mechanical properties. One beautiful example is the four
roller experiment set up by Andrew Keller and his coworkers(2). Here, a
dilute solution of coils is subjected to a purely longitudinal shear. If the exit
trajectory is well chosen (in the symmetry plane of the exit channel), the
molecules are stressed over long times. What is found is that, if the shear
rate exceeds a certain threshold value            an abrupt transition takes place,
and the medium becomes birefringent. This is what I had called a “coil-
stretch transition”(3). When the shear begins to open the coil, it offers
more grip to the flow, and opens even more... leading to a sharp transition.
Here, we see another fascinating aspect of soft matter - the amazing
coupling between mechanics and conformations. Indeed, Keller showed
that rather soon (at shear rates >          the chains break), and they do so very
near to their midpoint - a spectacular result.
   Another interesting feature of dilute coils is their ability to reduce the
losses in turbulent flows. This is currently called the Toms effect. But in
actual fact it was found, even before Toms, by Karol Mysels(4). He is here
today, to my great pleasure. Together with M. Tabor, we tried to work out a
scaling model of coils in a turbulent cascade(5), but our friends in mechan-
ics think that it is not realistic, the future will tell what the correct answer is.
   I have talked a lot about polymers. It would be logical to do the same with
colloids, or - as I like to call it - “ultra divided matter”. But since I just
gave another talk with this title at the Nobel symposium in Göteborg, I will
omit the subject, in spite of its enormous practical importance.
   Let me rather switch to surfactants, molecules with two parts: a polar head
which likes water, and an aliphatic tail which hates water. Benjamin Franklin
performed a beautiful experiment using surfactants; on a pond at Clapham
Common, he poured a small amount of oleic acid, a natural surfactant
which tends to form a dense film at the water-air interface. He measured
the volume required to cover all the pond. Knowing the area, he then knew
the height of the film, something like three nanometers in our current units.
This was to my knowledge the first measurement of the size of molecules. In
our days, when we are spoilt with exceedingly complex toys, such as nuclear
reactors or synchrotron sources, I particularly like to describe experiments
of this Franklin style to my students.
   Surfactants allow us to protect a water surface, and to generate these
beautiful soap bubbles, which are the delight of our children. Most of our
understanding of these soap bubbles is due to a remarkable team, Mysels,
Shinoda and Frankel, who wrote the book on this subject(6). Unfortunately,


10                                Physics 1991


this book is now very hard to find, I very much hope that it will be reprinted.
   Long ago Françoise Brochard, Jean-François Lennon and I(7) became
interested in some bilayer systems, where we have two sheets of surfactant,
each pointing towards the neighbouring water. A related (although more
complex) system of this type is a red blood cell. For many years it had been
known that, when observed under phase contrast, these cells flicker. - It was
sometimes believed that this flicker reflected an instability of a living system
under non-equilibrium conditions. Ultimately, the thing is simpler. The
essential property of insoluble bilayers is that they optimise their area at
fixed surfactant number. Thus, the energy is stationary with respect to area:
the surface tension vanishes. This means that the fluctuations in shape of
these deflated cells, or “vesicles”, are huge: the flicker is just an example of
Brownian motion for a very flexible object. What Jean-François had done
was to measure space time correlations for the flicker. Françoise then
showed that they could be understood from a model containing no surface
tensions, but only curvature energies plus viscous forces - another good
example of soft matter.
   This was, in fact, one of the starting points for many studies on surfactant
bilayers, pioneered by W. Helfrich and, on a more formal side, on random
surfaces especially with D. Nelson. One of the great successes in this field
has been the invention of the “sponge phase” of microemulsions(8,9). But,
more generally, it is amusing to learn from these people that there is some
overlap in thought between the highbrow string theories and the descrip-
tions of soaps!
   Let me now move to another corner in our garden - liquid crystals.
Here, I must pay tribute first to two great pioneers:
   i) Georges Friedel, who was the first to understand exactly what is a liquid
crystal, and what are the main types; ii) Charles Frank, who (after some early
work of Oseen) constructed the elastic theory of nematics, and described
also a number of their topological defects (“disclinations”).
   I will talk here only about the smectics. Observing certain defects (“focal
conics”) in smectics, Friedel was able to prove that their structure must be a
set of liquid, equidistant, deformable layers(l0). By observations at the one
hundred micron scale, he was thus able to infer the correct structure at the
ten Å scale - an amazing achievement.
   Smectics bring me naturally to another important feature of complex
fluids - namely that, in our days, it is sometimes possible to create new forms of
matter. The sponge phase quoted above was an example. Another striking
case was the invention of ferroelectric smectics by R.B. Meyer, in Orsay,
circa 1975. He thought about a certain molecular arrangement, with chiral
molecules, which should automatically generate a phase (the “C* phase”)
carrying a non-zero electric dipole. Within a few months, our local chemists
had produced the right molecule, and the first liquid ferroelectric was
born!(ll). In our days, these materials may become very important for
display purposes, they commute l0 3 times faster than the nematics in our
wrist-watches.


                                Pierre-Gilles   de Gennes                      11


   Another case of far smaller importance, but amusing, is the “ferrosmectic”
constructed by M. Veyssié and P. Fabre. The starting point is a water based
ferrofluid; a suspension of very fine magnetic particles. (Ferrofluids were
invented long ago by R. Rosensweig, and have many amazing properties).
Here, what is done, is to prepare a “club sandwich”
             . . . A system like this, subjected to a magnetic field H, is happier
when H is parallel to the layers. It is then interesting to observe the
sandwich, with a polarizing microscope, in the frustrated situation where
is normal to the layers. At very small H, nothing is seen. But beyond a
certain weak threshold H c, figures like flowers grow in the field(l2). We
understand this as a two step process a) just above threshold there is a
chemical undulation instability b) later, focal conics appear, with a basic size
imposed by the original undulation, but also with smaller conics (which are
required to fill space correctly). This “club sandwich” is ultimately detecting
rather weak magnetic fields            30 gauss).
    Let me quote still another new animal: the Janus grains, first made by C.
Casagrande and M. Veyssié. The god Janus had two faces. The grains have
two sides: one apolar, and the other polar. Thus, they have certain features
in common with surfactants. But there is an interesting difference if we
consider the films which they make, for instance at a water air interface. A
dense film of a conventional surfactant is quite impermeable. On the other
hand, a dense film of Janus grains always has some interstices between the
grains, and allows for chemical exchange between the two sides; “the skin
can breathe”. This may possibly be of some practical interest.
   The first technique used to make the Janus grains was based on spherical
particles, half embedded in a plastic and silanated on the accessible side( 13).
This produces only microquantities of material. But a group at Gold-
schmidt(l4) research invented a much more clever pathway. The starting
point is a collection of hollow glass particles, which are available commercial-
ly. There the outer surface is hydrophobized, and finally the particles are
crushed. The resulting platelets have one side hydrophilic and one side
hydrophobic. They are irregular, but they can be produced in tons.
    I would like now to spend a few minutes thinking about the style of soft
matter research. One first, major, feature, is the possibility of very simple
e x p e r i m e n t s - in the spirit of Benjamin Franklin. Let me quote two
examples. The first concerns the wetting of fibers. Usually a fiber, after being
dipped in a liquid, shows a string of droplets, and thus, for some time,
people thought that most common fibers were non-wettable. F. Brochard
analysed theoretically the equilibria on curved surfaces, and suggested that
in many cases we should have a wetting film on the fiber, in between the
droplets. J.M. di Meglio and D. Queré established the existence, and the
thickness, of the film, in a very elegant way(l5). They created a pair of
neighbouring droplets, one small and one large, and showed that the small
one emptied slowly into the big one (as capillarity wants it to go). Measuring
the speed of the process, they could go back to the thickness of the film


12                                 Physics 1991


which lies on the fiber and connects the two droplets: the Poiseuille flow
 rates in the film are very sensitive to thickness.
    Another elegant experiment in wetting concerns the collective modes of a
contact line; the edge of a drop standing on a solid. If one distorts the line by
 some external means, it returns to its equilibrium shape with a relaxation
 rate dependent upon the wavelength of the distortion, which we wanted to
 study. But how could we distort the line? I thought of very complex tricks,
 using electric fields from an evaporated metal comb, or other, even worse,
 procedures. But Thierry Ondarcuhu came up with a simple method.
    1) He first prepared the unperturbed contact line L by putting a large
 droplet on a solid.
    2) He then dipped a fiber in the same liquid, pulled it out, and obtained,
 from the Rayleigh instability, a very periodic string of drops.
    3) He laid the fiber on the solid, parallel to L, and generated a line of
droplets on the solid.
    4) He pushed the line L (by tilting the solid), up to the moment where L
 touched the droplets; then coalescence took place, and he had a single, wavy
 line on which he could measure relaxation rates(16).
    I have emphasized experiments more than theory. Of course we need
some theory when thinking of soft matter. And in fact some amusing
 theoretical analogies sometimes show up between soft matter and other
 fields. One major example is due to S.F. Edwards(l7). Edwards showed a
beautiful correspondence between the conformations of a flexible chain
and the trajectories of a non relativistic particle; the statistical weight of the
chain corresponding to the propagator of the particle. In the presence of
external potentials, both systems are ruled by exactly the same Schrödinger
equation! This observation has been the key to all later developments in
 polymer statistics.
    Another amusing analogy relates the smectics A to superconductors. It
was discovered simultaneously by the late W. McMillan (a great scientist,
who we all miss) and by us. Later, it has been exploited artistically by T.
 Lubensky and his colleagues(l8). Here again, we see a new form of matter
being invented. We knew that type II superconductors let in the magnetic
field in the form of quantized vortices. The analog here is a smectic A inside
which we add chiral solutes, which play the role of the field. In some
favorable cases, as predicted in 1988 by Lubensky, this may generate a
smectic phase drilled by screw dislocations - the so called A* phase. This
was discovered experimentally only one year later by Pindak and cowork-
ers(19), a beautiful feat.
    Let me now end up this sentimental journey into soft matter, with a brief
mention of my companions. Some were met during the way, like Jean
Jacques, a great inventor of liquid crystals, or Karol Mysels, the undisputed
master of surfactant science. Some others were with me all along the way;
Henri Benoit and Sam Edwards, who taught me polymer science; Jacques
des Cloizeaux and Gerard Jannink, who have produced a deep theoretical
book on this subject. Finally, an inner core of fellow travelers, over all forms


                            Pierre-Gilles de Gennes                   13


of land and sea: Phil Pincus, Shlomo Alexander, Etienne Guyon, Madeleine
Veyssié; and last but not least, Françoise Brochard - sans laquelle les
chases ne seraient que ce qu’elles sont.
  The final lines are not mine: they come from an experiment on soft
matter, after Boudin, which is shown on the following figure.


14                                  Physics 1991


An English translation might run like this:

          “Have fun on sea and land
          Unhappy it is to become famous
          Riches, honors, false glitters of this world
          All is but soap bubbles”

No conclusion could be more appropriate today.




REFERENCES:
 1. P G de Gennes, in Pvor. 2nd Conf. “Physique théorique et Biologie”. Editions
     CNRS 1969 (15 Quai A. France 75007 Paris, France).
 2. J.A. Odell, A. Keller, in Polymer-flow Interactions (ed. I. Rabin), AIP, New York
     1985 ; Av. Keller, J. Odell, Coll. Polym. Sci., 263, 181 (1985).
 3. P.G. de Gennes, J. Chem. Phys., 60, 5030 (1974).
 4. For a historical review see K. Mysels, Chem. Eng. Prog., Symposium series, 67,
     45, (1971).
 5. M. Tabor, P.G. de Gennes, Europhys. Lett., 2, 519 (1986) P.G. de Gennes,
     Physica, 140 A, 9 (1986).
 6. K. Mysels, K. Shinoda, S. Frankel, Soap Films , Pergamon, London (1959).
 7. F. Brochard, J.F. Lennon, J. Physique (Paris), 36, 1035 (1976).
 8. G. Porte, J. Marignan, P. Bassereau, R. May, J. Physique (Paris), 49, 511 (1988).
 9. D. Roux, M.E. Cates, Proceedings of the 4th Nishinomya-Yukawa Symposium,
     Springer (to be published).
10. G. Friedel, Annales de Physique, 18, 273 (1922).
11. R.B. Meyer, L. Liebert, L. Strzelecki, P. Keller, J. Physique L. 69 (1975).
12. P. Fabre, C. Casagrande, M. Veyssié, V. Cabuil, R. Massart, “Ferrosmectics : A
     new Magnetic and Mesomorphic Phase”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 64, 539 (1990).
13. C. Casagrande, M. Veyssié, C.R. Acad. Sci. (Paris), 306 II, 1423 (1988).
     C. Casagrande, P. Fabre, M. Veyssié, E. Raphael, Europhys. Lett., 9, 251
     (1989).
14. B. Grüining, U. Holtschmidt, G. Koerner, G. Rössmy US Patent no 4, 715, 986
     (Dec 1987).
15. J.M. di Meglio, CR. Acad. Sci. (Paris), 303 II, 437 (1986).
16. T. Ondarcuhu, M. Veyssié, Nature, 352, 418 (1991).
17. S.F. Edwards, Proc. Phys. Sot. (London), 85, 613 (1965).
18. S.R. Renn, T. Lubensky, Phys. Rev., A 38, 2132 (1988).
19. J.W. Goodby, M.A. Waugh, S.M. Stein, E. Chin, R. Pindak, J.S. Patel, J. Am.
     Chem. Soc., 111, 8119 (1989).
