                              PIERRE C URIE

       Radioactive substances, especially radium
                         Nobel Lecture, June 6, 1905



Allow me, first of all, to tell you that I am happy to speak today before the
Academy of Sciences which has conferred on Mme. Curie and myself the
very great honour of awarding us a Nobel Prize. We must also tender you
our apologies for being so tardy in visiting you in Stockholm, for reasons
quite outside our control.
   I have to speak to you today on the properties of the radioactive substances,
and in particular of those of radium. I shall not be able to mention exclusively
our own investigations. At the beginning of our studies on this subject in
1898 we were the only ones, together with Becquerel, interested in this
question; but since then much more work has been done and today it is no
longer possible to speak of radioactivity without quoting the results of in-
vestigations by a large number of physicists such as Rutherford, Debierne,
Elster and Geitel, Giesel, Kauffmann, Crookes, Ramsay and Soddy, to men-
tion only a few of those who have made important progress in our know-
ledge of radioactive properties.
   I shall give you only a rapid account of the discovery of radium and a
brief summary of its properties, and then I shall speak to you of the conse-
quences of the new knowledge which radioactivity gives us in the various
branches of science.
   Becquerel discovered in 1896 the special radiating properties of uranium
and its compounds. Uranium emits very weak rays which leave an impres-
sion on photographic plates. These rays pass through black paper and metals;
they make air electrically conductive. The radiation does not vary with time,
and the cause of its production is unknown.
   Mme. Curie in France and Schmidt in Germany have shown that tho-
rium and its compounds possess the same properties. Mme. Curie also showed
in 1898 that of all the chemical substances prepared or used in the labor-
atory, only those containing uranium or thorium were capable of emitting
a substantial amount of the Becquerel rays. We have called such substances
radioactive.
   Radioactivity, therefore, presented itself as an atomic property of uranium


74                                 1903 P. CURIE

and thorium, a substance being all the more radioactive as it was richer in
uranium or thorium.
    Mme. Curie has studied the minerals containing uranium or thorium, and
in accordance with the views just stated, these minerals are all radioactive.
But in making the measurements, she found that certain of these were more
active than they should have been according to the content of uranium or
thorium. Mme. Curie then made the assumption that these substances con-
tained radioactive chemical elements which were as yet unknown. We,
Mme. Curie and I, have sought to find these new hypothetical substances
in a uranium ore, pitchblende. By carrying out the chemical analysis of this
mineral and assaying the radioactivity of each batch separated in the treat-
ment, we have, first of all, found a highly radioactive substance with chem-
ical properties close to bismuth which we have called polonium, and then (in
collaboration with Bémont) a second highly radioactive substance close
 to barium which we called radium. Finally, Debierne has since separated a
 third radioactive substance belonging to the group of the rare earths, actinium.
    These substances exist in pitchblende only in the form of traces, but they
 have an enormous radioactivity of an order of magnitude 2 million times
 greater than that of uranium. After treating an enormous amount of mate-
rial, we succeeded in obtaining a sufficient quantity of radiferous barium salt
 to be able to extract from it radium in the form of a pure salt by a method
 of fractionation. Radium is the higher homologue of barium in the series of
 the alkaline earth metals. Its atomic weight as determined by Mme. Curie is
 225. Radium is characterized by a distinct spectrum which was first discov-
 ered and studied by Demarçay, and then by Crookes and Runge and Precht,
 Exner, and Haschek. The spectrum reaction of radium is very sensitive, but
 it is much less sensitive than radioactivity for revealing the presence of traces
 of radium.
    The general effects of the radiations from radium are intense and very
 varied.
     Various experiments: Discharge of an electroscope. - The rays pass through
 several centimetres of lead. - A spark induced by the presence of radium.
 - Excitation of the phosphorescence of barium platinocyanide, willemite and
 kunzite. - Coloration of glass by the rays. - Thermoluminescence of fluorine
 and ultramarine after the action of radiation from radium on these substances.
 - Radiographs obtained with radium.
     A radioactive substance such as radium constitutes a continuous source of
 energy. This energy is manifested by the emission of the radiation. I have


                         RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES                             75
also shown in collaboration with Laborde that radium releases heat continu-
ously to the extent of approx. 100 calories per gram of radium and per hour.
Rutherford and Soddy, Runge and Precht, and Knut Ångström have also
measured the release of heat by radium, this release seems to be constant after
several years, and the total energy released by radium in this way is consid-
erable.
   The work of a large number of physicists (Meyer and Schweidler, Giesel,
Becquerel, P. Curie, Mme. Curie, Rutherford, Villard, etc.) shows that the
radioactive substances can emit rays of the three different varieties designated
by Rutherford as α−, β− and γ -rays. They differ from one another by the
action of a magnetic field and of an electric field which modify the trajectory
of the α - and β -rays.
   The β -rays, similar to cathode rays, behave like negatively charged projec-
tiles of a mass 2000 times smaller than that of a hydrogen atom (electron).
We have verified, Mme. Curie and I, that the β -rays carry with them neg-
ative electricity. The α -rays, similar to the Goldstein’s canal rays, behave
like projectiles 1,000 times heavier and charged with positive electricity. The
γ-rays are similar to Röntgen rays.
    Several radioactive substances such as radium, actinium, and thorium also
act otherwise than through their direct radiation; the surrounding air be-
comes radioactive, and Rutherford assumes that each of these substances emits
an unstable radioactive gas which he calls emanation and which spreads in the
air surrounding the radioactive substance.
    The activity of the gases which are thus made radioactive disappears spon-
 taneously according to an exponential law with a time constant which is
 characteristic for each active substance. It can, therefore, be stated that the
 emanation from radium diminishes by one-half every 4 days, that from tho-
 rium by one-half every 55 seconds, and that from actinium by one-half every
 3 seconds.
    Solid substances which are placed in the presence of the active air sur-
 rounding the radioactive substances, themselves become temporarily radio-
 active. This is the phenomenon of induced radioactivity which Mme. Curie and
 I have discovered. The induced radioactivities, like the emanations, are equal-
 ly unstable and are destroyed spontaneously according to exponential laws
 characteristic of each of them.

Experiments: A glass tube filled with emanation from radium which was
brought from Paris. - Discharge of an electroscope by the rays from the in-


76                              1903 P . C U R I E

duced radioactivity. - Phosphorescence of zinc sulphide under the action of
the emanation.
   Finally, according to Ramsay and Soddy, radium is the seat of a contin-
uous and spontaneous production of helium.
   The radioactivity of uranium, thorium, radium and actinium seems to be
invariable over a period of several years; on the other hand, that of polo-
nium diminishes according to an exponential law, it diminishes by one-half
in 140 days and after several years it has almost completely disappeared.
   These are all the most important facts which have been established by the
efforts of a large number of physicists. Several phenomena have already been
extensively studied by them.
   The consequences of these facts are making themselves felt in all branches
of science:
   The importance of these phenomena for physics is evident. Radium con-
stitutes in laboratories a new research tool, a source of new radiations. The
study of the β -rays has already been very fruitful. It has been found that this
study confirms the theory of J. J. Thomson and Heaviside on the mass of
particles in motion, charged with electricity; according to this theory, part of
the mass results from the electromagnetic reactions of the ether of the vac-
uum. The experiments of Kauffmann on the β -rays of radium lead to the
assumption that certain particles have a velocity very slightly below that of
light, that according to the theory the mass of the particle increases with the
velocity for velocities close to that of light, and that the whole mass of the
particle is of an electromagnetic nature. If the hypothesis is also made that
material substances are constituted by an agglomeration of electrified par-
ticles, it is seen that the fundamental principles of mechanics will have to be
profoundly modified.
   The consequences for chemistry of our knowledge of the properties of the
radioactive substances are perhaps even more important. And this leads us to
speak of the source of energy which maintains the radioactive phenomena.
   At the beginning of our investigations we stated, Mme. Curie and I, that
the phenomena could be explained by two distinct and very general hypoth-
eses which were described by Mme. Curie in 1899 and 1900 (Revue Générale
des Sciences, January 10, 1899, and Revue Scientifique, July 21, 1900).
   1. In the first hypothesis it can be supposed that the radioactive substances
borrow from an external radiation the energy which they release, and their
radiation would then be a secondary radiation. It is not absurd to suppose
that space is constantly traversed by very penetrating radiations which cer-


                         RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES                               77
tain substances would be capable of capturing in flight. According to the
recent work of Rutherford, Cooke and McLennan, this hypothesis seems to
be useful for explaining part of the extremely weak radiation which ema-
nates from most of the substances.
   2. In the second hypothesis it can be supposed that the radioactive sub-
stances draw from themselves the energy which they release. The radioactive
substances would then be in course of evolution, and they would be trans-
forming themselves progressively and slowly in spite of the apparent in-
variability of the state of certain of them. The quantity of heat released by
radium in several years is enormous if it is compared with the heat released
in any chemical reaction with the same weight of matter. This released heat
would only represent, however, the energy involved in a transformation of
a quanty of radium so small that it cannot be appreciated even after years.
This leads to the supposition that the transformation is more far-reaching
than the ordinary chemical transformations, that the existence of the atom is
even at stake, and that one is in the presence of a transformation of the el-
ements.
   The second hypothesis has shown itself the more fertile in explaining the
properties of the radioactive substances properly so called. It gives, in partic-
ular, an immediate explanation for the spontaneous disappearance of polo-
nium and the production of helium by radium. This theory of the trans-
formation of the elements has been developed and formulated with great
boldness by Rutherford and Soddy who state that there is a continuous and
irreversible disaggregation of the atoms of the radioactive elements. In the
theory of Rutherford the disaggregation products would be, on the one
hand, the projectile rays, and on the other hand, the emanations and the in-
duced radioactivities. The latter would be new gaseous or solid radioactive
substances frequently with a rapid evolution and having atomic weights
lower than that of the original element from which they are derived. Seen in
this way the life of radium would be necessarily limited when this substance
is separated from the other elements. In Nature radium is always found in
association with uranium, and it can be assumed that it is produced by the
latter.
   This, therefore, is a veritable theory of the transmutation of elements, al-
though not as the alchemists understood it. The inorganic matter would
necessarily evolve through the ages and in accordance with immutable laws.
   Through an unexpected consequence the radioactive phenomena can be
important in geology. It has been found, for example, that radium always


78                                1903 P. CURIE

accompanies uranium in minerals. And it has even been found that the ratio
of radium to uranium is constant in all minerals (Boltwood). This confirms
the idea of the creation of radium from uranium. This theory can be ex-
tended to try to explain also other associations of elements which occur so
frequently in minerals. It can be imagined that certain elements have been
formed on the spot on the surface of the Earth or that they stem from other
elements in a time which may be of the order of magnitude of geological
periods. This is a new point of view which the geologists will have to take
into account.
   Elster and Geitel have shown that the emanation of radium is very wide-
spread in Nature and that radioactivity probably plays an important part in
meteorology, with the ionization of the air provoking the condensation of
water vapour.
   Finally, in the biological sciences the rays of radium and its emanation pro-
duce interesting effects which are being studied at present. Radium rays have
been used in the treatment of certain diseases (lupus, cancer, nervous dis-
eases). In certain cases their action may become dangerous. If one leaves a
wooden or cardboard box containing a small glass ampulla with several
centigrams of a radium salt in one’s pocket for a few hours, one will feel
absolutely nothing. But 15 days afterwards a redness will appear on the
epidermis, and then a sore which will be very difficult to heal. A more pro-
longed action could lead to paralysis and death. Radium must be transported
in a thick box of lead.
    It can even be thought that radium could become very dangerous in crim-
inal hands, and here the question can be raised whether mankind benefits
 from knowing the secrets of Nature, whether it is ready to profit from it or
 whether this knowledge will not be harmful for it. The example of the
 discoveries of Nobel is characteristic, as powerful explosives have enabled
 man to do wonderful work. They are also a terrible means of destruction in
 the hands of great criminals who are leading the peoples towards war. I am
 one of those who believe with Nobel that mankind will derive more good
 than harm from the new discoveries.
