                           P O L Y K A R P      K U S C H


           The magnetic moment of the electron
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1955



I must tell you, and with considerable regret, that I am not a theoretical
physicist. A penetrating analysis of the part that the discovery and meas-
urement of the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron has played in
the development of certain aspects of contemporary theoretical physics must
be left to the group of men who have in recent years devised the theoretical
structure of quantum electrodynamics. My role has been that of an exper-
imental physicist who, by observation and measurement of the properties
and operation of the physical world, supplies the data that may lead to the
formulation of conceptual structures. The consistency of the consequences of
a conceptual structure with the data of physical experiment determines the
validity of that structure as a description of the physical universe. Our early
predecessors observed Nature as she displayed herself to them. As know-
ledge of the world increased, however, it was not sufficient to observe only
the most apparent aspects of Nature to discover her more subtle properties;
rather, it was necessary to interrogate Nature and often to compel Nature,
by various devices, to yield an answer as to her functioning. It is precisely the
role of the experimental physicist to arrange devices and procedures that will
compel Nature to make a quantitative statement of her properties and behav-
ior. It is in this spirit that I propose to discuss my participation in a sequence
of earlier experiments that made possible the precision determination of the
magnetic moment of the electron. I will then discuss the experiments them-
selves which have yielded our present knowledge of the magnetic properties
of the electron.
    Research with atomic and molecular beams has had a long and fruitful
 record in the history of the growth of our present knowledge of matter. The
 experiments that I shall discuss are some in which the method of atomic and
 molecular beams is used essentially as a spectroscopic device for the observa-
 tion of spectral lines in the range of frequencies within which power may be
 generated by electronic means. The general principles of radiofrequency
 spectroscopy by the method of molecular beams were first described by
 Rabi1 and a group of his co-workers of which I was fortunate to be a mem-


                 MAGNETIC         MOMENT        OF   ELECTRON                 299
ber. It is here sufficient to say that a transition between energy levels may be
observed through the circumstance that the magnetic moment of an atom or
molecule may be changed in a transition. The method is characterized by a
very high potential resolution, and in many observations of the frequency of
a line, an accuracy of better than one part in a million has been achieved. It is
of particular value as a tool in the investigation of the details of interactions
within atoms and molecules because small interactions appear as first-order
effects rather than as small superpositions on the relatively enormous energies
that characterize optical spectra.
   The fact that the electron has a spin of one half and a magnetic moment at
least approximately equal to one Bohr magneton has long been recognized.
Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit2 first postulated these properties of the electron to
explain the fine structure in atomic spectra and what has been called the
anomalous Zeeman effect. An enormous body of evidence has given an ever-
increasing support to these postulates. The relativistic Dirac theory of the
electron assumed a particle that was endowed with the properties of mass
and charge. The spin and magnetic moment postulated by Uhlenbeck and
Goudsmit were then found to be a consequence of the relativistic invariance
of the Dirac equation. Indeed, one of the great triumphs of the Dirac elec-
tron theory was the prediction of these postulated electron properties. The
spin and moment of the electron were thus removed from the realm of ad hoc
assumptions, justified by experimental evidence, to the realm of an integral
part of quantum theory. The Dirac electron theory did not, however, con-
sider the interaction of the quantized electromagnetic field with the electron.
    I shall talk of the measurement of the g value rather than the magnetic
moment of the electron. The g value is, as usual, the negative ratio of the
magnetic moment in terms of the Bohr magneton µ 0 and the angular mo-
 mentum in units of          Since, in all cases here under discussion, the angular
 momentum of the system is known, the moment can immediately be ob-
 tained from the g value. The most elementary of the g values, gL, is that as-
 sociated with the orbital motion of the electron. Its value is 1 within small
 and calculable corrections. The electron also has a magnetic moment by vir-
 tue of its angular momentum about a spin axis. The g value associated with
 the spin, g S, is the quantity here under investigation; a value of 2 was ob-
 tained for it in the Dirac electron theory. Now the electrons in an atom have
 both spin and orbital angular momentum. To the total electronic angular
 momentum J, we assign the g value gJ. The atom contains a nucleus that may
 have a nuclear angular momentum and hence a nuclear magnetic moment.


300                            1955 P.KUSCH

The nuclear g value, gN, is designated as gp in the special case when the nucleus
is a proton. To the total angular momentum of the atom we assign the g
value gF.
   The earliest measurements by the molecular beams magnetic resonance
                                         1
method were undertaken by a group of which I was a member working in
Professor Rabi’s laboratory and under his direction. The measurements con-
sisted of the determination of nuclear g values by the observation in a mol-
ecule of the nuclear resonance frequency in a classically determined magnetic
field. Even in the great national laboratories dedicated to the maintenance of
physical standards, a precision of only about one part in forty thousand has
been achieved3 in the measurement of a field. In a well-equipped laboratory
that, however, lacks the equipment and tradition of meticulous intercom-
parison of electrical standards, a precision of perhaps one quarter percent may
be achieved in the determination of the magnitude of a field. While ratios of
nuclear g values may be found without an explicit knowledge of the field, the
accuracy of the determination of a nuclear moment in terms of the Bohr or
nuclear magneton is limited by the uncertainty in the measurement of a field
as well as by the uncertainty in a prior measurement of the Bohr or nuclear
magneton. Thus, the desirability of a direct measurement of a nuclear g value
in terms of the Bohr magneton is apparent.
   The molecular beam magnetic resonance method was originally applied
to the determination of the nuclear g values in molecules that did not have a
net electronic orbital or spin angular momentum. It is, however, possible to
apply the same experimental techniques to an investigation of the hyperfine
structure of atoms. If we observe transitions between the various F levels at
zero or very low magnetic field, the hyperfine structure separation may
readily be found. At a higher magnetic field the observation of the frequency
of transition between magnetic sub-levels yields again the zero-field h.f.s.
(hyperfine structure) splitting, the quantity              and the quantity gN/gJ
though the latter quantity can be found with only limited precision. The
group of which I was a member at Columbia made the first such studies on
                                                       4



the commonly occurring isotopes of the alkali atoms and determined the
magnetic hyperfine structure interaction constants of the alkali atoms. Ex-
tensive subsequent work in the observation of atomic h.f.s. has, of course,
been done in many laboratories with results of great interest in the study of
higher-order moments in nuclei and of the properties of radioactive nuclei.
The alkali atoms were particularly adaptable to the original experimental
work, first because the beams of the atoms may readily be produced and de-


                 MAGNETIC        MOMENT        OF   ELECTRON                301
tected and secondly, because they occur in S½ states, almost wholly free of
                                               2



perturbation by other states.
   The possibility of measuring the moment of a nucleus in terms of the Bohr
magneton is a consequence of the possibility of observing both nuclear res-
onance in molecules with a frequency                and transitions among the
magnetic components of h.f.s. levels for which the dependence of frequency
on field is of the order              Millman and I then addressed ourselves
                                                     5



to the problem of measuring the moment of the proton in terms of the elec-
tron spin moment. The experimental problems were considerable and arose
from three factors. The first of these was related to the fact that the effective
moment of a molecule of zero electronic angular momentum is of the order
of a nuclear magneton while that of an atom is of the order of a Bohr
magneton. Deflecting fields that allow the observation of a change in trajec-
tory of a molecule in which a hydrogen nucleus has undergone a transition
will deflect an atom through unmanageably large excursions if the field is
arbitrary. However, all atoms in which magnetic h.f.s. occurs and in which
the spin of the nucleus is greater than ½ have, in certain states, zero magnet-
ic moments at definite values of the magnetic field which may be very high.
Atoms in such states may thus traverse a carefully adjusted inhomogeneous
field without catastrophic deflections, and a transition from such a state may
at once be detected since the terminal state is generally characterized by a
large magnetic moment. Thus, it is possible to choose the deflecting field in
such a way that a change in the spin orientation of a nucleus in a molecule
and a transition among the magnetic levels of the h.f.s. may both be de-
tected. The second of our experimental problems was related to the produc-
tion of a beam of molecules that contained hydrogen and simultaneously an
alkali atom, requisite for the detection of beams by techniques then available
 to us. Since atomic lines were to be observed at the same field as nuclear res-
 onance lines, the simultaneous production of a beam of alkali atoms was nec-
 essary. We used beams of sodium and potassium hydroxides evaporated
 from silver ovens and noted that at the temperatures required to generate a
 beam of the hydroxide, the reaction between an alkali halide and metallic
 calcium proceeded at such a rate that a convenient beam of atoms appeared.
 The third experimental problem was associated with the need of applying to
 the same circuit, in succession, two frequencies that differed by as much as a
 factor of seventy, and with the pre-war difficulty of generating r.f. (radio-
 frequency) power at high frequencies.
    Extensive intercomparison of the frequencies of the resonance line of the


302                            1955 P.KUSCH

protons and of lines in the h.f.s. spectra of sodium, rubidium and caesium
for each of which a prior determination of the interaction constants had been
made, led to a determination of the ratio of the proton moment and the spin
magnetic moment of the electron in the calibrating atoms which we, of
course, assumed to be the Bohr magneton. The magnetic moment of the
proton in terms of the nuclear magneton found on the basis of the assump-
tion that the spin moment of the electron was indeed the Bohr magneton
differed from the moment as determined from the measurement of a fre-
quency in a classically determined field by about one tenth percent. When,
at a much later date, it was found that the spin magnetic moment of the
electron deviates from the Bohr magneton by the order of one tenth per-
cent, the direction of the deviation in the older experiment was examined.
It is perhaps a good commentary on the hazards of experimental physics that
no significant effect had escaped us but that the error in the mutual induc-
tance which we had used in the calibration of the magnetic field was of the
order of two tenths rather than one tenth percent.
   After the war, Nafe and Nelson6, working with Rabi, made the first of the
measurements of the hyperfine structure splitting of hydrogen in the ground
state. Now the h.f.s. of hydrogen may be calculated explicitly in terms of
the magnetic moment of the proton, the spin magnetic moment of the elec-
tron and the electronic wave function at the nucleus. However, a discrepancy
of about one quarter percent was noted between the observed and predicted
magnitude of the h.f.s. splitting when the value of the proton moment
found by Millman and me was used. The assumption that the spin moment
of the electron is a Bohr magneton enters into the calculation twice, first as
an intrinsic property of the electron and second in the calculation of the pro-
ton moment from the observed ratio of the proton moment and the spin
moment of the electron. The discrepancy led Breit 7 to suggest that the elec-
tron may possess an intrinsic magnetic moment greater than µΟ by the order
of αµ0, where a is the usual fine structure constant.
   The question of the existence of an anomalous magnetic moment was then
investigated in detail by Foley and me 8 . In this inquiry, as in all others con-
ducted in the atomic and molecular beams laboratory at Columbia Univer-
sity, we profited by Rabi’s advice. The procedure that we employed capi-
talizes on the fact that the gJ value associated with a state is a linear combina-
tion of the electronic orbital and spin g values, gL and gS and that this com-
bination is different for different states. That is, there is a contribution to
the total electronic magnetic moment of an atom both from the orbital mo-


                 MAGNETIC         MOMENT        OF   ELECTRON                 303
tion of the electrons and from the spin of the electrons, and the contribution
from each of these factors is dependent on the state of the atom. Since we
considered only atoms with single electrons outside of closed shells, Russell-
Saunders coupling is a good approximation and the coefficients that relate
the various g values are known. The ratio of the gJ values of two atoms that
occur in different spectroscopic states yields gS /gL to an accuracy limited by
the precision of observation and the precision with which the coefficients
relating the various g values are known.
   The intercomparison of g values to obtain a value of gS can only be made
if atoms in several different spectroscopic states are available for observation.
After our first investigation of the hyperfine structures of the alkali atoms,
all in the 2 S ½ state, Hardy and Millman studied the h.fs. of indium in
                                                 9



the 2 P ½ state. Just after the war Becker and 1 determined the interaction
                                                     1 0



constants that characterize the h.f.s. of both isotopes of gallium in the 2P ½
state. Gallium atoms in the excited and metastable 2P³/2 state also occur in an
atomic beam, and it was possible to determine the interaction constants for
both isotopes in this state as well. We thus had available for study atoms in
 three different spectroscopic states.
    In principle the determination of the ratio of two gJ values is simple. Sup-
pose we observe transitions for which F is constant and mF changes by ± 1
for two different atoms or for the same atom in two different states. To the
 extent to which strictly low field conditions prevail, all lines in a given F
 state have the same frequency and the ratio of the frequencies of such lines in
 two different states at a fixed field is simply the ratio of the gF values. From
 this ratio, gS/gL for the electron may readily be derived with some additional
 knowledge of the properties of the nucleus in each atom. However, the h.f.s.
 splitting of atomic states is generally small (from 200 to 20,000 megacycles)
 and the energies of the levels are far from linearly dependent on magnetic
 field at usefully high fields. It is, nevertheless, possible to obtain expressions
 for the energies of all levels in the h.f.s. in terms of the zero field h.f.s.
 splitting, the              and the                     or, where such expressions
 cannot be explicitly found, to determine the energies from the appropriate
 secular determinants. From the observed frequencies of appropriate lines and
 with a prior knowledge of the interaction constants which characterize an
 atom in the state in question it is then possible to determine              Meas-
 urement of this quantity at the same field for atoms in two different states
 yields, at once, the important ratio gS/gL. The determination is independent
 of a knowledge of the magnetic field and of any fundamental constants.


304                                        1955 P.KUSCH

   It is, perhaps, worthwhile to remark on some experimental details. The
field in which the transition frequency was measured was so chosen that all
the observed lines had a frequency of the order of 1 megacycle per gauss. To
avoid excessive distortion of the lines due to inhomogeneity of the field, a
great deal of adjustment of the field was required before the lines approxi-
mated in width their theoretical value.
   Special arrangements were made to allow the rapid interchange of ovens
so that lines of different atoms could be measured in rapid succession. A con-
siderable number of oscillators was required so that several frequencies which
differed by large factors could be applied to the r.f. circuits that induced the
transitions. While the lines should, in principle, be measured at a fixed if
unknown field, the actual measurements were made in a field that varied
monotonically throughout a series of observations. The variation of field has
the annoying effect of requiring a large body of data to establish the fre-
quencies of two or more lines at a fixed field, but it also aids in avoiding
repetitive errors that may occur when a reading of a fixed quantity is re-
peated.
   Three intercomparisons of gJ values were made in these experiments. The
results are given in Table 1.

Table 1 . Observed ratios of atomic g values and the corresponding values of gS/gL

        Comparison               Nominal            Observed                         g S / gJ
g J ( P 3 / 2G a ) / g J ( P ½ G a ) 2
    2                 2
                                           2 (1.00172 ± 0.00006)          2 (1.00114 ± 0.00004)
g J ( 2 S ½ N a ) / gJ ( 2 P ½ G a ) 3     3 ( 1.00242 ± 0.00006)         2 ( 1.00121 ± 0.00003)
g J ( 2 S ½ N a ) / gJ ( 2 P ½ I n ) 3     3 (I.00243 ± 0 . 0 0 0 1 0 )   2 (1.00121 ± 0 . 0 0 0 0 5 )



   It is to be noted that the ratio g s/gL which has been determined has been
found from the ratio of the gJ values on the basis of the assumption that the
coupling is Russell-Saunders coupling. Hence the deviation of the ratio gS/gL
from its nominal value of 2 as determined from any pair of atoms or any
pair of states does not constitute clear evidence that the spin moment of the
electron is other than one Bohr magneton because of the possibility of oc-
currence of significant perturbations of the states. Theoretical arguments,
however, indicate that such perturbations must be small. On experimental
grounds the agreement of the ratio obtained in three different ways from
different atoms in different spectroscopic states offers overwhelming ev-
idence that the spin moment of the electron does indeed differ from its nom-


                 MAGNETIC         MOMENT           OF     ELECTRON           305
inal value by the indicated amount. The discrepancies between the three val-
ues of the ratio may, however, arise from perturbations of the indicated en-
ergy levels.
    A later intercomparison of the g J values of the alkali atoms and a com-
parison of the gJ value of potassium and hydrogen has demonstrated that the
gJ values of the three alkali atoms of lowest atomic number are indeed equal
to the spin g value of the electron to within one part in forty thousand. A
further intercomparison by Mann and me 11 of the g J values of indium in the
2
  P ½ and 2P 3/2 states has given further confirmation to the interpretation of
the discrepancy between a measured ratio of gJ values and the nominal value.
     The experiments that have been described were performed at a field of
 about 400 gauss. In a wholly independent series of experiments Taub and 1 12
 determined the ratio of the g J value of indium in the 2P ½ state and that of
 sodium in the 2S ½ state by observations of lines in the h.f.s. spectrum at
 fields that ranged from 3,300 to 12,000 gauss. The method was to determine
 the nuclear g value of the proton in an alkali hydroxide in terms of the g J
 values of indium and sodium. The result, in so far as it concerns the proton,
 is of no further interest here in view of the highly refined experiments which
 have been done in later years that allow the precise and direct determination
  of the nuclear g value of the proton in terms of both the nuclear and the Bohr
  magneton. The result is, however, of interest in that it yields again the ratio
 of the gJ values in two different states on the basis of measurements at fields
 which differed from those in the earlier experiments by an order of magni-
 tude. We found that:


                          g S / gJ = 2 ( 1 + 0 . 0 0 1 1 9 )


We may, therefore, conclude on the basis of all evidence that the electron
does indeed possess an « intrinsic » or « anomalous » magnetic moment over
and above that deduced from the Dirac theory and whose magnitude is very
close to 0.119 percent of the Bohr magneton.
   Perhaps it is well, at this point, to make a brief statement of the theoretical
status of the spin magnetic moment of the electron. Soon after the publica-
tion of our first results which gave substance to the assertion that the electron
does have an anomalous moment, Schwinger13 gave a result, based on new
procedures in quantum electrodynamics, that

                     g S / gL = 2 ( 1 +    a /2 p ) = 2 ( 1 . 0 0 1 1 6 )


306                            1955   P.KUSCH

The result is in excellent agreement with experimental measurements of the
same quantity. The effect of the increased electron moment arises essentially
as a consequence of the quantization of the electromagnetic field which al-
ways has a residual zero-point amplitude. While the existence of this field
had previous1y been recognized, it had not been possible to deal with the
interaction prior to the formulation of the contemporary quantum electro-
dynamics. The importance of the observation of the anomalous magnetic
moment of the electron is in part in the demonstration that the procedures of
quantum electrodynamics are, in fact, satisfactory in formulating a descrip-
tion of Nature.
     It is obvious that a more detailed study of the magnetic moment of the
electron than that described thus far was desirable. The objective of a more
extended investigation lies in the avoidance of theoretical difficulties in the
interpretation, to a high precision, of the electronic g values of complex at-
oms. In the absence of substantial difficulties of interpretation, the very great
precision of which spectroscopy by the method of atomic beams is capable
may be used to obtain results of sufficient precision to test the validity of the
calculations of quantum electrodynamics when made to a higher order than
those originally made by Schwinger.
     Barring only a measurement of the spin moment of the free electron itself,
the best measurement that one may hope to make is on the electron in the
hydrogen atom. In this atom in the ground state, the electron has no orbital
angular momentum and hence there is no contribution to the electronic
magnetic moment from the orbital motion. The entire electronic magnetic
moment arises from the spin moment of the electron. Koenig, Prodell and
I 14 have determined the ratio of the electronic g value, g J, of the hydrogen
atom and the nuclear g value of the proton by experimental procedures to be
described. To a very high order of accuracy, gJ is equal to g s‘, the spin g value
of the electron bound in the hydrogen atom. The value of g S’ differs from
g S of the free electron through a small relativistic effect of about eighteen
parts per million. Corrections due to a mixing of states and relativistic effects
are well known and do not limit the accuracy with which the ratio g s/gp
 may be determined at the present time. Gardner and Purcell15 have meas-
ured the ratio 2gL/gP of the cyclotron frequency of the electron and the pre-
cession frequency of the proton in a magnetic field to an accuracy of about
one part in eighty thousand. Our result when combined with that of Gard-
ner and Purcell yields g S/gL.
     As a preliminary procedure, Prodell and I16 determined the hyperfine


                MAGNETIC        MOMENT       OF   ELECTRON                307
structure separation of hydrogen with high precision. A subsequent inves-
tigation by both Wittke and Dicke17 and by us18 indicated an excessively
optimistic estimate of the uncertainty. However, the value of the zero-field
h.f.s. splitting of hydrogen that we used was sufficiently good to contribute
no error to the value of g J /g P, comparable to other uncertainties.
   The apparatus designed for the purpose of these experiments had for the
magnet which determined the transition frequencies, one with a much better
field homogeneity than that which usually characterizes the magnets used in
atomic beams experiments. Ordinarily in an atomic beams apparatus, the
magnet that determines the splitting of the levels is internal to the vacuum
system. This arrangement permits small magnet gaps to be used and hence
the production of large fields with electromagnets of moderate dimensions
and power consumption. The use of a small gap, however, leads to a con-
siderable hazard of field inhomogeneity. In the present case the magnet was
external to the vacuum envelope, the pole faces were of large diameter to
reduce edge effects and the magnet could be carefully shimmed after each
change of externally imposed experimental parameters and from day to day
to give good homogeneity in the volume within which transitions were ob-
served. The deflecting magnets consisted of current-carrying conductors
rather than the iron magnets that have become conventional in atomic
beams experiments. This choice was made because of the smaller distortion
of the transition field by current-carrying conductors than by massive blocks
of iron.
   The experiment involved the measurement of the frequency of transition
between the levels m = o and m = - 1 in the state for which F = I , alter-
nately with the proton resonance frequency in the same magnetic field. The
frequency of the first of these lines is of the order of 3,600 megacycles at a
field of 1,500 gauss. The frequency of the proton resonance line is about 6.5
megacycles at the same field and is found by the methods of nuclear res-
 onance in the same region of space as that traversed by the beam. An impor-
tant component of the equipment is a device that can insert a cylindrical
sample of water or mineral oil into a region as closely coincident as inherent
limitations permit to that in which the atomic line has been observed. Va-
rious small corrections relating to the residual inhomogeneity of the field,
bulk diamagnetism of the matter in the cylindrical sample that we employed,
to the presence of paramagnetic ions when we observed the resonance in
water and the differential internal diamagnetic shielding between oil and
water must be applied.


308                                    1955 P.KUSCH

  We found that

                       g J / gP = - 6 5 8 . 2 1 7 1 ± 0 . 0 0 0 6


where gP is the nuclear g value observed in a spherical sample of mineral oil.
It is to be noted that this is only an apparent value of gp since the externally
applied field is modified by the internal diamagnetic shielding of the proton
by the electrons in the molecules containing the proton. It is, nevertheless,
of value to give the result in this form since the ratio 2g L/gP measured by
Gardner and Purcell also refers to a spherical sample of mineral oil.
   Application of a small relativistic term yields g S, the spin g value of the
electron in terms of g P.

                       g S / gP = - 6 5 8 . 2 2 8 8 ± 0 . 0 0 0 6


  The combination of this result with that of Gardner and Purcell


                          2 g L / gP   = - 6 5 7 . 4 7 5 ± 0.008
yields
                      g S/ gP = 2 (1.001146 ± 0.000012)

where the principal uncertainty arises from the result of Gardner and Purcell.
Since g L equals I, we can write

                    gS=    2µ   s   = 2 (1.001146 ± 0.000012)


where µ s, is the spin magnetic moment of the electron in terms of µ Ο.
   The same result has subsequently been obtained by Beringer and Heald19
who used a different experimental method involving, for atomic hydrogen,
a microwave absorption technique and for the observation of the proton
resonance frequency, the usual nuclear resonance technique. The primary
result obtained by them was

                          g J / gp = - 6 5 8 . 2 1 8 1 ± 0 . 0 0 0 3


In view of the stated uncertainties and the possibility of differences in the
internal diamagnetic shielding in different samples of mineral oil, the agree-
ment is good. Because of the limited accuracy for the result 2gL/gP, the value


                  MAGNETIC           MOMENT          OF    ELECTRON              309
of gS/gL is not affected, within its uncertainty, by the discrepancy, in the two
results.
   It is interesting to examine the ratio of g S/gL obtained by the sequence of
experiments just described in light of the theoretical calculations of the elec-
tron moment. The result gives unambiguous evidence that the electron mo-
ment is anomalous and that the deviation of the moment from its nominal
value is about αµ /2π. Karplus and Kroll20 have calculated to a higher order
                    0


the radiative correction to the spin moment of the electron and have found
for the spin g value


              g s = 2 ( 1 ± α/ 2 ,π - 2.973 α + π ) = 2 ( 1 . 0 0 1 1 4 5 4 )
                                                 2   2




The result of the experiment is in remarkable agreement with the calcula-
tion, especially since the uncertainty in the experiment is much greater than
the discrepancy between the experimental and calculated values. The agree-
ment offers conclusive evidence of the validity of the calculation to the order
α and very strong support to the validity of the calculations to the order α2.
Thus the new procedures of quantum electrodynamics which have, perhaps,
a questionable a priori validity are demonstrated to be, in practice, valid for
the interpretation of certain observed phenomena and, therefore, useful in
the exploration of other aspects of the behavior of matter.




 1. I. I. Rabi, S. Millman, P. Kusch, and J. R. Zacharias, Phys. Rev., 55 (1939) 526.
 2. G. E. Uhlenbeck and S. Goudsmit, Naturwiss., 13 (1925) 953 ; Nature, 117 (1926)
    264.
 3. H. A. Thomas, L. Driscoll, and J. A. Hipple, Phys. Rev., 75 (1949) 902, 992; 78
      (1950) 787.
  4. P. Kusch, S. Millman, and I. I. Rabi, Phys. Rev., 57 (1940) 765.
  5. S. Millman and P. Kusch, Phys. Rev., 60 (1941) 91.
  6. J. E. Nafe and E. B. Nelson, Phys. Rev., 73 (1948) 718.
  7. G. Breit, Phys. Rev., 72 (1947) 984.
  8. P. Kusch and H. M. Foley, Phys. Rev., 72 (1947)    1256; 73 (1948) 412; 74 (1948)
      250.
  9. T. C. Hardy and S. Millman, Phys. Rev., 61 (1942) 459.
 IO . G. E. Becker and P. Kusch, Phys. Rev., 73 (1948) 584.
 11. A. K. Mann and P. Kusch, Phys. Rev., 77 ( 1950) 435.
 12. H. Taub and P. Kusch, Phys. Rev., 75 (1949) 1481.
 13. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev., 73 (1948) 416.


310                              1955    P.KUSCH

14. S. H. Koenig, A. G. Prodell, and P. Kusch, Phys. Rev., 88 (1952) 191.
15. J. H. Gardner and E. M. Purcell, Phys. Rev., 76 (1949) 1262.
16. A. G. Prodell and P. Kusch, Phys. Rev., 88 (1952) 184.
17. J. B. Wittke and R. H. Dicke, Phys. Rev., 96 (1954) 530.
18. P. Kusch, Phys. Rev., 100 (1955) 1188.
19. R. Beringer and M. A. Heald, Phys. Rev., 95 (1954) 1474.
20. R. Karplus and N. M. Kroll, Phys. Rev., 77 (1950) 536.
