                                                          Rainer Weiss Lecture   67




Ligo and the Discovery of
Gravitational Waves, I
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2017 by Rainer Weiss
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA.



all three of us − Barry Barish, Kip Thorne and I − want to recognize
the critical role played by the scientists, engineers, students, technicians
and administrators of the LIGO laboratory and LIGO Scientific Collabo-
ration who are responsible for opening a new field of scientific research:
Gravitational Wave Astronomy and Astrophysics. We are also deeply
indebted to the United States National Science Foundation, which was
willing to take a risk in supporting a new field that required significant
technical development and with an uncertain knowledge of sources but
certain that, should it succeed, it would have a profound influence on our
understanding of physics and the universe.
   The three of us will give talks with the same title, “LIGO and the Dis-
covery of Gravitational Waves”, but focus on different aspects. I will dis-
cuss some of the early history of gravitational waves and develop the con-
cepts to understand the detectors as well as the challenges faced in meas-
uring strains as small as 10–21. Barry will show how the LIGO project
organized to make steady improvements and ultimately carry out a suc-
cessful scientific program. He will describe the detections as well as ideas
to improve the detectors driven by the new science we hope to learn. Kip
will look at the broader aspects of the new field of gravitational wave
astronomy. He will tell of the critical role numerical relativity and under-
standing the quantum mechanics of precision measurements has played.
He will also give a vision of the science that could come from an investi-


68   THE NOBEL PRIZES


     gation of the gravitational wave sky from periods of fractions of millisec-
     onds to tens of billions of years.
        In 1915, a little over 100 years ago, Einstein published the General The-
     ory of Relativity (GR)1,2, a new theory of gravitation which replaced the
     Newtonian force by the idea that mass distorts the geometry of space and
     the flow of time. Matter then moves in this new space-time along the
     shortest four-dimensional paths. (Figure 1 and its caption give an impres-
     sion of the idea).

     The new theory solved a puzzle remaining from Newton’s theory for the
     motion of the planet Mercury, the planet in the strongest gravitational
     field of the sun, which after correction for the motions of other objects in
     the solar system, still did not seem to obey Newton’s theory. Specifically,




     Figure 1. An attempt at visualizing Einstein’s concept of gravity (the General Theory of
     Relativity) in which distortions in the geometry of space and time have replaced the
     gravitational force of Newton. Think of a jungle gym of rectangular bars in the three
     spatial dimensions. The intersection points of the bars are all evenly spaced and straight
     lines. Imagine also that a clock is placed at all the intersection points and that all the
     clocks read the same time at the same moment in time. The situation when there are no
     masses in the vicinity. Now, take a two-dimensional cut through the structure and place
     the sun and earth into the picture. The structure near the sun and to a smaller extent that
     near the earth is distorted. Also, though not shown, the clocks at the intersection points
     near the sun and to a lesser extent those near the Earth run a little more slowly than those
     in the less distorted parts. The orbit of the Earth around the sun is now dictated by the
     distortion of space and the time dilation – the path an object with no forces would follow
     in the new geometry.


                                                           Rainer Weiss Lecture   69


Mercury was not moving along a path dictated by a pure 1/r2 force law. To
save Newton, another planet between the Sun and Mercury was hypothe-
sized but never found. To Einstein’s enormous pleasure, GR gave the
measured orbits. It was the first confirmation that he was on the right
track. GR also provided some new phenomena open to measurement,
small effects difficult to measure but profound in their importance. These
were the prediction that clocks ran more slowly in strong gravitational
fields than weak ones3,4 and that starlight passing the limb of the sun
would be deflected toward the sun, the so-called bending of light5. It is a
tribute to the difficulty of the measurements that both of these effects
were only really measured reliably about 50 years later.
   GR had more in it still. In principle, as we have now have found
directly, one could carry out calculations of massive systems moving at
relativistic speeds. Furthermore, gravitational information – gravitational
waves – did not travel at infinite speed as implied by Newton’s gravity,
but travelled at the speed of light as is necessary to be compatible with
special relativity.
   In 1916 Einstein6 wrote a paper showing some of the ideas discussed
above by perturbation calculations using linearized versions of his full
field equations. It is in this paper he first describes gravitational waves.
(Figure 2).

They travel at the speed of light and are transverse waves much as elec-
tromagnetic waves, but rather than exerting forces on charges, they dis-
tort space perpendicular to the direction along which they propagate.
Alternately stretching space in the east-west direction while simultane-
ously compressing space in the north-south direction. The distortion has
the special property that the change in separation of two points is pro-
portional to their separation, the strain h = Dl/l in the east-west direction
is the same over the entire wavefront, while strain is equal but opposite in
the north-south direction. (For completeness it is necessary to at least say
there is another polarization for the waves rotated by 45 degrees to the
east-west, north-south directions traveling along the same direction
which acts independently [is orthogonal]). The gravitational waves carry
energy as well as linear and angular momentum. In the 1916 paper, Ein-
stein describes the wave kinematics well but runs into trouble showing
how accelerated masses radiate gravitational waves. In a second paper
dedicated entirely to gravitational waves in 19187, he derives the quadru-
pole formula (to within a factor of 2) relating the gravitational wave
energy radiated by a mass distribution to its non-spherically symmetric
accelerations. Despite the mistake in the 1916 paper, he makes a bold (and
for 1916 correct) claim at the end of this paper that gravitational waves
will never play a significant role in physics. I have asked the editors of the


70   THE NOBEL PRIZES




     Figure 2. A gravitational wave with + polarization. Gravitational waves are emitted by
     accelerated masses. They propagate at the speed of light. Once they have become plane
     waves some number of wavelengths from their source they become transverse waves
     which cause a strain in space perpendicular to the direction in which they propagate. The
     strain stretches space in one dimension while simultaneously contracting space in a per-
     pendicular dimension. The strain h = Dl/l is the change in distance between two places
     divided the by their separation. The figure tries to show this by distributing a set of probe
     masses throughout space. The gravitational wave propagates perpendicular to the plane
     of the figure and the masses. Time evolves from the top left to the bottom right by going
     through one complete cycle of an oscillating strain. L in the figure symbolizes the LIGO
     detector. The thing to notice is the change in length of the arms of the L which becomes
     the measurable in the detector. The longer the arms the larger is the measurable displa-
     cement signal. The extension of one arm with the contraction of the other arm enables
     the use of a Michelson interferometer which is specifically sensitive to the difference in
     light travel time along the two arms.




     Einstein Papers Project to find evidence in his notebooks and back of
     envelopes for the estimates that led him to this, but nothing has been
     found.
        I will be presumptive and guess at what he might have considered,
     given the technology and knowledge of astronomy open to him in 1916.
     There are two equations that will help us with this: an estimate for the
     gravitational wave strain h that comes from the quadrupole formula and
     the relation between the power carried by the gravitational waves and the
     time dependence of the strain. A way of estimating the gravitational wave
     strain from the motion of the masses at the source of the waves is


                                                            Rainer Weiss Lecture   71




    Here G is the Newtonian gravitational constant, m is the mass of the
radiating system, R the distance from the source, c is the velocity of light
and v is a non-spherically symmetric velocity of the radiating mass distri-
bution. For example, if the system is composed of two orbiting objects, it
becomes the relative tangential velocity in their orbits. The term in the
first pair of brackets has a special meaning in general relativity, it is
dimensionless and is a measure of the absolute strength of gravity in the
situation. We who are standing on the surface of the Earth experience the
strength of this term as 10–10, at the surface of the sun it is about 10–6, or
the surface of a neutron star it is 10–1, at the event horizon of a black hole,
it is about 1. It is clear we live in very weak gravity.
    The other relation we will find useful is the power per area carried
away by the gravitational wave knowing the gravitational strain in the
wave




   The power per area in the wave is proportional to the square of the rate
of change of the strain times a gigantic factor which tells that a small
amount of strain in space is accompanied by a huge amount of energy. In
other words, it takes enormous amounts of energy to distort space. One
way to say it is, the stiffness (Young’s modulus) of space at a distortion
frequency of 100 Hz is 1020 larger than steel.
   An example one might have expected Einstein to use is the gravitational
radiation emitted by the collision of two trains, a man-made event of sig-
nificant energy transfer. Using parameters such as m = 105 kg, v = 100km/
hr, collision times of 1/3 second and a distance of R = 300km (far enough
away to be dominated by the radiation rather than Newtonian interaction),
one gets a strain h =10–42 truly too small to have any physical effect.
Another possibility might have been to estimate the change one might be
able to detect in observing a binary star system through a telescope. The
two stars orbiting each other would lead to the loss of energy by gravita-
tional radiation and would be changing their period as they fall toward
each other. Some typical numbers that might have been available in 1916,
the two stars both have a solar mass and an orbital period of a day. The
energy lost to gravitational waves each orbit relative to the kinetic energy
stored in the orbit is about 10–15 so that it would take about 1013 years to
see the orbit collapse, not a practical astronomical observation.


72   THE NOBEL PRIZES




        As with many of the other effects predicted by general relativity, it took
     the development of technology as well as the improved knowledge of the
     universe through improved technology to make reliable measurements
     and observations.
        It took until the mid-1970s with discovery of pulsars and vastly
     improved time keeping to perform the measurements of a binary star sys-
     tem which showed evidence for energy loss due to the radiation of gravi-
     tational waves. The definitive measurements were made after the discov-
     ery of a binary neutron star system by Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor
     (Figure 3).

     Hulse and Taylor tracked the pulsations from a neutron star using the
     radio telescope at Arecibo (Puerto Rico) beginning in 1972. The fre-
     quency of the pulsar was nominally 17Hz but they noticed that pulsation
     frequency was frequency modulated with a period of 8 hours. After a con-




     Figure 3. Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor who were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in
     1993 for the discovery of the binary pulsar system, which became a remarkable test labo-
     ratory for general relativity. They were able to measure relativistic periastron precession
     of 4 degrees/year and many other relativistic dynamical effects which allowed them to
     solve for the individual masses of the neutron stars. As shown in Figure 4 they solved for
     the dynamics of this system and minimized the residual between their data and the full
     relativistic model of the motion; to do this it was necessary to include the loss of energy
     by the system to gravitational radiation.


                                                                      Rainer Weiss Lecture   73




Figure 4. The change in orbital period of the binary pulsar as a function of epoch. The
dots indicate the measured reduction of the orbital period as the neutron stars lose total
energy by radiation of gravitational waves. The line is the expectation from the Gene-
ral Theory of Relativity. The system was the first to show the effects of gravitational
radiation and also provided the first demonstrated source of gravitational waves for
direct detection. As Barry will show, the coalescence of a pair of neutron stars has been
detected by LIGO and VIRGO.


siderable effort to establish that there were no other stars in the vicinity,
they came to a model of a pair of neutron stars orbiting each other. They
established quickly that the dimensionless gravitational field strength of
one neutron star at the position of the other was about 10–6 and that they
had come upon a wonderful laboratory to test general relativity. The Gen-
eral Relativistic periastron advance was close to 4 degrees per year, enor-
mous compared to the 43 seconds of arc per century in the Mercury Sun
system, and through other relativistic terms it was possible to solve for
the mass of the two objects separately. One of the more stunning meas-
urements was the change of the orbital period as a function of epoch.
Figure 4 from Taylor and Weisberg8 shows the period was getting shorter
systematically and was consistent with being due to energy being lost by
the system to gravitational waves using the quadrupole formula. The
explorations of gravitation with this really remarkable laboratory led to
Hulse and Taylor receiving the 1993 Nobel Prize in Physics. The discovery
not only confirmed the existence of gravitational waves but also identified
a source for the eventual direct detection of gravitational waves.
   The first experiments that attempted to directly detect gravitational
waves from astrophysical sources were an outcome of the Chapel Hill
Conference on Gravitation in 19579. At this conference John Wheeler and


74   THE NOBEL PRIZES


     Joseph Weber presented the idea of writing the gravitational wave as a
     tidal force transverse to the propagation direction and treating the detec-
     tion of weak gravitational waves as a Newtonian interaction of these
     forces exciting a mechanical resonator. The idea was to measure a gravi-
     tational wave arising from an astrophysical event such as a supernova
     explosion in our own or a neighboring galaxy. The event involved the con-
     version of a decent fraction of the rest mass of the exploding star into
     gravitational waves. The frequencies of the motion at the star are in the
     low kHz band. The waves, when incident on an aluminum bar with longi-
     tudinal resonances in the same band, would drive the bar into oscilla-
     tion10. The bar would ring on after the wave had passed through, making
     it easier to measure.
         Figure 5 shows Weber mounting strain gauges on one of these detec-
     tors. A critical idea from the beginning was to look for coincident excita-
     tions in several bars as a means of making a detection over the noise in
     the device which was dominated by Brownian motion (the thermally
     induced random motions of the bar’s longitudinal modes). All through the
     mid- to late 1960s, Weber kept improving the experiment. In 1969 with a
     detector at the University of Maryland, another at a golf course about 8
     miles from the university and a remote detector at the Argonne Labora-
     tory in Chicago, he wrote a discovery paper in Physical Review Letters11
     showing a few coincident pulses per day at a peak strain level of h ~ 10–15
     in the KHz band. It soon became evident that if the pulses were gravita-
     tional waves from the region around the center of our galaxy, this implied
     an extremely efficient conversion of rest mass to gravitational waves, in
     fact the conversion of all the rest mass in the galaxy into gravitational
     waves in a few million years. Despite this unlikely possibility, about a
     dozen experimental groups throughout the world began the development
     of Weber-like detectors. By the early 1970s it was becoming clear that no
     one was able to confirm the Weber measurements.
         In 1966 I was asked by the MIT Physics department to teach a course
     in General Relativity. It was at the time of the revived interest in GR in the
     physics community which had begun with the Chapel Hill meeting and
     with the increased research in experimental work in gravitation due to
     Dicke and Wheeler at Princeton and Schiff at Stanford and others. I had
     just returned to MIT from a post doctoral position with Dicke and had
     started a new group in Cosmology and Gravitation. For the prior 40 years
     GR had not been taught in physics at MIT but had occasionally been
     taught in the mathematics department as part of differential geometry.
     What little I knew of the physics of GR had come from conversations
     with colleagues at Princeton and simply from reading. The formal mathe-
     matics of differential geometry and tensor analysis was entirely new to me
     and at the time there were not yet really good text books on the subject. It


                                                                       Rainer Weiss Lecture     75




Figure 5. Joseph Weber was the first to attempt to detect gravitational waves from
astrophysical sources directly. The concept for doing this was generated by John
Wheeler and Weber at the 1957 Chapel Hill conference on gravitation. The idea was to
measure the distortions induced by a gravitational wave in a cylinder. Instead of thinking
of the gravitational wave as a strain in space, they thought of the wave as exerting tidal
forces on the cylinder and calculated the motion of the bar as an oscillator in inertial spa-
ce. The tidal force was just another Newtonian force on the bar. Weber imagined short
pulses of gravitational waves with some Fourier components at the resonant frequency
of the cylinder. The wave would pass through the cylinder and leave it ringing. In the
picture at the right, Weber is attaching some strain gauges to the cylinder to measure the
excitation. The cylinder is placed in the vacuum chamber (behind him) when searching
for gravitational waves.



was a hard term, often learning from the students and just catching up to
them. The students in the course were aware of the Weber experiments
and asked for lectures about them. By that time in the course, I had
become a convert to Einstein’s geometric view and had a hard time look-
ing at gravitational waves as a tidal force and, especially, the idea of a
metal bar interacting with the wave.
   I spent the weekend before the lecture trying to apply F.A.E. Pirani’s12
(Figure 7) approach of the geodesic deviation to a simple gedanken exper-
iment to measure a gravitational wave. Eventually it turned into a
straightforward idea of measuring the time it took light to travel back and
forth between two free masses. With a light source mounted on one of the
free masses, one set a clock also mounted on the mass to start as the light
left to go to the distant mass. At the distant mass the light was reflected by
a mirror back to the source and the clock was stopped by the arrival of


76   THE NOBEL PRIZES


     the return light. One did this measurement when no gravitational wave
     passed between the two masses and when a wave did pass and compared
     the times. It turns out an easy problem to set up in GR and since all the
     measurements were made at the same mass there was no question of the
     conversion of coordinate time to proper time. After this we went on to
     cosmology and more interesting problems. Unknown to me two Russians,
     Gertsenshtein and Pustovoit13 , in 1963 had come up with a similar idea.
        By early in the 1970s, when it became evident that there were no con-
     firmations of the Weber experiments, I returned to thinking whether it
     was actually possible to convert the gedanken experiment in the GR
     course to a real experiment. (Figure 6) The real experiment would use a
     Michelson interferometer configuration to exploit the symmetry of the
     gravitational waves.
        The interferometer would need some unusual properties: the mirror
     masses were suspended so they could move in response to the wave, the
     light was to be reflected back and forth many times along the interferome-
     ter arms, and to get to the shot noise limit (quantum limit) one needed a
     method to high frequency modulate the light above the excess noise of
     the available laser sources. (Figure 7) A study of the various fundamental
     physics noises in such an instrument and of the environmental noise
     sources showed by making the instrument on km scales there was a
     chance that one could intersect the strain sensitivity required for detec-
     tion of some astrophysical sources. I put the calculations in a Quarterly
     Progress Report of the Research Laboratory for Electronics14 and asked
     the Laboratory management to help fund the construction of a 1.5-meter
     prototype using military research funds. (Figure 7).
        At that time in the early 1970s the primary condition required by the
     military to support research was to train scientists and engineers. By 1974
     one of the corrosive effects of the Vietnam War was the demand by many
     of the anti-war demonstrators to starve the war effort by insisting the mil-
     itary only support research essential for their mission. This was also
     urged by the supporters of the war in the administration who distrusted
     academic scientists in general. As judged by the Director of the Research
     Laboratory of Electronics, cosmology and gravitation research was not
     relevant to the military’s mission and the lab support was terminated. I
     then began a multi-year effort to gain support from other federal agencies
     but ran against a skepticism among peer reviewers of whether interfero-
     metric methods using free masses could be used to detect gravitational
     waves as well as increased pessimism about gravitational wave research
     in general.
        Scientists in Europe who had been involved in attempting to confirm
     the Weber results had become interested in the interferometric free mass
     detector. The group at the Max Planck Institute of Astrophysics in Garch-


                                                                       Rainer Weiss Lecture      77




Figure 6. Schematic of a Michelson interferometer used as a gravitational wave detector.
The gravitational wave at a low frequency fg is incident from above the plane of the inter-
ferometer. Start by following the light from the laser to the symmetric port of the beam
splitter (+ no phase inversion of the light on reflection). The laser generates carrier light
(red amplitude). The violet vectors indicate the propagation direction of the light. The laser
light that gets reflected by the beam splitter heads to the mirror on test mass1 reduced by
the reflectivity of the beam splitter. On reflection from test mass1, which is moving due to
the gravitational wave, the carrier generates two sidebands one at a frequency fg above
the carrier (blue) and another fg below (green). The beam heads back to the beam splitter.
The beam from the laser that gets transmitted by the beam splitter heads toward test mass
2; the carrier is reduced by the transmission of the beam splitter. That beam on reflection
from test mass 2 also gets two sidebands from the motion of the test mass 2, but they have
the opposite sign because the gravitational wave is compressing space on the test mass 1
side while expanding space on the test mass 2 side. The beam from test mass 2 gets reflec-
ted toward the detector from the antisymmetric port of the beam splitter (the phases of
the carrier and the sidebands are inverted). The beam from test mass 1 is transmitted by the
beam splitter toward the detector. The beams from the two sides of the interferometer are
added. If the paths on the two sides take equal time from the first encounter with the beam
splitter to the second one (or take a difference in time that is an integral number of periods
of the light wave), the carrier cancels while the sidebands double at the detector. The side-
bands carry the information about the gravitational wave both the wave amplitude and
the phase. To make the sidebands detectable as a current in the photodetector requires a
small amount of carrier to beat against the sidebands.



ing led by Heinz Billing had collaborated with an Italian group in Frascati
to run coincident bar detectors. They had done a thorough analysis of the
noise in their detectors and designed a data acquisition system with ade-
quate bandwidth to fully characterize their signals and also had devel-
oped software algorithms that provided meaningful false alarm probabili-
ties. They saw no coincident pulses. They were deciding whether to drop


78   THE NOBEL PRIZES




     Figure 7. Bottom left, F.A.E. Pirani, who showed that it is possible to measure the relative
     motion of two free masses traveling through a gravitational wave (so-called geode-
     sic deviation) in a coordinate-independent manner. A critical idea that was not fully
     accepted until the 1957 Chapel Hill Conference. Bottom middle, a schematic diagram of
     an interferometric gravitational wave detector with suspended masses, multiple passes
     along the interferometer arms and a technique to reduce the amplitude noise of the laser
     light. Bottom right, the 1.5-meter prototype at MIT and the three graduate students who
     constructed and operated it. Top line, the gravity research group at the Max Planck Insti-
     tute of astrophysics in Garching, Germany, who built a 3-meter interferometer prototype
     and then a 30-meter one to show that the idea scaled properly. The group invented many
     of the solutions for the noise in these systems including the idea of suspending all the op-
     tics in the phase sensitive part of the interferometer and the need to frequency stabilize
     the laser to deal with scattering by stray light. Schnupp came up with the idea to make a
     slight imbalance in the interferometer arms to use external phase modulation. Schilling
     invented the idea of power recycling to increase the modulated light in the interfero-
     meter. Middle line, the gravity research group in Glasgow, Scotland, Drever developed
     Fabry-Perot cavities as multipass elements in the interferometer arms and also invented
     the idea of power recycling16. Brian Meers17 was the first to suggest putting another
     partially reflecting mirror between the photo detector and the beam splitter to tailor the
     interferometer spectral response by reflecting the sidebands back into the main interfer-
     ometer arms. Ward developed a method to align the interferometer.



     out or develop cryogenic detectors or to try free mass interferometers.
     They decided to build a 3-meter interferometric prototype and quickly
     established the fundamental noise processes that would limit perfor-
     mance, some of which I had estimated in my study but also others which I
     had neglected. (Figure 7). They worked on this prototype systematically
     diagnosing the noise and designing methods and concepts to circumvent


                                                                   Rainer Weiss Lecture   79




Figure 8. The abstract of the paper on the 30-meter interferometer operated by the Max
Planck Group in Garching showing that an interferometer had attained better sensitivity
than the best cryogenic Weber bar detectors. The 30-meter results were important in
helping to make the case for long baseline instruments such as LIGO. The top two photos
are of the 40-meter instrument constructed at Caltech by Whitcomb and Drever. The
40-meter at Caltech and the 5-meter at MIT (Figure 13) were the final test beds for the
first LIGO detector.


the noise. Eventually they were limited by the fundamental quantum and
thermal noise. At that point in their research they designed and con-
structed a 30-meter prototype15 to test the scaling laws toward km scale
instruments. (Figure 8).
   Another group in Glasgow Scotland, led by Ronald Drever (Figure 7)
also became interested in interferometric free mass detectors after having
worked with bar detectors. The experience here was a little different.
They had redesigned the bar detector to be broad band and were now
more disturbed by noise generated in the motion transducer. They
became interested in the possibility of using an interferometric rather
than a piezoelectric sensor as readout. They also eventually went to a free
mass design but decided on optical cavities (Fabry-Perot interferometers)
as the means of bouncing the light back and forth in the interferometers
arms instead of the Herriot delay lines (discrete spots on the mirrors) I
had proposed. They came to this design by noting that delay lines were
more prone to phase noise from optical scattering than a Fabry-Perot.
   An important turning point occurred in 1975 when Kip Thorne (Figure
9) and I met in Washington D.C. to work on a committee to study the pos-
sible role of the space program in research on gravitation and cosmology.


80   THE NOBEL PRIZES


     At the time Kip had established one of the premier groups in theoretical
     gravitation at Caltech and was thinking of encouraging Caltech to start a
     new complementary program in experimental gravitation. The issue we
     discussed was the nature of such a program. Kip had been thinking of
     gravitational wave research and had come to realize that a program ulti-
     mately going to be able to measure gravitational waves from “allowed”
     astrophysical sources would require sensitivities h ≤ 10–21 in the 10 to
     1000Hz band, a million times more sensitive than the Weber bars. Kip
     had been much influenced by Vladimir Braginsky (Moscow State Univer-
     sity), whose notion was to develop bars operating near the quantum limit.
     I suggested he think about long baseline interferometers and look into
     bringing people from the Max Planck or Glasgow groups to Caltech to
     start such a program. In 1978 Caltech did make the decision to form a
     new group with Ronald Drever as its leader and with a significant internal
     Caltech investment. In 1980, Stan Whitcomb was brought to Caltech to
     help lead the new Caltech Group.
        The combined facts of the success of the Max Planck group in demon-
     strating the scaling relations for the interferometers, the progress in gain-
     ing sensitivity in the Max Planck as well as the MIT prototypes and the
     significant investment in the field being made by Caltech led me to make a
     proposal to the NSF to study what was involved in actually making an
     interferometeric detector with adequate sensitivity to detect astrophysical
     sources. Our study involved several scientists working (Figure 10) with




     Figure 9. Kip Thorne around 1980 with his measurement challenge to the experimenters
     based on his and others’ estimates of possible astronomical gravitational wave source
     dynamics and populations.


                                                             Rainer Weiss Lecture   81


industrial engineering consultants to look at designs and costs of the vac-
uum system, the large-scale optics and lasers, the siting for the construc-
tion of two multikilometer interferometric detectors separated by conti-
nental distance. The aim of the study was to establish feasibility and cost
scaling relations for the large infrastructure and to look at the experimen-
tal challenges to gain the two large factors in the detector design itself.
With multi kilometer long arms measuring a strain of 10–21 requires a dis-
placement sensitivity of 10–18 meters, about 1/1000 of the size of a proton.
Using light with a wavelength of 10–6 meters, one needs to develop optical
techniques that can measure 10–12 of a wavelength. Furthermore, typical
ground vibrations even in quiet places are broadly around 10–6 meters, so
that to be able to sense a gravitational wave above just ground noise one
would need to isolate the mirrors that determine the end points of the
interferometer to another factor of 10–12. Reducing the noise in the system
by these two factors of 10–12 was known at the outset to be the primary
challenge. The intent of the study was to serve as the basis for a collabo-
rative proposal by all groups interested in the construction of a Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO).
   The results of the study were presented to an NSF committee considering
large new projects in physics in 1983. The presentations were given jointly
by the Caltech and MIT research groups who had begun to form a collabo-
ration. The committee was remarkably encouraging in their evaluation:
   The committee is impressed with the long-range scientific potential of grav-
itational wave detection. It will not only test our basic understanding of grav-
itation, but provide an entirely new window on the universe.
   We have considered the major interferometric laser detection system now
being developed by the Caltech and MIT groups. We note that not only is this
an outstanding scientific opportunity, but the Foundation is the only source
of support for ground based gravitational physics.
   As with any attempt at a qualitative advance, there are risks: here the
uncertainties involve both the magnitude of the signals to be detected and the
large extrapolation of known experimental technique inherent in the pro-
posed scale. We find, however, the fundamental scientific merits of such an
investigation so important as to be worth a substantial investment.
           (National Science Foundation, Advisory Committee for Physics,
                                                         December 12–13, 1983).

Following this encouragement from the NSF committee we began making
the transition from independent investigator small-scale science to the
project organization required for a large-scale coordinated scientific
effort. At first, we did not succeed; it took until 1994 with Barry Barish
becoming Director of LIGO to truly make this transition. In the interim
there was progress in the technology in the various laboratories but only


82   THE NOBEL PRIZES




     Figure 10. In 1979 the NSF supported a study18 with industry to look at the feasibility
     of building a multi-kilometer baseline interferometric gravitational wave detector. The
     study summarized the current state of prototype research and estimates for gravitatio-
     nal wave sources. It looked at the ability of industry combined with academic research
     to develop adequate optics, lasers, vibration isolation and control systems to meet the
     scientific requirements. The designs and costs of the vacuum system and the buildings as
     well cost scaling relations were developed. Possible sites for up to 10km baseline systems
     both above and below ground were investigated. One of the intents of the study was to
     be the factual basis for a proposal to the NSF by a consortium of scientists and institutions
     to build a pair of detectors in the United States.



     halting progress in major project decisions such as choosing sites or more
     than a conceptual design for the interferometer configuration. In 1986 we
     began an effort to seek significant funding for the interferometric gravita-
     tional wave detection program, Richard Garwin suggested that the NSF
     carry out a summer study of the field by an independent group to both
     reevaluate its importance as well as to assess readiness and cost. A “Panel
     on Interferometric Observatories for Gravitational Waves” was estab-
     lished consisting of established scientists with experience in large pro-
     jects, experts in the various technologies required and scientists with
     knowledge of the relevant aspects of gravitation and astrophysics. In Jan-
     uary 1987 they issued their report, which encouraged the NSF to build
     two full scale interferometric detectors at widely separated sites and
     insisted that the project find a single Director before moving forward.
        Robbie Vogt became the first Director of LIGO in 1987. He introduced a
     structure into the laboratory research program assigning responsibilities


                                                                     Rainer Weiss Lecture    83




Figure 11. The 1989 proposal19 to build and operate LIGO. Rochus (Robbie) Vogt, who
had become Director of the LIGO project in 1987, organized a joint Caltech/MIT collabo-
ration to write the proposal. The proposal specified specific parameters for the project:
two sites run in coincidence − one in Hanford, Washington and the other in Livingston,
Louisiana − a 4km baseline, an initial detector design and strain sensitivity spectrum, an
environmental monitoring system, the vacuum system for the instrumentation and the
vacuum system for the beamtubes, the buildings and permanent infrastructure. The
proposal also provided a plan for a developmental approach for the detector with an
initial detector using then available technology, having a possibility for detection; and
a later advanced detector with not yet fully available technology, in the development
stages at the various LIGO research laboratories, having a good chance for detection.
The facilities were designed to accommodate both the initial and the advanced detector.
I worked with engineers Boude Moore and later Larry Jones on the design, construction
and qualification of the 4km beam tubes.



for both detector development and infrastructure planning and estima-
tion. His major effort was to guide us, both Caltech and MIT participants,
scientists and engineers, to write a construction proposal for LIGO with
sufficient detail to estimate schedules and costs. The proposal also served
to pull together in one place the knowledge of gravitational wave sources,
the noise budgets for the detectors and the plans for data analysis to
establish confidence of detection. It became a source book for the field19
(Figure 11). The proposal also laid out the plans for the field with a staged
strategy. The infrastructure would be designed and built to be adequate
for both an initial detector using technology we now had (almost) in hand
and would not compromise a future advanced detector we could envision


84   THE NOBEL PRIZES




     Figure 12. By 1994 the NSF as well as both the Caltech and MIT administrations felt the
     management of the LIGO project needed strengthening. In 1994 Professor Barry Barish
     of Caltech became Director of LIGO. He substantially increased the management and
     technical staff of the project. He brought in Dr. Gary Sanders as the Project Manager and
     engaged Dr. Albert Lazzarini and Dennis Coyne as system scientist and engineer. He as-
     ked Dr. Stan Whitcomb to manage the design and construction of the first interferometer.
     Barish also realized that a larger group than only the Caltech and MIT groups would be
     needed to analyze the data and to publish results. He was the architect for the LIGO Sci-
     entific Collaboration. Barry asked me to be the first spokesperson for the Collaboration.



     operating at the quantum limit of a 1 ton test mass. In the process of writ-
     ing the proposal, Vogt paired an engineer with a scientist to assure that
     the planned infrastructure would be able to serve the experiment require-
     ments. Vogt also oversaw the site selection.
        After a stormy period in the project, Barry Barish became the second
     Director of LIGO in 1994. He instituted significant changes in the project
     organization by broadening the leadership from a skunk works to a larger
     managerial group (Figure 12). He also conceived and organized the LIGO
     Scientific Collaboration, which included both LIGO project members as
     well as groups outside of Caltech and MIT who were interested in the
     new science to come from LIGO. The Collaboration has major roles in the
     data analysis and publications of the science. Some groups in the Collab-
     oration are involved in basic detector research as well.
        By the mid 1980s the technical development to accomplish the two fac-
     tors of 10–12 was advancing in several research laboratories: a 40-meter
     prototype at Caltech, a 5-meter prototype at MIT (Figure 13), a 10-meter
     prototype in Glasgow, at a new laboratory in Hannover where the Max


                                                                    Rainer Weiss Lecture    85


Planck group had moved from Garching and a new program joint
between Italy and France in Cascina, Italy (VIRGO). Instead of continu-
ing with the historical development I will turn to the major ideas to gain
the two factors. The optical arrangement of the advanced detector, for
which Barry will show some of the results, is schematized in Figure 14.
The initial LIGO detector was the same, except there was no signal recy-
cling mirror. The caption explains some of the basic concepts. The noise
budget for the initial long baseline detector in the LIGO facilities is
shown in Figure 15, giving both the estimated contributions from funda-
mental physical principles and contributions from technical noise that
can be reduced by further engineering. The noise budget is an excellent
way to keep track of our progress in accomplishing the two factors of
10–12, and, as Barry will show with real data from the instrument, the
slow but steady progress made as we learned more about the instrument
in the commissioning.




Figure 13. The MIT group in the 1990s and some of the research that was done. Front row
left to right: Michael Zucker, Nergis Mavalvala, Peter Csatorday, Peter Fritschel, Joseph
Kovalik, R. Weiss, next row back: Yaron Hefetz, David Shoemaker, Brett Bochner, in the
back: Brian Lantz.


86   THE NOBEL PRIZES




     Figure 14. A schematic diagram of the advanced detector that made the 2015 measure-
     ment of the gravitational waves from a binary black hole collision. The interferometer
     has all the ingredients needed to make the factor of 10–12 sensitivity improvement in
     measuring the small displacements of the test masses. To the main elements of the inter-
     ferometer presented in Figure 6 are added input test masses with partially transmitting
     coatings between the beam splitter and the end test masses. The combination of the
     input and end test mass comprise an optical resonator (Fabry-Perot cavities) which can
     be thought of as bouncing the light between them many times (typically several hundred
     times) to increase the gravitational wave induced sidebands by the number of bounces
     before returning the light to the beam splitter. One attempts to make the number of
     bounces the same in both arms. As in Figure 6 the sidebands from the two arms add
     going toward the photodetector and the carrier cancels. No sidebands return to the
     laser, but all the carrier does. Between the beam splitter and the laser a new partially
     reflecting mirror is inserted, the power recycling mirror. The position of this mirror and
     its transmission is arranged to make another interferometer that cancels the carrier from
     the laser reflected by the power recycling mirror with the carrier transmitted back by
     the recycling mirror from the beam splitter. This eliminates the carrier being reflected
     by the interferometer to the laser and builds up the carrier power between the beam
     splitter and the input test masses by several hundred. This is the equivalent of using a
     more powerful laser. The optical configuration described was used in the initial LIGO
     interferometer. Finally, the advanced detector includes another partially reflecting mirror
     between the beam splitter and the photodetector, the signal recycling mirror. This mirror
     reflects the sidebands back into the interferometer and modifies the spectral response
     of the entire interferometer to the sidebands, thereby tuning the spectral response of the
     detector to the gravitational waves being sought.


                                                                       Rainer Weiss Lecture     87




Figure 15. The noise budget of the initial LIGO interferometer as described in the 1989
proposal. Note the vertical axis is the spectral amplitude strain/sqrt(Hz). To convert to the
rms strain, which has been used in other parts of this paper, multiply the plotted value
by the square root of the detection bandwidth. At approximately 100 Hz with a 100 Hz
detection bandwidth, the rms detector sensitivity is about 10–22 strain. The plot shows the
principal noise terms that limit the performance of the detector. At frequencies above
200 Hz, the quantum noise (shot noise) limits the performance. The line labeled radiation
pressure, which does not limit this detector, is the other part of the quantum noise due
to the fluctuations in radiation pressure on the mirror. The two terms together consti-
tute the quantum limit and are the equivalent of the noise in a Heisenberg microscope
but here with a macroscopic object such as a 10kg mirror rather than an electron. In this
naïve rendering one can reduce the shot noise by increasing the optical power but at
the expense of increasing the radiation pressure noise. The noise near 100Hz, the sweet
spot for this detector, is limited by the thermal noise in the pendulum suspension, in this
case phonon excitations at the end points of the pendulum. At frequencies below 70Hz
the detector is limited by incomplete removal of the ground vibrations (seismic noise)
at the mirror. Seismic noise and pendulum thermal noise were greatly reduced for the
advanced detector (figure 16). The broad noise spectra called residual gas are the phase
fluctuations induced by forward scattering of residual gas molecules traveling through
the optical beams in the long arms, this term is the primary reason for ultra-high vacuum
in the beam path. The sharply rising curve at low frequencies labeled gravity gradients
is due to the fluctuating Newtonian gravitational forces on the end test masses caused
by time dependent density fluctuations in both the atmosphere and the ground. Even
though there is some hope in being able to measure these fluctuations or reduce them
by burying the instrument, these constitute a severe limit to measure low frequency, less
than a few Hz, gravitational waves on the ground.


88   THE NOBEL PRIZES


         A significant step in achieving the improvement against seismic and
     pendulum thermal noise was made in the development and construction
     of the advanced detector, Figure 16. The two major improvements were a
     new suspension system with four pendula in series each stage providing a
     filter against seismic displacement noise varying as 1/frequency2. The
     final stage supporting the test mass using very low mechanical loss fused
     silica fibers (rather than steel fibers) to reduce the suspension thermal
     noise. The suspension system was provided by the Glasgow group. The
     second improvement was a multi stage active vibration isolation system
     to further reduce the seismic motion, especially at low frequencies where




     Figure 16. Some properties of the advanced detector. Right, a quadruple pendulum
     system developed at Glasgow University which provides four stages of high frequency
     ground noise isolation as well as low pendulum thermal noise by using fused silica fiber
     supports (pioneered by Braginsky’s Moscow group) in the final pendulum stage. Top left,
     a dual active seismic isolation system, initially developed at Stanford University, which
     becomes a platform for the quadruple suspension. The active system measures the
     motion of a platform with a three-dimensional seismometer and then feeds this back to
     a set of controllers to null the seismometer. Two such active systems are placed in series.
     Bottom left, the noise budget for the advanced detector. The dominant noise has become
     the quantum noise at both high and low frequencies (discussed in Kip’s lecture). The
     noise limiting the performance at the sweet spot near 100 Hz has become the thermal
     noise generated in the mirror coatings. At this writing in February 2018, the noise in the
     advanced detector, as Barry will show, is about a factor 2.5 worse at the sweet spot than
     this projected noise curve.


                                                                     Rainer Weiss Lecture     89




Figure 17. A key individual at the National Science Foundation (NSF) was Dr. Richard Isaac-
son, who became discipline chief for Gravity in the Division of Physics in the mid-1970s.
He had received his Ph.D. from the University of Maryland in Charles Misner’s group
and had written a paper that rigorously showed gravitational waves carried energy and
momentum away from their sources − an issue that was still controversial in the 1960s.
Isaacson sensed the scientific promise in a vital program of research in experimental
and theoretical gravitation and became a powerful advocate for the field at the NSF. He
convinced the Director of the Physics Division, Dr. Marcel Bardon, that gravitational wave
detection, though risky since the technology needed development and the sources were
not certain, was the type of science which could produce transformative results and was
well suited to the NSF. In addition to his advocacy within the Foundation, Isaacson guided
the scientists in the field with strategic advice and wisdom about what was possible.
After he retired from the NSF, he made a profession of a significant hobby in a study
of textiles and the cultures that produce them in Asia. He curated an exhibit of the tent
bands of yurts for the Washington Textile Museum.




the pendula are not effective. The results of these developments will be
described by Barry in the next talk.
    I started this talk with an acknowledgment of the remarkable role the
National Science Foundation played in fostering and supporting LIGO over
the 45 years from an idea to the first detections and the opening of a new
field of science. All the more remarkable as it was risky science and the NSF
saw the project through significant external criticism and our internal dis-
organization. Much of the responsibility and foresight for this is due to Dr.
Richard Isaacson (Figure 17), who was both an advocate for the field of
gravitation within the Foundation and a strategist for the possible.
    Once an internal NSF decision was made to construct LIGO, the strong


90   THE NOBEL PRIZES




     Figure 18. Three Directors of the National Science Foundation who played critical roles
     in the evolution of the LIGO project: Eric Block was the first Director to consider going
     forward with the large baseline LIGO project. Walter Massey defended the program
     during the time when astronomers considered LIGO premature and a possible waste of
     funds. Neal Lane was a strong advocate for a line item in the congressional NSF budget
     to support Major Research Equipment Funds for Construction (MREFC). LIGO was one of
     the first projects to take advantage of these funds, and since then the funds have been
     used to begin many other large NSF projects.




     support of three NSF Directors (Figure 18) was essential to keep the pro-
     ject moving at critical junctures with Congress and amidst criticism in a
     skeptical subset of the scientific community.
        A personal reflection. Science reporters who have written about the
     LIGO project have noted the 45 years from its inception to the first meas-
     urements. They comment on our perseverance and the novelty of a group
     of scientists working so long together without the satisfaction of a signifi-
     cant scientific result. This might be the way a person outside of the pro-
     ject views it. From the inside it is a very different story. What held the
     group together were the daily little triumphs or puzzles generated in the
     development of the ideas and technology (both hardware and software)
     as well as the collegiality of a dedicated group of people.


                                                                   Rainer Weiss Lecture   91



references

1.    Einstein, A. (1915) “Zur Allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie”, Sitzunsberichte der
      Königlich Preussichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 778 & 799.
2.    Einstein, A. (1916) “Die Grundlage der Allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie”,
      Annalen der Physik, 49, 769.
3.    Pound, R.V. and Rebka, G.A. (1960) “Apparent Weight of Photons”, Physical
      Review Letters 4, 337.
4.    Brault, J (1963) “Gravitational Redshift of Solar Lines”, Bulletin of the Ameri-
      can Astronomical Society 8, 28.
5.    Fomalont, E.B. and Sramek, R.A. (1975) “A Confirmation of Einstein’s General
      Theory of Relativity by Measuring the Bending of Microwave Radiation in the
      Gravitational Field of the Sun”, Astrophysical Journal 199, 749.
6.    Einstein, A. (1916) “Näherungsweise integration der feldgleichungen der grav-
      itation”, Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussichen Akademie der Wissenschaf-
      ten XXXIII, 688.
7.    Einstein, A. (1918) “Über gravitationswellen”, Sitzungsberichte der Königlich
      Preussichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 8, 154.
8.    Taylor, J. H. and Weisberg, J.M. (1982) “A new test of general relativity: Gravi-
      tational radiation and the binary pulsar PSR 1913+16”, Astrophysical Journal
      253, 908.
9.    “The Role of Gravitation in Physics”, Report from the 1957 Chapel Hill Con-
      ference, Reprinted Max Planck Research Library for the History and Develop-
      ment of Knowledge Sources 5.
10.   Weber, J. (1960) “Detection and generation of gravitational waves”, Physical
      Review 117, 306.
11.   Weber, J. (1969) “Evidence for the Discovery of Gravitational Waves”, Physical
      Review Letters 22,1320.
12.   Pirani, F.A.E. (1956) “On the physical significance of the Riemann tensor”,
      Acta Physica Polonica, 15, 389 and (1957) “Measurement of classical gravita-
      tion fields”, Chapel Hill Conference (Reference 9, 61).
13.   Gertsenshtein, M.E. and Pustovoit, V.I. (1963) “On the Detection of Low Fre-
      quency Gravitational Waves”, Soviet Physics – JETP 16, 433.
14.   Weiss, R. (1972) “Electromagnetically coupled broadband gravitational
      antenna”, Research Laboratory for Electronics, MIT, Quarterly Progress Report,
      No 105, 54.
15.   Shoemaker, D., Schilling, R., Schnupp, L., Winkler, W., Maischberger, K., and
      Rüdiger, A. (1988). “Noise behavior of the Garching 30-meter prototype gravi-
      tational wave detector”, Physical Review D 38, 423.
16.   Drever, R.W.P. (1983). “Interferometric detectors for gravitational radiation”,
      Gravitational Radiation, NATO Advanced Physics Institute, Les Houches, ed
      N. Deruelle and T. Piran, (North Holland Publishing), 321.
17.   Meers, B.J. (1988). “Recycling in laser-interferometric gravitational-wave
      detectors”, Physical Review D 38, 2317.
18.   NSF Bluebook (1983). https://emvogil-3.mit.edu/~weiss/ligo_history_docu-
      ments/NSF_bluebook_1983.pdf
19.   Caltech/MIT NSF proposal (1989). https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-M890001/pub-
      lic/main/
