DEEP INELASTIC SCATTERING:
THE EARLY YEARS
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1990
R I C H A R D E. T A Y L O R

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford, California, USA




FOREWORD
Soon after the 1990 Nobel Prize in Physics was announced Henry Kendall,
Jerry Friedman and I agreed that we would each describe a part of the deep
inelastic experiments in our Nobel lectures. The division we agreed upon
was roughly chronological. I would cover the early times, describing some
of the work that led to the establishment of the Stanford Linear Accelerator
 Center where the experiments were performed, followed by a brief account
of the construction of the experimental apparatus used in the experiments
and the commissioning of the spectrometer facility in early elastic scattering
experiments at the Center.
    In a second paper, Professor Kendall was to describe the inelastic experi-
ments and the important observation of scale invariance which was found in
the early electron-proton data.
    In a final paper, Professor Friedman was to describe some of the later
experiments at SLAC along with experiments performed by others using
 muon and neutrino beams, and how these experiments, along with advances
 in theory, led to widespread acceptance of the quark model as the best
description of the structure of the nucleon.
   This paper is, therefore, part of a set and should be read in conjunction
with the lectures of H. W. Kendall (1) and J. I. Friedman. (2)
   There were many individuals who made essential contributions to this
work. Our acknowledgements to a number of them are given in Reference
3.

                                      *

Forty years of electron scattering experiments have had a significant impact
on the understanding of the basic components of matter. Progress in
experimental high energy physics is often directly coupled to improvements
in accelerator technology and experimental apparatus. The electron scatter-
ing experiments, including the deep inelastic experiments cited this year by
the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, provide examples of this sort of
progress. Experiments made possible by increasing electron energy and
intensity, along with increasingly sophisticated detectors have continued to
shed light on the structure of nuclei and nucleons over the years. Much


                                   R E. Taylor                                633


additional information has come from experiments using secondary beams
of muons and neutrinos from proton accelerators.
   Scattering experiments can trace their roots back to the u-particle experi-
ments (4) in Rutherford’s laboratory which led to the hypothesis of the
nuclear atom. (5) The α-sources used at that time emitted electrons as well as
α-particles, but the electron momentum was too small to penetrate beyond
the electron cloud of the target atoms, and electron scattering was just an
annoying background in those experiments.
   Following the landmark experiments of Franck and Hertz (6) on the inter-
action of electrons with the atoms of various gases, electron scattering was
used extensively to investigate the electronic configurations of atoms.
Later, after higher energy electrons became available from accelerators,
interest in their use as probes of the nucleus increased. Rose (7) gave the first
modern treatment of the subject in 1948, followed by Schiff,         (8)
                                                                         who was
exploring possible experiments for the new electron linear accelerator at
Stanford. Schiff stressed the importance of e-p measurements which could
probe the structure of the proton itself using the known electromagnetic
interaction. Soon after, Rosenbluth (9) calculated the probability that an
electron of energy E0. will scatter through an angle θ in an elastic collision
with a proton-corresponding to the following idealized experimental set
up:




  The energy E’ of the scattered electron is less than the incident energ y E0.
because energy is transferred to the recoil proton (of mass M):




The square of the four momentum transfer, Q 2, is a measure of the ability to
probe structure in the proton. The uncertainty principle limits the spatial
definition of the scattering process to        so Q 2, (and therefore E 0 must
be large in order to resolve small structures.


When only the scattered electron is detected the elastic differential cross
section,         obtained by Rosenbluth is a simple expression, quite similar
to the original Rutherford scattering formula:


634                                      Physics 1990


where
                                        7   = Q2 / 4 M 2
   G E and G M are form factors describing the distributions of charge and
magnetic moment respectively. They are functions of only the momentum
transfer, Q 2.




where µ p is the magnetic moment of the proton (in units of A). If the charge
and magnetic moment distributions are small compared with                  then G E
and G M will not vary as Q 2 changes, but if the size of those distributions is
comparable with h/Q th en the G’s will decrease with increasing Q .
                                                                        2



   Hanson, Lyman and Scott      (10)
                                     were the first to observe elastic electron
scattering from a nucleus using a 15.7 MeV external beam from the 22 MeV
betatron at Illinois. They were studying the scattering of electrons by
electrons and observed two peaks in the energy spectrum of the scattered
electrons (Fig I).
   In 1953, the commissioning of the first half of the new Mark III linac in
the High Energy Physics Laboratory (HEPL) at Stanford provided an
external electron beam of unprecedented intensity at energies up to 225
MeV. Complementing this advance in accelerator technology, Hofstadter
and his collaborators constructed a quasi-permanent scattering facility (Fig.
2) based on a 180° magnetic spectrometer (radius of bending = 18 inches).
The spectrometer could be rotated about the target to measure different
scattering angles, and the excitation of the magnet could be varied to




Fig. 1. First observation of elastic electron scattering from a nucleus, using 15.7 MeV electrons
from the Illinois betatron, scattered at 10°.


                                           R E. Taylor                                        635




 --




Fig. 2. Schematic of the electron scattering facility located at the halfway point of the Mark III
linear accelerator at the High Energy Physics Laboratory at Stanford. The central orbit in the
spectrometer has a radius of 18 inches.


636                                       Physics 1990




         Spectrum of scattered electrons from a CH 2 target showing evidence of electron-proton
scattering, circa 1954.


change the energy of the electrons detected. This apparatus was used for a
series of experiments with only minor modifications.
   Nuclear scattering was easy to observe with this apparatus. At small
angles, the “elastic peak” was the most prominent feature of the energy
spectrum of the scattered electrons, although scattering with transitions to
excited nuclear states was also evident        (11)
                                                      (Fig. 3). From the behavior of the
elastic scattering cross sections at the various beam energies and various
scattering angles, Hofstadter and his collaborators were able to measure the
size and some simple shape parameters for many nuclides.
   In 1953, this facility furnished the first evidence of elastic scattering from
the proton, using a polyethylene target            (12)
                                                        as shown in Fig. 4. A hydrogen
gas target was then constructed in order to reduce the backgrounds under
the elastic peak, and in 1955, Hofstadter and McAllister                 (13)
                                                                              presented data
showing that the form factors in the Rosenbluth cross section were less than


                                         R E. Taylor                                       637




scattering formula (electrons scattered from a particle with unit charge and no magnetic
moment) and with the Rosenbluth cross section for a point proton with an anomalous magnetic
moment. The data falls between the curves, showing that magnetic scattering is occurring but
also indicating that the scattering is less than would be expected from a point proton.



unity (Fig. 5) - and were decreasing with increasing momentum transfer.
They gave an estimate of (0.7           0.2) X 10 -13 cm for the size of the proton.
   In 1955, new end station facilities at HEPL were commissioned, doubling
the energy available for scattering experiments. Beams from the full length
of the linac were available in the new area, reaching energies of 550 MeV
(Fig. 6). A new spectrometer facility was installed by Hofstadter’s group
with a magnet of twice the bending radius (36 inches) of the spectrometer in
use at the halfway station. A liquid hydrogen target was constructed and
installed. This equipment was a considerable improvement (Fig. 7) and a
large effort was focused on scattering from hydrogen.(               14
                                                                        ) A graph of the
measured form factors is shown in Fig. 8, which shows data for various
values of       compared with a model proton with a “size” of 0.8 x 10                         -13



cm.


638                                        Physics 1990



                                                                       (36” radius)




Fig. 6. Layout of the beam line and the 36 inch spectrometer in the End Station of the High
Energy Physics Laboratory. This facility was used for electron scattering experiments for more
than a decade by R. Hofstadter and his collaborators. (A 72 inch spectrometer was added in
1960 to analyze scattered electrons to an energy of 1000 MeV.)



      4000

                             Proton Peak




              0
              290                            300                                           310
                                          ENERGY (MeV)
Fig. 7. Electron-proton scattering energy spectrum taken using the facility in Figure 6 and a
liquid hydrogen target. The stainless steel container for the liquid hydrogen contributes very
little background. The radiative tail of the elastic peak is clearly evident on the low energy side of
the peak.


                                         R. E. Taylor                                        639




                                                                  Proton
                                                        Exponential Model




calculated from the original Rosenbluth formula which defined form factors             and
  corresponds to the form factor for a Dirac (spin      proton, and    to the form factor for the
anomalous magnetic moment. In the analysis of the data it was assumed that         =
   At higher values of       it became evident that          but rather that     =         for the
proton, and the use of the G’s then became universal.           =          and          for small
values of       The curve shown in the figure was based on a model assuming exponentially
falling distributions of charge and magnetic moment, each with a root mean square radius of
0.8 x 10 -13cm (1 Fermi = 10 -13 cm, 1 (Fermi)-2 = 0.0388 GeV 2)



   These experiments mark the beginning of the search for sub-structure in
the proton. They showed persuasively that the proton was not a point, but
an extended structure. This fundamental discovery was rapidly accepted by
the physics community. It was generally assumed that there was a connec-
tion between spatial extent and structure, although I don’t think anyone
was seriously questioning the “elementary” character of the proton at that
time. The available electron energies were not yet high enough for the
exploration of inelastic scattering from the proton, and only elastic experi-
ments provided clues about proton structure for the next several years.
   The new facility was also used to measure scattering from deuterium, in
order to extract information about the neutron. The form factor for elastic
scattering from the loosely bound deuterium nucleus falls off extremely


640                                        Physics 1990




scattering from the individual nucleons in deuterium. The elastic scattering from the deuterium
nucleus would occur at an energy above the highest energy shown on the graph and would be
negligible in comparison with the cross-sections illustrated here. The quasi-elastic scattering from
either the proton or the neutron in deuterium is spread out over a wider range of energies than
the scattering from the free proton because of the momentum spread of the nucleons in the
deuterium nucleus.



rapidly with increasing momentum transfer, so the neutron was studied via
quasi-elastic scattering - scattering from either the proton or the neutron,
which together form the deuterium nucleus. The quasi-elastic scattering
reaches a maximum near the location of the peak for electron-proton
scattering, since the scattering takes place off a single nucleon and the recoil
energy is largely determined by the mass of that nucleon (Fig. 9). One also
observes the effects of the motion of the nucleons in deuterons, and one
result is a measurement of the nucleon’s momentum distribution in the
deuterium nucleus.
   The great success of the scattering program at HEPL had three conse-
quences: Scattering experiments became more popular at existing electron
synchrotrons, new synchrotrons were planned for higher energies, and
discussions began at Stanford about a much larger linear accelerator- two
miles long and powered by one thousand klystrons!
   After more than a year of discussions and calculations, the physicists and
engineers of the High Energy Physics Laboratory prepared the first propos-
al for a two-mile linear accelerator to be built at Stanford.         (15)
                                                                           E.L. Ginzton,
W.K.H. Panofsky and R.B. Neal directed the design effort, and Panofsky


                                  R. E. Taylor                             641


and Neal went on to direct the construction of what came to be called the
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) - surely one of the great engi-
neering achievements of the early 1960s. (16) The new machine was a bold
extrapolation of existing techniques. The design was conservative in the
sense that working prototypes of all the machine components were in hand,
but a formidable challenge because of the increase in scale. The investiga-
tion of the structure of the proton and neutron was a major objective of the
new machine. The 20 GeV energy of the accelerator made both elastic and
inelastic scattering experiments possible in a new range of values of Q 2, and
presented our collaboration with a golden opportunity to pursue the studies
of nucleon structure.
   When it was proposed, the two-mile linac was the largest and most
expensive project ever in high energy physics. Up until that time the field
had been dominated by proton accelerators, and electron machines had
been relatively small and few in number. Electrons were catching up and, in
parallel with the Stanford linac,     two large electron synchrotrons were
proposed and built: the Cambridge Electron Accelerator (CEA) and the
Deutches Electronen Synchrotron (DESY) in Hamburg, with peak energies
of 5 and 6 GeV respectively. The establishment of SLAC in 1960 would
eventually bring electron physics into direct competition with the largest
proton accelerators of the time, the Brookhaven AGS and the CERN PS,
both of which were already under construction in the late 1950s. The new
electron accelerators would make available many opportunities for physi-
cists.
   The new linear accelerator consisted of two miles of accelerating wave-
guide, mounted in a tunnel buried 25 feet underground. In the initial
phase, the waveguide was powered by two hundred and forty 20-30 MW


642                                      Physics 1990




Fig. 12. Aerial view of the SLAC site. On the left are the experimental areas fed by beam lines
from the accelerator. On the right is the campus area where offices, laboratories, and shops are
located. The scattering experiments were performed in the large shielded building just to the
left of center near the bottom of the picture. The structure crossing the accelerator is a super-
highway which was under construction at the time this picture was taken.




klystrons housed in a building at ground level. The accelerator was sited in
the hills behind Stanford on University land, and was probably the last of
the university-based high energy physics accelerators in the U.S. (Figures 10
and 11).
  The design parameters of the new machine - 20 GeV in energy and
average currents in the neighborhood of 100 µA - presented many new
problems for experiments. Two experimental areas (called End Stations in
Figure 12) were developed initially - one heavily shielded area, where sec-
ondary beams of hadrons and muons could be brought out to various
detectors, and a second area for electron and photon beam experiments.
The “beam switchyard” connected each area to the accelerator with a
magnetic beam transport system which defined the momentum spread of
each beam to better than 0.2%, was achromatic and isochronous (in order
to preserve the RF time structure of the beam). The transport systems were
fed by a system of pulsed magnets, so that a given accelerator pulse could be
directed into either of the two experimental areas. Unavoidable beam losses
in the system would lead to high levels of radioactivity, and to challenging
thermal design problems at the expected levels of beam currents. The
design of this “switchyard” area was fairly well fixed by the end of 1963,
along with the specifications for the heavily shielded end station buildings
(see Ref. 16).


                                      R. E. Taylor                         643


                                                                          Beam
                                                                          Dump




     Beam   Direction




                                                         End   Station



Fig. 12. Layout of the SLAC experimental areas and the beam switchyard.




   The experimental area which was to be devoted to electron scattering and
photoproduction experiments using the primary beam had to satisfy the
experimental needs of several groups of experimenters. The challenge was
to build apparatus which would allow rapid and efficient data collection in
the new energy region which was being made available. The operating costs
of the new accelerator (not to mention the depreciation on the capital costs
of over 100 million dollars) would be many thousands of dollars per day, so
it was important to balance costs in such a way that the experiments would
give good value - a spectrometer with small solid angle would be cheaper,
but might take much longer to make a given measurement. The major costs
in this area would be for large magnetic spectrometers and shielding, and so
some of the smaller components could be developed to a much more
sophisticated level than had been possible at the smaller laboratories, while
still adding only a small percentage to the overall costs.
   Although half a decade had passed since the original proposal for SLAC,
the basic physics aims remained much the same. The most effective tech-
nique still appeared to be the detection of a single particle from a given
interaction. (The duty factor [i.e., the percentage of on-time] was low for
the linac - the klystrons were pulsed for approximately two microseconds,
at a rate of 360 times per second. This resulted in high instantaneous rates
during the short pulses, and made coincidence experiments difficult.) The
overall experimental design required instruments which would determine
the energy and angle of a particle coming from a target placed in the beam
of electrons. Magnetic spectrometers were still the most effective way to
accomplish this, but they would be large and cumbersome devices at these
energies.
   The resolution in energy,         had to be much better than              ~
0.7% in order to separate reactions that differed in the number of pions


644                               Physics 1990


emitted. Since the energy of particles from a given reaction is a very steep
function of angle, it was also necessary to measure the angle of scattering to
high accuracy ( ~ 0.15 mrad). Practical spectrometers have angular accep-
tances much greater than the required resolution in angle, so the optics and
the detectors had to be arranged in such a way that the true angle of
scattering was determined along with the energy.
   There were many discussions about the most effective design for the
facilities. Records are sparse, but there are indications of frank and earnest
discussions. There was a suggestion that a single 2 GeV spectrometer could
cover most of the interesting electron scattering experiments, while others
were suggesting that a complex system with a high energy forward spec-
trometer combined with a huge solenoidal detector in the backward direc-
tion was the right way to go.
   In the Spring of 1964, I found myself gradually being elected to a
position of responsibility for the design and engineering of the facilities in
End Station A (as the larger of the two experimental areas was called). This
was not an enviable position, since there was little agreement about what
should be done, and most of the people involved clearly outranked me.
   The sub-group interested in electron scattering experiments was pretty
well convinced that a spectrometer of 8 - 10 GeV maximum energy with a
solid angle 1 milli-steradian would be capable of an extensive program of
scattering measurements. By bending in the vertical plane, measurements
of scattering angle and momentum could be separated at the location of the
detectors. Preliminary designs for such a device had been proposed and had
already influenced the layout of the end station, which by this time was in an
advanced state of design. The spectrometer incorporated a vertical bend of
~       with focusing provided by separate quadrupoles preceding and
following the bend (Fig. 13, elevation). The magnetic design of the spec-
trometer involved a lot of computation, but proceeded smoothly. After
taking practical and financial constraints into account, the top momentum
was fixed at 8 GeV and the solid angle at 1.0 milli-steradians.
   In order to cover a range of scattering angles it was our intention to build
the spectrometer so that it could be rotated around the target from an
external control room (Fig. 13, plan). We needed frames which would hold
hundreds of tons of magnets and counters in precise alignment while they
were moved about the end station.
   It was about this time that we began to assemble a team of engineers and
draftsmen to translate the requirements into designs for working hardware.
The group began the detailed design of the 8 GeV spectrometer compo-
nents, while the debate continued about the rest of the complex.
   By the middle of 1964 the utility of a forward-angle spectrometer which
would analyze particles with a maximum momentum of 20 GeV was no
longer questioned. Successful photoproduction experiments were being
carried out at energies up to 5 GeV at the CEA electron synchrotron, and
extending the energy of these measurements would obviously be a produc-
tive program for SLAC. Also, if the electric form factor of the proton, G      E,


                                           R E. Taylor                                        645


                 8 GeV Spectrometer Elevation




Fig. 13. Schematic drawings of the 8 GeV spectrometer. Five magnets (two bending magnets,
(B), and three quadrupoles,        direct scattered particles into the detectors which are mounted
in a heavily shielded enclosure. The whole assembly rides on the rails and can be pivoted about
the target to change the angle of scattering of the detected electrons.




was to be measured, small-angle scattering experiments would be required.
   Scaling up the 8 GeV spectrometer to 20 GeV (and keeping the resolution
at 0.1%) would have required very large vertical displacements. Some
attempts were made to design a big pit in the end station to accommodate


646                                     Physics 1990




                                                                                                  Dump




Fig. 14. Layout of spectrometers in End Station A. All three spectrometers can be rotated about
the pivot. The 20 GcV spectrometer can be operated from about          to      the 8 GeV from
about      to over     The 1.6 GcV spcctrometer coverage is from ~          150°.




such a system which would bend downward, but it looked very awkward
from a mechanical viewpoint. An ingenious solution was proposed by
Panofsky and Coward, in which horizontal bending could be used while
preserving orthogonal momentum and angle measurements at the focus.
This proposal seemed complicated to me, and I resisted adopting the
design. Finally, I was rescued by K. Brown’s calculation of aberrations in
this device, which he found to be unacceptably large. Shortly thereafter,
Brown and Richter proposed a relatively simple spectrometer with a central
crossover which allowed vertical bending, but kept the vertical height within
bounds. A simple system of sextupoles was required to correct aberrations
in the system. Once proposed, this design was accepted by all, and final
layout of the spectrometers in the end station was soon accomplished (Fig.
14).
   The two large groups at SLAC were not very interested in measurements
in the backward direction at the time, but D. Ritson of the Stanford Physics
Department saw an opportunity to continue his HEPL program of photo-
production measurements at higher energies, and proposed the construc-
tion of a 1.5 GeV, 90 ° spectrometer at large angles, a proposal which was
accepted by the laboratory after a short delay, and the spectrometer was
added to the facility.
   With the magnetic design of the two large spectrometers fixed, design
and construction of the facility began in earnest. The building of the facility
was a joint effort of the SLAC-MIT-CIT group, the SLAC photoproduction
group under B. Richter and the Stanford group interested in the 1.6 GeV
spectrometer led by D. Ritson. The facility consisted of several parts.


                                                                                               647




                   Vertical Plane




Fig. 15. The magnet layout and optics of the 8 GeV spectrometer. The arrangement of magnet
is shown at the top of the figure. In the vertical plane the focusing is “point to point”
momenta arc dispersed along the focal plane. In the horizontal, the focusing is parallel to point
and angles arc dispersed along the θ focal plane. (mr = milli-radian)


648                                      Physics 1990


                             20 GeV SPECTROMETER
                                MAGNET LAYOUT                                           Focal
                                                                                        Plane




Target
                                                           B = Bending Magnet
  6                                                        Cl = Quadrupole Magnet
                                                           S = Sextupole Magnet

Fig. 16. Magnetic system for the 20 GeV spectrometer. With a momentum focus at the central
sextupole, the final two bending magnets add to the momentum dispersion, even though the
direction of bending is opposite to that in the first two bending magnets. The three sextupoles
are used to adjust the angle of the focal plane to a convenient value.




  The 8 GeV spectrometer used five magnetic elements-three quadru-
poles and two bending magnets (Fig. 15). It had point-to-point focusing in
the vertical plane (the plane in which momentum is dispersed). A detector
hodoscope in the p -focal plane defined the differential momentum, ∆ p. In
the horizontal plane (scattering plane), the spectrometer gave parallel-to-
point focusing, allowing the use of a long target. A second hodoscope in the
        plane determined the scattering angle. The           p- and          planes
were located close to each other, but were not coincident.
  The 20 GeV spectrometer used eleven magnetic elements - four bending
magnets, four quadrupoles, and three sextupoles - to produce very similar
conditions at the p- and            planes (Fig. 16). An added feature was the
extra p -focus in the middle of the magnetic system. A slit at this point could
be used to control the ∆           band-pass of the instrument. A system of
counters similar to those in the 8 GeV spectrometer was mounted in the
shielding hut.
   The 1.6 GeV spectrometer had only a single magnetic element (Fig. 17).
Focusing was achieved by rotation of the pole tips out of the normal to the
central orbit. Some sextupole fields were built into the pole faces to control
aberrations.
   The liquid hydrogen targets for the facility were of the condensation type.
In these devices a separate target cell was in thermal contact with a reservoir
of liquid hydrogen at atmospheric pressure. Gaseous hydrogen (or deuter-
ium) introduced into the target cell at greater than atmospheric pressure
would condense to the liquid phase.
   The first target built for the facility was very simple in concept and used
convection in the target cell to transfer the heat generated by the passage of
the beam to the reservoir. It turned out that this mechanism was not
effective at high beam power levels, and that, as a result, intense beams
caused fluctuations in the liquid density. Targets were then built that used


                                             R. E. Taylor                                         649


                                     1.6 GeV SPECTROMETER MAGNET

                                                                            Focal Plane




Fig. 17. Schematic of the 1.6 GeV spectrometer. Focusing is achieved by rotated pole tips
(angles β 1, and β 2). and sextupoles are built into the pole faces to adjust the focal plane to be at
right angles to the central ray.




forced circulation by a fan to keep the liquid in the target cell in closer
thermal contact with the reservoir. Schematics of both targets are shown in
Fig. 18. (Even the circulating targets had some problems at very high beam
currents.)
  The accuracy to which cross sections can be measured is directly related
to the accuracy with which the incident beam intensity can be measured.
The primary standard for the early experiments was a Faraday cup (Fig.
19a) in which 20 GeV electrons were stopped, and the resulting charge
measured with an accurate current integrator. The Faraday cup could not
be used with the full beam power of the linac because of thermal limitations,
but it was used to calibrate other monitors at low repetition rates.


650                                      Physics 1990




                                                                                   Direction of
                                                                                   Liquid Flow
                                                                                   Hydrogen
                                                                                   Reservoir
                                                                                   Heat Exchanger

                                                                                  Circulation Fan
                                                                                   Upper
 Incident                                                                          Bulb
 Beam
                                                                                   Liquid Target
                                                                                   Cdl

      Solid
      Target                                                                       Em     Target
                                                                                   Cel




Fig. 18. a) Schematic of the first condensation hydrogen target built for the End Station A
facility. The target could be displaced vertically to put either the dummy target or the solid
targets on the beamline.
   b) Schematic of a condensation target with forced circulation of the condensed hydrogen. As
in (a) the target could be displaced vertically so that other targets could be placed in the beam
line.




  A new toroid monitor was specifically developed for the End Station A
experiments. The principle of operation is illustrated in Fig. 19b. The beam
acted as the primary winding of a toroidal transformer. Passage of a beam
pulse through the toroid set up an oscillation, and the amplitude of that
oscillation was sampled after a certain fixed interval. The sampling and
subsequent readout of the signal determined the final accuracy of the
monitor. The readout was carefully engineered by the SLAC electronics
group, and as experience with this device increased, it became the absolute
standard for beam current measurements, though often cross checked
against the Faraday cup.
   In addition to the beam monitors, there were various collimators and
screens along the beam line, and a high-power beam dump buried in a hill a
hundred meters or so behind the end station. An impressive cable plant
connected the spectrometer detectors to the electronics in the “counting
house” high above the end station floor.
   I wish I had the skills to recreate for you the three years of intense activity
that went into translating the paper plans of 1964 into the instruments
which began to do physics in early 1967. The problems in procuring the
precision magnets, the construction of the giant frames to hold the magnets
and to support the massive shields for the detectors, the laying of the rails to
extraordinary tolerances - all these and many other problems were attacked
with drive and dedication by the mechanical engineering group. Even the
professional crews hired to install large parts of the apparatus became


                                         R. E. Taylor                                    651


               Faraday Cup




Fig. 19. a) Drawing of the Faraday cup. The beam was stopped in the carbon-copper core of the
cup, and the lead absorbed y-rays created in the shower. The Alnico magnets deflected low
energy electrons coming from the window so that they did not reach the cup, and those from the
core did not escape from it.
  b) Schematic of the toroidal transformer monitor. The beam acted as the primary winding of
the ferrite core. A beam pulse caused a “ringing” of a damped LC circuit, the amplitude of
which was read out after three quarters of a cycle.


infected with the enthusiasm of the engineers. I lived in mortal fear that a
union steward would drop in unannounced and find a millwright (steel
worker) building a wooden scaffold, while a carpenter was operating the
crane. Figure 20 is a view of the experimental area with the completed 8 and
20 GeV spectrometers in place.




Fig. 20. Photograph of the 8 and 20 GeV spectrometers in End Station A.


652                                     Physics 1990




Fig. 21. Schematic drawing of the counter system inside the 8 GeV shielding hut.




   The 8 GeV detectors were designed and built at MIT (Fig. 21). Two large
scintillation counters acted as trigger counters, signalling the passage of
charged particles through the counter system. Two multi-element scintilla-
tion counter hodoscopes (mounted between the trigger counters) defined
the position of the track in the horizontal (θ) and vertical (p) directions. The
hodoscopes each consisted of two layers of overlapping counters, so that
each double hit defined the position to half a counter width. The location of
the hits together with the angle and energy setting of the spectrometer
defined the angle of scattering to ± 0.15 milli-radians and the momentum
of the scattered particle to ± 0.05 %. Following the system of hodoscopes
was a set of counters used to distinguish electrons from pions. The principal
element was a total absorption lead-lucite shower counter. The pulse height
threshold was set to be more than 99% efficient for electrons. In the elastic
scattering experiments this counter alone was enough to ensure a pure
electron signal, but for inelastic scattering, pion backgrounds increased and
the use of the dE/dx counters was sometimes necessary. These counters
measured the energy loss in a scintillator for particles which had passed
through one radiation length of lead. Electrons will often shower in the
radiator, giving large pulse height in the counters. In most cases pions will
not shower, giving an almost independent indication of their identity. By
the time of the first inelastic scattering experiments using the 8 GeV
spectrometer, a gas cerenkov counter had been added in front of the
trigger counter as a further tool for particle discrimination. The dE/dx
system was used only for the lowest secondary energies where the pion-
electron ratios were large. The 20 GeV spectrometer’s counter system (Fig.


                                          R. E. Taylor                                        653




                                                         To Offline   Computer



                             Printer



Fig. 22. Schematic of the 20 GeV spectrometer indicating the various computer control and
read-out functions. Also shown is a schematic of the 20 GeV counter system. Particle identifica-
tion in the spectrometer was somewhat more complex than for the 8 GeV instrument, partly
because of the higher energies involved, but also because it was sometimes desirable to identify π
mesons in a large electron background in the 20 GeV spectrometer.




22) was similar to that in the 8 GeV spectrometer, with the addition of a
differential gas Cerenkov counter,     and extra sets of hodoscopes which
determined the angle of scatter outside the horizontal plane (ϕ hodoscope)
and the position of the scattering center along the beam line (x hodoscope).
The MIT group also took responsibility for much of the counting electron-
ics, photo tube power supplies, etc.,    and were of great assistance to the
electrical engineers in the SLAC group who installed the electronics and
interfaced the on-line computer.
   One innovation by the collaboration was the extensive use of on-line
computation in the experiment. While not the first experiment to be
equipped with an on-line computer, the degree of computer control was
ambitious for the time. We purchased a fairly powerful mainframe, dedi-
cated to only one experiment at a time. A lot of work was done on both
software and hardware, so that the effort to set up and operate a given
experiment was greatly reduced. The on-line analysis of a fraction of the


Fig. 23. Summary of results on nuclear form factors presented by the Stanford group at the
1965 “International Symposium on Electron and Photon Interactions at High Energies”. (A
momentum transfer of 1 GeV2 is equivalent to 26 Fermis-2.)



increasing data was a powerful way to check on the progress of the experi-
ments (Fig. 22).
   In the summer of 1966 there was a call for proposals to use the beam at
SLAC. The accelerator was nearing completion, and some early tests of the
accelerator with beam were being done with considerable success. Although
the initial programs in End Station A were built into the design of the
facility, it was now necessary to parcel out beam time and arrange the
sequence of experiments for the first year of operation. The Cal Tech-MIT-
SLAC collaboration prepared a proposal that consisted of three parts:
  a. Elastic electron-proton scattering measurements (8 GeV spectrometer)
  b. Inelastic electron-protron scattering measurements (20 GeV spectrom-
eter)
  c. Comparison of positron and electron scattering cross sections (8 GeV
spectrometer)
   It is clear from the proposal that the elastic experiment was the focus of
interest at this juncture. “We expect that most members of the groups in
the collaboration will be involved in the e-p elastic scattering experiment,
and that the other experiments will be done by subgroups.”
  During the construction of SLAC and the experimental facilities a lot of
progress had been made on the measurements of nucleon form factors at
other laboratories. The program at HEPL had continued to produce a great


                                       R E. Taylor                                    655


             CORNELL ELECTRON SCATTERlNG SETUP, CIRCA 1960




                        .




                                        SIDE VIEW




        Counter                    Obstacles


Fig. 24. Schematic of the equipment for electron scattering experiments at Cornell around
1960. These experiments used a quadrupole spectrometer to analyze electrons scattered from
an internal target in the electron synchrotron. The target is mounted away from the normal
orbit in the accelerator, and the beam is slowly moved onto the target after acceleration.




deal of new data using the facilities in the end station of the Mark III
accelerator. A new spectrometer with a bending radius of 72 inches had
been added to accommodate the increased energy available from the accel-
erator. Extensive results on both the proton and the deuteron were gener-
ated and reported (17) (Fig. 23).


656                                     Physics 1990


   At over 1 GeV, the Cornell electron synchrotron was the highest energy
electron machine in the world for a few years in the early 1960s. Experi-
menters there made a series of measurements on CH              2 targets, using a

quadrupole spectrometer of novel design (18) (Fig. 24) and a new type of γ
ray monitor. The results from Cornell started a trend toward the use of
              (19)



the electric and magnetic form factors (2O) (G E and G M), rather than one form
factor for a spin l/2 (Dirac) proton and a second for the anomalous
magnetic moment of the proton.
  The linear accelerator at Orsay had begun operations in 1959 and by the
following year there was an active program of both nucleon and nuclear
scattering. The emphasis shifted to colliding beam experiments in later
years, but many scattering experiments were done in the intermediate
energy stations of that accelerator with beams of up to 750 MeV.
   Electrons had become a big success in high energy physics and a new high
energy electron synchrotron was approved and built at Harvard. The Cam-
bridge Electron Accelerator was built jointly by Harvard and MIT and came
into operation in 1962 with a peak energy of 5 GeV. A program of electron
scattering experiments using internal targets was soon in operation. The
new accelerator opened up a new range of Q 2 for scattering experiments
and several different experimental setups were used to measure the proton
and neutron form factors. The higher Q 2 proton measurements fell very
close to values expected from a straightforward extrapolation of the data at
lower energies. The results (21)were summed up (somewhat later) by Richard
Wilson in the words “The peach has no pit . ” These results were the first
evidence that the old core model of the proton was unlikely to be correct
(Fig. 25).



        1.6




Fig. 25. GM, for the proton from data taken at CEA. The curve labelled “dipole” is a tit which
originated in the late 1950’s when the maximum measured Q2 was limited to less than 1 GeV2. It
has the form      =       +               and is in qualitative agreement with the CEA data at
higher Q2, though the fit is not very good in the statistical sense.


                                                R E. Taylor                                        657




Fig. 26. Layout of the spectrometer setup for internal target electron scattering experiments at
DESY. Later on, the same set-up was used to detect electron-proton coincidences in elastic
scattering (in order to reduce backgrounds).




   A slightly larger synchrotron was built in Hamburg, Germany at about the
same time. DESY came into operation in 1964 with a peak energy of 6 GeV.
An extensive series of nucleon scattering measurements, using both internal
targets (22) (Fig. 26) and external beams (23) (Fig. 27), was undertaken.
   With both CEA and DESY operating, the amount of elastic scattering
data at high Q2 (which essentially measures G M) increased rapidly in both
quantity and accuracy. The data continued to follow the so-called dipole
model to a good approximation. By the Hamburg conference in 1965 there
were no dissenters from the view that




and


658                                          Physics 1990


                                   DESYEXTERNALBEAM
                                  SPECTROMETER FACILITY




Fig. 27. Setup for external beam scattering experiments at DESY. The spectrometer was
articulated between the magnets         M 2 and M 3. By varying the bending in        M 2 and M 3, lines of
constant “missing mass   ” could be adjusted to a given slope at S 1 for different scattered energies.




   SLAC was expected to test this formulation in the new range of Q 2 (Fig.
28) made available with 20 GeV electrons. Questions of interest concerned
the evidence for a nucleon core and the validity of the dipole description of
the form factor in the extended range of Q 2 available at the new accelerator.
The cherished picture of a “real proton” surrounded by a meson cloud was
already in pretty serious trouble, but more tests for a small core were
outlined in the SLAC proposal. Other questions were related to particular
models of behavior for the form factors which are not of great interest
today.
   Our SLAC proposal demanded certain specifications for the beams to be
used in the experiment, which were within the design specifications of
SLAC, but which were nonetheless very difficult to meet, given the fact that
the accelerator was just being commissioned. Operating the accelerator for
the initial scattering experiments was a challenging experience for the crew
of accelerator operators, and many of them have indelible memories of
those times.
   The proposed experiment on elastic scattering aimed at measurements of
the cross section at momentum transfers of 16 GeV 2 and beyond, even in
the very first round of experimentation. There was an extensive discussion
in the proposal about running at angles and energies in a manner which


                                          R. E. Taylor                                       659



                         - Locus of (Q , 0) pairs
                                                         2



                             for which E’ = constant
                         --- Limit due to primary energy




Fig. 28. Plot of elastic kinematics showing the extra kinematic region made available at SLAC for
spectrometers of different maximum energies (above 4 GeV, only the maximum Q 2 is indicated
to avoid confusion on the graph).




would result in an efficient separation of G E. and G M. Possible backgrounds
were considered, and it was expected that they would be negligible. Radia-
tive corrections to elastic scattering were expected to reach up to 30% for
our apparatus and incoming energies of 20 GeV. These corrections arose
from two related but physically distinct processes:
   1. Electrons passing through the target and the target windows might
emit radiation as a result of interactions with individual atoms (real brems-
strahlung) and thereby suffer an energy loss.


660                                Physics 1990


   2. Scattered electrons might emit radiation in the scattering process
itself (“wide-angle bremsstrahlung”). The effects of wide-angle bremsstrah-
lung were first discussed by Schwingerer
                                           (24)
                                                in 1949 and have been the subject
of increasingly sophisticated calculations over the years.
   In some cases the energy of the emitted radiation (in either reaction) was
sufficient to affect the kinematics of the scattering to such an extent that the
measuring apparatus would no longer “recognize” the interaction. For
example, if sufficient (radiative) energy were lost in an elastic scatter, the
energy of the scattered electron might fall below the range that the appara-
tus defined as the “elastic peak.”
   The emission of radiation gives rise to the characteristic “radiative tail” in
the energy spectrum of elastically scattered electrons as shown schematically
in Figure 29. The cross section measured by detecting the electrons in a
certain energy range will be smaller than expected because some particles
will be lost. It is customary to correct experimental cross sections for these
losses - removing the dependence of the final cross section on the energy
resolution of the apparatus.
   A simple (first order) correction formula illustrates how such a correction
might be applied.




where the wide-angle bremsstrahlung correction           is




                   m e= mass of electron.
                      = energy resolution or acceptance
                    E = incident energy (assumes E s ~ E)

and the real bremsstrahlung correction            is




                            t = thickness of target in
                                radiation lengths

  As long as the corrections can be calculated to sufficient accuracy, they
are innocuous in elastic scattering, and determination of elastic form fac-
tors is straightforward.
  Our proposal included a possible run plan for measuring G         E and G M to

values of Q 2 exceeding 15 GeV 2. (At the higher Q 2 one finds an upper
bound on G E, rather than a measure of its value.) The program was
expected to take about 350 hours of beam time, and a first run of 200 hours
was suggested, after which the requests would be updated using measured
quantities, rather than estimates. This experiment was to be the first carried
out with the new facility.


                                           R E. Taylor                                         661




                                                  E’
Fig. 29. Radiative effects in elastic scattering. In the absence of radiative effects, all elastic
scatters would be found in the box labelled         (the width of which depends on resolution in
the incoming beam and the detection apparatus). Radiative processes result in energy losses for
some scattered electrons, and so some electrons will be found in a “tail” on the low energy side
of the peak. A measurement of the electrons in the shaded region results in a cross section which
is somewhat smaller than          This smaller             can be corrected for radiative losses to
determine




  The second part of the proposal concerned the measurement of inelastic
scattering from the proton . Inelastic scattering from the nucleon had a
much shorter history than elastic scattering so there was much less guidance
for the design of that part of our proposal.
   Inelastic scattering from nuclei was a common feature of the early scatter-
ing data at HEPL. The excitation of nuclear levels and the quasi-elastic
scattering from the constituent protons and neutrons of a nucleus were
observed in the earliest experiments. The excitation of nuclear levels in
carbon could be seen in the data of Fig. 4, for example. Quasi-elastic
scattering became more evident as momentum transfer was increased. Fig.
30 shows scattering from the same target as in Fig. 4, and at approximately
the same incident energy, but at a scattering angle of 135 °. A comparison of
the two figures illustrates the growth in the fraction of quasi-elastic scatter-
ing as the angle (and therefore the momentum transfer) is increased. When
the electrons scatter through            the elastic peak is very small and the
pattern of level excitation has changed because the different multipole
transitions have different angular dependences. The most prominent fea-
ture of the spectrum is the broad quasi-elastic peak in Fig. 30 due to
scattering from individual protons and neutrons. The width of the peak
reflects the Fermi momentum of the nucleons in the nucleus.
  The earliest experiments on the inelastic scattering of electrons from the
proton itself were carried out by Panofsky and co-workers at HEPL in the
second half of the 1950’s. (25,26,27) The early experiments were comparisons


  662                                      Physics 1990




                               SCATTERED ENERGY (MeV)
 Fig. 30. Spectrum of electrons scattered inelastically from carbon. The excitation of nuclear
 levels is evident. The large, broad peak between 100 and 150 MeV is due to quasi-elastic
 scattering from the individual neutrons and protons that make up the carbon nucleus.




Fig. 31. The zero dispersion magnetic spectrometer used in inelastic experiments at HEPL.
Splitting the magnet allowed the insertion of momentum defining slits in the middle of the bend.


                                    R. E. Taylor                               663


of photo- and electroproduction of positive pions in lithium and (later)
hydrogen targets. Those experiments checked the calculation of the electro-
magnetic fields that accompany a relativistic electron, but added little to the
knowledge of meson dynamics beyond that which was known from photo-
production (because the dominant contribution to the electroproduction
came from virtual photons with very small values of         The authors pointed
out that observing the scattered electrons at a large angle (rather than the
pions) might lead to more interesting results, and the next experiment was
of that kind.
   A new magnetic spectrometer was commissioned at HEPL at about this
time(28), and was used for these experiments (Fig. 31). Panofsky and All-
ton (29) made measurements of the inelastic scattering of electrons from
hydrogen in the region near the threshold for pion production. The energy
of the available electrons was not high enough to reach much beyond the
threshold for pion production , but the experiment established that the
“tail” of the elastic peak was due to the two (calculable) radiative processes
mentioned above. One process was elastic scattering preceded (or followed)
by emission of bremsstrahlung in the material of the target; the other was
“wide-angle bremsstrahlung” - the emission of a photon in the scattering
interaction. The experiment was a quantitative test of calculations of the
radiative tail of the elastic peak in the region near pion threshold.
   The peak energy of the electrons from the Mark III accelerator was
improving steadily during those years, and in 1959 Ohlsen (30) used the 36-
inch spectrometer in the Hofstadter group’s scattering facility (Fig. 6) to do
an experiment similar to the Panofsky-Allton measurement. With increased
energy, it was possible to make measurements covering the region of the
first        resonance, and a clear peak was observed at the resonance
energy. The experimenters were also able to measure a rough Q            2
                                                                           depen-
dence of the peak cross section.
   In 1962, Hand reported on a similar experiment (using the same spec-
trometer used by Allton) and the results were discussed in modern notation.
In particular, there appears an inelastic equivalent of the Rosenbluth
formula containing two form factors which are functions of Q          2
                                                                        and V , the
energy loss suffered by the scattered electron. The measured quantities are
E , E’, and θ:
 0


664                                   Physics 1990




   W is the mass of the final state of the struck hadron (when W 2 = M , the  2



elastic kinematics are recovered). The square of the momentum transfer,
Q2


the energy loss


and W 2 are relativistically invariant quantities in the scattering process.
  There are two equivalent formulations describing the cross sections
which are in current use, one due to Drell and Walecka           (31)
                                                                      which is very
similar in form to the Rosenbluth expression




    The structure functions W and W are functions of both the momentum
                                1          2

 transfer and energy loss, W (Q 2,v). This is the most general form of the
                                1,2

cross section in the (parity conserving) one photon approximation.
   Hand(32) popularized a different but equivalent form for the cross section
in which one of the form factors reduces to the photoproduction cross
section at Q 2 = 0




where




Again     and     (corresponding to the photo-cross sections for transversely
polarized and longitudinally polarized virtual photons respectively) are
functions of the momentum transfer and energy loss of the scattered
electron, Q L,T (Q2, v), with the limiting values at Q 2 = 0 of




  These early experiments and the associated theoretical studies developed
much of the framework for thinking about inelastic experiments at SLAC.
The energy available limited the early experiments on the proton to studies
of the π-p resonance near 1238 MeV.
  An important influence came from the Laboratoire de l’Accelerateur


                                        R E. Taylor                                       665




Fig. 32. Inelastic spectra from CEA at 3lo for initial energies of 2.4 GeV and 3.0 GeV. Three
bumps are clearly evident corresponding to resonance excitations of the proton.


Lineaire in Orsay, where experiments on inelastic electron scattering from
nuclei led to the study of radiative processes, and to the determination of
radiatively corrected cross sections from inelastic scattering data.
   The focus of our thinking about inelastic experiments during the con-
struction period centered on the excitation of resonances and the Q          2



dependences of the “transition form factors” (the nucleon makes a transi-
tion from the ground state to the resonant state). We hoped to learn more
about each of the observable resonances, and also expected to see new
resonances that had not been electroproduced before and even some that
had never been observed before in any reaction. Just before the proposal
was submitted, data from the CEA was published showing clear evidence
of three resonant states excited by inelastic electron scattering. The group
at CEA used a quadrupole spectrometer to obtain spectra like those in
Figure 32. The background of radiative events is substantial. Very interest-
ing spectra from DESY, (34) showing large non-resonant contributions to the
inelastic cross section, would come later, at about the time that the first
(inelastic) experiments were starting up at SLAC.
   Our proposal was approved in 1966, along with proposals from other
groups. The running time for the various parts of our proposal was inter-
leaved with other runs to study photoproduction with the spectrometer
facility (and with experiments on a streamer chamber which occupied a
building behind End Station A and which used the same beam line).
   By January of 1967, the 8 GeV spectrometer was nearly complete and we
were beginning preparations for the initial elastic scattering experiment.


666                                    Physics 1990




Fig. 33. Angular acceptance of the 8 GeV spectrometer for electrons from the center of the
target and with the spectrometer set so that the incoming beam followed the central axis. The
points are for two different beam energies       = 8 GeV , + = 6 GeV). The solid line is the
aperture from computer calculations.




  The solid angle of the spectrometers entered directly into the calculation
of the cross section, and we wanted to check the calculations of the 8 GeV
aperture. A special run with beam was planned to study the optics of the
spectrometer and the acceptance. The spectrometer was placed at 0 ° so that


                                         R. E. Taylor                                      667


the beam entered the spectrometer along the central orbit. The beam
energy was adjusted to the setting of the spectrometer and the beam was
observed with scintillation screens mounted at the focal planes. Magnets
located at the target position steered the beam, tracing out orbits and
verifying the optical properties of the spectrometer’s magnetic fields. By
determining the limiting orbits in the spectrometer the solid angle could be
measured. Fig. 33 shows the results for the central momentum case. The
agreement with the predictions was quite good, but there were some slight
discrepancies with the calculated aperture limits for the extreme rays. After
the initial run, lead masks were introduced into the spectrometer to better
define the aperture.
   Following the optics tests, the counters and shielding were installed along
with the hydrogen target and the beam current monitors. By the month of
May the first runs of the elastic scattering proposal were underway. The
accelerator was operating rather well by this time, though still struggling to
meet all of the design specifications.
   It is an exciting moment when a new experimental facility is put into
operation at a new accelerator, especially when the new accelerator opens
up extended new regions of energy for exploration. We were about to use




Fig. 34. Computer display of the focal plane location of particles passing through the elements
of the p and theta hodoscopes of the 8 GeV spectrometer. The line corresponding to elastic
scattering is evident.


668                                       Physics 1990


          16




Fig. 35. The same data as in Figure 34, plotted against the calculated missing mass of each event.
(The peak is displaced from the mass of the proton at 938 MeV by a slight mismatch in energy
calibrations between the switchyard and the spectrometer.)


the biggest physics project ever built to look into places where no one had
ever looked before. Nearly a decade of thinking and hard work by hundreds
of people would be tested by the events of that evening. Such moments are
often spoiled by last minute difficulties, but we were fortunate. Prepara-
tions proceeded smoothly, the target was filled with hydrogen and soon the
computer was analyzing events. Within a few minutes a respectable elastic
peak was showing in the “ p-θ” display which sorted events into bins corre-
sponding to the counters hit in the momentum and scattering angle hodos-
copes (Fig. 34). The data in this 3-dimensional plot can be converted to a 2-
dimensional plot of counts vs. missing mass (Fig. 35) and then to cross
sections and form factors. For the next couple of weeks we accumulated
data and ran various checks. The system worked well - we could accumulate
data fairly rapidly and change both energy and angle from the counting
house. The investments made for the sake of efficiency were proving to be
valuable, and we were happy with the functioning of our apparatus and the
operation of the accelerator.
   A preliminary analysis of the data obtained was made within a few months
for presentation at the Electron-Photon Symposium held at SLAC in Au-


                                           R. E. Taylor                                   669




Fig. 36. Magnetic form factor measurement at SLAC in 1967. The dipole curve is the same as in
Figure 25, here extended to Q2 = 25 GeV2. Again, the agreement is imperfect but the curve
describes the general behavior of the data quite well.




gust, 1967. (35) The elastic cross sections measured at SLAC behaved in much
the same way as those measured at lower energies - falling on the same
simple extrapolation of the earlier fits as the CEA and DESY data (Fig. 36).
We collected data for G MP at values of Q 2 up to 25 GeV .          2



   The first opportunity to find something new and unexpected with the
spectrometer facility and the SLAC beam had been a disappointment. This
is quite normal in experimental physics. Most measurements increment
knowledge by just a small amount. Sometimes enough of those small incre-
ments eventually result in insights that change our point of view. The
sudden observation of unexpected phenomena that result in major new


670                                 Physics 1990


insights is an uncommon event in science. One tries to be ready for such
observations, but usually has to be content with adding a small brick of
knowledge to the existing edifice . In any case, we had very little time to
philosophize over the elastic results because we were busy preparing for the
first inelastic scattering experiments. They began in August 1967, using the
20 GeV spectrometer.
   In this talk I have tried to point out the importance of advances in
accelerators and experimental equipment for the long series of electron
scattering experiments at Stanford and elsewhere. The utility of large scale
facilities would continue to be demonstrated in later work on nuclear
structure with muons and neutrinos at Fermilab and CERN. Large facilities
are now commonplace in high energy physics, partially because of the early
successes of such facilities in the field of electron scattering.
   The Stanford Linear Accelerator and the associated initial complement of
experimental equipment were generously supported by U.S. Gover            nment
funding administered by (what is now) the Department of Energy. We were
given a chance to build apparatus that was well suited to the opportunities
provided by the new linear accelerator. The vast changes in the scale of
scientific endeavors during this century have not changed one of the princi-
pal preoccupations of the experimental physicist- the building of quality
experimental equipment which is matched to the task at hand. In those days
the cost-effectiveness of apparatus was considered more important than
arbitrary cost-ceilings, and we hope that the physics output of the facilities
in End Station A has justified the considerable expense incurred in building
them.
   In the summer of 1967, SLAC was embarking on a long and productive
program of experiments. The story of one of those experiments will be
continued in Professor Kendall’s lecture.




REFERENCES
 1. H. W. Kendall, Deep Inelastic Scattering: Experiments on the Proton and the
     Observation of Scaling. Les Prix Nobel 1990.
 2. J. I. Friedman, Deep Inelastic Scattering: Comparisons with the Quark Model.
      Les Prix Nobel 1990.
 3. J. I. Friedman, H. W. Kendall, R. E. Taylor, Deep Inelastic Scattering: Acknowl-
      edgments. Les Prix Nobel 1990.
 4. H. Geiger and E. Marsden, Proc. Roy. Soc. 82, 495 (1909).
 5. E. Rutherford, Phil. Mag. 21, 669 (1911).
 6. J. Franck and G. Hertz, Verh. Dtsch. Phys. Ges. 16, 457 (1914).
 7. M. E. Rose, Phys. Rev. 73, 279 (1948).
 8. L. I. Schiff, Summary of Possible Experiments with a High Energy Linear Electron
      Accelerator, SUML- 102, Stanford University, Microwave Laboratory, 1949 (un-
      published).
 9. M. N. Rosenbluth, Phys. Rev. 79, 615 (1950).
10. E. M. Lyman, A. 0. Hanson, and M. B. Scott, Phys. Rev. 84, 626 (1951).
11. J. H. Fregeau and R. Hofstadter, Phys. Rev. 99, 1503 (1955).


12. R. Hofstadter, H. R. Fechter and J. A. McIntyre, Phys. Rev. 91, 422 (1953).
13. R. Hofstadter and R. W. McAllister, Phys. Rev. 98, 217 (1955).
14. R. Hofstadter, Rev. Mod. Phys. 28, 214 (1956) and op. cit. (This article summa-
     rizes the work at HEPL up to 1956 and contains a fairly complete set of
     references to the early work in the field.)
15. Proposal for a Two Mile Linear Electron Accelerator, Stanford University, April
     1957.
16. R. B. Neal, ed., The Stanford Two Mile Accelerator (W. A. Benjamin, NY, 1968).
17. C. D. Buchanan et al., in Proc. 1965 Int. Symp. on Electron and Photon Interactions
     at High Energies, Hamburg, Germany, G. Hohler et al., eds. (Hamburg, Ger-
     many, Deutsche Phys. Geselleschaft, 1965). pp. 20-42; presented by R. Hof-
     stadter, and op. cit.
18. R. R. Wilson et al., Nature 188, 94 (1960).
19. R. R. Wilson, Nucl. Instrum. 1, 101 (1957).
20. K. Berkelman et al., Phys. Rev. 130, 2061 (1965).
21. J. R. Dunning et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 631 (1964) and op. cit.
22. H. J. Behrend et al., Nuovo Cimento A38, 140 (1967) and op. cit.
23. W. Bartel et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 608 (1966) and op. cit.
24. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 75, 898 (1949).
25. W. K. H. Panofsky, C. Newton, and G. B. Yodh, Phys. Rev. 98, 751 (1955).
26. W. K. H. Panofsky, W. M. Woodward, and G. B. Yodh, Phys. Rev. 102, 1392
     (1956).
27. G. B. Yodh and W. K. H. Panofsky, Phys. Rev. 105, 731 (1957).
28. R. A. Alvarez et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 31, 556 (1960).
29. W. K. H. Panofsky and E. A. Allton, Phys. Rev. 110, 1155 (1958).
30. G. G. Ohlsen, Phys. Rev. 120, 584 (1960).
31. S. D. Drell and J. D. Walecka, Ann. Phys. (NY) 28, 18 (1964).
32. L. Hand, Phys. Rev. 129, 1584 (1963).
33. A. A. Cone et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 326 (1965).
34. F. W. Brasse et al., Nuovo Cimento 55, 679 (1968).
35. R. E. Taylor in Proc. of the 1967 Int. Symp. on Electron and Photon Interactions at
     High Energies (Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, 1967) pp. 70 - 101.
