                            R O B E R T A. M I L L I K A N


         The electron and the light-quant from the
                experimental point of view
                            Nobel Lecture, May 23, 1924

The fact that Science walks forward on two feet, namely theory and exper-
iment, is nowhere better illustrated than in the two fields for slight contribu-
tions to which you have done me the great honour of awarding me the
Nobel Prize in Physics for the year 1923.
   Sometimes it is one foot which is put forward first, sometimes the other,
but continuous progress is only made by the use of both - by theorizing and
then testing, or by finding new relations in the process of experimenting and
then bringing the theoretical foot up and pushing it on beyond, and so on in
unending alternations.
   The terms of this year’s award state that it is given for work on the fun-
 damental electrical unit and on photoelectricity. In both fields my own work
has been that of the mere experimentalist whose main motive has been to
 devise, if possible, certain crucial experiments for testing the validity or in-
validity of conceptions advanced by others.
   The conception of electrical particles or atoms goes back a hundred and
seventy years to Benjamin Franklin who wrote about 1750: "The electrical
matter consists of particles extremely subtle since it can permeate common
matter, even the densest, with such freedom and ease as not to receive any
appreciable resistance."
   This theoretical conception was developed in no little detail by Wilhelm
Weber1 in papers written in 1871. The numerical value of the ultimate elec-
trical unit was first definitely estimated by G. Johnstone Stoney2 in 1881, and
in 1891 this same physicist gave to it the name the electron*.
* It is highly desirable that this historically correct, etymologically most suitable, and
authoritatively recognized nomenclature (see among many others Rutherford’s Pres-
 idential Addresses at the British Association 1923, Nemst’s Theoretical Chemistry, last
edition, etc., etc.) be retained. When used without a prefix or qualifying adjective,
the word electron may signify, if we wish, as it does in common usage, both the generic
thing, the unit charge, and also the negative member of the species, precisely as the
word man in English denotes both the genus homo and the male of mankind. There
is no gain in convenience in replacing *positive electron, by                  but on the
other hand a distinct loss logically, etymologically, and historically.


                     ELECTRON AND LIGHT-QUANT                                 55
    In 1897 the experimental foot came forward with J. J. Thomson’s and
 Zeeman’s determinations of e/m by two wholly distinct methods. It was these
experiments and others like them which in a few years gained nearly uni-
 versal acceptance among physicists for the electron theory.
    There remained, however, some doubters, even among those of scientific
 credentials, for at least two decades - men who adopted the view that the
 apparent unitary character of electricity was but a statistical phenomenon;
 and as for educated people of the non-scientific sort, there exists today among
 them a very general and a very serious misconception as to the character of
 the present evidence. A prominent literary writer recently spoke of the elec-
 tron as only the latest scientific hypothesis which will in its turn give way
 to the abra-ca-da-bra of tomorrow
    It is perhaps not inappropriate then to attempt to review today as precisely
 as possible a few features of the existing experimental situation and to en-
 deavour to distinguish as sharply as may be between theory and some newly
 established facts.
    The most direct and unambiguous proof of the existence of the electron
 will probably be generally admitted to be found in an experiment which for
 convenience I will call the oil-drop experiment. But before discussing the
 significance of that advance I must ask you to bear with me while I give the
 experimentalist’s answer to the very fundamental but very familiar query:
   What is electricity? His answer is naive, but simple and definite. He ad-
 mits at once that as to the ultimate nature of electricity he knows nothing.
    He begins rather with a few simple and familiar experiments and then sets
 up some definitions which are only descriptions of the experiments and
 therefore involve no hypothetical elements at all.
    He first notes the fact that a pith ball, after contact with a glass rod that
 has been rubbed with silk, is found to be endowed with the new and striking
 property that it tends to move away from the rod with a surprisingly strong
 and easily measurable force. He describes that fact, and affirms at the same
 time his ignorance of all save the existence of this force, by inventing a new
 word and saying that the pith ball has been put into a positively electrified
 state, or simply has received a charge of positive electricity. He then measures
 the amount of its charge by the strength of the observed force.
    Similarly he finds that the pith ball, after contact with an ebonite rod that
 has been rubbed with cat’s fur is attracted, and he proceeds to describe this
 experiment by saying that it has now received a charge of negative electricity.
 Whenever the pith ball is found to have been put, by contact with any body


56                         1923   R.A.MILLIKAN

or by any other process, into a condition to behave in either of the foregoing
ways, it has, by definition, received a charge of either positive or negative
electricity. The whole of our thinking about electrical matters starts with
these two simple experiments and these two definitions.
   In order now to get the most crucial possible test of the correctness or in-
correctness of Franklin’s conception of a particle, or an atom, of electricity it
was clearly necessary to reduce the charge on the pith ball to the smallest
possible amount, to change that charge by the most minute possible steps,
and then to see whether the forces acting upon it at a given distance from the
glass rod (i.e. in a constant field) had any tendency to increase or decrease
by unitary steps.
   The success of the experiments first performed in 1909, was wholly due to
the design of the apparatus, i.e. to the relation of the parts.
   The pith ball itself which was to take on the smallest possible charge had
of course to be the smallest spherical body which could be found and yet
which would remain of constant mass; for a continuously changing grav-
itational force would be indistinguishable, in its effect upon the motion of the
charged body, from a continuously changing electrical charge.
   A non-homogeneous or non-spherical body also could not be tolerated;
for the force acting on the pith ball had to be measured by the speed of mo-
tion imparted to it by the field, and this force could not be computed from
the speed unless the shape was spherical and the density absolutely constant.
This is why the body chosen to replace the pith ball was an individual oil-
droplet about a thousandth of a millimeter in diameter blown out of an
ordinary atomizer and kept in an atmosphere from which convection cur-
rents had been completely removed by suitable thermostatic arrangements.
The glass rod, the purpose of which was to produce a constant electrical
field, was of course replaced by the two metal plates C and D (Fig. 1) of
an air condenser, one of the plates (D) being attached to the positive, the


                    ELECTRON AND LIGHT-QUANT                                57
other (C) to the negative terminal of a battery, and a switch being added, as
shown in the figure, so as to make it possible to throw the field on or off at
will.
   In order to be able to measure very accurately the force acting upon the
charged oil-droplet it was necessary to give it about a centimeter of path in
which the speed could be measured. This is one of the most important ele-
ments in the design, the overlooking of which has caused some subsequent
observers to fall into error. The centimeter of path and the constancy of field
then fixed the approximate size of the plates the diameter of which was
actually 22 cm. They were placed 16 mm apart.
   The Geld strength too, about 6,000 volts per cm, was vital, and new in
work of anything like this kind. It was the element which turned possible
failure into success. Indeed, Nature here was very kind. She left only a nar-
row range of field strengths within which such experiments as these are all
possible. They demand that the droplets be large enough so that the Brown-
ian movements are nearly negligible, that they be round and homogeneous,
light and non-evaporable, that the distance be long enough to make the
timing accurate, and that the field be strong enough to more than balance
gravity by its pull on a drop carrying but one or two electrons. Scarcely any
other combination of dimensions, field strengths and materials, could have

                                    Table 1.


58                           1923 R.A.MILLIKAN

yielded the results obtained. Had the electronic charge been one-tenth its
actual size, or the sparking potential in air a tenth of what it is, no such ex-
perimental facts as are here presented would ever have been seen.
    The observations which gave an unambiguous answer to the questions as
to the atomic nature of electricity consisted in putting a charge upon the
drop, in general by the frictional process involved in blowing the spray,
letting the charged drop drift through a pin-hole in the center of plate C
into the space between C and D, and then in changing its charge in a consid-
erable number of different ways; for example, by ionizing the air just be-
neath it by alpha, beta, or gamma rays from radium and letting the field
throw these ions into the drop; by illuminating the surface of the drop itself
with ultraviolet light; by shooting X-rays both directly at it and beneath it,
etc. The results of those changes in charge in a constant field, as is now well-
known, and as is shown in particular cases in the accompanying Table 1,
were
   (1) that it was found possible to discharge the droplet completely so
that within the limits of observational error-a small fraction of one per cent
- it fell its centimeter undergravity, when the 6,000 volt electrical-field was on, in
precisely the same time required to fall the same distance when there was no field;
   (2) that it could become endowed with a particular speed in the electrical
field (corresponding to 67.7 sec in the particular case shown), which could be
reproduced as often as desired, but which was the smallest speed that the given field
ever communicated to it - nor was this change in speed due to the capture of an
electron a small one, difficult to observe and measure. It was often larger
than the speed due to gravity itself and represented, as in this case shown, a
reversal in direction so that it was striking and unmistakable;
   (3) that speeds exactly two times, three times, four times, jive times, etc. (al-
ways within the limits of observational error - still less than a percent) could
be communicated to the droplet, but never any fraction of these speeds.
   He who has seen that experiment, and hundreds of investigators have ob-
served it, has literally seen the electron. For he has measured (in terms of a
speed) the smallest of the electrical forces which a given electrical field ever
exerts upon the pith ball with which he is working and with the aid of whose
movements he defines electricity itself. Further, he has found that that some-
thing which he has chosen to call electricity may be placed upon or removed
from his pith ball only in quantities which cause the force acting upon it
either to drop to zero, or else to go up by definite integral multiples of the
smallest observed force.


                     ELECTRON AND LIGHT-QUANT                                      59
   If a man had seen a football which someone told him was the electron he
would be far less certain that what he had seen corresponded to reality, than
is the man who has become familiar with the foregoing experiment. By its
aid he can count the number of electrons in a given small electrical charge with
exactly as much certainty as he can attain in counting his fingers and his toes. It is
true that when he has counted up to 200 electrons in a given charge, his ob-
servational error begins to make it impossible to distinguish between 200
and 201; so that the conclusion that large electrical charges are built up in the
same manner as are the charges that he can count is of course in the nature of
a generalization, but obviously not one of much uncertainty.
  But the electron itself, which man has measured, as in the case shown in the table,
is neither an uncertainty nor an hypothesis. It is a new experimental fact that this
generation in which we live has for the first time seen, but which anyone who wills
may henceforth see.
  The measurement of the electron, not as above in terms of the speed that
it imparts to a given oil-drop, but in absolute electrostatic units, involved
observations of the foregoing sort upon thousands of drops of various sizes,
made from a number of different substances, surrounded by a large number
of different gases at widely differing pressures, varying from atmospheric
down to a millimeter and a half of mercury.
   It involved also years of work in finding accurate values of gaseous viscos-
ities, and in determining just how Stokes’ law must be modified to yield
the complete law of fall of a particle through a gas at any density whatever.




                                       Fig. 2.


60                           1923     R.A.MILLIKAN

But all this is only of interest here in showing, as Fig. 2 does*, how inevitably
all observations on all gases and all substances converge upon the same absolute value
of the electron at the intercept on the axis of the figure. It is from this intercept
that the value of the electron e = 4.774 (± 0.005) x 10 -10 absolute electro-
static units is directly obtained.
   After ten years of work in other laboratories in checking the methods and
the results obtained in connection with the oil-drop investigation published
from 1909 to 1923, there is practically universal concurrence upon their cor-
rectness, despite the vigorous gauntlet of criticism which they have had to
run.
  Electrons, of both the positive and negative variety, are then merely observed
centers of electrical force, just as was the charged pith ball from which we got
our original definition of an electric charge, the difference being that elec-
trons are invariable in their charge while pith-ball charges are built up out
of them.
   The dimensions of electrons may in general be ignored; i.e. they may
both, for practical purposes, be considered as point charges, though, as is well
known, the positive has a mass 1,845 times that of the negative. Why this is
so no one knows. It is another experimental fact.
   It is also well-known that we can now count the exact number of positives
and of negatives in every atom; that we can locate all the positives in the
nucleus; that we find the negatives scattered partly through the outer regions
and partly held within the nucleus; that the number of outer negatives varies
from I in hydrogen by unit steps up to 92 in uranium, and that the number
of negatives in the nucleus is given by the difference between the atomic
weight and the atomic number.
   Shall we ever find that either positive or negative electrons are divisible?
Again no one knows; but we can draw some inferences from the history of
the chemical atom. This is sometimes said by the unthinking to have ex-
ploded, but of course every scientist knows that it has never lost an iota of its
old reality nor of its old vitality. From an experimental point of view the
atom of the chemist was all contained in the facts of definite and multiple
proportions in combining powers. For the purposes for which the concept
was used, viz. those of chemical combination, the chemical atom is just as
much the ultimate unit now as it ever has been.
This is taken from a repetition of my observations in different gases by my assistant
Dr. Yoshio Ishida. For similar observations upon different drop-substances, see The
Electron, rev. ed., University of Chicago Press, 1924.


                    ELECTRON AND LIGHT-QUANT                                 61

   Similarly it is not likely that the field in which the electron has already
been found to be the unit, namely that of atomic structure, will ever have to
seek another unit. The new facts which this generation has discovered are
certainly the permanent heritage of the race. If the electron is ever subdivided
it will probably be because man, with new agencies as unlike X-rays and
radioactivity as these are unlike chemical forces, opens up still another field
where electrons may be split up without losing any of the unitary properties
which they have now been found to possess in the relationships in which we
have thus far studied them.

The second domain in which, as your award indicates, I have been attempt-
ing to take another step, and to assist in bringing the experimental foot up to
parallelism at least with the theoretical, is the field of ether waves. In this
domain I have been seeking since the year 1904 to find some crucial test for
the Thomson-Planck-Einstein conception of localized radiant energy.
  This conception in its most general form was introduced by J. J. Thom-
sons in 1903 to account for two newly discovered experimental facts, viz.:
  (I) that X-rays pass over all but an exceedingly minute fraction, say one
in a billion, of the atoms contained in the space traversed without spending
any energy upon them, but here and there find an atom from which they
hurl an electron with enormous speed;
   ( 2 ) that ultraviolet light has the amazing property, discovered by Lenard
                                                                               4



in 1902, of ejecting electrons from metal surfaces with an energy which is
independent of the intensity of the source.
  This Thomson semicorpuscular conception of localized radiant energy
was taken up in 1905 by Einstein who, by combining it with the facts of
quanta discovered by Planck6 through his analysis of black-body radiation,
obtained an equation which should govern, from his viewpoint, the inter-
change of energy between ether waves and electrons, viz.              = hv - P,
the first term representing the energy with which the electron escapes, the
second term Planck’s energy quantum for the particular light employed, and
the last the work necessary to get the electron out of the metal.
   After ten years of testing and changing and learning and sometimes blun-
dering, all efforts being directed from the first toward the accurate exper-
imental measurement of the energies of emission of photoelectrons, now as a
function of temperature, now of wavelength, now of material (contact
e.m.f. relations), this work resulted, contrary to my own expectation, in
the first direct experimental proof7 in 1914 of the exact validity, within


62                         1923 R.A.MILLIKAN




narrow limits of experimental error, of the Einstein equation, and the first
direct photoelectric determination of Planck’s h. The accuracy obtained was
about 0.5% which was much the best available at the time. Figs. 3 and 4,
which represent the most accurate work done on an individual metal (so-
dium), will illustrate the entire lack of ambiguity of the result.
   This work, like that on the electron, has had to run the gauntlet of severe
criticism, for up to 1916 not only was discussion active as to whether there
were any limiting velocity of emission, but other observers who had thought
that a linear relation existed between energy and frequency had not found
the invariable constant h appearing as the ratio. But at the present time it is
not too much to say, that the altogether overwhelming proof furnished by
the experiments of many different observers, working by different methods
in many different laboratories, that Einstein’s equation is one of exact validity
(always within the present small limits of experimental error) and of very
general applicability, is perhaps the most conspicuous achievement of Exper-
imental Physics during the past decade.
   A brief historical summary of this advance is as follows: A year or two
after the foregoing photoelectric work was completed, Duane8 and his as-
sociates found unambiguous proof of a relation which is just the inverse of
Einstein’s. They bombarded a metal target with electrons of known and con-
stant energy and found that the maximum frequency of the ether waves
(general X-radiation) thereby excited was given, with much precision, by
      = hr.


                     ELECTRON AND LIGHT-QUANT                                   63




   D. L. Webster9 then proved that the characteristic X-ray frequencies of
atoms begin to be excited at just the potential at which the energy of the
stream of electrons which is bombarding the atoms has reached the value
given by hv =          in which v is now the frequency of an absorption edge.
   De Broglie10 and Ellis11, on the other hand, measured with great precision
the speed of electrons ejected from different atomic levels by high-frequency
radiations and thus beautifully verified, in this high-frequency field, precisely
the same Einstein equation           = hv - P which I had found to hold for
ultraviolet and visible frequencies.
   Parallel with these developments has come the very full working out of
the large field of ionizing and radiating potentials. This has also involved the
utilization and verification of the same reciprocal relation between frequency
and electronic energy which is stated in the Einstein equation and which
constitutes in its inverse form the cornerstone of Bohr’s epoch-making treat-
ment of spectral lines. This work all takes its start in Franck and Hertz’ fun-
damental experiments12, but the field has been most actively and successfully
explored since 1916 in America, especially by Foote and Mohler, Wood,
Davis and Goucher, McLennan, and others13.
   In view of all these methods and experiments the general validity of Ein-
stem’s equation is, I think, now universally conceded, and to that extent the
reality of Einstein’s light-quanta may be considered as experimentally established.
But the conception of localized light-quanta out of which Einstein got his
equation must still be regarded as far from being established. Whether the


64                         1923 R.A.MILLIKAN

mechanism of interaction between ether waves and electrons has its seat in
the unknown conditions and laws existing within the atom, or is to be
looked for primarily in the essentially corpuscular Thomson-Planck-Ein-
stein conception as to the nature of radiant energy is the all-absorbing un-
certainty upon the frontiers of modern Physics.
   In 192114 I thought I had taken another step toward its solution in proving
that in the photoelectric process the light energy hv is taken up, not only by
electrons within atoms, but also by the free (i.e. the conduction) electrons
in metals. For this seemed to take the absorbing mechanism out of the atom
entirely and to make the property of imparting the energy hv to an electron,
whether free or bound, an intrinsic property of light itself.
   But a beautiful discovery by Klein and Rosseland15 a year later in Bohr’s
Institute made this conclusion unnecessary. For it showed, as Dr. Epstein
first pointed out, that there was an intermediate process, namely a collision
of the second kind, by which the energy might be transferred, without loss,
indirectly from the light wave to the conduction electron, thus obviating the
necessity of a direct transfer. The act of absorption could still, then, be an
atomic process and the absorbed energy be afterward passed on by a collision
of the second kind to a free electron. This important discovery then left the
evidence for localized light-quanta just where it was before.
   Within the past year, however, a young American physicist, Arthur H.
Compton 16 of the University of Chicago, by using the conception of lo-
calized light-quanta, has brought forward another new phenomenon which
at least shows the fecundity of the Einstein hypothesis. Compton goes a step
farther than Einstein in that he assumes not only the existence of light-quanta
but also that in the impact between a light-quant and a free electron the
laws of conservation of energy and of conservation of momentum both
hold. This assumption enables him to compute exactly how much the fre-
quency of ether waves which have collided with free electrons will be low-
ered because of the energy which they have given up to the electron in the
act of collision, and therefore the loss which their own hv has experienced.
He then finds experimentally that there is approximately the computed
lowering in frequency when monochromatic X-rays from molybdenum are
scattered by carbon. Further Ross 17 at Stanford University has checked this
result by the photographic method.
   On account of the fact that Duane and his co-workers at Harvard Univer-
sity could not find a trace of the Compton effect, Messrs. Becker 18, Watson,
and Smythe have within a month, at the California Institute at Pasadena,


                     ELECTRON AND LIGHT-QUANT                                65
repeated the same type of scattering experiments as those made by Ross, using
however aluminium as a scatterer, and have found on one plate, taken with high
resolution, the alpha doublet line of molybdenum shifted as a clearly observable
doublet toward longer wavelengths. Further the amount of the shift was here
measurable with an accuracy of about 1% and agreed within this narrow
limit with that predicted by Compton’s equations. Fig. 5 shows one of these




                                       Fig. 5.

new photographs in which both the α and β lines of molybdenum are shifted
toward longer wavelengths the correct amount, i.e. to          and     through
being scattered by aluminium. It may be said then without hesitation that it
is not merely the Einstein equation which is having extraordinary success at
the moment, but the Einstein conception as well.
   But until it can account for the facts of interference and the other effects
which have seemed thus far to be irreconcilable with it, we must withhold
our full assent. Possibly the recent steps taken by Duane 19, Compton20,
Epstein and Ehrenfest21 may ultimately bear fruit in bringing even inter-
ference under the control of localized light-quanta. But as yet the path is
dark.




 I. W. Weber, Werke, Vol. 4 (1871), p. 281.
 2. G. J. Stoney, Phil. Mug., II (1881) 384.
 3. J. J. Thomson, Silliman Lectures, Yale University, 1903.
 4. P. E. A. Lenard, Ann. Pkysik, 8 (1902) 149.
 5. A. Einstein, Ann. Pkysik, 17 (1905) 132; 20 (1906) 199     .
 6. M. Planck, Verkandl. Deut. Pkys. Ges., Dec. 14 (1900).


66                            1923 R.A.MILLIKAN

  7. R. A. Millikan, Phys. Rev., 4 (1914) 73; 6 (1915) 55; 7 (1916) 362.
  8. W. Duane et al., Phys Rev., 6 (1915) 66; 7 (1916) 599; 9 (1917) 568; IO (1917)
      624; Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2 (1916) go.
  9. D. L. Webster, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 3 (1917) 181; 6 (1920) 26, 39.
IO . L. de Broglie, paper read before the Third Solvay Congress, 1921.

II. C. D. Ellis, Proc. Roy. Soc., A 99 (1921) 261; C. D. Ellis and H. W. B. Skinner,

      ibid., A 105 (1924) 165, 185.
12. J. Franck and G. Hertz, VerhandI. Deut. Phys. Ges., 15 and 16 (1914).
13. Report Photoelectric Conference, Natl. Research Council, 1921; see also: P. D. Foote
      and F. L. Mohler, The Origin of Spectra, New York, 1922.
14. R. A. Mihikan, Phys. Rev., 18 (1921) 236.
15. O. Klein and S. Rosseland, Z. Physik, 4 (1921) 46.
16. A. H. Compton, Phys. Rev., 21 (1923) 483 ; 22 (1923) 409.
17. P. A. Ross, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., g (1923) 246.
18. J. A. Becker, Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), April 25 (1924); Phys. Rev., 24 (1924) 478.
19. W. Duane, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 9 (1923) 158.
20. A. H. Compton, ibid., g (1923 ) 359.
21. P. S. Epstein and P. Ehrenfest, ibid., IO (1924) 133.
