THE COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND
RADIATION
Nobel Lecture, 8 December, 1978
by
ROBERT W. WILSON
Bell Laboratories
Holmdel, N.J. U.S.A.



1. INTRODUCTION

Radio Astronomy has added greatly to our understanding of the structure
and dynamics of the universe. The cosmic microwave background radi-
ation, considered a relic of the explosion at the beginning of the universe
some 18 billion years ago, is one of the most powerful aids in determining
these features of the universe. This paper is about the discovery of the
cosmic microwave background radiation. It starts with a section on radio
astronomical measuring techniques. This is followed by the history of the
detection of the background radiation, its identification, and finally by a
summary of our present knowledge of its properties.


II. RADIO ASTRONOMICAL METHODS

A radio telescope pointing at the sky receives radiation not only from
space, but also from other sources including the ground, the earth’s
atmosphere, and the components of the radio telescope itself. The 20-foot
horn-reflector antenna at Bell Laboratories (Fig. 1) which was used to
discover the cosmic microwave background radiation was particularly suit-
ed to distinguish this weak, uniform radiation from other, much stronger
sources. In order to understand this measurement it is necessary to discuss
the design and operation of a radio telescope, especially its two major
                                             1
components, the antenna and the radiometer .

a. Antennas
An antenna collects radiation from a desired direction incident upon an
area, called its collecting area, and focuses it on a receiver. An antenna is
normally designed to maximize its response in the direction in which it is
pointed and minimize its response in other directions.
   The 20-foot horn-reflector shown in Fig. 1 was built by A. B. Crawford
and his associate? in 1960 to be used with an ultra low-noise communica-
tions receiver for signals bounced from the Echo satellite. It consists of a
large expanding waveguide, or horn, with an off-axis section parabolic
reflector at the end. The focus of the paraboloid is located at the apex of
the horn, so that a plane wave traveling along the axis of the paraboloid is
focused into the receiver, or radiometer, at the apex of the horn. Its design
emphasizes the rejection of radiation from the ground. It is easy to see


464




Fig. I The 20 foot horn-reflector which was used to discover the Cosmic Microwave Back-
ground Radiation.




from the figure that in this configuration the receiver is well shielded from
the ground by the horn.
   A measurement of the sensitivity of a small hornreflector antenna to
radiation coming from different directions is shown in Fig. 2. The circle
marked isotropic antenna is the sensitivity of a fictitious antenna which
receives equally from all directions. If such an isotropic lossless antenna
were put in an open field, half of the sensitivity would be to radiation from
the earth and half from the sky. In the case of the hornreflector, sensitivity
in the back or ground direction is less than l/3000 of the isotropic antenna.
The isotropic antenna on a perfectly radiating earth at 300 K and with a
                o
cold sky at 0 K would pick up 300 K from the earth over half of its
response and nothing over the other half, resulting in an equivalent
antenna temperature of 150 K. The horn-reflector, in contrast, would pick
up less than .05 K from the ground.
  This sensitivity pattern is sufficient to determine the performance of an
ideal, lossless antenna since such an antenna would contribute no radiation
of its own. Just as a curved mirror can focus hot rays from the sun and
burn a piece of paper without becoming hot itself, a radio telescope can
focus the cold sky onto a radio receiver without adding radiation of its
own.

h. Radiometers
A radiometer is a device for measuring the intensity of radiation. A
microwave radiometer consists of a filter to select a desired band of


                                                                                               465




Fig. 2 Sensitivity pattern of a small horn-reflector antenna. This is a logarithmic plot of the
collecting area of the antenna as a function of angle from the center of the main beam. Each
circle below the level of the main beam represent a factor of ten reduction in sensitivity. In the
back direction around 180 the sensitivity is consistently within the circle marked 70, corre-
sponding to a factor of 10 -7 below the sensitivity at 0.



frequencies f o11owed by a detector which produces an output voltage
proportional to its input power. Practical detectors are usually not sensitive
enough for the low power levels received by radio telescopes, however, so
amplification is normally used ahead of the detector to increase the signal
level. The noise in the first stage of this amplifier combined with that from
the transmission line which connects it to the antenna (input source)
produce an output from the detector even with no input power from the
antenna. A fundamental limit to the sensitivity of a radiometer is the
fluctuation in the power level of this noise.
   During the late 1950’s, H. E. D. Scovil and his associates at Bell Laborato-
ries, Murray Hill were building the world’s lowest-noise microwave amplifi-
ers, ruby travelling-wave masers . These amplifiers were cooled to 4.2 K or
                                   3



less by liquid helium and contribute a correspondingly small amount of
noise to the system. A radiometer incorporating these amplifiers can
therefore be very sensitive.
   Astronomical radio sources produce random, thermal noise very much


466                             Physics 1978


like that from a hot resistor, therefore the calibration of a radiometer is
usually expressed in terms of a thermal system. Instead of giving the noise
power which the radiometer receives from the antenna, we quote the
temperature of a resistor which would deliver the same noise power to the
radiometer. (Radiometers often contain calibration noise sources consist-
ing of a resistor at a known temperature.) This “equivalent noise tempera-
ture” is proportional to received power for all except the shorter wave-
length measurements, which will be discussed later.

c. Observations
To measure the intensity of an extraterrestrial radio source with a radio
telescope, one must distinguish the source from local noise sources - noise
from the radiometer, noise from the ground, noise from the earth’s
atmosphere, and noise from the structure of the antenna itself. This
distinction is normally made by pointing the antenna alternately to the
source of interest and then to a background region nearby. The difference
in response of the radiometer to these two regions is measured, thus
subtracting out the local noise. To determine the absolute intensity of an
astronomical radio source, it is necessary to calibrate the antenna and
radiometer or, as usually done, to observe a calibration source of known
intensity.


I I I . PLANS FOR RADIO ASTRONOMY WITH THE 20-FOOT HORN-
REFLECTOR

In 1963, when the 20-foot horn-reflector was no longer needed for satellite
work, Arno Penzias and I started preparing it for use in radio astronomy.
One might ask why we were interested in starting our radio astronomy
careers at Bell Labs using an antenna with a collecting area of only 25
square meters when much larger radio telescopes were available else-
where. Indeed, we were delighted to have the 20-foot horn-reflector be-
cause it had special features that we hoped to exploit. Its sensitivity, or
collecting area, could be accurately calculated and in addition it could be
measured using a transmitter located less than 1 km away. With this data, it
could be used with a calibrated radiometer to make primary measure-
ments of the intensities of several extraterrestrial radio sources. These
sources could then be used as secondary standards by other observatories.
In addition, we would be able to understand all sources of antenna noise,
for example the amount of radiation received from the earth, so that
background regions could be measured absolutely. Traveling-wave maser
amplifiers were available for use with the 20-foot horn-reflector, which
meant that for large diameter sources (those subtending angles larger than
the antenna beamwidth), this would be the world’s most sensitive radio
telescope.
   My interest in the background measuring ability of the 20-foot horn-
reflector resulted from my doctoral thesis work with J. G. Bolton at


                                  R. W. Wilson                             467


Caltech. We made a map of the 31 cm radiation from the Milky Way and
studied the discrete sources and the diffuse gas within it. In mapping the
Milky Way we pointed the antenna to the west side of it and used the
earth’s rotation to scan the antenna across it. This kept constant all the
local noise, including radiation that the antenna picked up from the earth.
I used the regions on either side of the Milky Way (where the brightness
was constant) as the zero reference. Since we are inside the Galaxy, it is
impossible to point completely away from it. Our mapping plan was
adequate for that project, but the unknown zero level was not very satisfy-
ing. Previous low frequency measurements had indicated that there is a
large, radio-emitting halo around our galaxy which I could not measure by
that technique. The 20-foot horn-reflector, however, was an ideal instru-
ment for measuring this weak halo radiation at shorter wavelengths. One
of my intentions when I came to Bell Labs was to make such a measure-
ment.
   In 1963, a maser at 7.35 cm wavelength 3 was installed on the 20-foot
horn-reflector. Before we could begin doing astronomical measurements,
however, we had to do two things: 1) build a good radiometer incorporat-
ing the 7.35 cm maser amplifier, and; 2) finish the accurate measurement
of the collecting-area (sensitivity) of the 20-foot horn-reflector which D. C.
Hogg had begun. Among our astronomical projects for 7 cm were absolute
intensity measurements of several traditional astronomical calibration
sources and a series of sweeps of the Milky Way to extend my thesis work.
In the course of this work we planned to check out our capability of
measuring the halo radiation of our Galaxy away from the Milky Way.
Existing low frequency measurements indicated that the brightness tem-
perature of the halo would be less than 0.1 K at 7 cm. Thus, a background
measurement at 7 cm should produce a null result and would be a good
check of our measuring ability.
   After completing this program of measurements at 7 cm, we planned to
build a similar radiometer at 21 cm. At that wavelength the galactic halo
should be bright enough for detection, and we would also observe the 21
cm line of neutral hydrogen atoms. In addition, we planned a number of
hydrogen-line projects including an extension of the measurements of
Arno’s thesis, a search for hydrogen in clusters of galaxies.
   At the time we were building the 7-cm radiometer John Bolton visited us
and we related our plans and asked for his comments. He immediately
selected the most difficult one as the most important: the 21 cm back-
ground measurement. First, however, we had to complete the observations
at 7 cm.


IV. RADIOMETER SYSTEM

We wanted to make accurate measurements of antenna temperatures. To
do this we planned to use the radiometer to compare the antenna to a
reference source, in this case, a radiator in liquid helium. I built a switch


468


which would connect the maser amplifier either to the antenna or to
Arno’s helium-cooled reference noise source 5 (cold load). This would allow
an accurate comparison of the equivalent temperature of the antenna to
that of the cold load, since the noise from the rest of the radiometer would
be constant during switching. A diagram of this calibration system 6 i s
shown in Figure 3 and its operation is described below.




                                                            NOISE LAMP




Fig. 3 The switching and calibration system of our 7.35 cm radiometer, The reference port
was normally connected to the helium cooled reference source through a noise adding
attenuator.

a. Switch
The switch for comparing the cold load to the antenna consists of the two
polarization couplers and the polarization rotator shown in Fig. 3. This
type of switch had been used by D. H. Ring in several radiometers at
Holmdel. It had the advantage of stability, low loss, and small reflections.
The circular waveguide coming from the antenna contains the two ortho-
gonal modes of polarization received by the antenna. The first polarization
coupler reflected one mode of linear polarization back to the antenna and
substituted the signal from the cold load for it in the waveguide going to
the rotator. The second polarization coupler took one of the two modes of
linear polarization coming from the polarization rotator and coupled it to
the rectangular (single-mode) waveguide going to the maser. The polariza-
tion rotator is the microwave equivalent of a half-wave plate in optics. It is a


                                     R. W. Wilson                         469


piece of circular waveguide which has been squeezed in the middle so that
the phase shifts for waves traveling through it in its two principal planes of
linear polarization differ by 180 degrees. By mechanically rotating it, the
polarization of the signals passing through it can be rotated. Thus either
the antenna or cold load could be connected to the maser.
   This type of switch is not inherently symmetric, but has very low loss and
is stable so that its asymmetry of .05 K was accurately measured and
corrected for.

b. Reference Noise Source
A drawing of the liquid-helium cooled reference noise source is shown in
Figure 4. It consists of a 122 cm piece of 90 percent-copper brass wave-
guide connecting a carefully matched microwave absorber in liquid He to a
room-temperature flange at the top. Small holes allow liquid helium to fill
the bottom section of waveguide so that the absorber temperature could be
known, while a mylar window at a 30” angle keeps the liquid out of the rest
of the waveguide and makes a low-reflection microwave transition between
the two sections of waveguide. Most of the remaining parts are for the
cryogenics. The gas baffles make a counter-flow heat exchanger between
the waveguide and the helium gas which has boiled off, greatly extending
the time of operation on a charge of liquid helium. Twenty liters of liquid
helium cooled the cold load and provided about twenty hours of opera-
tion.




Fig. 4 The Helium Cooled Reference Noise Source.




  Above the level of the liquid helium, the waveguide walls were warmer
than 4.2 K. Any radiation due to the loss in this part of the waveguide
would raise the effective temperature of the noise source above 4.2 K and


470                                     Physics 1978


must be accounted for. To do so we monitored the temperature distribu-
tion along the waveguide with a series of diode thermometers and calculat-
ed the contribution of each section of the waveguide to the equivalent
temperature of the reference source. When first cooled down, the calculat-
ed total temperature of the reference noise source was about 5 K, and after
several hours when the liquid helium level was lower, it increased to 6 K.
As a check of this calibration procedure, we compared the antenna tem-
perature (assumed constant) to our reference noise source during this
period, and found consistency to within 0.1 K.

C. Scale Calibration
A variable attenuator normally connected the cold load to the reference
port of the radiometer. This device was at room temperature so noise
could be added to the cold load port of the switch by increasing its
attenuation. It was calibrated over a range of 0.11 dB which corresponds
to 7.4 K of added noise.
   Also shown in Fig. 3 is a noise lamp (and its directional coupler) which
was used as a secondary standard for our temperature scale.

d. Radiometer Backend
Signals leaving the maser amplifier needed to be further amplified before
detection so that their intensity could be measured accurately. The remain-
der of our radiometer consisted of a down converter to 70 MHz followed
by I. F. amplifiers, a precision variable attenuator and a diode detector.
The output of the diode detector was amplified and went to a chart
recorder.




Fig. 5 Our 7.35 cm radiometer installed in the cab of the 20 foot horn-reflector.


                                          R. W. Wilson                                      471


e. Equipment Performance
Our radiometer equipment installed in the cab of the 20-foot horn-reflec-
tor is shown in Fig. 5. The flange at the far right is part of the antenna and
rotates in elevation angle with it. It was part of a double-choke joint which
allowed the rest of the equipment to be fixed in the cab while the antenna
rotated. The noise contribution of the choke-joint could be measured by
clamping it shut and was found to be negligible. We regularly measured
the reflection coefficient of the major components of this system and kept
it below 0.03 percent, except for the maser whose reflection could not be
reduced below 1 percent. Since all ports of our waveguide system were
terminated at a low temperature, these reflections resulted in negligible
errors.

V. PRIOR OBSERVATIONS
The first horn-reflector-travelling-wave maser system had been put to-
gether by DeGrasse, Hogg, Ohm, and Scovil in 1959 7 to demonstrate the
feasibility of a low-noise, satellite-earth station at 5.31 cm. Even though
they achieved the lowest total system noise temperature to date, 18.5 K,
they had expected to do better. Fig. 6 shows their system with the noise
temperature they assigned to each component. As we have seen in Section
IIa,

 S ID E   OR




Fig. 6 A diagram of the low noise receiver used by deGrasse, Hogg, Ohm and Scovil to show
that very low noise earth stations are possible. Each component is labeled with its contribution
to the system noise.


the 2 K they assigned to antenna backlobe pickup is too high. In addition,
direct measurements of the noise temperature of the maser gave a value
about a degree colder than shown here. Thus their system was about 3 K
hotter than one might expect. The component labeled T s in Fig. 6 is the
radiation of the earth’s atmosphere when their antenna was aimed straight
up. It was measured by a method first reported by R. H. Dicke 8. (It is
interesting that Dicke also reports an upper limit of 20 K for the cosmic
microwave background radiation in this paper - the first such report.) If
the antenna temperature is measured as a function of the angle above the


472                                    Physics 1978


horizon at which it is pointing, the radiation of the atmosphere is at a
minimum when the antenna is directed straight up. It increases as the
antenna points toward the horizon, since the total line of sight through the
atmosphere increases. Figure 7 is a chart recording Arno Penzias and I




Fig. 7 A measurement of atmospheric noise at 7.35 cm wavelength with theoretical fits to the
data for 2.2 and 2.4K Zenith atmospheric radiation.


                                             R. W. Wilson                                  473


made with the 20-foot horn-reflector scanning from almost the Zenith
down to       above the horizon. The circles and crosses are the expected
change based on a standard model of the earth’s atmosphere for 2.2 and
2.4 K Zenith contribution. The fit between theory and data is obviously
good leaving little chance that there might be an error in our value for
atmospheric radiation.
   Fig. 8 is taken from the paper in which E. A. Ohm 9 d e s c r i b e d t h e
receiver on the 20-foot horn reflector which was used to receive signals
bounced from the Echo satellite. He found that its system temperature was
3.3 K higher than expected from summing the contributions of the compo-
nents. As in the previous 5.3 cm work, this excess temperature was smaller




            the temperature was found to vary a few degrees from day to day, but
            the lowest temperature was consistently 22.2 ±              By realistically
            assuming that all sources were then contributing their fair share (as is
            also tacitly assumed in Table II) it is possible to improve the over-all
            accuracy. The actual system temperature must be in the overlap region
            of the measured results and the total results of Table II, namely between
            20 and          The most likely minimum system temperature was there-
            fore




Fig. 8 An   excerpt   from E. A. Ohm’s article on the Echo receiver showing that his system
temperature was 3.3K higher than predicted


than the experimental errors, so not much attention was paid to it. In
order to determine the unambiguous presence of an excess source of
radiation of about 3 K, a more accurate measurement technique was re-
quired. This was achieved in the subsequent measurements by means of a
switch and reference noise source combination which communications
systems do not have.

VI. OUR OBSERVATIONS

Fig. 9 is a reproduction of the first record we have of the operation of our
system. At the bottom is a list of diode thermometer voltages from which
we could determine the cold load’s equivalent temperature. The recorder
trace has power (or temperature) increasing to the right. The middle part
of this trace is with the maser switched to the cold load with various settings
of the noise adding attenuator. A change of 0.1 dB corresponds to a
temperature change of 6.6 K, so the peak-to-peak noise on the trace
amounts to less than 0.2 K. At the top of the chart the maser is switched to


Fig. 9 The first measurement which clearly showed the presence of the microwave b a c k -
ground. Noise temperature is plotted increasing to the right. At the top, the antenna pointed
at    elevation is seen to have the samt noise temperature as the cold load with 0.04 db
attenuation (about 7.5K). This is considerably above the expected value of 3.3K.




the antenna and has about the same temperature as the cold load plus .04
dB, corresponding to a total of about 7.5 K. This was a troublesome result.
The antenna temperature should have been only the sum of the atmo-
spheric contribution (2.3 K) and the radiation from the walls of the
antenna and ground (1 K). The excess system temperature found in the
previous experiments had, contrary to our expectations, all been in the
antenna or beyond. We now had a direct comparison of the antenna with
the cold load and had to assign our excess temperature to the antenna
whereas in the previous cases only the total system temperature was mea-
sured. If we had missed some loss, the cold load might have been warmer
than calculated, but it could not be colder than 4.2 K - the temperature of
the liquid helium. The antenna was at least 2 K hotter than that. Unless we
could understand our “antenna problem” our 21 cm galactic halo experi-


                                  R. W. Wilson                             475

ment would not be possible. We considered a number of possible reasons
for this excess and, where warranted, tested for them. These were:
a. At that time some radio astronomers thought that the microwave ab-
    sorption of the earth’s atmosphere was about twice the value we were
    using - in other words the “sky temperature” of Figs. 6 and 8 was about
    5 K instead of 2.5 K. We knew from our measurement of sky tempera-
    ture such as shown in Fig. 7 that this could not be the case.
b. We considered the possibility of man-made noise being picked up by
    our antenna. However, when we pointed our antenna to New York
    City, or to any other direction on the horizon, the antenna temperature
    never went significantly above the thermal temperature of the earth.
c. We considered radiation from our galaxy. Our measurements of the
    emission from the plane of the Milky Way were a reasonable fit to the
    intensities expected from extrapolations of low-frequency measure-
    ments. Similar extrapolations for the coldest part of the sky (away from
    the Milky Way) predicted about .02 K at our wavelength. Furthermore,
    any galactic contribution should also vary with position and we saw
    changes only near the Milky Way, consistent with the measurements at
    lower frequencies.
d. We ruled out discrete extraterrestrial radio sources as the source of our
    radiation as they have spectra similar to that of the Galaxy. The same
    extrapolation from low frequency measurements applies to them. The
    strongest discrete source in the sky had a maximum antenna tempera-
     ture of 7 K.
   Thus we seemed to be left with the antenna as the source of our extra
noise. We calculated a contribution of 0.9 K from its resistive loss using
standard waveguide theory. The most lossy part of the antenna was its
small diameter throat, which was made of electroformed copper. We had
measured similar waveguides in the lab and corrected the loss calculations
for the imperfect surface conditions we had found in those waveguides.
The remainder of the antenna was made of riveted aluminum sheets, and
although we did not expect any trouble there, we had no way to evaluate
the loss in the riveted joints. A pair of pigeons was roosting up in the small
part of the horn where it enters the warm cab. They had covered the inside
with a white material familiar to all city dwellers. We evicted the pigeons
and cleaned up their mess, but obtained only a small reduction in antenna
temperature.
   For some time we lived with the antenna temperature problem and
concentrated on measurements in which it was not critical. Dave Hogg and
I had made a very accurate measurement of the antenna’s gain 10 , and
Arno and I wanted to complete our absolute flux measurements before
disturbing the antenna further.
   In the spring of 1965 with our flux measurements finished 5, we thor-
oughly cleaned out the 20-foot horn-reflector and put aluminum tape over
the riveted joints. This resulted in only a minor reduction in antenna
temperature. We also took apart the throat section of the antenna, and
checked it, but found it to be in order.


476                                       Physics 1978


   By this time almost a year had passed. Since the excess antenna tempera-
ture had not changed during this time, we could rule out two additional
sources: 1) Any source in the solar system should have gone through a
large change in angle and we should have seen a change in antenna
temperature. 2) In 1962, a high-altitude nuclear explosion had filled up
the Van Allen belts with ionized particles. Since they were at a large
distance from the surface of the earth, any radiation from them would not
show the same elevation-angle dependence as the atmosphere and we
might not have identified it. But after a year, any radiation from this
source should have reduced considerably.




VII.    IDENTIFICATION

The sequence of events which led to the unravelling of our mystery began
one day when Arno was talking to Bernard Burke of M.I.T. about other
matters and mentioned our unexplained noise. Bernie recalled hearing
about theoretical work of P. J. E. Peebles in R. H. Dicke’s group in
Princeton on radiation in the universe. Arno called Dicke who sent a copy
of Peebles’ preprint. The Princeton group was investigating the implica-
tions of an oscillating universe with an extremely hot condensed phase.
This hot bounce was necessary to destroy the heavy elements from the
previous cycle so each cycle could start fresh. Although this was not a new
idea” Dicke had the important idea that if the radiation from this hot
phase were large enough, it would be observable. In the preprint, Peebles,
following Dicke’s suggestion calculated that the universe should be filled
with a relic blackbody radiation at a minimum temperature of 10 K.
Peebles was aware of Hogg and Semplak’s (1961) 12 measurement of atmo-
spheric radiation at 6 cm using the system of DeGrasse et al., and conclud-
ed that the present radiation temperature of the universe must be less than
their system temperature of 15 K. He also said that Dicke, Roll, and
Wilkinson were setting up an experiment to measure it.
   Shortly after sending the preprint, Dicke and his coworkers visited us in
order to discuss our measurements and see our equipment. They were
quickly convinced of the accuracy of our measurements. We agreed to a
side-by-side publication of two letters in the Astrophysical Journal - a letter on
the theory from Princeton and one on our measurement of excess anten-
                                      13



n a t e m p e r a t u r e f r o m B e l l L a b o r a t o r i e s 1 4 . Arno and I were careful to
exclude any discussion of the cosmological theory of the origin of back-
ground radiation from our letter because we had not been involved in any
of that work. We thought, furthermore, that our measurement was inde-
pendent of the theory and might outlive it. We were pleased that the
mysterious noise appearing in our antenna had an explanation of any
kind, especially one with such significant cosmological implications. Our
mood, however, remained one of cautious optimism for some time.


                                        R.W. Wilson                                   477

VIII. RESULTS
While preparing our letter for publication we made one final check on the
antenna to make sure we were not picking up a uniform 3 K from earth.
We measured its response to radiation from the earth by using a transmit-
ter located in various places on the ground. The transmitter artificially
increased the ground’s brightness at the wavelength of our receiver to a
level high enough for the backlobe response of the antenna to be measur-
able. Although not a perfect measure of the structure of the backlobes of
an antenna, it was a good enough method of determining their average
level. The backlobe level we found in this test was as low as we had
expected and indicated a negligible contribution to the antenna tempera-
ture from the earth.
   The right-hand column of Fig. 10 shows the final results of our measure-
ment. The numbers on the left were obtained later in 1965 with a new
throat on the 20-foot horn-reflector. From the total antenna temperature
we subtracted the known sources with a result of 3.4 ± 1 K. Since the errors
in this measurement are not statistical, we have summed the maximum
error from each source. The maximum measurement error of 1 K was
considerably smaller than the measured value, giving us confidence in the
reality of the result. We stated in the original paper that “This excess
temperature is, within the limits of our observations, isotropic, unpolar-
ized, and free of seasonal variations”. Although not stated explicitly, our
limits on an isotropy and polarization were not affected by most of the
errors listed in Fig. 10 and were about 10 percent or 0.3 K.




                                           New Throat                     Old Throat




Fig. 10 Results of our 3965 measurements of the microwave background. “Old Throat” and
“New Throat” refer to the original and a replacement throat section for the 20 foot horn-
reflector.


478                               Physics 1978


  At that time the limit we could place on the shape of the spectrum of the
background radiation was obtained by comparing our value of 3.5 K with a
74 cm survey of the northern sky done at Cambridge by Pauliny-Toth and
Shakeshaft, 1962 15 . The minimum temperature on their map was 16 K.
Thus the spectrum was no steeper than λ 0.7 over a range of wavelengths
that varied by a factor of 10. This clearly ruled out any type of radio source
known at that time, as they all had spectra with variation in the range λ 2.0
to λ 3.0 . The previous Bell Laboratories measurement at 6 cm ruled out a
spectrum which rose rapidly toward shorter wavelengths.


IX. CONFIRMATION

After our meeting, the Princeton experimental group returned to com-
plete their apparatus and make their measurement with the expectation
that the background temperature would be about 3 K.
   The first confirmation of the microwave cosmic background that we
knew of, however, came from a totally different, indirect measurement.
This measurement had, in fact, been made thirty years earlier by Adams
and Dunhan 16-21 . Adams and Dunhan had discovered several faint optical
interstellar absorption lines which were later identified with the molecules
C H , C H+ , and CN. In the case of CN, in addition to the ground state,
absorption was seen from the first rotationally excited state. McKellar 22
using Adams’ data on the populations of these two states calculated that
the excitation temperature of CN was 2.3 K. This rotational transition
occurs at 2.64 mm wavelength, near the peak of a 3 K black body spec-
trum. Shortly after the discovery of the background radiation, G. B.
Field 23 , I. S. Shklovsky24 , and P. Thaddeus 25 (following a suggestion by N.
J. Woolf), independently realized that the CN is in equilibrium with the
background radiation. (There is no other significant source of excitation
where these molecules are located). In addition to confirming that the
background was not zero, this idea immediately confirmed that the spec-
trum of the background radiation was close to that of a blackbody source
for wavelengths larger than the peak. It also gave a hint that at short
 wavelengths the intensity was departing from the 1           dependence expect-
 ed in the long wavelength (Raleigh-Jeans) region of the spectrum and
 following the true blackbody (Plank) distribution. In 1966, Field and
 Hitchcock 23 reported new measurements using Herbig’s plates of Oph
a n d Per obtaining 3.22 ± 0.15 K and 3.0 ± 0.6 K for the excitation
temperature. Thaddeus and Clauser also obtained new plates and mea-
                                         25



sured 3.75 ± 0.5 K in       Oph. Both groups argued that the main source of
excitation in CN is the background radiation. This type of observation,
taken alone, is most convincing as an upper limit, since it is easier to
imagine additional sources of excitation than refrigeration.
   In December 1965 Roll and Wilkinson 26 completed their measurement
of 3.0 ± 0.5 K at 3.2 cm, the first confirming microwave measurement.
This was followed shortly by Howell and Shakeshaft's 27 value of 2.8 ± 0.6


                                         R. W. Wilson                                    479


K at 20.7 cm22 and then by our measurement of 3.2 K ± 1 K at 21.1 cm 28 .
(Half of the difference between these two results comes from a difference
in the corrections used for the galactic halo and integrated discrete
sources.) By mid 1966 the intensity of the microwave background radi-
ation had been shown to be close to 3 K between 21 cm and 2.6 mm, almost
two orders of magnitude in wavelength.

X. EARLIER THEORY

I have mentioned that the first experimental evidence for cosmic
microwave background radiation was obtained (but unrecognized) long
before 1965. We soon learned that the theoretical prediction of it had been
made at least sixteen years before our detection. George Gamow had made
calculations of the conditions in the early universe in an attempt to under-
stand Galaxy formation 29 . Although these calculations were not strictly
correct, he understood that the early stages of the universe had to be very
hot in order to avoid combining all of the hydrogen into heavier elements.
Furthermore, Gamow and his collaborators calculated that the density of
radiation in the hot early universe was much higher than the density of
matter. In this early work the present remnants of this radiation were not
considered. However in 1949, Alpher and Herman 30 followed the evolu-
tion of the temperature of the hot radiation in the early universe up to the
present epoch and predicted a value of 5 K. They noted that the present
density of radiation was not well known experimentally. In 1953 Alpher,
Follin, and Herman 31 reported what has been called the first thoroughly
modern analysis of the early history of the universe, but failed to recalcu-
late or mention the present radiation temperature of the universe.
   In 1964, Doroshkevich and Novikov 32 33, h a d a l s o c a l c u l a t e d t h e r e l i c
radiation and realized that it would have a blackbody spectrum. They
quoted E. A. Ohm’s article on the Echo receiver, but misunderstood it and
concluded that the present radiation temperature of the universe is near
zero.
   A more complete discussion of these early calculations is given in Arno’s
lecture. 34

XI. ISOTROPY

In assigning a single temperature to the radiation in space, these theories
assume that it will be the same in all directions. According to contemporary
theory, the last scattering of the cosmic microwave background radiation
occurred when the universe was a million years old, just before the elec-
trons and nucleii combined to form neutral atoms (“recombination”).The
isotropy of the background radiation thus measures the isotropy of the
universe at that time and the isotropy of its expansion since then. Prior to
recombination, radiation dominated the ‘universe and the Jeans mass, or
mass of the smallest gravitationally stable clumps was larger than a cluster
of Galaxies. It is only in the period following recombination that Galaxies
could have formed.


480




                      ANGLE BETWEEN INSTRUMENT DIRECTION AND SITE
                            OF MAXIMUM TEMPERATURE (DEGREES)
Fig. 11 Results of the large scale isotropy Experiment of Smoot, Gorenstein a n d M u l l e r
showing the clear cosine dependence of brightness expected from the relative velocity of the
earth in the background radiation. The shaded area and arrows show the values allowed b y
the data of Woody and Richards . (This figure is reproduced with permission of Scientific
American.)

   In 1967 Rees and Sciama 35 suggested looking for large scale anisotropies
in the background radiation which might have been left over from aniso-
tropies of the universe prior to recombination.
   In the same year Wilkinson and Partridge 36 completed an experiment
which was specifically designed to look for anisotropy within the equatorial
plane. The reported a limit of 0.1 percent for a 24 hour asymmetry and a
possible 12 hour asymmetry of 0.2 percent. Meanwhile we had re-analyzed
an old record covering most of the sky which was visible to us and put a
limit of 0.1 K on any large scale fluctuations.37
   S i n c e t h e n a s e r i e s o f m e a s u r e m e n t s 38 39 40 h a v e s h o w n a 2 4 - h o u r
anisotropy due to the earth’s velocity with respect to the background
radiation. Data from the most sensitive measurement to date 41 are shown
in Fig. 11. They show a striking cosine anisotropy with an amplitude of
about .003 K, indicating that the background radiation has a maximum
temperature in one direction and a minimum in the opposite direction.
The generally accepted explanation of this effect is that the earth is
moving toward the direction where the radiation is hottest and it is the
blue shift of the radiation which increases its measured temperature in
that direction. The motion of the sun with respect to the background
radiation from the data of Smoot et al. is 390 ± 60 km/s in the direction
                    o
         R. A., 5 Dec. The magnitude of this velocity is not a surprise since
300 km/s is the orbital velocity of the sun around our galaxy. The direc-
tion, is different, however yielding a peculiar velocity of our galaxy of
about 600 km/s. Since other nearby Galaxies; including the Virgo cluster,


                                   R. W Wilson                              481


have a small velocity with respect to our Galaxy, they have a similar velocity
with respect to the matter which last scattered the background radiation.
After subtracting the 24-hour anisotropy, one can search the data for more
complicated anisotropies to put observational limits on such things as
rotation of the universe 41 . Within the noise of .001 K, these anisotropies
are all zero.
   To date, no fine-scale anisotropy has been found. Several early investiga-
tions were carried out to discredit discrete source models of the back-
ground radiation. In the most sensitive experiment to date, Boynton and
Partridge 42 report a relative intensity variation of less than 3.7 x 10-3 in an
80” Arc beam. A discrete source model would require orders of magnitude
more sources than the known number of Galaxies to show this degree of
smoothness.
   It has also been suggested by Sunyaev and Zel’dovich43 that there will be
a reduction of the intensity of the background radiation from the direction
of clusters of galaxies due to inverse Compton scattering by the electrons
in the intergalactic gas. This effect which has been found by Birkinshaw
and Gull 44 , provides a measure of the intergalactic gas density in the
clusters and may give an alternate measurement of Hubble’s constant.




XII. SPECTRUM

Since 1966, a large number of measurements of the intensity of the
background radiation have been made at wavelengths from 74 cm to 0.5
mm. Measurements have been made from the ground, mountain tops,


482                                  Physics 1978


airplanes, balloons, and rockets. In addition, the optical measurements of
the interstellar molecules have been repeated and we have observed their
millimeter-line radiation directly to establish the equilibrium of the excita-
tion of their levels with the background radiation45. Fig. 12 is a plot of most
of these measurements 46 . An early set of measurements from Princeton
covered the range 3.2 to .33 cm showing tight consistency with a 2.7 K
black body
              47-50
                    . A series of rocket and balloon measurements in the
millimeter and submillimeter part of the spectrum have converged on
about 3 K. The data of Robson, et al. 51 and Woody and Richards 52 extend
to 0.8 mm, well beyond the spectral peak. The most recent experiment,
that of D. Woody and P. Richards, gives a close fit to a 3.0 K spectrum out
to 0.8 mm wavelength with upper limits at atmospheric windows out to 0.4
mm. This establishes that the background radiation has a blackbody spec-
trum which would be quite hard to reproduce with any other type of
cosmic source. The source must have been optically thick and therefore
must have existed earlier than any of the other sources, which can be
observed.
   The spectral data are now almost accurate enough for one to test for
systematic deviations from a single-temperature blackbody spectrum
which could be caused by minor deviations from the simplest cosmology.
Danese and DeZotti 53 report that except for the data of Woody and
Richards, the spectral data of Fig. 12 do not show any statistically signifi-
cant deviation of this type.


XIII. CONCLUSION

Cosmology is a science which has only a few observable facts to work with.
The discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation added one
- the present radiation temperature of the universe. This, however, was a
significant increase in our knowledge since it requires a cosmology with a
source for the radiation at an early epoch and is a new probe of that epoch.
More sensitive measurements of the background radiation in the future
will allow us to discover additional facts about the universe.


XIV. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work which I have described was done with Arno A. Penzias. In our
fifteen years of partnership he has been a constant source of help and
encouragement. I wish to thank W. D. Langer and Elizabeth Wilson for
carefully reading the manuscript and suggesting changes.



REFERENCES
 1. A more complete discussion of radio telescope antennas and receivers may be found in
    several text books. Chapters 6 and 7 of J. D. Kraus “Radio Astronomy”, 1966, McGraw-
    Hill are good introductions to the subjects.
 2. Crawford, A. B. Hogg, D. C. and Hunt, L. E. 1961, Bell System Tech. J., 40, 1095.


                                        R. W. Wilson                                    483

 3.  DeGrasse, R. W. Schultr-DuBois, E. 0. and Scovil, H. E. D. BSTJ 38, 30.5.
 4.  Tabor, W. J. and Sibilia, J. 1‘. 1963, Bell System Tech. J., 42, 1863.
 5.  Penzias, A. A. 1965, Rev. Sci. Instr., 36. 68.
 6.  Penzias, A. A. and Wilson, R. W. 1965 Astrophysical Journal 142. 1149.
 7.  DeGrasse, R. W. Hogg, D. C. Ohm, E. A. and Scovil, H. E. D. 1950, Proceedings of the
     National Electronics Conference. 15, 370.
  8. Dicke. R. Beringer R. Kyhl, R. L. and Vane, A. V. Phys. Rev. 70, 340 (1046).
  9, Ohm, E. A. 1961 BSTJ, 40, 1065.
10. Hogg, D. C. and Wilson, R. W. Bell system Tech J., 44, 1019.
11. c.f. F. Hoyle and R. J. Taylor 1964. Nature 203, 1108. A less explicit discussion of the
     same notion occurs in [29].
12. Hogg, D. C. and Semplak, R. A. 1961, Bell System Technical Journal. 40, 1331 .
13. Dicke, R. H. Peebles, P. J. E. Roll, P. G. and Wilkinson, D. T. 1965, Ap. J., 142. 4 14.
14. Penzias, A. A. and Wilson R. W. 1965, Ap. J.. 142, 420.
15. Pauliny-Toth, I. I. K. and Shakeshaft, J. R. 1962, M. N. RAS.. 124, 61.
16. Adams, W. S. 1941, Ap. J. 93, 11.
17. Adams, W. S. 1943, Ap. J., 97, 105.
18. Dunham, T. Jr. 1937, PASP, 49, 26.
19. Dunham, T. Jr. 1939, Proc. Am. Phil. Soc., 81, 277.
20. Dunham, T. Jr. 1941, Publ. Am. Astron. Soc., 10, 123.
21. Dunham, T. Jr. and W. S. Adams 1937, Publ. Am. Astron. Soc., 9, 5.
22. McKellar, A. 1941, Publ. Dominion Astrophysical Observatory Victoria B. C. 7, 251.
23. G. B. Field, G. H. Herbig and J. L. Hitchcock, talk at the American Astronomical Society
     Meeting, 22-29 December 1965, Astronomical Journal 1966, 71. 161; G. B. Field and J .
     I,. Hitchcock, 1966, Phys. Rev. Lett. 16, 8 17.
24. Shklovsky, I. S. 1966, Astron. Circular No. 364, Acad. Sci. USSR.
25. Thaddeus, P. and Clauser, J. F. 1966, Phys. Rev. Lett. 16, 8 19.
26. Roll, P. G. and Wilkinson, D. T. 1966, Physical Review Letters, 16, 405.
27. Howell, T. F. and Shakeshaft, J. R. 1966, Nature 210, 138.
28. Penzias, A. A. and Wilson R. W. 1967, Astron. J. 72, 315.
29. Gamow, G. 1948, Nature I62 680.
30. Alpher, R. .4. and Herman, R. C. 1949, Phys. Rev., 75, 1089.
31. Alpher, R. A. Follin, J. W. and Herman, R. C. 1953, Phys. Rev., 92, 1347.
32. Doroshkevich, A. G. and Novikov. I. D. 1964 Dokl. Akad. Navk. SSR 154, 809.
33. Doroshkevich, A. G. and Novikov, I. D. 1964 Sov. Phys. Dokl. 9, 111 .
34. Penzias, A. A. The Origin of the Elements, Nobel Prize lecture 1978.
3.5. Rees, M. J. and Sciama, D. W. 1967, Nature, 213, 374.
36. Partridge, R. B. and Wilkinson, D. T. 1967, Nature, 215, 7 19.
37. Wilson, R. W. and Penzias, A. A. 1967, Science 156, 1100.
38. Conklin, E. K. 1969, Nature, 222, 97 I.
39. Henry, P. S. 1971, Nature, 231, 516.
40. Corey, B. E. and Wilkinson, D. T. 1976, Bull. Astron. Astrophys. Soc., 8, 351.
41. Smoot, G. F. Gorenstein, M. V. and Muller, R. A. 1977, Phys. Rev. Lett., 39, 898.
42. Boynton, P. E. and Partridge, R. B. 1973, Ap. J., 181, 243.
43. Sunyaev, R. A. and Zel’dovich, Ya B 1972, Comments Astrophys. Space Phys., 4, 173.
44. Birkinshaw, M. and Gull, S. F. 1978, Nature275 40.
45. Penzias, A. A. Jefferts, K. B. and Wilson, R. W’. 1972, Phys. Rev. Letters, 28, 772.
46. The data in Fig. 11 are all referenced by Danese and Dezotti 4 5 except for the 13 cm
     measurement of T. Otoshi 1975, IEEE Trans on Instrumentation and Meas. 24 174. I
     have used the millimeter measurements of Woody and Richards 48 and left off those of
     Robson et al 47 to avoid confusion.
47. Wilkinson, D. J. 1967, Phys. Rev. Letters. 19, 1195.
48. Stokes, R. A. Partridge, R. B. and Wilkinson, D. J. 1967. Phys. Rev. Letters, 19, 1199.
49. Boynton, P. E. Stokes, R. A. and Wilkinson, D. J. 1968, Phys. Rev. Letters, 21, 462.
50. Boynton, P. E. and Stokes, R. A. 1974, Nature, 247, 528.
51. Robson, E. I. Vickers, D. G. Huizinga, J. S. Beckman.J. E. and Clegg, P. E. 1974, Nature
     251, 591.
52. Woody, D. P. and Richards, P. L. Private communication.
53. Danese, L. and DeZotti, G. 1978, Astron. and Astrophys.. 68, 157.
