Measuring the Acceleration of the
Cosmic Expansion Using Supernovae

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2011
by
Saul Perlmutter


University of California at Berkeley and Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Introduction
The “discovery of the acceleration of the expansion of the Universe” does
not flow trippingly off the tongue – which is fitting, since the work that led to
it was comparably long and tortuous. In this Lecture, I would like to give you
a feel for some of the science issues we were facing over the ten years leading
up to the discovery. I will primarily use the graphics from the original over-
head projector transparencies we were using in those years. Although they
are not as beautiful as our modern-day graphics, I hope they will help give
some of the texture of what was going on during that period.


AN ancient question
The question that motivated all this work is something you can imagine that
the very first humans might have asked when they walked out of their caves
at night and found themselves looking up at the starry sky. Do we live in a
Universe that goes on forever in space and will it last forever in time? I think
it almost defines what it means to be the very first humans – that they could
ask such questions.
   For most of human history, this sort of question was a truly philosophical
question. It wasn’t until the 20th century that we began to have a scientific
version of this question. This is partly because Einstein’s theory of general rela-
tivity gave us some new conceptual tools that made it possible to think about
this topic in a more rigorous way. But it’s also because Edwin Hubble (1929)
measured an expansion of the Universe, which meant that we started to see
in more concrete terms what we could mean by the fate of the Universe.
   Hubble’s observations indicated that we don’t live in a Universe that
is standing still, but rather one in which all of the distances between
galaxies are growing with time. You can then immediately start asking
yourself whether it will continue to grow with the same speed over time, or
might it slow down because gravity would attract all stuff to all other stuff in
the Universe. In fact, you might wonder if it could be slowing enough so that
someday it could come to a halt, and then collapse into a Big Crunch that
could be an end of the Universe.

                                                                                 3


   This is a question about the future of the Universe that you can address by
looking into the past of the Universe, by looking to see what was happening
billions of years ago and how much the Universe was slowing down back
then. If it was slowing enough, you could predict that it is slowing enough to
collapse in the future. This was understood, even back in the 1930s, in the
decade following Hubble’s discovery, by astronomers like Walter Baade and
Fritz Zwicky who were studying supernovae. They saw that in principle, you
could use a very bright exploding star, a supernova, to perhaps answer this
question.


Supernovae as probes of the history of the Universe
You could take the brightness of a supernova as an indicator of how far away
it is: The fainter it is, the further away it is from us – and hence its light has
taken more time to reach us. So with the fainter supernovae, you are looking
further and further back in time. You can also use the colors of the spectral
features of a supernova: a supernova would look blue if it were seen nearby,
but when you see it very, very far away it looks red. How red it gets tells you
how much the Universe has stretched since the supernova exploded, because
while the light is traveling to us, its wavelength stretches by the exact same
proportion as the Universe stretches. So, this is a very direct way of plotting
how much the Universe has stretched as a function of time. In principle, if
you observe enough supernovae and plot them on such a graph, you can
see just how much the Universe has decelerated in the past and make a
prediction about how much it will slow down in the future.
   Baade (1938) wrote about the possible supernova measurement back in
the 1930s. The problem was that the supernovae that they knew about at that
time were not quite good enough “standard candles” – they weren’t all quite
the same brightness. They varied by more than a factor of two or three in
brightness, so while it looked like a good idea, it was not really practical to do
at that time. That’s essentially where the problem stood for about the next 50
years (but see Kowal 1968 for a benchmark along the way).


How OUR WORK began
Two things happened in the mid-1980s that got me and others interested
in the problem: First, there was the realization that the supernovae could
be subdivided into subclasses. It was in the mid-1980s that the “Type Ia”
subclass was identified (Panagia 1985, Uomoto and Kirshner 1985, Wheeler
and Levreault 1985). It began to be clear that this subclass really was a bet-
ter standard candle than the others. For example, a histogram of supernova
brightnesses in a paper by Nino Panagia (1985) showed that supernovae
found in spiral galaxies varied greatly, while those found in elliptical galaxies
had only a small dispersion (Fig. 1). The implication was that the ellipticals
might host a subclass that was a better standard candle, and also that the spi-
ral galaxies are known to have dust that would add further dispersion. The

4


possibility that we now had a good standard candle suggested that we now
might be ready to go back to the original idea of Baade and Zwicky.




                                 Figure 1. Histogram of supernova absolute
                                 magnitudes from Panagia (1985).

   The other development of the mid-1980s was the introduction into
astronomy of the new sensors, the CCD detectors, which are like the detec-
tors in the back of the digital cameras that most people have today. These
were just becoming available in the beginning of the 1980s, and I worked
on one of the first astronomy projects to use CCDs. It also included the new
computers that were just then becoming fast enough to analyze the large
amounts of data that came out of these detectors. This was a project led by
my inspiring thesis advisor, Richard Muller. It was doing a search for nearby
supernovae using a small robotic telescope and automatic detection of the
supernovae by the computers (Fig. 2). I worked on the software that made
it possible to subtract the image of a galaxy from the image of a supernova
plus the galaxy, and thus find these supernovae (Fig. 3). With the automatic




                                             Figure  2. Saul Perlmutter and
                                             Richard Muller with a new tele-
                                             scope the group was automating
                                             to replace the Leuschner Obser-
                                             vatory telescope (though it was
                                             later used for a different purpose
                                             at another site).


                                                                                  5


searching technique we had found 20 supernovae by the time the project
stopped (Muller et al. 1992; Fig. 4).




SN +Galaxy                            Galaxy                                   SN
Figure 3. Example of digital image subtraction. From the CCD image of a supernova and
its host galaxy, we subtract an image of the galaxy before the supernova appeared (or after
it disappeared), leaving an image of just the supernova.




Figure 4. Before-and-after images of one of the supernovae discovered in 1986 by our
Berkeley Automated Supernova Search, led by Professor Richard Muller.


   These two developments led Carl Pennypacker and myself, both of us
researchers in Rich Muller’s group at that time in 1987 (I had stayed on as a
postdoc after just completing my PhD), to decide to try out the original idea
of Baade and Zwicky to measure the deceleration of the universe’s expansion
using supernovae. We began working on the project with Rich’s support, and
it looked very promising. However, we were aware that it was not going to be
easy. For a number of reasons we knew there was a lot of work to be done
to make this possible. So, when we proposed the project we did not get an
immediately enthusiastic response from the referees and reviewers. But it’s
Carl’s nature to be absolutely undaunted and to be optimistic that we can do
anything, and so we carried on. There were the practical problems of trying
to find the more distant supernovae. There were some specific technical
problems concerning how you would analyze those very faint, distant super-
novae and compare them to nearby examples. There were issues about the

6


   Why is the supernova measurement not easy?

   1. Can they be found far enough -- and
        enough of them -- for cosmology?
      Can they be found early enough to measure
        brightness over peak?

   2. Can they be identified as Type Ia with
        spectra, despite how faint they will be?
      Can their brightness be compared with nearby
                                                 ?

   3. Are the supernovae standard enough?
      And how can one eliminate possible dust that
        might diminish their brightness?             Figure 5. Some of the issues that
                                                     we recognized as hurdles to be
   4.                                                crossed in order to use supernovae
        five billion years?                          to measure the deceleration of the
                                                     Universe’s expansion.


standardness of the supernovae themselves and their consistency over time
that needed to be addressed. These were the specific details that we saw as
the hurdles that had to be jumped over in order to do the project (Fig. 5).


How can we find supernovae on demand?
I will try to describe how we addressed the problems, because what is interest-
ing about this particular measurement is that it is so simple to describe that
it is possible to explain the difficulties in some detail, and most people can
then understand what it would take to do this particular project.

First of all, there are the questions of:
     •    Can you find these supernovae at all?
     •    Can you find them far enough away?
     •    Can you find enough of them?
     •    Can they be found early enough so that they can brighten, fade away
          and you can measure the peak brightness?
   The peak brightness is what we knew was standard, so we couldn’t use
them if we found them weeks after they had already peaked. These were very
difficult problems, because if you had to choose a research tool, you would
never choose supernovae – they are a real pain in the neck to do research
on (Fig. 6). They are rare – the Type Ia supernovae explode only a couple
of times per millennium in a given galaxy. They are random – they don’t tell
you when they’re going to explode. They are short lived – they brighten and
fade away in time scales of weeks, so they don’t stick around so that you can
study them. So, they are just very inconvenient to do research with.
   The difficulties were illustrated when we later saw the results from another
supernova project, which we learned had started shortly before ours. Hans
Nørgaard-Nielsen and a Danish team searched several years for very distant
Type Ia supernovae but found just one, several weeks after it had already

                                                                                     7


                                                     Figure 6. The characteris-
                                                     tics of Type Ia supernovae
                                                     that make them difficult to
                                                     find and study over their
                                                     peak brightness.


passed its peak brightness (Nørgaard-Nielsen et al. 1989). So, while it was
encouraging that such distant supernovae existed, the critics of our project
said that this did not look like a very viable program. This was the first
concern.
   The approach that we took to this problem was to develop the capability
to look at more than one galaxy at a time (since looking at one galaxy would
have meant waiting the 500 years for a Type Ia supernova to explode), and
even more than a small cluster of galaxies at a time (as the Danish program
had done). We decided to build a wide-field camera that would allow us, with
each exposure, to look at 10 to 20 times as many galaxies as you would find
even in a cluster of galaxies. We had to develop an unusual optical system
(Fig. 7) that would bring light from a very big field of view onto a small CCD
detector. This novel instrument went onto the Anglo-Australian 4-m tel-
escope which meant that we were able to work with a large enough telescope
with a large enough field of view to be able to search for supernovae at great
distances in thousands of galaxies at a time.




                                                Figure 7. The novel F/1 wide-
                                                field CCD camera we developed
                                                for the Anglo-Australian 4-m tele-
                                                scope (AAT) to collect a wide
                                                enough field to search for z > 0.3
                                                Type Ia supernovae in hundreds
                                                of galaxies in each image.


8


  With our wide-field camera on the Anglo-Australian Telescope you obtain
images like the one shown in Fig. 8a, in which all the small specks of light
are the distant galaxies in which we were searching for supernovae. You then
take an image another time in the year (Fig. 8b) and subtract it from the first
one. You are left with an image that shows just the spot that got bright – and
that’s your supernova. Of course we did this with software, so we had to go
back to our image analysis software and develop that much further. Fig. 8c
shows what the computer subtraction looked like, and Fig. 9 shows some of
the members of the group at that time.




                                    Figure 8a. An image obtained November 1989
                                    with our wide-field camera on the Anglo-
                                    Australian 4-m telescope. The small specks of
                                    light are the distant galaxies in which we were
                                    searching for supernovae.




                                    Figure 8b. The same field as in Fig. 8a, but
                                    observed January 1990. It is reversed in grayscale
                                    to indicate that it will be subtracted from the
                                    first.




                                    Figure 8c. Computer subtraction of the Fig. 8b
                                    image from the Fig. 8a image. The spot remain-
                                    ing is what a supernova would look like.


                                                                                    9


Figure 9. Members of the group in 1992 discuss images with many distant galaxies obtained
with a wide-field camera for the distant supernova search. Left to right: Carl Pennypacker,
Saul Perlmutter, Heidi Marvin Newberg, Gerson Goldhaber, Rich Muller.



   This method of finding supernovae seemed to work. However, the remain-
ing problems were still haunting us, because even if you could find the
supernova you couldn’t prove that you had a supernova, since you would
need to schedule the largest telescopes in the world to obtain the identifying
spectrum. You would also need to schedule the largest telescopes in the
world to follow it as it brightens and fades away, to measure its brightness at
peak. Of course, no telescope time assignment committee would give you
the time to schedule a telescope six months in advance for a supernova that
may or may not appear on the proposed observing date, say March 3rd. As
Mario Hamuy et al. (1993a) put it, in their discussion of the Calan/Tololo
Supernova Search at much lower redshifts, “Unfortunately, the appearance
of a SN is not predictable. As a consequence of this we cannot schedule the
follow-up observations a priori, and we generally have to rely on someone
else’s telescope time. This makes the execution of this project somewhat
difficult.”
   So, we had to figure out a way to make the whole operation more system-
atic, and what we came up with was a new search strategy that I developed to
make this possible. Fig. 10 shows the strategy on a timeline of new moon to
full moon to new moon. I realized that if you collect all of your first images
just after new moon, wait 2 1/2 weeks or so, and collect all of the second
set of images just before the next new moon (and then subtract all the
second set from the first set), you now have enough galaxies collected with
a wide field imager to guarantee not just one supernova discovery, but more
than half a dozen supernova discoveries. Once you reach this statistically

10


significant sample size of supernovae, then you can be sure that you always
have some new supernovae to observe by the second new moon. The other
advantage is that with this short timescale between the two sets of images,
you can guarantee that the supernovae won’t have enough time to reach
maximum and then start fading away; since they rise in a couple of weeks
and fade in a few months, this timescale ensures that you always catch them
while they’re still brightening. You can then guarantee that right before that
second new moon (which is the time you need to do the spectroscopy) you
will have new supernovae, they will be on the rise, and there will be more
than one. Now you can schedule the follow-up spectroscopy and photometry
on the following nights.


                                                     Figure 10. The “batch”
                                                     observational strategy that
                                                     made it possible to guar-
                                                     antee multiple new super-
                                                     nova discoveries at high
                                                     redshift. They would all be
                                                     on a pre-specified date (in
                                                     particular just before a new
                                                     moon) and all while still
                                                     brightening (Perlmutter et
                                                     al. 1995a). This in turn
                                                     made it possible to propose
                                                     many months in advance for
                                                     scheduled telescope time
                                                     at the largest telescopes to
                                                     study the supernova over
                                                     the peak of their light curves
                                                     with both photometry and
                                                     spectroscopy.



   Once we demonstrated this, we were able to start applying for telescope
time at the best telescopes in the world – the telescopes in Chile, where the
weather is good enough that you can usually follow this whole time series
without getting hit by clouds and rain. The first time that we tried this new
“batch” observational strategy we called up the International Astronomical
Union telegram service, which notifies astronomers around the world when
a new supernova is discovered so it can be studied. They’re very careful
about what they allow in the telegram and I wanted to be sure they would be
able – and willing – to accept our results. I warned them that we would be
sending them a half a dozen new supernova discoveries two weeks from now.
They laughed, because nobody had ever predicted a supernova discovery
before, and certainly nobody ever found more than one at a time before, so
it sounded a little unusual. In fact, we then sent out such telegrams semester
after semester for the following years, as this new observing technique
worked, producing batches of supernovae. So, this did work and we had
surmounted the problem of making the supernova a systematic tool.

                                                                                11


more difficulties to overcome
The next problem was that even if you found the supernovae, there was
the question of whether you could identify the subtype, i.e. the Type Ia’s. It
wasn’t clear that they would be bright enough to obtain a reasonable spec-
trum. In fact the first spectra that we obtained looked mostly like a lot of
noise. We realized, however, that we could take advantage of the fact that the
spectral features of supernovae are very broad on these wavelength scales,
unlike the narrow spectral features of the underlying host galaxy and the
noise. (This is because the supernova explosion spreads the spectral fea-
tures out over a wide range of wavelengths, due to the Doppler shifts.) This
meant that we could cut out all the sharp lines, and then smooth the whole
spectrum, in order to bring out the broad features that then did look like a
supernova (Fig. 11).




Figure 11a. Spectrum of a high redshift Type Ia supernova (Lidman et al. 2005).




Figure 11b. Same spectrum as Fig. 11a, after removing very narrow spectral features, and
smoothing to bring out the broad supernova features. The red curve shows the excellent
match with a spectrum of a low-redshift Type Ia supernova, as it would appear redshifted
to z = 0.55.


12


   Once we were able to show this, it became believable that we could
identify the supernovae at these great distances. It also helped that the larger
telescopes came online just at this time, e.g. the Keck telescope that was be-
ing developed just upstairs from me at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory while
I was a graduate student. At that time, I had no idea that I would be using it,
but just a few years later – as it was being commissioned – it was exactly the
telescope that we needed to do this kind of work.
   Another problem arises because the spectrum of a low-redshift super-
nova gets shifted to the redder wavelengths when you look at supernovae at
greater distances – that’s what we mean by “redshift”. Seen nearby, most of
the light of the supernova is emitted in the blue wavelengths, so typically at
low redshifts we study the supernova using the B-band filter (“B” for “blue”).
But, at high redshift the same blue filter would be looking at the very faint
UV tail of the spectrum (Fig.12). The question is, how are you going to
compare a supernova seen in this faint tail of the spectrum with a supernova
seen at the peak of the spectrum. This kind of comparison is called a K
correction, and whether it could be done well enough to compare low- and
high-redshift supernovae was far from clear. A paper by Bruno Leibundgut
(1990) tried to show what the correction would have to be to account for
the difference between the different parts of the two spectra. He did a very
careful job, but the uncertainties in the correction looked like they would
present a significant problem.
   In 1992 we found the first high-redshift supernova that we were able to
follow throughout its entire light curve. It was at a redshift of z = 0.45,
(z stands for redshift). When we started trying to analyze it, we saw that the
K correction everybody thought we’d have to use was the wrong way to go
about it. Instead of trying to find what part of the spectrum we were looking
at based on what the blue filter saw, what we really had to do was look at
the high redshift supernova with a red filter, the R-band filter. The same
part of the spectrum that comes through the R-band filter at high redshift
is what comes through the B-band filter at low redshift (Fig. 13). Alex Kim,
Ariel Goobar, and I wrote a paper describing this “cross-filter K correction”
approach, which made us confident that we could control uncertainties
that would otherwise be introduced by the single-filter K correction (Kim,
Goobar and Perlmutter 1996; see also Nugent, Kim and Perlmutter 2002).
   The next set of issues had to do with how standard these supernovae were.
Could you rely on them as a marker of distances? The papers I mentioned
earlier, e.g. Panagia (1985), were certainly suggestive of the possibility that
the Type Ia supernovae could make a good standard. Bruno Leibundgut
(1988) and Gustav Tammann (Tammann and Leibundgut 1990) were really
responsible for making the community aware of how consistent the Type Ia
supernovae were with each other, during the late 1980s and into the 1990s,
so it’s important to mention their names in this context. It’s also important
to note David Branch’s group (Branch and Tammann 1992, Miller and
Branch 1990, Branch and Miller 1993) in Oklahoma, who were compiling
sets of published supernovae, and finding that they could come up with ways

                                                                             13


     Figure 12. The standard “K correc-
     tion” was intended to capture the
     difference between the amount of
     light in a given filter (here the “B”
     filter) seen at zero redshift and at
     high redshift, due to the different
     parts of the spectrum that would
     be observed in that filter. This was
     calculated for high-redshift super-
     novae by Leibundgut (1990) and by
     Hamuy et al. (1993b).




     Figure 13. The new “Cross-filter
     K correction” developed in Kim,
     Goobar, and Perlmutter (1996)
     worked by observing the high red-
     shift supernova with a red filter, in
     this case the R-band filter, so that
     the same part of the supernova
     spectrum is coming through this
     filter at high redshift as comes
     through the B-band filter at low red-
     shift. This approach makes possible
     a much smaller uncertainty for the
     K correction.


14


to make them even more standard than the earlier papers indicated. One
good example of this was the paper by Vaughn et al. (1995), which I worked
on with the Oklahoma group, that showed the improvement in the disper-
sion of Type Ia supernovae that was possible by simply rejecting the redder
supernovae (Fig. 14). This would remove supernovae that were dimmed
by dust (making them appear redder), and also peculiar supernovae that
were intrinsically redder. This meant that you could take the dispersion of
brightness that you observed from the 40 to 50% range that was seen in the
earlier dataset down to something like a 30% dispersion by removing the
redder supernovae. The Vaughn et al. paper pointed out that this dispersion
included measurement errors, and since these were not very well measured
data sets the measurement errors could, in fact, already account for most
of this 30% dispersion. So, it was possible that the Type Ia supernovae were
perfectly good standard candles but, given the quality of data available, we
just couldn’t tell.


                           Type la Supernovae




                                B
Figure 14. One approach to improving the standardization of the Type Ia supernovae sug-
gested by David Branch’s Oklahoma group (Branch et al. 1993, Vaughan et al. 1995) was
to remove all the redder supernovae (plotted here as red-filled circles). This apparently
removed both the dust-reddened supernovae and many peculiar Type Ia supernovae, thus
greatly improving the dispersion about the Hubble line.



calan/tololo: a new and improved low-redshift dataset
In the early 1990s, the Calan/Tololo supernova search joined in the game.
This was a key moment for this field. I should particularly mention the names
of Mario Hamuy, José Maza, Mark Phillips, and Nick Suntzeff who were lead-
ers in this work, because they were responsible for setting the next stage. The
dataset they developed contained relatively nearby supernovae that were just
far enough out into the Hubble flow so that you could measure the relative
distances very well (Hamuy et al., 1993a, 1996). Using the exact same color
cut from the Vaughn et al. paper, you could bring the brightness dispersion

                                                                                      15


down to about 18%, just by using this better measured dataset. Now, this was
good enough for the cosmological measurement we wanted to make.
   There was another approach to this that Mark Phillips proposed in the
early 1990s: You could use the timescale of the supernova event, e.g. how rap-
idly it decayed from its peak brightness, to estimate what its brightness had
been at the peak of its light curve (Fig. 15) (Phillips 1993). Mark saw this in
the previously published supernova data, but even more clearly in the new
Calan/Tololo data. Adam Riess then came up with a sophisticated statistical
analysis of this, adding and subtracting template light curve shapes (Riess,
Press and Kirshner 1995). Our group used a third method of capturing this
supernova timescale that I had developed: Simply stretching or compressing
the time axis of the light curve by a single “stretch factor” (Perlmutter et al.
1995a, 1997, 1999; see also Goldhaber et al. 1995, 2001).




Figure 15. Three alternative approaches to using the time scale of the supernova event
(or the shape of the light curve) as an indicator of how bright the supernova reached at
peak. These methods followed Phillips’ (1993) recognition that the faster the supernova’s
decline the fainter its peak magnitude.


16


   With this approach, you could take the range of beautifully measured
Calan/Tololo data that includes brighter/slower light curves as well as
fainter/faster light curves, and for each one measure the stretch factor that
would be needed to make them all match each other – and this stretch factor
would predict the brightness of each one. In fact, if you “correct” each light
curve by appropriately brightening the faster ones and dimming the slower
ones while stretching or compressing their timescales, you can standardize all
the light curves so that they all lie right on top of each other (Fig. 16). These
techniques brought the field another step forward, further improving the
brightness dispersion from 18% down to the 12-15% range.




Figure 16. It is possible to “correct” each Type Ia supernova light curve by appropriately
brightening the faster ones (low “stretch factor”) and dimming the slower ones (large
“stretch factor”) while stretching or compressing their timescales. The lower panel shows
the result of this, using a linear relation between the stretch of the light curve timescale
and its peak luminosity.


                                                                                         17


   With respect to the problem of dust dimming the supernova, I men-
tioned earlier that the color cut proposed by the Oklahoma group in the
Vaughan et al. paper not only removed intrinsically redder supernovae, but
also supernovae that were dimmed (and reddened) by dust. Another way
to handle dust is to measure how red each supernova is, and then correct
the brightness for that amount of dust. It was also found that such a color
correction can account for some color-brightness relation intrinsic to the
supernovae themselves, since it appears to follow a very similar trend to
dust’s (Tripp 1998, Tripp and Branch 1999). As I’ll discuss later, once we had
proven the batch-discovery-and-follow-up technique with that first batch of
discoveries we were able to start getting the telescope time to make better
supernova measurements, including the good color measurements needed
for this purpose.
   An important element of this dust story is that apparently most supernovae
are not suffering much dimming by dust. At the time, you could already look
at the range of relative brightnesses and colors of nearby supernovae and
see that most supernovae were in a very narrow range – it would be spread
more if dust were prevalent. And, of course, what you really care about if
you are comparing nearby and distant supernovae is whether the range of
supernova colors is the same for both groups, indicating essentially the same
dust-dimming. So we developed two approaches to this color-study of dust:
You could compare the nearby and distant distributions of supernova color,
or you could correct each individual supernova’s brightness using the color
as an indication of how much correction is needed. (We used both of these
approaches in the results that I’ll be discussing, and we were thus able to
robustly account for the dust with our measurements.)
   There is also a third handle on dust that we began presenting at meetings,
as an option for the future if we could find even more distant supernovae. At
these much higher redshifts it becomes possible to differentiate the dimming
due to dust from the cosmological effects. At great distances the supernova
events are so far back in time you would not expect dust dimming to increase
with distance the same way it does at closer distances. The farther back you
go, the more the dimming should be due to the cosmology and not to dust
(Fig. 17). In 1998 (Aldering et al. 1998), using the Hubble Space Telescope,
we discovered, spectroscopically confirmed, and measured the light curve
of a supernova with a redshift of 1.2. It is the first supernova ever found at a
redshift above z = 1. We nicknamed it Albinoni (Fig. 17), and it was the kind
of supernova needed to perform these tests. This approach was then taken to
its conclusion by Adam Riess and colleagues, in some beautiful Hubble Space
Telescope work (Riess et al. 2004).
   Finally, there is the concern that the supernovae are not guaranteed to act
the same over billions of years. Since we are looking so far back in time with
these studies, the worry would be that the supernovae back then might not
be the same as supernovae today. It would then be meaningless to compare
the brightnesses if they were not identical. Our group realized that there was
a nice route to addressing this problem: Just as the low-redshift supernova

18


sample had been separated into those hosted by elliptical galaxies or spiral
galaxies, the same study could be performed for the high-redshift superno-
vae. Then the cosmology could be determined separately for the low- and
high-redshift supernovae found in elliptical galaxies and for those in spirals
(Fig. 18). These different host galaxy environments have very different
histories, so if the cosmology results from these different environments agree
we have a strong indication that the results are not strongly distorted by the
environmental histories changing the behavior of the supernovae.




Figure 17. With the discovery (Aldering et al. 1998) of SN 1998eq (nicknamed “Albinoni”),
we showed that it was possible to discover and spectroscopically confirm a Type Ia super-
nova well beyond redshift 1. We suggested that measurements at these very high redshifts
would make it possible to separate dust from cosmology in the dimming seen on the
Hubble diagram.




Figure 18. By performing the cosmology measurement with separate subgroups of super-
novae found in different host-galaxy environments, it is possible to test that the measure-
ments are not strongly distorted by the different evolutionary histories at low- and high-
redshift. We proposed such tests in Perlmutter et al. (1995b, 1997, 1999) and implemented
them in several stages, leading to the HST-morphology-based study shown here from our
Sullivan et al. (2003) paper.


                                                                                        19


a new concern
By mid-1994, we had answers in hand to the series of concerns listed in Fig.
5 about using distant supernovae for the cosmological measurement – but
then we added one further new concern (Fig. 19). We began thinking about
this when we were analyzing the cosmological implications of that very first
high-redshift supernova we found in 1992. Of course, that supernova by itself
did not give you a very definitive measurement. But, it happened to come out
with a very low value for the slowing of the expansion of the Universe, and
hence the mass density of the Universe responsible for this slowing. In fact,
it was so low that we started to think about a mathematical term called the
“cosmological constant” that Einstein had put into his equations describing
the Universe’s expansion. Einstein early on rejected this term, once it was
learned that the Universe was expanding. If it were there, however, it would
have the effect of fighting against gravity’s slowing of the expansion. We
realized that our first supernova’s very low values for the slowing could be
due to some of this cosmological constant fighting against gravity – and then
how could you tell what you were seeing? Is it less mass density, that is, less
slowing due to gravity, or is it perhaps more of the cosmological constant?
The concern was that we wouldn’t be able to tell these apart.




Figure 19. By 1994 there was a new concern about the supernova measurement – in addi-
tion to the four problems described in Fig. 5.


  The problem distinguishing between less mass or a stronger cosmological
constant is illustrated in Fig. 20a (from a paper that Ariel Goobar and I wrote
together). Say you have a supernova with redshift z = 0.5 (which we didn’t yet,
so this was still hypothetical) and plot the combinations of mass density and
the density of the cosmological constant consistent with its brightness. You
get a steadily rising strip of possible values. With just this plot, you wouldn’t
know if the true values describing our Universe were at the lower-left part of
this strip, with low mass density and low cosmological constant density, or at
the upper-right with high values for both densities. What Ariel and I realized
was that if you go out to a larger range of redshifts, that is, if you study much


20


farther supernovae at redshifts as high as z = 1 and beyond, then this plotted
strip of allowed cosmological values starts to rotate (Fig. 20b). Then the
intersection of these strips for different redshift supernovae allows us to sepa-
rate out these two effects – the mass density and the cosmological constant
density on the expansion history of the Universe. Fig. 21 shows the plot we
used in the paper to show that for a given mass density you could distinguish
between a zero cosmological constant – no cosmological constant at all – and
a significant cosmological constant. Interestingly, the values we chose for this
example of a significant cosmological constant turned out to be very close to
the final answer we found. Of course, we were expecting to find the zero cos-
mological constant result shown. (We pointed out in the paper that it would
be easier to make the measurement if there were a cosmological constant,
because the error bars are smaller in that region of this plot.)
                           cosmological
                           constant
                           density


Figure 20a. Goobar
and Perlmutter (1995)
used this figure to show
that a measurement of
a supernova at z = 0.5
(hypothetical at the
time) would constrain
the possible values of
the mass density and
the cosmological con-
stant density, but they
could be traded against
each other along the
strip of values shown
here as a green band.



Figure 20b. The strip of cosmological
possible values rotates constant
                         density
in the plane of mass
density versus cosmo-
logical constant den-
sity when we observe a
supernova at higher
redshifts. The results
for a then hypotheti-
cal z = 1 supernova
are shown here with
the blue band. The
intersection of such
measurements at dif-
ferent redshifts allows
the two densities to
be distinguished. (Also
from Goobar and
Perlmutter 1995.)


                                                                              21


           Distinguishing among                        Distinguishing a universe
            flat universe models                       with Λ from one without Λ
ΩΛ                                           ΩΛ
                                                              E

           A
                 B
                          C                                        D




                     ΩΜ                                            ΩΜ
Figure 21. In Goobar and Perlmutter (1995), we gave a range of sample cosmologies to
show how supernovae at, e.g., z = 0.5 and z = 1 could distinguish mass density from cos-
mological constant density. The examples in the right panel turned out to be particularly
prescient, since they showed that in a universe with significant cosmological constant the
smaller error bands make it easier to confirm the cosmological constant’s existence.




An unexpected outcome
Now we were in a position at the end of 1994 to use the new on-the-rise/
on-demand “batch” discovery strategy over and over again during each of the
following semesters at the telescopes. It became a production job: We wanted
to turn out enough of these supernovae and make these delicate high-preci-
sion measurements in multiple colors so that we could have the strong statis-
tical sample needed to measure how much the Universe is slowing down. We
were by now applying to telescopes all around the world to do this. We had to
use telescopes to find the supernovae (at the Cerro Tololo 4-meter telescope
in Chile), to follow the supernovae with spectroscopy (at the Keck 10-meter
telescope in Hawaii), to follow the supernova with photometry (at the Isaac
Newton telescope in the Canary Islands and the WIYN telescope in Tucson).
   So it was a pretty dramatic scene during the weeks that we would conduct
one of these supernova campaigns. One team would be flying down to Chile
and then returning to Chile three weeks later for the “discovery images,”
while another team back in Berkeley would be pulling the data in near-real-
time over the then-fledgling internet to analyze the data. Meanwhile teams
would head out to Hawaii, the Canary Islands, and Tucson, with email going
back and forth updating everything we knew about each supernova in our
batch of discoveries. By this time, the whole Supernova Cosmology Project
(SCP) team was more than the three or four people that we had at the begin-
ning. Fig. 22 shows much of the team at that time. I want to emphasize what
a capable, creative, and dedicated group of people this was – and it made for
a collaboration that was a great example of teamwork.


22


Figure 22. A collaboration meeting of the Supernova Cosmology Project in the late 1990s.
Top row: Greg Aldering, Saul Perlmutter, Isobel Hook; Second row: Sebastian Fabbro, Alex
Kim; Third row: Rob Knop, Pilar Ruiz-Lapuente; Bottom row: Peter Nugent, Ariel Goobar,
Gerson Goldhaber. (Not shown: Reynald Pain, who was taking the picture.)


Semester by semester, we started to build up this increasingly larger sample
of supernovae, covering an increasing redshift range. In Fig. 23 the color
coding shows the supernova redshifts for each batch of supernova discoveries
from a given semester’s search-and-follow-up. First a half-a-dozen, and then a
dozen, and then another dozen… and by 1997 we had enough supernovae in
hand to get results that were statistically significant.
   As we added the new batches of high-redshift supernovae to the Hubble
diagram, publishing the results at each step, the history of the Universe’s
expansion slowly began to be apparent. The very first data (the red points
around a redshift of z = 0.4 in Fig. 24a) appeared to favor a slowing Universe
with no cosmological constant, but with only 7 supernovae the uncertainties
were large. These were the very first high-redshift supernovae we had stud-
ied. After we had used them to show that the batch-discovery-and-follow-up
method worked, we were able to request and obtain sufficient follow-up time
on major telescopes to make more comprehensive measurements of the fol-
lowing batches of supernovae. So the next supernovae were all much better
measured.
   In a Nature article that appeared 1 January 1998, we then reported that
even one very-well-measured supernova – it had Hubble Space Telescope
observations – at twice the redshift (the red point at z = 0.83 in Fig. 24a)
already began to tell a different story, pointing to a Universe with a cosmo-
logical constant! But the evidence really became strong almost immediately
afterwards with 42 supernovae (the red points in Fig. 24b). Now there was a
clear bulk of the supernova data indicating a Universe that is dominated by a
cosmological constant, not ordinary matter.

                                                                                     23


  Plotting the same data as an Expansion History of the Universe (Fig.
25a), we see that it doesn’t match any of the entire range of possible slowing
histories shown (the curved lines on the figure). Apparently we don’t live in
a Universe that is currently slowing in its expansion, but rather a Universe
with one of the more interesting histories shown in the panel of Fig. 25b. Its
expansion rate used to be slowing, but has been speeding up for the last half
of its history, and presumably could speed up forever.




Figure 23. Each semester (shown in different colors) between 1994 and 1998 we employed
the “batch search-and-follow-up” method to add another set of Type Ia supernovae. The
distance (redshift) range increased, and we began to use the Hubble Space Telescope to
follow the SNe to obtain the most precise measurements.




24


Figure 24. Fig. 24a top – Fig 24b bottom. As the SCP added the new batches of high-
redshift supernovae to the Hubble diagram the history of the universe’s expansion slowly
began to be apparent (Perlmutter et al. 1998). The very first data (the red points around
a redshift of z = 0.4 in Fig. 24a) appeared to favor a slowing Universe with no cosmological
constant, but with only 7 supernovae the uncertainties were large. Even one very-well-mea-
sured supernova – it had Hubble Space Telescope observations – at twice the redshift (the
red point at z = 0.83 in Fig. 24a) already began to tell a different story. But the evidence
really became strong with 42 supernovae (the red points in Fig. 24b). Now there was a
clear bulk of the supernova data indicating a Universe that is dominated by a cosmological
constant, not ordinary matter. Its expansion is apparently speeding up.




                                                                                         25


Figure 25. Fig. 25a top – Fig 25b bottom. Our supernova data clearly didn’t fit with any of
the decelerating options shown in Fig. 25a. To fit the data, we now had to add curves that
are currently accelerating, as shown in the blue region of Fig. 25b. The best fit curve was
decelerating for about the first seven billion years, and then accelerating for the most re-
cent approximately seven billion years. This was the surprising result the supernovae were
showing us. (Based on figure from Perlmutter 2003.)


26


   Apparently we have a Universe that is dominated by some new ingredient,
some previously unknown “Dark Energy” that makes the Universe expand
faster and faster. It is so rare that you come across something that is not part
of our current physics model! This is one of the best outcomes that you could
ever get in a project like this. I feel very lucky to be able to work on this at
all, because here was a project where any result you could discover would be
exciting: We might have found that the Universe was infinite, or that it was
finite and going to come to an end. Either of these results would have been
great. Instead we found an answer that was even better than “great”, in that
it was a surprise. This is not something that you can even wish for in science.
   This outcome is a perfect example of how science can so often be two-
headed. On the one hand, it was only possible to discover what came as a
surprise to all of us because our field, physics, had already made such great
progress in understanding the Universe. Less than a century ago we had
no idea that there was more to the Universe than our own Milky Way. The
immense size of the Universe, the fact that it is expanding, the fact that it is
populated with such things as exploding stars – all this and more had to be
discovered before we could do the work that led us to contemplate an un-
known form of energy that accounts for more than two-thirds of everything
there is.
   It’s amazing how much we figured out, but on the other hand it’s amazing
how big a mystery has opened up as a result, and how much we still have left
to discover. One of the real pleasures of doing science – which will continue
to be true, I believe, on any given day for the next few centuries – is that we
have so much knowledge to build upon, yet there is still be so much for us to
discover.
   These two aspects of science remind us that science is a method, not a
finished product. We don’t know where it will lead or what new, seemingly
magical powers it will give us in the future. We never know whether what we
find will turn out to be useful, but we do know that in the past, whenever we
made a major step forward in our understanding of how the world works,
we’ve ultimately been able to solve more problems, including very practical
problems. I think that’s the only way we can proceed as basic scientists: We try
to see what we can understand, and we hope it opens more possibilities for
what we can do in the world.


scenes from a decade: an impressionistic sketch
So far, you may have the impression of this science being a very cut-and-dried
activity: We identify each problem, and solve it, and then see the results. But
the actual experience of this work is completely different: It’s a non-stop
whirlwind of activity and people. Unfortunately there are almost no photo-
graphs of these 10 year project to show this.
   But a few years ago I tried to convey this with the following very fast, impres-
sionistic, verbal sketch of scenes from the decade leading up to the discover-
ies. (I’ll supplement this with the few photos that we do have, Figs. 26–71.)

                                                                                27


	It begins with brainstorming in Berkeley with Carl Pennypacker (in 1987)
as we first batted around hardware and software plans for a new high-redshift
SN project in Rich Muller’s group, which Rich soon embraced. And then
the consequence: The mountaintop observatory cafeteria at Coonabarabran
as Carl, graduate student Heidi Newberg, former-graduate student Shane
Burns, and I got to know our pioneering Australia-based colleagues, Warrick
Couch and Brian Boyle. They were installing and then using our weird
crystal-ball of a wide-field corrector and camera at the AAT 4-meter telescope
– which led to our first high-redshift (but unconfirmed!) SN.




Figure 26. Carl Pennypacker (left)   Figure 27a and b. Rich Muller then and now.
and Saul Perlmutter.




Figure 28a and b. The F/1 wide-field CCD camera being mounted at the Anglo-Australian
telescope.




28


Figure 29. (left to right) Heidi Figure 30. Shane             Figure 31. Brian Boyle.
Marvin Newberg, Warrick Couch, Carl Burns now.
Pennypacker, and Shane Burns then.




Figure 32a and b. Warrick Couch then and now.              Figure 33. Heidi Marvin
                                                           Newberg.




Figure 34a and b. The group’s first (unconfirmed) high-redshift supernova, observed at
the Anglo-Australian telescope.



                                                                                    29


  Back in Berkeley, I have an image of Gerson Goldhaber overlaying trans-
parencies with negative and positive images of fields full of galaxies – image
analysis for the days when the computers were down! I should pause here to
say that we are very sad that Gerson isn’t here today – he died just over a year
ago. He was a warm heart – and sharp eyes! – of our team. He was the host
of the collaboration parties, and he should have been here to celebrate with
us. We miss him.




                             Figure 35. Gerson Goldhaber.




Figure 36a–d. Transparencies showing successive images of distant galaxies with computer
subtraction to isolate possible supernova.




  In Australia, we had rain, rain, rain, and more clouds – and then the sunny
relief of beautiful La Palma where our new Cambridge colleagues, Richard
McMahon (working with Mike Irwin) studied the most distant quasars. Long
nights debugging a new instrument for La Palma, and tense phone calls to
the Isaac Newton telescope while the data was sent to Berkeley for analysis.
And then, our first “official” high-redshift supernova – and a crucial La Palma
spectrum from the Herschel telescope as Richard Ellis has by now joined the
team (after being one of those Danish group pioneers).




30


Figure 37. Anglo-Australian Telescope in Coonabarabran, Australia (Fig. 37a) and Isaac
Newton Telescope on La Palma in the Canary Islands (Fig. 37b).




Figure 38a and b. Richard McMahon then and now.




Figure 39a. One of the preliminary graphs
showing the brightening and fading light
of the group’s first official high-redshift
supernova, SN 1992bi. The plot is on a
transparency that is overlaid with another
transparency showing the expected light
curve, based on nearby Type Ia supernovae.




                                                                                   31


Figure 39b. Spectrum, obtained at      Figure 40. Richard Ellis then and now.
the William Herschel telescope on La
Palma, of the galaxy that hosted SN
1992bi.

   By this time the Europeans had arrived full force in Berkeley – Ariel
Goobar from Stockholm kicked it off by developing new analyses with
our then grad student Alex Kim, and brainstorming with me about the
cosmological measurements. A glimpse of Reynald Pain from Paris assessing
the damage (and successes!) at the end of a complex telescope run – the
first of the so-called “batch discoveries.” This epoch ends in my mind with a
celebratory party at Gerson Goldhaber’s in the Berkeley hills, where we have
a bottle of champagne for each of the half dozen SNe discovered in a batch.




Figure 41. Ariel Goobar   Figure. 41a. Ariel Goobar      Figure 41b. Alex Kim.
(left) and Carl Penny-    now.
packer in 1998.




32


Figure 41d. Reynald Pain.
                                               Figure 42. An IAU circular report-
                                               ing the results of a “batch” SN dis-
                                               covery observing run.

  The sociology changes a little as we move to mass production, with new
outposts at telescopes around the world, typically manned by a lone team
member tenuously connected by a stream of email, phone, and fax. Pilar
Ruiz-Lapuente and Nic Walton are at La Palma, Chris Lidman is the voice
at the VLT in Chile, Brad Schaefer at Kitt Peak. Larger expeditionary
forces head to Cerro Tololo in Chile where all the SN discoveries now are
generated (I picture Don Groom and Susana Deustua on one such trip),
immediately followed by another team of us rushing with the new list of likely
SNe to the oxygen poor mountaintop of the then new Keck Telescope. (I
have a memory video-clip of Alex Filippenko – then on our team, his student
Tom Matheson, and our new Cambridge PhD Isobel Hook and I crowding
round the computer screen as SN after SN proved itself. And at the control
center in Berkeley the graduate students working round the clock: I picture
Matthew Kim and – from France – Sebastian Fabbro in the cramped room
full of students, postdocs, and computers, where our former undergrad
intern, Ivan Small, now presides over the growing search software.




Figure 43a and b. Pilar Ruiz-Lapuente       Figure 44. Telescopes around the
then and now.                               world.


                                                                                33


Figure 45a and b. Chris Lidman then and now.




Figure 46.           Figure 47.            Figure 48.                   Figure 49.
Brad Schaefer.       Don Groom.            Susana Deustua.              Alex Filippenko.




Figure 50.             Figure 51a and b. Isobel Hook then and now.
Tom Matheson.




Figure 52.             Figure 53.              Figure 54. Ivan Small.
Matthew Kim.           Sebastien Fabbro.


34


  I then imagine the calm of space as the Hubble Space Telescope quietly
does its part of the job, but of course down on Earth the same flurry of hu-
mans – here Andy Fruchter and Nino Panagia – make it possible to use this
robot effectively.




                                              Figure 55. The Hubble Space
                                              Telescope.




Figure 56. Andy Fruchter.                 Figure 57. Nino Panagia.




   The last act begins with a view of the end-of-night clean up after the
next collaboration party, but this time there are entire cases of bottles of
champagne left un-drunk – we’re lightweights – all labeled with the names
of the now-scores of new SNe to be analyzed. A fresh relief team of scientists
is now on the field at Berkeley: Rob Knop, who thinks, types – and programs
– faster than I talk, Peter Nugent, juggling SN theory and practice, and Greg
Aldering pulling together all the strains of the analysis …and the search.

                                                                            35


             Figure 58. Matthew Kim (left) and Rob Knop, relaxing after-
             wards.




Figure 59. Rob Knop.              Figure 60a and b. Peter Nugent then and now.




Figure 61a and b. Greg Aldering then and now.


36


  A final push of analyses has all of our Berkeley-based pre-graduate-school
interns working nights and weekends (parallel computing at its finest): First
Julia Lee, and then Patricia Castro, Nelson Nunes, and Robert Quimby – all
of whom continued careers in the field.




Figure 62a and b. Julia Lee then and now.




Figure 63. Nelson Nunes and Patricia Castro then (Fig. 63a), Nelson Nunes now (Fig. 63b)
and Patricia Castro now (Fig. 63c).




Figure 64a and b. Robert Quimby then and now.


   And we all fall gasping in a metaphorical heap with the surprising
discovery about the Universe that you just heard about. … And that’s just our
science team!

                                                                                     37


   I think it’s pretty clear from all this that the popular image of the lone
scientist in a lab looks nothing like our experience: Science is – at least for
us – an extremely social activity. This particular work was the product of an
amazing community of scientists. In fact, between our two teams we include a
large fraction, but not all, of the community of scientists studying supernova.
I show here several of the key players that I mentioned in the talk, just repre-
senting the rest of this supernova community. It was an honor and a pleasure
to work with all of you on this.




Figure 65. The Supernova Cosmology Project team in 2007.




Figure 66. The High-Z Supernova Search team in 2007.




38


Figure 67. José Maza.       Figure 68. Mario Hamuy.




Figure 69.              Figure 70.                Figure 71. David Branch.
Craig Wheeler.          Gustav Tammann.




A word of gratitude
None of this whirlwind of human choreography happens without the
constant support of our families and friends, our teachers and mentors – and
our staff at the universities, labs, and observatories – and also, in many cases,
the really courageous administrators and funders who took risks on things
when it wasn’t obvious they were going to work. They are represented today
by the family and friends who are here and we all thank you for helping –
and putting up with – all this.
   But the work is not done! We look forward to joining in with the next
tag-teams of scientists as we delve into the mystery that we are currently
calling Dark Energy.
   And, finally, we are grateful for the Nobel Prize committees and founda-
tion, who have found a way to encourage this human activity of science.
   Thank you.




                                                                              39


References
 1.	G. Aldering et al., IAUC 7046, 1A (1998)
 2. W. Baade, Astrophys. J. 88, 285 (1938)
 3. D. Branch, G. Tammann, Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 30, 359 (1992)
 4. D. Branch, D. Miller, Astrophys. J. Lett. 405, L5 (1993)
 5. D. Branch, A. Fisher, P. Nugent, Astron. J. 106, 2383 (1993)
 6.	G. Goldhaber et al., in: “Four Papers by the Supernova Cosmology Project”,
    ed. S. Perlmutter, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Report, LBL-38400 (1995); also in
    Thermonuclear Supernovae, ed. P. Ruiz-Lapuente, R. Canal, J. Isern, NATO ASI Series
    C (Kluwer, Dordrecht), Vol. 486 (1997)
 7.	G. Goldhaber et al., Astrophys. J. 558, 359 (2001)
 8.	A. Goobar and S. Perlmutter, Astrophys. J. 450, 14 (1995)
 9. M. Hamuy et al., Astron. J. 106, 2392 (1993a)
10. M. Hamuy et al., PASP 105, 787 (1993b)
11. M. Hamuy et al., Astron. J. 112, 2398 (1996)
12.	E. Hubble, Proc. Nat. Academy Sci. 15, 168 (1929)
13.	A. Kim, A. Goobar, S. Perlmutter, Pub. Astron. Soc. Pacific 108, 190 (1996)
14.	C. T. Kowal, Astron. J. 73, 1021 (1968)
15.	C. Lidman et al., Astron. Astrophys. 430, 843 (2005)
16. B. Leibundgut, PhD Thesis, University of Basel (1988)
17. B. Leibundgut, Astron. Astrophys. 229, 1 (1990)
18. D. Miller, D. Branch, Astron. J. 100, 530 (1990)
19.	R. Muller et al., Astrophys. J. Lett. 384, L9 (1992)
20.	H. U. Nørgaard-Nielson et al., Nature 339, 523, (1989)
21.	P. Nugent, A. Kim, S. Perlmutter, Pub. Astron. Soc. Paciﬁc 114, 803 (2002)
22.	N. Panagia, Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer Berlin/Heidelberg) 224, 14 (1985)
23.	S. Perlmutter et al., in: “Four Papers by the Supernova Cosmology Project”, ed.
    S. Perlmutter, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Report, LBL-38400 (1995a); also in
    Thermonuclear Supernovae, ed. P. Ruiz-Lapuente, R. Canal, J. Isern, NATO ASI Series
    C (Kluwer, Dordrecht), Vol. 486, (1997)
24.	S. Perlmutter et al., Astrophys. J. Lett. 440, L41 (1995b)
25.	S. Perlmutter et al., Astrophys. J. 483, 565 (1997)
26.	S. Perlmutter et al., Nature 391, 51 (1998)
27.	S. Perlmutter et al., Astrophys. J. 517, 565 (1999)
28.	S. Perlmutter, Physics Today 56, 53 (2003)
29. M. Phillips, Astrophys. J. Lett. 413, L105 (1993)
30.	A. Riess, W. Press, R. Kirshner, Astrophys. J. Lett. 438, L17 (1995)
31.	A. Riess et al., Astrophys. J. 607, 665 (2004)
32. M. Sullivan et al., Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 340, 1057 (2003)
33.	G. A. Tammann, B. Leibundgut, Astron. Astrophys. 236, 9 (1990)
34.	R. Tripp, Astron. Astrophys. 331, 815 (1998)
35.	R. Tripp, D. Branch, Astrophys. J. 525, 209 (1999)
36.	A. Uomoto, R. P. Kirshner, Astron. Astrophys. 149, L7 (1985)
37.	T. Vaughan, D. Branch, D. Miller, S. Perlmutter, Astrophys. J. 439, 558 (1995)
38. J. C. Wheeler, R. Levreault, Astrophys. J. Lett. 294, L17 (1985)




40
