TOWARDS A UNIFIED THEORY - THREADS IN
A TAPESTRY
Nobel Lecture, 8 December, 1979
by
SHELDON LEE GLASHOW
Lyman Laboratory of Physics Harvard University Cambridge, Mass., USA




INTRODUCTION

In 1956, when I began doing theoretical physics, the study of elementary
particles was like a patchwork quilt. Electrodynamics, weak interactions,
and strong interactions were clearly separate disciplines, separately taught
and separately studied. There was no coherent theory that described them
all. Developments such as the observation of parity violation, the successes
of quantum electrodynamics, the discovery of hadron resonances and the
appearance of strangeness were well-defined parts of the picture, but they
could not be easily fitted together.
    Things have changed. Today we have what has been called a “standard
theory” of elementary particle physics in which strong, weak, and electro-
magnetic interactions all arise from a local symmetry principle. It is, in a
sense, a complete and apparently correct theory, offering a qualitative
description of all particle phenomena and precise quantitative predictions
in many instances. There is no experimental data that contradicts the
theory. In principle, if not yet in practice, all experimental data can be
expressed in terms of a small number of “fundamental” masses and cou-
pling constants. The theory we now have is an integral work of art: the
patchwork quilt has become a tapestry.
    Tapestries are made by many artisans working together. The contribu-
tions of separate workers cannot be discerned in the completed work, and
the loose and false threads have been covered over. So it is in our picture
of particle physics. Part of the picture is the unification of weak and
electromagnetic interactions and the prediction of neutral currents, now
being celebrated by the award of the Nobel Prize. Another part concerns
the reasoned evolution of the quark hypothesis from mere whimsy to
established dogma. Yet another is the development of quantum chromo-
dynamics into a plausible, powerful, and predictive theory of strong inter-
actions. All is woven together in the tapestry; one part makes little sense
without the other. Even the development of the electroweak theory was
not as simple and straightforward as it might have been. It did not arise
full blown in the mind of one physic&t, nor even of three. It, too, is the
result of the collective endeavor of many scientists, both experimenters
and theorists.
    Let me stress that I do not believe that the standard theory will long


                                                                           495


survive as a correct and complete picture of physics. All interactions may
be gauge interactions, but surely they must lie within a unifying group.
This would imply the existence of a new and very weak interaction which
mediates the decay of protons. All matter is thus inherently unstable, and
can be observed to decay. Such a synthesis of weak, strong, and electro-
magnetic interactions has been called a “grand unified theory”, but a
theory is neither grand nor unified unless it includes a description of
gravitational phenomena. We are still far from Einstein’s truly grand
design.
   Physics of the past century has been characterized by frequent great but
unanticipated experimental discoveries. If the standard theory is correct,
this age has come to an end. Only a few important particles remain to be
discovered, and many of their properties are alleged to be known in
advance. Surely this is not the way things will be, for Nature must still have
some surprises in store for us.
   Nevertheless, the standard theory will prove useful for years to come.
The confusion of the past is now replaced by a simple and elegant synthe-
sis. The standard theory may survive as a part of the ultimate theory, or it
may turn out to be fundamentally wrong. In either case, it will have been
an important way-station, and the next theory will have to be better.
   In this talk, I shall not attempt to describe the tapestry as a whole, nor
even that portion which is the electroweak synthesis and its empirical
triumph. Rather, I shall describe several old threads, mostly overwoven,
which are closely related to my own researches. My purpose is not so much
to explain who did what when, but to approach the more difficult question
of why things went as they did. I shall also follow several new threads
which may suggest the future development of the tapestry.


EARLY MODELS

In the 1920’s, it was still believed that there were only two fundamental
forces: gravity and electromagnetism. In attempting to unify them, Ein-
stein might have hoped to formulate a universal theory of physics. How-
ever, the study of the atomic nucleus soon revealed the need for two
additional forces: the strong force to hold the nucleus together and the
weak force to enable it to decay. Yukawa asked whether there might be a
deep analogy between these new forces and electromagnetism. All forces,
he said, were to result from the exchange of mesons. His conjectured
mesons were originally intended to mediate both the strong and the weak
interactions: they were strongly coupled to nucleons and weakly coupled
to leptons. This first attempt to unify strong and weak interactions was
fully forty years premature. Not only this, but Yukawa could have predict-
ed the existence of neutral currents. His neutral meson, essential to pro-
vide the charge independence of nuclear forces, was also weakly coupled
to pairs of leptons.
   Not only is electromagnetism mediated by photons, but it arises from the


496                                         Physics 1979


requirement of local gauge invariance. This concept was generalized in
1954 to apply to non-Abelian local symmetry groups. [1] It soon became
clear that a more far-reaching analogy might exist between electromagne-
tism and the other forces. They, too, might emerge from a gauge princi-
ple.
     A bit of a problem arises at this point. All gauge mesons must be
massless, yet the photon is the only massless meson. How do the other
gauge bosons get their masses? There was no good answer to this question
u n t i l t h e w o r k o f W e i n b e r g a n d S a l a m [2] a s p r o v e n b y ‘ t H o o f t [ 3 ]
(for spontaneously broken gauge theories) and of Gross, Wilczek, and
Politzer [4] (for unbroken gauge theories). Until this work was done, gauge
meson masses had simply to be put in ad hoc.
     Sakurai suggested in 1960 that strong interactions should arise from a
gauge principle. [5] Applying the Yang-Mills construct to the isospin-
hypercharge symmetry group, he predicted the existence of the vector
mesons and ω. This was the first phenomenological SU(2) X U( 1) gauge
theory. It was extended to local SU(3) by Gell-Mann and Ne’eman in 1961.
[6]
    Yet, these early attempts to formulate a gauge theory of strong interac-
tions were doomed to fail. In today’s jargon, they used “flavor” as the
relevant dynamical variable, rather than the hidden and then unknown
variable “color”. Nevertheless, this work prepared the way for the emer-
gence of quantum chromodynamics a decade later.
     Early work in nuclear beta decay seemed to show that the relevant
interaction was a mixture of S, T, and P. Only after the discovery of parity
violation, and the undoing of several wrong experiments, did it become
clear that the weak interactions were in reality V-A. The synthesis of
Feynman and Gell-Mann and of Marshak and Sudarshan was a necessary
precursor to the notion of a gauge theory of weak interactions. [7] Bludman
formulated the first SU(2) gauge theory of weak interactions in 1958. [8]
No attempt was made to include electromagnetism. The model included
the conventional charged-current interactions, and in addition, a set of
neutral current couplings. These are of the same strength and form as
those of today’s theory in the limit in which the weak mixing angle vanish-
es. Of course, a gauge theory of weak interactions alone cannot be made
renormalizable. For this, the weak and electromagnetic interactions must
be unified.
     Schwinger, as early as 1956, believed that the weak and electromagnetic
interactions should be combined together into a gauge theory. [9] T h e
charged massive vector intermediary and the massless photon were to be
the gauge mesons. As his student, I accepted this faith. In my 1958
Harvard thesis, I wrote: “It is of little value to have a potentially renormali-
zable theory of beta processes without the possibility of a renormalizable
electrodynamics. We should care to suggest that a fully acceptable theory
of these interactions may only be achieved if they are treated together. . .”
[10]
     We used the original SU(2) gauge interaction of Yang and Mills. Things
had to be arranged so that the charged current, but not the neutral


(electromagnetic) current, would violate parity and strangeness. Such a
theory is technically possible to construct, but it is both ugly and experi-
mentally false. [11] We know now that neutral currents do exist and that the
electroweak gauge group must be larger than SU(2).
   Another electroweak synthesis without neutral currents was put forward
by Salam and Ward in 1959. Again, they failed to see how to incorpo-
                               [12]



rate the experimental fact of parity violation. Incidentally, in a continu-
ation of their work in 196 1, they suggested a gauge theory of strong, weak,
and electromagnetic interactions based on the local symmetry group SU(2)
x SU(2). [13] This was a remarkable portent of the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)
model which is accepted today.
   We come to my own work [ ] done in Copenhagen in 1960, and done
                                  14



independently by Salam and Ward. [ ] We finally saw that a gauge group
                                       15



larger than SU(2) was necessary to describe the electroweak interactions.
Salam and Ward were motivated by the compelling beauty of gauge
theory. I thought I saw a way to a renormalizable scheme. I was led to the
group SU(2) x U(1) by analogy with the approximate isospin-hypercharge
group which characterizes strong interactions. In this model there were
two electrically neutral intermediaries: the massless photon and a massive
neutral vector meson which I called B but which is now known as Z. The
weak mixing angle determined to what linear combination of SU(2) x U(1)
generators B would correspond. The precise form of the predicted neu-
tral-current interaction has been verified by recent experimental data.
However, the strength of the neutral current was not prescribed, and the
model was not in fact renormalizable. These glaring omissions were to be
rectified by the work of Salam and Weinberg and the subsequent proof of
renormalizability. Furthermore, the model was a model of leptons-it
could not evidently be extended to deal with hadrons.


RENORMALIZABILITY

In the late 50’s, quantum electrodynamics and pseudoscalar meson theory
were known to be renormalizable, thanks in part to work of Salam. Neither
of the customary models of weak interactions - charged intermediate
vector bosons or direct four-fermion couplings - satisfied this essential
criterion. My thesis at Harvard, under the direction of Julian Schwinger,
was to pursue my teacher’s belief in a unified electroweak gauge theory. I
had found some reason to believe that such a theory was less singular than
its alternatives. Feinberg, working with charged intermediate vector me-
sons discovered that a certain type of divergence would cancel for a special
value of the meson anomalous magnetic moment.[16] It did not correspond
to a “minimal electromagnetic coupling”, but to the magnetic properties
demanded by a gauge theory. Tzou Kuo-Hsien examined the zero-
mass limit of charged vector meson electrodynamics. [17] Again, a sensible
result is obtained only for a very special choice of the magnetic dipole
moment and electric quadrupole moment, just the values assumed in a


498                                          Physics 1979


gauge theory. Was it just coincidence that the electromagnetism of a
charged vector meson was least pathological in a gauge theory?
   Inspired by these special properties, I wrote a notorious paper. [18] I
alleged that a softly-broken gauge theory, with symmetry breaking provid-
ed by explicit mass terms, was renormalizable. It was quickly shown that
this is false.
   Again, in 1970, Iliopoulos and I showed that a wide class of divergences
that might be expected would cancel in such a gauge theory. [19] We
showed that the naive divergences of order                            were reduced to “mere-
ly”              where        is a cut-off momentum. This is probably the most
difficult theorem that Iliopoulos or I had even proven. Yet, our labors
were in vain. In the spring of 1971, Veltman informed us that his student
Gerhart ‘t Hooft had established the renormalizability of spontaneously
broken gauge theory.
   In pursuit of renormalizability, I had worked diligently but I completely
missed the boat. The gauge symmetry is an exact symmetry, but it is
hidden. One must not put in mass terms by hand. The key to the problem
is the idea of spontaneous symmetry breakdown: the work of Goldstone as
e x t e n d e d t o g a u g e t h e o r i e s b y H i g g s a n d K i b b l e i n 1 9 6 4 .[20] T h e s e
workers never thought to apply their work on formal field theory to a
phenomenologically relevant model. I had had many conversations with
Goldstone and Higgs in 1960. Did I neglect to tell them about my
SU (2)xU (1) model, or did they simply forget?
   Both Salam and Weinberg had had considerable experience in formal
field theory, and they had both collaborated with Goldstone on spontane-
ous symmetry breaking. In retrospect, it is not so surprising that it was they
who first used the key. Their SU (2)XU (1) gauge symmetry was spontane-
ously broken. The masses of the W and Z and the nature of neutral
current effects depend on a single measurable parameter, not two as in my
unrenormalizable model. The strength of the neutral currents was correct-
ly predicted. The daring Weinberg-Salam conjecture of renormalizability
was proven in 1971. Neutral currents were discovered in 1973[21] , but not
until 1978 was it clear that they had just the predicted properties. [22]


THE STRANGENESS-CHANGING NEUTRAL CURRENT

I had more or less abandoned the idea of an electroweak gauge theory
during the period 1961-1970. Of the several reasons for this, one was the
failure of my naive foray into renormalizability. Another was the emer-
gence of an empirically successful description of strong interactions - the
SU(3) unitary symmetry scheme of Gell-Mann and Ne’eman. This theory
was originally phrased as a gauge theory, with        and K* as gauge
mesons. It was completely impossible to imagine how both strong and
weak interactions could be gauge theories: there simply wasn’t room
enough for commuting structures of weak and strong currents. Who could
foresee the success of the quark model, and the displacement of SU(3)


from the arena of flavor to that of color? The predictions of unitary
symmetry were being borne out - the predicted             was discovered in
1964. Current algebra was being successfully exploited. Strong interac-
tions dominated the scene.
   When I came upon the SU(2)xU(1) model in 1960, I had speculated on
a possible extension to include hadrons. To construct a model of leptons
alone seemed senseless: nuclear beta decay, after all, was the first and
foremost problem. One thing seemed clear. The fact that the charged
current violated strangeness would force the neutral current to violate
strangeness as well. It was already well known that strangeness-changing
neutral currents were either strongly suppressed or absent. I concluded
that the Z0 had to be made very much heavier than the W. This was an
arbitrary but permissible act in those days: the symmetry breaking mecha-
nism was unknown. I had “solved” the problem of strangeness-changing
neutral currents by suppressing all neutral currents: the baby was lost with
the bath water.
   I returned briefly to the question of gauge theories of weak interactions
in a collaboration with Gell-Mann in 1961 . From the recently develop-
                                             [23]



ing ideas of current algebra we showed that a gauge theory of weak
interactions would inevitably run into the problem of strangeness-chang-
ing neutral currents. We concluded that something essential was missing.
Indeed it was. Only after quarks were invented could the idea of the
fourth quark and the GIM mechanism arise.
   From 196 1 to 1964, Sidney Coleman and I devoted ourselves to the
exploitation of the unitary symmetry scheme. In the spring of 1964, I
spent a short leave of absence in Copenhagen. There, Bjorken and I
suggested that the Gell-Mann-Zweig-system of three quarks should be ex-
tended to four. [24] (Other workers had the same idea at the same time). [25]
We called the fourth quark the charmed quark. Part of our motivation
for introducing a fourth quark was based on our mistaken notions of
hadron spectroscopy. But we also wished to enforce an analogy between
the weak leptonic current and the weak hadronic current. Because there
were two weak doublets of leptons, we believed there had to be two weak
doublets of quarks as well. The basic idea was correct, but today there seem
to be three doublets of quarks and three doublets of leptons.
   The weak current Bjorken and I introduced in 1964 was precisely the
GIM current. The associated neutral current, as we noted, conserved
strangeness. Had we inserted these currents into the earlier electroweak
theory, we would have solved the problem of strangeness-changing neutral
currents. We did not. I had apparently quite forgotten my earlier ideas of
electroweak synthesis. The problem which was explicitly posed in 1961 was
solved, in principle, in 1964. No one, least of all me, knew it. Perhaps we
were all befuddled by the chimera of relativistic SU(6), which arose at
about this time to cloud the minds of theorists.
   Five years later, John Iliopoulos, Luciano Maiani and I returned to the
question of strangeness-changing neutral currents. [26] It seems incredible


500                                         Physics 1979


that the problem was totally ignored for so long. We argued that unob-
served effects (a large K 1K 2 mass difference; decays like K          etc.)
would be expected to arise in any of the known weak interaction models:
four fermion couplings; charged vector meson models; or the electroweak
gauge theory. We worked in terms of cut-offs, since no renormalizable
theory was known at the time. We showed how the unwanted effects would
be eliminated with the conjectured existence of a fourth quark. After
languishing for a decade, the problem of the selection rules of the neutral
current was finally solved. Of course, not everyone believed in the predict-
ed existence of charmed hadrons.
   This work was done fully three years after the epochal work of Wein-
berg and Salam, and was presented in seminars at Harvard and at M. I. T.
Neither I, nor my coworkers, nor Weinberg, sensed the connection be-
tween the two endeavors. We did not refer, nor were we asked to refer, to
the Weinberg-Salam work in our paper.
   The relevance became evident only a year later. Due to the work of
‘t Hooft, Veltman, Benjamin Lee, and Zinn-Justin, it became clear that the
Weinberg-Salam ansatz was in fact a renormalizable theory. With GIM, it
was trivially extended from a model of leptons to a theory of weak interac-
tions. The ball was now squarely in the hands of the experimenters. Within
a few years, charmed hadrons and neutral currents were discovered, and
both had just the properties they were predicted to have.


FROM ACCELERATORS TO MINES

Pions and strange particles were discovered by passive experiments which
made use of the natural flux of cosmic rays. However, in the last three
decades, most discoveries in particle physics were made in the active mode,
with the artificial aid of particle accelerators. Passive experimentation
stagnates from a lack of funding and lack of interest. Recent developments
in theoretical particle physics and in astrophysics may mark an imminent
rebirth of passive experimentation. The concentration of virtually all high-
energy physics endeavors at a small number of major accelerator laborato-
ries may be a thing of the past.
   This is not to say that the large accelerator is becoming extinct; it will
remain an essential if not exclusive tool of high-energy physics. Do not
forget that the existence of Z 0 at ~ 100 GeV is an essential but quite
untested prediction of the electroweak theory. There will be additional
dramatic discoveries at accelerators, and these will not always have been
predicted in advance by theorists. The construction of new machines like
LEP and ISABELLE is mandatory.
   Consider the successes of the electroweak synthesis, and the fact that the
only plausible theory of strong interactions is also a gauge theory. We must
believe in the ultimate synthesis of strong, weak, and electromagnetic
interactions. It has been shown how the strong and electroweak gauge
g r o u p s m a y b e p u t i n t o a l a r g e r b u t s i m p l e g a u g e g r o u p .[27] G r a n d


                                                                              501


unification - perhaps along the lines of the original SU (5) theory of
Georgi and me - must be essentially correct. This implies that the proton,
and indeed all nuclear matter, must be inherently unstable. Sensitive
searches for proton decay are now being launched. If the proton lifetime is
shorter than 10 32 years, as theoretical estimates indicate, it will not be long
before it is seen to decay.
    Once the effect is discovered (and I am sure it will be), further experi-
ments will have to be done to establish the precise modes of decay of
nucleons. The selection rules, mixing angles, and space-time structure of a
new class of effective four-fermion couplings must be established. The
heroic days of the discovery of the nature of beta decay will be repeated.
   The first generation of proton decay experiments is cheap, but subse-
quent generations will not be. Active and passive experiments will compete
for the same dwindling resources.
   Other new physics may show up in elaborate passive experiments. To-
day’s theories suggest modes of proton decay which violate both baryon
number and lepton number by unity. Perhaps this ∆ B =             = 1 law will be
 satisfied. Perhaps ∆ B =     ∆ L transitions will be seen. Perhaps, as Pati and
Salam suggest, the proton will decay into three leptons. Perhaps two
nucleons will annihilate in ∆ B = 2 transitions. The effects of neutrino
oscillations resulting from neutrino masses of a fraction of an election volt
may be detectable. “Superheavy isotopes” which may be present in the
Earth’s crust in small concentrations could reveal themselves through their
multi-GeV decays. Neutrino bursts arising from distant astronomical catas-
trophes may be seen. The list may be endless or empty. Large passive
experiments of the sort now envisioned have never been done before.
Who can say what results they may yield?


PREMATURE ORTHODOXY

The discovery of the       in 1974 made it possible to believe in a system
involving just four quarks and four leptons. Very quickly after this a third
charged lepton (the tau) was discovered, and evidence appeared for a
third Q= -1/3 quark (the b quark). Both discoveries were classic sur-
prises. It became immediately fashionable to put the known fermions into
families or generations:




The existence of a third Q = 2/3 quark (the t quark) is predicted. The
Cabibbo-GIM scheme is extended to a system of six quarks. The three
family system is the basis to a vast and daring theoretical endeavor. For
example, a variety of papers have been written putting experimental
constraints on the four parameters which replace the Cabibbo angle in a


502                               Physics 1979


six quark system. The detailed manner of decay of particles containing a
single b quark has been worked out. All that is wanting is experimental
confirmation. A new orthodoxy has emerged, one for which there is little
evidence, and one in which I have little faith.
   The predicted t quark has not been found. While the upsilon mass is less
than 10 GeV, the analogous tt particle, if it exists at all, must be heavier
than 30 GeV. Perhaps it doesn’t exist.
   Howard Georgi and I, and other before us, have been working on
models with no t quark. [28] We believe this unorthodox view is as attractive
as its alternative. And, it suggests a number of exciting experimental
possibilities.
   We assume that b and       share a quantum number, like baryon number,
that is essentially exactly conserved. (Of course, it may be violated to the
same extent that baryon number is expected to be violated.) Thus, the
system is assumed to be distinct from the lighter four quarks and
four leptons. There is, in particular, no mixing between b and d or
s. The original GIM structure is left intact. An additional mechanism
must be invoked to mediate b decay, which is not present in the
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) gauge theory.
   One possibility is that there is an additional SU(2) gauge interaction
whose effects we have not yet encountered. It could mediate such decays
of b as these




All decays of b would result in the production of a pair of leptons,
including a     or its neutral partner. There are other possibilities as well,
which predict equally bizarre decay schemes for b-matter. How the b quark
decays is not yet known, but it soon will be.
  The new SU(2) gauge theory is called upon to explain CP violation as
well as b decay. In order to fit experiment, three additional massive
neutral vector bosons must exist, and they cannot be too heavy. One of
them can be produced in e + e - annihilation, in addition to the expected Z 0.
Our model is rife with experimental predictions, for example: a second Z0,
a heavier version of b and of     the production of     b in e p collisions, and
the existence of heavy neutral unstable leptons which may be produced
and detected in e+ e - or in up collisions.
  This is not the place to describe our views in detail. They are very
speculative and probably false. The point I wish to make is simply that it is
too early to convince ourselves that we know the future of particle physics.
There are too many points at which the conventional picture may be
wrong or incomplete. The SU(3)xSU(2)xU(1) gauge theory with three
families is certainly a good beginning, not to accept but to attack, extend,
and exploit. We are far from the end.


                                          S.L. Glashow                                     503


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

 I wish to thank the Nobel Foundation for granting me the greatest honor
to which a scientist may aspire. There are many without whom my work
would never have been. Let me thank my scientific collaborators, especially
James Bjorken, Sidney Coleman, Alvaro De Rújula, Howard Georgi, John
Iliopoulos, and Luciano Maiani; the Niels Bohr Institute and Harvard
University for their hospitality while my research on the electroweak
interaction was done: Julian Schwinger for teaching me how to do scienti-
fic research in the first place; the Public School System of New York City,
Cornell University, and Harvard University for my formal education; my
high-school friends Gary Feinberg and Steven Weinberg for making me
learn too much too soon of what I might otherwise have never learned at
all; my parents and my two brothers for always encouraging a child’s
dream to be a scientist. Finally, I wish to thank my wife and my children
for the warmth of their love.




REFERENCES
 1. Yang, C. N. and Mills, R., Phys. Rev. 96, 191 (1954). Also, Shaw, R., unpublished.
 2. Weinberg, S., Phys. Rev. Letters 19, 1264 (1967); Salam, A., in Elementary Particle Physics
    (ed. Svartholm, N.; Almqvist and Wiksell; Stockholm; 1968).
 3. ‘t Hooft, G., Nuclear Physics B 33, 173 and B 35, 167 (1971); Lee, B. W., and Zinn-Justin,
    J., Phys. Rev. D 5, pp. 3121-3160 (1972); ‘t Hooft, G., and Veltman M., Nuclear Physics
    B 44, 189 (1972).
 4. Gross, D. J. and Wilczek, F., Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 1343 (1973); Politzer, H. D., Phys. Rev.
    Lett. 30, 1346 (1973).
 5. Sakurai, J. J., Annals of Physics II, 1 (1960).
 6. Cell-Mann, M., and Ne’eman, Y., The Eightfold Way (Benjamin, W. A., New York, 1964).
 7. Feynman, R., and Cell-Mann, M., Phys. Rev. 109, 193 (1958); Marshak, R., and Sudar-
    shan, E. C. G., Phys. Rev. 109, 1860 (1958).
 8. Bludman, S., Nuovo Cimento Ser. 10 9, 433 (1958).
 9. Schwinger, J., Annals of Physics 2, 407 (1958).
10. Glashow, S. L., Harvard University Thesis, p. 75 (1958).
11. Georgi, H., and Glashow, S. L., Phys. Rev. Letters 28, 1494 (1972).
12. Salam, A., and Ward, J., Nuovo Cimento 11, 568 (1959).
13. Salam, A., and Ward, J., Nuovo Cimento 19, 165 (1961).
14. Glashow, S. L., Nuclear Physics 22, 579 (1961).
15. Salam, A., and Ward, J., Physics Letters 13, 168 (1964).
16. Feinberg, G., Phys. Rev. 110, 1482 (1958).
17. Tzou Kuo-Hsien, Comptes rendus 245, 289 (1957).
18. Glashow, S. L., Nuclear Physics 10, 107 (1959).
19. Glashow, S. L., and Iliopoulos J., Phys. Rev. D 3, 1043 (197 1).
20. Many authors are involved with this work: Brout, R., Englert, F., Goldstone, J., Guralnik,
    G., Hagen, C., Higgs, P., Jona-Lasinio, G., Kibble, T., and Nambu, Y.
21. Hasert, F. J., et al., Physics Letters 46B, 138 (1973) and Nuclear Physics B 73, 1 (1974).
    Benvenuti, A., et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 32, 800 (1974).
22. Prescott, C. Y., et al., Phys. Lett. B 77, 347 (1978).
23. Cell-Mann, M., and Glashow, S. L., Annals of Physics 15, 437 (1961).
24. Bjorken, J., and Glashow, S. L., Physics Letters II, 84 (1964).


504                                       Physics 1979


25. Amati, D., et al., Nuovo Cimento 34, 1732 (A 64); Hara, Y. Phys. Rev. 134, B 701 (1964);
      Okun, L. B., Phys. Lett. 12, 250 (1964); Maki, Z., and Ohnuki, Y., Progs. Theor. Phys. 32,
      144 (1964); Nauenberg, M., (unpublished); Teplitz, V., and Tarjanne, P., Phys. Rev.
      Lett. 11, 447 (1963).
26. Glashow, S. L., Iliopoulos, J., and Maiani, L., Phys. Rev. D 2, 1285 (1970).
27. Georgi, H., and Glashow, S. L., Phys. Rev. Letters 33, 438 (1974).
28. Georgi, H., and Glashow, S. L., Harvard Preprint HUTP-79/A 053.
