STOCHASTIC COOLING AND THE
ACCUMULATION OF ANTIPROTONS
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1984

by
SIMON VAN DER MEER
CERN, CH- 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland




1. A general outline of the  project
The large project mentioned in the motivation of this year’s Nobel award in
physics includes in addition to the experiments proper described by C. Rubbia,
the complex machinery for colliding high-energy protons and antiprotons (Fig.
1). Protons are accelerated to 26 GeV/c in the PS machine and are used to
produce p’s in a copper target. An accumulator ring (AA) accepts a batch of
these with momenta around 3.5 GeV/c every 2.4 s. After typically a day of
accumulation, a large number of the accumulated             (~1011) are extracted
from the AA, reinjected into the PS, accelerated to 26 Gev/c and transferred to
the large (2.2 km diameter) SPS ring. Just before, 26 Gev/c protons, also from
the PS, have been injected in the opposite direction. Protons and antiprotons
are then accelerated to high energy (270 or 310 Gev) and remain stored for
many hours. They are bunched (in 3 bunches of about 4 ns duration each) so
that collisions take place in six well-defined points around the SPS ring, in two
of which experiments are located. The process is of a complexity that could
only be mastered by the effort and devotion of several hundreds of people. Only
a small part of it can be covered in this lecture, and I have chosen to speak
about stochastic cooling, a method that is used to accumulate the antiprotons,
and with which I have been closely associated.




Fig. 1.   Overall layout of the   project.


292                                 Physics 1984


2. Cooling, why and how?
A central notion in accelerator physics is phase space, well-known from other
areas of physics. An accelerator or storage ring has an acceptance that is
defined in terms of phase volume. The antiproton accumulator must catch
many antiprotons coming from the target and therefore has a large acceptance;
much larger than the SPS ring where the p’s are finally stored. The phase
volume must therefore be reduced and the particle density in phase space
increased. On top of this, a large density increase is needed because of the
requirement to accumulate many          batches. In fact, the density in 6-dimen-
sional phase space is boosted by a factor 109 in the AA machine.
   This seems to violate Liouville’s theorem that forbids any compression of
phase volume by conservative forces such as the electromagnetic fields that are
used by accelerator builders. In fact, all that can be done in treating particle
beams is to distort the phase volume without changing the density anywhere.
   Fortunately, there is a trick - and it consists of using the fact that particles
are points in phase space with empty space in between. We may push each
particle towards the centre of the distribution, squeezing the empty space
outwards. The small-scale density is strictly conserved, but in a macroscopic
sense the particle density increases. This process is called cooling because it
reduces the movements of the particles with respect to each other.
   Of course, we can only do this if we have information about the individual
particle’s position in phase space and if we can direct the pushing action
against the individual particles. Without these two prerequisites, there would
be no reason why particles rather than empty space would be pushed inwards.
A stochastic cooling system therefore consists of a sensor (pick-up) that ac-
quires electrical signals from the particles, and a so-called kicker that pushes
the particles and that is excited by the amplified pick-up signals.
   Such a system resembles Maxwell’s demon, which is supposed to reduce the
entropy of a gas by going through a very similar routine, violating the second
law of thermodynamics in the process. It has been shown by Szilard1 that the
measurement performed by the demon implies an entropy increase that com-
pensates any reduction of entropy in the gas. Moreover, in practical stochastic
cooling systems, the kicker action is far from reversible; such systems are
therefore even less devilish than the demon itself.

3. Qualitative description of betatron cooling
The cooling of a single particle circulating in a ring is particularly simple. Fig. 2
shows how it is done in the horizontal plane. (Horizontal, vertical and longitu-
dinal cooling are usually decoupled.)
   Under the influence of the focusing fields the particle executes betatron
oscillations around its central orbit. At each passage of the particle a so-called
differential pick-up provides a short pulse signal that is proportional to the
distance of the particle from the central orbit. This is amplified and applied to
the kicker, which will deflect the particle. If the distance between pick-up and
kicker contains an odd number of quarter betatron wavelengths and if the gain
is chosen correctly, any oscillation will be cancelled. The signal should arrive at


                                                                                             293




Fig. 2.   Cooling of the horizontal betatron oscillation of a single particle




Fig. 3.   Variation with system gain of the coherent cooling and incoherent heating effect




the kicker at the same time as the particle; because of delays in the cabling and
amplifiers, the signal path must cut off a bend in the particle’s trajectory.
   In practice, there will not just be one particle, but a very large number (e.g.
1 06 or 1012). It is clear that even with the fastest electronics their signals will
overlap. Nevertheless, each particle’s individual signal will still be there and
take care of the cooling. However, we must now reduce the gain of the system
because all the other particles whose signals overlap within one system re-
sponse time will have a perturbing (heating) effect, as they will in general have
a random phase with respect to each other. Fortunately, the perturbing effect is
on average zero and it is only its second-order term that heats (i.e. increases the
mean square of the amplitude). This is proportional to the square of the gain,
whereas the cooling effect-each particle acting on itself-varies linearly with
gain. As illustrated in Fig. 3, we may always choose the gain so that the cooling
effect predominates.

4. Simplified analysis of transverse cooling
We shall now analyse the process sketched above in a somewhat approximative
way, neglecting several effects that will be outlined later. The purpose is to get


294                                   Physics 1984


some feeling about the possibilities without obscuring the picture by too much
detail.
    In the first place, we shall assume a system with constant gain over a
bandwidth W and zero gain outside this band. A signal passed by such a
system may be described completely in terms of 2W samples per unit time. If
we have N particles in the ring and their revolution time is T, each sample will
on average contain
                                        N s = N/2WT                                   (1)
particles. We may now consider the system from two viewpoints:
a) we may look at each individual particle and combine the cooling by its own
      signal with the heating by the other particles,
b) we may look at the samples as defined above and treat each sample as the
      single particle of Fig. 1; this is justified because the samples are just resolved
      by the system.
    The two descriptions are equivalent and yield the same result. For the
moment, we shall adopt b). Incidentally, the name “stochastic cooling” origi-
nated’ because from this viewpoint we treat a stochastic signal from random
samples. However, viewpoint a) is more fundamental; cooling is not a stochas-
tic process.
    The pick-up detects the average position of each sample and the gain will
be adjusted so that this is reduced to zero, so that for each particle x is changed
into         Averaging over many random samples, we see that the mean square
x 2 is changed into




  Therefore, the decrement of x2 per turn is           = l/Ns, and the cooling rate
(expressed as the inverse of cooling time) is l/τ = I/N sT. In fact, we have to
divide this by four. One factor 2 occurs because the betatron oscillation is not
always maximum at the pick-up as shown in Fig. 2. Both at the pick-up and at
the kicker WC therefore lose by a factor equal to the sine of a random phase
angle; the average of sin2 is l/2. Another factor 2 is needed because it is usual to
define cooling rate in terms of amplitude rather than its square. So we have,
using (1)

1      1      w
             2N                                                                       (2)

   This result, although approximative, shows that stochastic cooling is not a
practical technique for proton accelerators; for a typical accelerator N   1013,
so that even with a bandwidth of several GHz the cooling would be much too
slow compared to the repetition rate. In storage rings, however, the available
time is longer and sometimes the intensity is lower, so that the technique may
become useful.


                                                                               295


5. Mixing and thermal noise
In deriving the cooling rate, we assumed that all samples have a random
population, without correlation between successive turns. The main reason
why the sample populations change is the spread in energy between the
particles, which results in a revolution frequency spread. The particles overtake
each other, and if the spread of revolution time is large compared to the sample
duration, we speak of “good mixing”; in this case the derivation above is valid.
In practice, it is rarely possible to achieve this ideal situation. In particular
with strongly relativistic particles a large spread of revolution frequency can
only be obtained by a large spread in orbit diameter; for a given aperture this
reduces the momentum spread that is accepted by the machine.
   We may see how bad mixing influences the cooling by replacing the correc-
tion in the derivation of the cooling rate by a smaller amount        As a result
we find in the same way



                                                                               (3)

Clearly, this is largest for g = 1.
   It can be shown that the two terms correspond to the coherent, cooling effect
(each particle cooled by its own signal) and the incoherent, heating effect from
the other particles3. It is the second one that increases by bad mixing, because
of the correlation between samples at successive turns. It may also increase if
thermal noise is added to the signal (usually originating in the low-level
amplifier attached to the pick-up). Thus, we may define a mixing factor M (= 1
for perfect mixing) and a thermal noise factor U (equal to the noise/ signal
power ratio) and obtain




  By optimizing g (now < 1) we find

     W
τ 2N(M+U)                                                                      (4)

6. Frequency domain analysis
This qualitative analysis may be made much more precise by considering the
process from the frequency (instead of time) domain standpoint4-5.
   Each particle produces in the pick-up (considered to be ideal) a delta-
function signal at each passage. For a sum pick-up, where the signal is indepen-
dent of the transverse position, the Fourier transformation into the frequency
domain results in a contribution at each harmonic of the revolution frequency
 (Fig. 4) while for a difference pick-up the modulation by the betatron oscilla-
tion splits up each line into two components 5 . For a collection of many particles
with slightly different revolution frequencies, these lines spread out into bands,


296                                       Physics 1984


called Schottky bands because they represent the noise due to the finite number
of charge carriers as described by Schottky6.
   The width of these bands increases towards higher frequency. The total
power is the same for each band. The power density is therefore lower for the
wider bands at high frequency up to the point where they start to overlap;
beyond this point the bands merge and their combined density is constant with
frequency. This is illustrated in Fig. 5 for so-called longitudinal lines (from a
sum pick-up).
   The cooling process may now be seen as follows. Firstly, each particle will
cool itself with its own (coherent) signal. This means that at the frequency of
each of its Schottky lines the phase of the corresponding sine-wave signal must
be correct at the kicker, so that the latter exerts its influence in the right
direction. Secondly, the other particles produce an incoherent heating effect at


                                                              Frequency domain




Fig. 4.   Schottky signals in time domain and frequency domain




F i g . 5. Longitudinal Schottky bands originating from a large group of particles with slightly
different revolution frequencies. At high frequencies the bands overlap.


each Schottky line proportional to the noise power density around that line 7.
Thus, only particles with frequencies very near to those of the perturbed
particle will contribute. Any power density from thermal noise must of course
be added to the Schottky power density.
   For obtaining optimum cooling, the gain at each Schottky band should be
adjusted so as to achieve an optimum balance between these two effects. If the
bands are separated, the low-frequency ones have a higher density. This
requires a lower gain and leads to less cooling for these bands. This is exactly
the same effect that we called “bad mixing” in the time domain. At higher
frequencies where the bands overlap we have good mixing and the gain should
be independent of frequency.
   Note that the picture given here (i.e. heating only caused by signals near the
particle’s Schottky frequencies) is completely different from the time-domain
picture, where it seemed that particles in the same sample all contribute,
independent of their exact revolution frequency. In fact, the latter is only true if
the mixing is perfect and the samples are statistically independent. In the more
general case, it turns out that both the optimum gain and the optimum cooling
rate per line are inversely proportional to the density dN/df around that line,
rather than to the total number of particles N. In the time domain treatment
this was expressed by the mixing factor M, but the dependence of the para-
meters on frequency was lost.
   There is yet another mixing effect that we have neglected so far. While
moving from the pick-up to the kicker, each sample will already mix to a
certain extent with its neighbours. This harmful effect may be described in the
frequency domain as a phase lag increasing with frequency (particles with
higher revolution frequency arrive too early at the kicker, so that their signal is
too late). It appears quite difficult to correct this by means of filters at each
Schottky band; on the other hand, in practical cases the effect is usually not
very serious8.

7. Beam feedback
Another aspect that we have not yet considered is essential for the correct
analysis of a cooling system. This is the feedback loop formed by the cooling
chain together with the beam response (Fig. 6). Any signal on the kicker will




Fig. 6.   Beam feedback effect. The loop is closed by the coherent beam response B


                                   Physics I984




Fig. 7. Filter   cooling




modulate the beam coherently (in position for a transverse kicker, in energy
and density for a longitudinal one). The modulation is smoothed by mixing,
but some of it will always remain at the pick-up, closing the feedback loop.
    The beam response is a well-known effect from the theory of instabilities in
accelerator rings. For cooling purposes, because the exciting and detecting
points are separated in space 5,9, the treatment is slightly different. This is not
the place to discuss the details; it may, however, be said that the response as a
function of frequency can be calculated if the particle distribution versus
revolution frequency is given, as well as some of the ring parameters.
     It is found that for separated Schottky bands and with negligible thermal
noise the optimum gain for cooling corresponds to an open-loop gain with an
absolute value of unity and that the phase angle of the amplifier chain response
must be opposite to the phase of the beam response*. As a result of this, it turns
out that in the centre of the distribution the optimum loop gain becomes - l for
transverse cooling. The coherent feedback will then halve the amplitude of the
Schottky signals as soon as the system is switched on. This is a convenient way
of adjusting the gain; the correct phase may be checked by interrupting the
loop somewhere and measuring its complete response with a network ana-
l Y ser 10.

8. Longitudinal cooling
So far, I have mainly discussed transverse cooling, i.e. reducing the betatron
oscillations. Longitudinal cooling reduces the energy spread and increases the
longitudinal density. This process, as it turns out, is most important for
accumulating antiprotons.
   One method of longitudinal cooling (sometimes called “Palmer cooling” 11)
is very similar to the one of Fig. 2. Again, we use a differential pick-up, now
placed at a point where the dispersion is high, so that the particle position
depends strongly on its momentum. The kicker must now give longitudinal
kicks.


                                                                                 299




Fig. 8a.   Simple transmission-line filter




Fig. 8b.   Amplitude and phase response vs. frequency.




   A different method is to use a sum pick-up (Fig. 7) and to discriminate
between particles of different energy by inserting a filter into the system
("Thorndahl method” 12). This works because the Schottky frequencies of
particles with different energy are different; the filter must cause a phase
change of 180º in the middle of each band, so that particles from both sides will
be pushed towards the centre. Such a filter may be made by using transmission
lines whose properties vary periodically with frequency. The simple filter of
Fig. 8a may serve as an example. The line, shorted at the far end, behaves as a
short-circuit at all resonant frequencies, which may be made to coincide with
the centres of the Schottky bands. Just above these frequencies the line behaves
as an inductance, just below as a capacitance; thus, the phase jump of 180” is
achieved (Fig. 8b). For relativistic particles, the length of the line must be equal
to half the ring’s circumference. More complicated filters, using several lines
and/or active feedback circuits may sometimes be useful10.
   The advantage of the filter method, especially for low-intensity beams, is that
the attenuation at the central frequencies is now obtained after the preampli-
fier, instead of before it as with a difference pick-up. The signal-to-noise ratio is
therefore much better. Also, at frequencies below about 500 MHz where
ferrites may be used, sum pick-ups may be made much shorter than differential
ones, so that more may fit into the same space. This again gives a better signal-
to-noise ratio. Of course, for filter cooling to be practical, the Schottky bands
must be separated (bad mixing).


Fig. 9.    Loop-type and ferrite ring-type pick-ups (or kickers). Note that for loop-type kickers the
beam direction should be inverted.



9. Pick-ups and kickers
Cooling systems often have an octave bandwidth, with the highest frequency
equal to twice the lowest one. Pick-ups with a reasonably flat response may
consist of coupling loops that are a quarter wavelength long in the middle of the
band (Fig. 9a). At the far end, a matching resistor equal to the characteristic
impedance prevents reflections (or, seen in the frequency domain, ensures a
correct phase relationship between beam and signal). Two loops at either side
of the beam may be connected in common or differential mode for use as a sum
or differential pick-up. The same structure may function as pick-up or kicker.
Sum pick-ups or kickers may also consist of a ferrite frame with one or more
coupling loops around it (Fig. 9b).
   At high frequencies (typically > 1 GHz), slot-type pick-ups or kickers 13
become interesting (Fig. 10). The field from the particles couples to the
transmission line behind the slots. If the latter are shorter than λ/2, the
coupling is weak and the contributions from each slot may all be added
together, provided the velocity along the line is equal to the particle velocity.
   The signal-to-noise ratio at the pick-ups may be improved by using many of
these elements and adding their output power in matched combiner circuits. A




Fig. IO.    Slot-type pick-up or kicker. One end of the transmission line is terminated with its own
characteristic   impedance.


                                            S. van der Meer                                        301




Fig. 11. Density distribution vs. revolution frequency in the Antiproton Accumulator. On the
right, the stack; on the left, the newly injectcd batch, before and after precooling.



further improvement may be obtained by cryogenic cooling of the matching
resistors and/or the preamplifiers.
   Using many kickers reduces the total power required. The available power is
sometimes a limitation to the cooling rate that may be obtained.




Fig. 12.   Inside of a vacuum tank with precooling kickers at the left and space for the stack at the
right. The fcrrite frames of the kickers are open in the centre of the picture; they can be closed by
the ferrite slabs mounted on the shutter that rotates around a pivot at the far right. Water tubes for
cooling the ferrite may be seen.


                                         Physics 1984




Fig. 13.   Precooling 6 x 10 6   in 2 seconds. Longitudinal Schottky band at the 170th harmonic
(314 MHz) before and after cooling.



10. Accumulation of antiprotons; stochastic stacking
It is now possible to explain how the antiproton accumulator works. It should,
however, be made clear first that stochastic cooling is not the only method
available for this purpose. In fact, already in 1966, Budker14 proposed a pp
collider scheme where the cooling was to be done by his so-called electron
cooling method. A cold electron beam superimposed on the beam cools it by
electromagnetic interaction (scattering). We originally also planned to use this
idea; it turns out, however, that it needs particles with low energy to work well
with large-emittance beams. An additional ring to decelerate the antiprotons
would then have been needed. The simpler stochastic method, using a single
ring at fixed field was preferred.
    In Fig. 11 we see how the particle density depends on revolution frequency
(or energy, or position of the central orbit; the horizontal axis could represent
any of these). On the right, the so-called stack, i.e. the particles that have
already been accumulated. On the left, the low-density beam that is injected
every 2.4 seconds. The latter is separated in position from the stack in those
regions of the circumference where the dispersion of the lattice is large. In such
a place the injection kicker can therefore inject these particles without kicking
 the stack. Also, the pick-ups and kickers used for the first cooling operation
 (longitudinal precooling) are placed here so that they do not see the stack.
They consist, in fact, of ferrite frames surrounding the injected beam (Fig. 12).
The pick-ups are therefore sum pick-ups (200 in total, each 25 mm long in


                                   S. van der Meer                            303


beam direction) and the Thorndahl type of cooling, with a filter, is used15.
Figure 13 shows how the distribution is reduced in width by an order of
magnitude within 2 seconds. The number of antiprotons involved is about
6 x 106, the band used is 150-500 MHz.
   After this precooling, one leg of the ferrite frames is moved downwards by a
fast actuator mechanism 16 so that the precooled beam can be bunched by RF
and decelerated towards the low-frequency tail of the stack (Fig. 11). The
whole process, including the upward movement of the “shutter” to restore the
pick-ups and kickers, takes 400 ms. The RF is then slowly reduced] 17 so that the
particles are debunched and deposited in the stack tail.
   They must be removed from this place within the next 2.4 seconds because
Liouville’s theorem prevents the RF system from depositing the next batch at
the same place without simultaneously removing what was there before. A
further longitudinal cooling system, using the 250-500 MHz band, therefore
pushes these particles towards higher revolution frequencies, up against the
density gradient18.
   This so-called stack tail system should have a gain that depends on energy
(or revolution frequency). In fact, the density gradient increases strongly
towards the stack core (note the logarithmic scale), and the gain for optimum
cooling should vary inversely with this. We achieve this by using as pick-ups
small quarter-wave coupling loops, positioned underneath and above the tail
region, in such a place that they are sensitive to the extreme tail, but much less
to the far-away dense core. This results in a bad signal-to-noise ratio for the
region nearer to the core. Therefore, two sets of pick-ups are used, each at a
different radial position and each with its own preamplifier and gain adjust-
ment. With this set-up we obtain fast cooling at the stack edge where the
particles are deposited, and slow cooling at the dense core, where we can afford
it because the particles remain there for hours.
   A problem is that the tail systems must be quite powerful to remove the
particles fast enough. As a result, their kickers will also disturb the slowly-
cooled stack core (the Schottky signals do not overlap with the core frequencies,
but the thermal noise does). The problem exists because the kickers must be at
a point where the dispersion is zero to prevent them from exciting horizontal
betatron oscillations. They therefore kick all particles (tail or core) equally.
   A solution is found by using transmission-line filters as described above to
suppress the core frequencies in the tail cooling systems. These filters also
rotate the phase near the core region in an undesirable way; this does not
matter, however, because the cooling of the core is done by a third system of
larger bandwidth (l-2 GHz).
   While the particles move towards the core, they are also cooled horizontally
and vertically, first by tail cooling systems, then by l-2 GHz core systems. The
layout of the various cooling circuits is shown in Fig. 14. In the general view of
Fig. 15, some of the transmission lines transporting the signals for the pick-ups
to the kickers may be seen.
   When the stack contains a sufficient number of antiprotons (typically
2X 1011), a fraction of these (~ 30 %) is transferred to the PS and from there to


                                             Physics 1984




Fig. 14.      Plan of the AA ring with its 7 cooling systems. L = longitudinal, V = vertical, H =
horizontal.


                                     S. van der Meer                           305


the SPS machine. This is done by bunching a part of the stack, of a width that
may be adjusted by properly choosing the RF bucket area19. These are acceler-
ated until they are on the same orbit where normally particles are injected.
They can then be extracted without disturbing the remaining stack. This
process is repeated (at present three times); each time one RF bucket of the SPS
is filled. The remaining p’s form the beginning of the next stack.

11. Design of longitudinal cooling systems; Fokker-Planck equation
The main difference between transverse and longitudinal cooling systems is
that the latter will change the longitudinal distribution on which the incoherent
(heating) term depends, as well as effects such as the beam feedback. This
complicates the theory; still, everything can be calculated if all parameters are
given.
   It is convenient to define the flux       i.e. the number of particles passing a
certain energy (or frequency) value per unit time. It may be shown 5 that

                                 =                                              (5)

where      is the density dN/df0 while F and D are slowly varying constants,
depending on various system parameters as well as on the particle distribution.
The first term represents the coherent cooling, the second one the incoherent
(diffusion) effect that has the effect of pushing the particles down the gradient
under the influence of perturbing noise.
  By using the continuity equation




expressing that no particles are lost, we find the Fokker-Planck-type equation




that allows us to compute the evolution of the density versus revolution
frequency fO and time given the initial distribution. The particles deposited at
the edge are introduced as a given flux at that point.
   The constants F and D depend on many system parameters (pick-up and
kicker characteristics, amplifier gain, filter response, beam distribution, etc.).
Their value is found through summing the contributions of all Schottky bands.
Analytic solutions of (6) do not exist in practice and a complicated numerical
treatment is indicated.
   Such calculations resulted in the design of the antiproton stacking system. At
the time this was done, tests in a small experimental ring (ICE) had confirmed
the cooling in all planes at time scales of the order of 10 seconds. However, it
was not possible to check the stacking system (increasing the density by four
orders of magnitude) in any way, and it may be argued that we took a certain
risk by starting the project without being able to verify this aspect. Fortunately,


                                           Physics 1984




Fig. 15.   View of the Antiproton Accumulator beforc it was covered by concrete slabs. The silvered
material around the vacuum tanks is insulation, needed because everything may be heated to 300”
to obtain ultra-high vacuum. The transmission lines crossing the ring and carrying the cooling
signals may be seen.



everything behaved according to theory and although the number of p’s
injected is smaller than was hoped for by a factor 3.5, the cooling works largely
as expected.

12. Other applications of stochastic cooling; future developments
At present. stochastic cooling is used at CERN in the accumulator and in the
low energy ring (LEAR) where the p’s may be stored after deceleration in the
PS. Before the intersecting storage rings (ISR) were closed down last year, they
also used the antiprotons and contained cooling equipment.
   In the SPS where the high-energy collisions take place, cooling would be
attractive because it would improve the beam lifetime and might decrease its
cross-section. However, a difficulty is formed by the fact that the beam is
bunched in this machine; the bunches are narrow (3 x 4 ns). In fact, owing to
the bunching each Schottky band is split up into narrow, dense satellite bands
and the signals from different bands are correlated”. Nevertheless, a scheme is
being considered that might improve the lifetime to a certain extent”.
   In the United States, a accumulator complex similar to the CERN one and
also using stochastic cooling is being constructed22. This machine is expected to
have a stacking rate an order of magnitude higher than the CERN one because
it uses a higher primary energy to produce the antiprotons and higher frequen-
cies to cool them. In the meantime, we are building a second ring at CERN,


                                                                                         307


surrounding the present accumulator (Fig. 16), with a similar performance. It
will have stronger focusing, so increasing both transverse acceptances by at
least a factor 2, and the longitudinal one by a factor 4. The increased focusing
strengths will diminish the mixing; consequently, higher frequencies (up to 4
GHz) will be used for cooling. The present AA will be used to contain the stack
and its cooling systems will also be upgraded.




Fig. 16.   The new ACOL ring (under construction) around the AA. This ring will increase the
stacking rate by an order of magnitude. The stack will still be kept in the AA ring.




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The development of the stochastic cooling. theory owes much to H. G.
 Hereward, D. Möhl, F. Sacherer, and L. Thorndahl. The latter also made
 important contributions to the construction of most cooling systems at CERN
 and it is doubtful if the accumulator would have been feasible without his
 invention of the filter method. It is also a pleasure to acknowledge the invalu-
 able contributions of G. Carron (hardware), L. Faltin (slot pick-ups) and C.
 Taylor (l-2 GHz systems).
    During the construction of the Antiproton Accumulator, R. Billinge was
joint project leader with myself and it is mostly because of his contributions to
 the design and his able management that the machine was ready in a record
 time (2 years) and worked so well.


308                                          Physics 1984


REFERENCES

 1. L. Szilard, Gbcr die Entropieverminderung in &cm thermodynamischen System bei Eingrif-
      fin intclligenter Wesen, Zcitsch. f. Physik 53 (1929) 840.
2. S. van dcr Meer, Stochastic damping of betatron oscillations in the ISR, CERN/ISR-PO/ 72-
      31 (1972).
3. D. Möhl, Stochastic cooling for beginners, Proceedings of the CERN Accelerator School on
      Antiprotons for Colliding Beam Facilities, CERN 84- 15 (1984).
4. F. Sacherer, Stochastic cooling theory, CERN/ISR-TH/78- 11          (1978).
5. D. Möhl, G. Petrucci, L. Thorndahl, S. van der Merr, Physics and technique of stochastic
      cooling, Phys. Reports 58 (1980) 73.
6. W. Schottky, Ann. Physik 57 (1918) 541.
 7. H. G. Hereward, The elementary theory of Landau damping, CERN 65-20 (1965).
8. S. van der Meer, Optimum gain and phase for stochastic cooling systems, CERN/PS-AA/83-
      48 (1983).
9. S. van der Meer. A different formulation of the longitudinal and transvcrse beam response,
      CERN/PS-AA/80-4 (1980).
10. S. van der Meer, Stochastic cooling in the Antiproton Accumulator, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.
      NS28 (1981) 1994.
11.    R. B. Palmer, BNL, Private communication (1975).
12. G. Carron, L. Thorndahl, Stochastic cooling of momentum spread by filter techniques,
      CERN/ISR-RF/78-12 (1978).
13. L. Faltin, Slot-type pick-up and kicker for stochastic beam cooling, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
      148 (1978) 449.
14. G. I. Budker, Proc. Int. Symp. on Electron and Positron Storage Rings, Saclay, 1966, p. 11 -l-
      1; Atom. Energ. 22 (1967) 346.
      G. I. Budkcr et al., Experimental studies of electron cooling, Part. Acc. 7 (1976) 197.
15. S. van der Meer, Precooking in the Antiproton Accumulator, CERN/PS-AA/78-26 (1978).
16. D. C. Fiander, S. Milner, P. Pearce, A. Poncet, The Antiproton Accumulator shutters: design,
      technology and performance, CERN/PS/84-23 (1984).
17. R. Johnson, S. van dcr Meer, F. Pcdersen, G. Shering, Computer control of RF manipulations
      in the CERN Antiproton Accumulator, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-30 (1983) 2290.
18. S. van der Meer, Stochastic stacking in the Antiproton Accumulator, CERN/PS-AA/78-22
      (1978).
19. R. Johnson, S. van dcr Meer, F. Pedersen, Measuring and manipulating an accumulated stack
      of antiprotons in the CERN Antiproton Accumulator, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-30 (1983)
      2123.
20. H. Herr, D. Möhl, Bunched bram stochastic cooling, CERN/EP/Note 79-34 (1979).
21. D. Boussard, S. Chattopadhyay, G. Dôme, T. Linnecar, Feasibility study of stochastic cooling
      of bunches in the SPS, CERN/SPS/84-4 (1984).
22. Design Report Tevatron I project, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, 111. (1983).
