PASSION FOR PRECISION
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2005
by
Theodor W. Hänsch
Max-Planck-Institut für Quantenoptik, Garching, and
Department of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany.




ABSTRACT
Optical frequency combs from mode-locked femtosecond lasers have revolu-
tionized the art of counting the frequency of light. They can link optical and
microwave frequencies in a single step, and they provide the long missing
clockwork for optical atomic clocks. By extending the limits of time and fre-
quency metrology, they enable new tests of fundamental physics laws. Precise
comparisons of optical resonance frequencies of atomic hydrogen and other
atoms with the microwave frequency of a cesium atomic clock are establish-
ing sensitive limits for possible slow variations of fundamental constants.
Optical high harmonic generation is extending frequency comb techniques
into the extreme ultraviolet, opening a new spectral territory to precision
laser spectroscopy. Frequency comb techniques are also providing a key to
attosecond science by offering control of the electric field of ultrafast laser
pulses. In our laboratories at Stanford and Garching, the development of new
instruments and techniques for precision laser spectroscopy has long been
motivated by the goal of ever higher resolution and measurement accuracy in
optical spectroscopy of the simple hydrogen atom which permits unique con-
frontations between experiment and fundamental theory. This lecture re-
counts these adventures and the evolution of laser frequency comb tech-
niques from my personal perspective.


INTRODUCTION
In our highly complex and ever changing world it is reassuring to know that
certain physical quantities can be measured and predicted with very high pre-
cision. Precision measurements have always appealed to me as one of the
most beautiful aspects of physics. With better measuring tools, one can look
where no one has looked before. More than once, seemingly minute differ-
ences between measurement and theory have led to major advances in funda-
mental knowledge. The birth of modern science itself is intimately linked to
the art of accurate measurements.
   Since Galileo Galilei and Christiaan Huygens invented the pendulum
clock, time and frequency have been the quantities that we can measure with

                                                                           149


the highest precision. Today, it is often a good strategy to transform other
quantities such as length or voltage into a frequency in order to make accur-
ate measurement. This is what my friend and mentor Arthur Schawlow at
Stanford University had in mind when he advised his students: “Never mea-
sure anything but frequency!” Measuring a frequency, i.e. counting the num-
ber of cycles during a given time interval, is intrinsically a digital procedure
that is immune to many sources of noise. Electronic counters that work up to
microwave frequencies have long been available. In 1967, the Conference
Generale des Poids et Mesures (CGPM) has defined the second, our unit of
time, as the period during which a cesium-133 atom oscillates 9 192 631 770
times on a hyperfine clock transition in the atomic ground state. Today, after
50 years of continuous refinement, microwave cesium atomic clocks reach a
precision of 15 decimal digits [1].
   Even much higher precision is expected from future optical atomic clocks
which use atoms or ions oscillating at the frequency of light as the “pendu-
lum”. By slicing time into a hundred thousand times finer intervals, such
clocks will greatly extend the frontiers of time and frequency metrology. The
long missing clockwork mechanism can now be realized with a femtosecond
laser frequency comb, an ultra-precise measuring tool that can link and com-
pare optical frequencies and microwave frequencies phase coherently in a
single step. Laser frequency combs provide powerful tools for new tests of
fundamental physics laws. Precise comparisons of optical resonance frequen-
cies of atomic hydrogen and other atoms with the microwave frequency of a
cesium atomic clock are already establishing sensitive limits for possible slow
variations of fundamental constants. Optical high harmonic generation is ex-
tending frequency comb techniques into the extreme ultraviolet, opening a
new spectral territory to precision laser spectroscopy. Frequency comb tech-
niques are also providing a key to attosecond science by offering control of
the electric field of ultrafast laser pulses.
   Femtosecond laser frequency combs have been highlighted in the citation
for the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physics. Although perfected only about seven
years ago, they have already become standard tools for precision spectroscopy
and optical frequency metrology in laboratories around the world.
Commercial instruments have quickly moved to the market, and extensive re-
view articles and books have been written on frequency comb techniques [2 -
4]. In this lecture I will try to give my personal perspective on the evolution of
these intriguing measuring tools for time and frequency. Far from attempting
a comprehensive review, I have selected references that helped guide my own
insights along a winding path.


THE DAWN OF DOPPLER-FREE LASER SPECTROSCOPY
High resolution laser spectroscopy and precise spectroscopic measurements
have appealed to me since I was a graduate student at the University of
Heidelberg. For my diploma and thesis research I worked with helium-neon
gas lasers in the group of Peter Toschek at the Institute of Applied Physics,

150


headed by Christoph Schmelzer. I was intrigued by the central narrow Lamb
dip that Abraham Szöke and Ali Javan had first observed while scanning the
frequency of a single-mode gas laser across the Doppler-broadened gain pro-
file [5]. Such a dip had been predicted by Willis Lamb in his semiclassical
laser theory [6]. Bill Bennett was the first to give a simple explanation in
terms of saturation and spectral hole burning the two counter propagating
waves inside the standing wave laser cavity [7]. Other researchers such as
John Hall, Veniamin Chebotaev, or Christian Bordé soon explored “inverted
Lamb dips” by placing some absorbing molecular gas inside the laser cavity
[8]. With resonances of unprecedented spectral resolution, one could almost
smell the revolution in laser spectroscopy that would unfold within the next
few years. At that time, however, such Doppler free spectroscopy remained
limited to the study of gas laser transitions or of a few molecular absorption
lines in accidental coincidence. In my own work with Peter Toschek, I studied
quantum interference effects in coupled atomic three-level systems [9, 10],
demonstrating phenomena which have recently been recognized as impor-
tant, such as lasing without inversion or electromagnetically induced trans-
parency. They are also essential to understand slow light.
   In 1970, I joined Arthur L. Schawlow at Stanford University as a postdoc.
Collaborating in separate experiments with Peter Smith, then at Berkeley
[11], and with Marc Levenson at Stanford [12], I perfected a new method of
Doppler-free saturation spectroscopy that did not require the sample to be
placed inside a laser cavity. Soon afterwards, I succeeded in making a nitro-
gen-laser-pumped widely tunable pulsed dye laser so highly monochromatic
that we could apply Doppler-free saturation spectroscopy to arbitrarily cho-
sen atomic resonance lines [13, 14]. Broadly tunable laser action in liquid so-
lutions of organic dyes had been discovered in 1966, independently by Fritz
Schäfer [15] and Peter Sorokin [16].


LASER SPECTROSCOPY OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN
Arthur Schawlow at Stanford suggested to apply our technique to the red
Balmer- line of atomic hydrogen that had been at the center of attention of
atomic spectroscopists in the 1930s because of suspected discrepancies be-
tween the observed line profile and the predictions of Dirac’s relativistic
quantum theory [17]. In those days, spectroscopists could only observe a
blend of unresolved fine structure components because Doppler broadening
is particularly large for the light hydrogen atoms. Spectroscopy of the simple
hydrogen atom has long played a central role in the history of atomic physics.
The visible Balmer spectrum was the Rosetta stone that allowed us to de-
cipher the laws of quantum physics. It has inspired the path breaking discover-
ies of Niels Bohr, Arnold Sommerfeld, Louis De Broglie, Erwin Schrödinger,
Paul Dirac, and even Willis Lamb at the origin of modern quantum electrody-
namics.
   In 1972, graduate student Issa Shahin and myself were proud to present to
Arthur Schawlow a Doppler-free saturation spectrum of the red hydrogen

                                                                           151


Balmer- line, recorded with our pulsed tunable dye laser [18]. The 2S Lamb
shift, i.e. the splitting between the 2S1/2 and 2P1/2 states that should be degen-
erate according to the Dirac theory, appeared clearly resolved in the optical
spectrum. This was the beginning of a long adventure in precision spec-
troscopy of the simple hydrogen atom, which permits unique confrontations
between experiment and theory. This quest continues today. It has inspired
many advances in spectroscopic techniques, including the first proposal for
laser cooling of atomic gases [19], and, most recently, the femtosecond laser
frequency comb.
   Fig. 1 illustrates how the accuracy of optical spectroscopy of atomic hydro-
gen has advanced over time [20]. Classical spectroscopists remained limited
to about six or seven digits of precision by the large Doppler broadening of
hydrogen spectral lines. In 1971, our group at Stanford overcame this barrier
by nonlinear spectroscopy with a tunable dye laser. Other groups, notably in
New Haven, Oxford, and Paris, soon joined in to improve the accuracy by
three orders of magnitude over the next two decades. Around 1990, a new
barrier appeared: the limits of optical wavelength metrology due to unavoid-
able geometric wave front errors. Progress beyond a few parts in 1010 has
been achieved only because we have learned increasingly well how to mea-
sure the frequency of light rather than its wavelength. In 2003, the accuracy
has reached 1.4 parts in 1014 [21]. Further progress is becoming difficult, be-
cause we are again approaching a barrier: the limits of how well we know our
unit of time, the second. Cesium atomic clocks have been continually refined
over the past 50 years [1], as shown by the dashed line in Fig. 1, but the po-
tential for further improvements seems almost exhausted. However, our opti-
cal frequency counting techniques make it now feasible to develop optical
atomic clocks, based on sharp optical resonances in laser-cooled trapped
ions, neutral atoms or molecules. With such clocks future spectroscopic mea-
surements may reach accuracies of parts in 1018 and beyond.
    In atomic hydrogen, the highest resolution can be achieved on the ultra-
violet 1S-2S two-photon resonance with a natural line width of only 1 Hz. First
order Doppler shifts cancel if this transition is excited with two counter-
propagating laser waves, as was first pointed out by Veniamin Chebotaev [22].
The first Doppler-free spectra have been recorded in our laboratory at
Stanford in 1975 [23]. At Garching, we observe this resonance by collinear
excitation of a cold hydrogen atomic beam [21]. Starting in 1986, many gen-
erations of graduate students and postdocs have made important contribu-
tions to advance the state of the art.
   Today, the hydrogen atoms are produced by microwave dissociation of
molecules and cooled to a temperature of about 6 K by collisions with the
walls of a nozzle mounted to a helium cryostat. A collinear standing wave
field at 243 nm for Doppler-free two-photon excitation is produced by coup-
ling the frequency-doubled output of a dye laser into a buildup cavity inside
the vacuum chamber. Atoms excited to the 2S metastable state after traveling
along a path of about 10 cm are detected by applying a quenching electric
field and counting the emitted vacuum ultraviolet Lyman- photons. The

152


Figure 1. The relative accuracy in optical spectroscopy of atomic hydrogen is charted over
eight decades. Major barriers have been overcome in the early 1970s with the advent of
Doppler-free laser spectroscopy and in the early 1990s with the introduction of optical fre-
quency measurements. The accuracy of such measurement will soon be limited by the per-
formance of cesium atomic clocks. Dramatic future advances are expected from the devel-
opment optical atomic clocks.




laser light is periodically blocked by a chopper, and the photon counts are
sorted into bins corresponding to different delay times. With slow atoms se-
lected by a delay time of 1.3 ms, the line width is now reduced to about 530
Hz at 243 nm corresponding to a resolution of 4.3 parts in 1013. We would
have to reach an accuracy of 5 parts in 1015 in order to measure the line posi-
tion to 1% of this width.


MEASURING OPTICAL FREQUENCIES
The observation of sharp optical resonances by nonlinear laser spectroscopy
with a resolution much beyond the measurement limits of wavelength inter-
ferometry had long created a strong need for methods to measure the fre-
quency rather than the wavelength of light. The quest for an optical frequency
counter is almost as old as the laser itself. Ali Javan, the co-inventor of the he-
lium-neon laser, was the first to superimpose the beams from two different
lasers with a beam splitter on a photo detector to observe a beat note, similar
to the interference of the sound waves from two tuning forks [24]. This was

                                                                                       153


an extraordinary result, because it proved that laser light can behave like a
classical radio wave. A coherent laser wave can have a well defined phase and
amplitude, so that it must be possible to count the ripples of such a light
wave. However, at a frequency near 500 000 billion oscillations per second,
there are no electronic detectors and circuits fast enough to build an optical
frequency counter.
   At MIT in the early 1960s, Ali Javan started a research project, aimed at ex-
tending microwave frequency counting techniques into the optical spectral
region. He experimented with whisker-like metal-insulator-metal point con-
tacts as antennas, detectors and mixers for infrared laser waves. Such ele-
ments were later used by John Hall and Ken Evenson at NBS (now NIST) in
Boulder to realize the first harmonic laser frequency chain, that was used to
determine the speed of light by measuring both the wavelength and the fre-
quency of a methane-stabilized 3.39 m helium-neon gas lasers [25].
Harmonic laser frequency chains were highly complex systems, engineered
to measure just one particular optical frequency, and only a handful of these
chains have ever been constructed at a number of well-equipped national
metrology laboratories. In the early 1980s, a chain at NBS in Boulder had
been perfected so that it could measure the frequencies of some iodine-stabi-
lized visible helium-neon lasers to 10 decimal digits. This demonstration led
the Conference Generale des Poids et Mesures in 1983, to redefine the meter
by defining the speed of light in vacuum c as exactly 299 792 458 meters per
second. One meter is then the distance traveled by light during the time of
1/299 792 458 seconds. From now on, one could determine the precise
wavelength of a laser in vacuum, , by simply measuring the frequency f, since
f •  = c.
   Unfortunately, the complex NBS frequency chain had to be abandoned
soon after this definition was in the books, and for the next decade there was
not a single laboratory in the U.S. that could have followed this prescription.
A number of European laboratories did better, notably the Observatoire in
Paris (now BNM SYRTE) and the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt
(PTB) in Braunschweig. In an article published in early 1996 [26], a team
from the PTB laid claim to the first phase coherent frequency measurement
of visible radiation. An elaborate frequency chain filling three large laborato-
ries spread over two separate buildings was assembled to compare the fre-
quency of the red intercombination line of atomic calcium with the micro-
wave frequency of a cesium atomic clock. To reach sufficient phase stability,
the clock frequency was first reduced to the 100 MHz of a stable quartz oscil-
lator. From here, the chain traversed the entire electromagnetic spectrum in
discrete steps, always generating some harmonic frequency in a suitable non-
linear element and producing enough power for the next step with a phase-
locked transfer oscillator. A tricky puzzle had to be solved to reach the de-
sired final frequency with the help of several auxiliary oscillators.
   It was obvious that we could not afford to assemble such a harmonic laser fre-
quency chain for our hydrogen experiments at Garching. As a simpler alterna-
tive, I proposed a frequency interval divider chain in 1988, that worked with

154


frequency differences rather than the frequencies themselves so that one could
stay in a convenient region of the electromagnetic spectrum such as the near
infrared where compact diode laser sources are available [27]. The basic build-
ing block is an interval divider stage with a laser that is servo-controlled to oscil-
late at the precise mid-point of two input frequencies. To this end, the second
harmonic frequency of the central laser is compared to the sum of the two in-
put frequencies, as generated in a nonlinear optical crystal. With a cascaded
chain of n such interval dividers, a large frequency interval can be divided by
2n. To measure an absolute laser frequency f, one could start with the interval
between f and its second harmonic 2f, which is just equal to the frequency f.
After repeatedly cutting this interval in half with perhaps 15 stages, the remain-
ing frequency gap is small enough that it can be observed as a beat note with a
fast photo-detector and measured with a microwave frequency counter. With
Harald Telle, who had joined us from the PTB, and Dieter Meschede, we
demonstrated the first working interval divider in 1990 [28].
   We never assembled a complete optical frequency counter, but we con-
structed a chain of four interval dividers to measure a frequency interval of 1
THz that we encountered when comparing our hydrogen 1S-2S frequency
with the infrared frequency of a methane-stabilized infrared helium-neon
laser at 3.39 m as the starting point of our own short harmonic laser fre-
quency chain [29]. This intermediate frequency reference had to be repeat-
edly shuttled to Braunschweig to be calibrated with the PTB frequency chain
against a cesium clock. In 1997, we established a new record in optical fre-
quency metrology [29] by determining the ultraviolet 1S-2S frequency to
within 3.7 parts in 1013 . From this and other spectroscopic measurement in
hydrogen, we were able to derive a new value of the Rydberg constant, the
scaling factor for any spectroscopic transition, and the most precisely known
of the fundamental constants. We could also derive the Lamb shift of the 1S
ground state accurately enough to provide a stringent new test of bound-state
QED. Assuming that QED is correct we could, moreover, determine new
values for the rms charge radius of the proton and the structure radius of the
deuteron [29, 30]. We were rather proud that the accuracy achieved with our
table-top experiments exceeded that of electron scattering experiments with
large accelerators by an order of magnitude.
   Soon, a number of metrology laboratories set out to build optical fre-
quency counters based on optical interval division. At Garching, we were also
experimenting with electro-optic frequency comb generators kindly provided
by Motonobu Kourogi, that could produce an evenly spaced comb of modu-
lation sidebands extending over several THz [31]. A frequency counter could
have been realized with only six or seven interval divider stages, if the final
frequency gap was bridged with such an electro-optic comb generator.
During an extended visit to Garching, Motonobu Kourogi showed us how to
observe even feeble comb lines by heterodyne detection, improving the sig-
nal to noise ratio with optical balanced receivers and variable beam splitters.
We soon verified the accuracy of his frequency comb generator and our fre-
quency interval divider chain in a direct comparison [32].

                                                                                 155


Figure 2. Scheme of a femtosecond laser frequency comb synthesizer.




   Many other alternatives have been explored in the long quest for precise
optical frequency measurements, including interferometry with modulated
laser waves [33, 34] or frequency division with phase-locked optical para-
metric oscillators [35]. David Wineland has proposed to synchronize the
cyclotron motion of a single electron to a laser wave [36]. In the meantime,
all these approaches have become obsolete. Since 1998, optical frequency
measurements have been enormously simplified with the advent of femtosec-
ond laser optical frequency comb synthesizers [2,3].


FEMTOSECOND LASER OPTICAL FREQUENCY COMBS
The scheme of a frequency comb synthesizer is rather simple, as illustrated in
Fig. 2. At the heart is a single mode-locked femtosecond laser which main-
tains a soliton-like short pulse circulating inside the optical cavity. This laser
can be compared to Einstein’s Gedanken light clock. With each roundtrip,
an attenuated copy of the light pulse escapes so that the laser emits a regular
train of ultrashort pulses. To measure the unknown frequency of a laser wave,
the beam and the pulse train are superimposed with a beam splitter, and a
photo detector registers an interference signal. In the idealized case of a per-
fectly periodic pulse train, we would expect a low frequency beat note when-
ever the laser frequency comes close to a value where an integer number of
oscillations fits in the time interval between two pulses. To give an example, if

156


we know that the laser emits precisely one billion pulses per second and if we
can be sure that the laser wave oscillates precisely 500 000 times during the
pulse repetition period, then we know that the optical frequency must be
500 000 billion cycles per second.
   In the frequency domain, we can argue that the coupled longitudinal
modes of the pulsed laser form an evenly spaced comb of spectral lines. A low
frequency beat note is expected whenever the unknown laser frequency ap-
proaches one of these comb lines. The origin of the comb spectrum is well
explained by Antony E. Siegman in his classic textbook [37]. Consider an ar-
bitrary optical waveform circulating inside an optical cavity. During each
roundtrip, an attenuated copy escapes through a partly transmitting mirror.
A single copy will have a broad and more or less complicated spectrum.
However, two identical copies end-to-end will produce interference fringes in
the spectrum, somewhat reminiscent of Young’s double slit experiment.
Three copies produce a spectrum that resembles the interference pattern of
a triple-slit, and an infinite series of copies produces sharp lines which can be
identified with the modes of the cavity. Mathematically, an ideal periodic
pulse train can be described in terms of a Fourier series, and the comb lines
correspond to the elements of this series.
   The separation between two modes or comb lines is just equal to the repe-
tition frequency fr. This remains true even if the pulses are not identical repli-
cas but if we allow for a (reproducible) slip of the phase of the electromagnet-
ic “carrier”-wave relative to the pulse envelope from pulse to pulse [38, 2, 3].
Such phase slips are unavoidable in a real laser because of dispersion in the
cavity. The entire comb will then be shifted relative to the integer harmonics
of the repetition frequency fr by a carrier-envelope offset frequency fCE, that
equals the net phase slip modulo 2 per pulse interval. The frequency of a
comb line with integer mode number m is then given by

                                  fm = m fr + fCE.

Such a comb acts like a ruler in frequency space that can be used to measure
a large separation between two different optical frequencies in terms of the
pulse repetition rate fr. If these two frequencies are known multiples or frac-
tions of the same laser frequency f, such a measurement reveals the optical
frequency f itself. With a known repetition frequency fr, the beat signal be-
tween a known optical frequency f and the nearest comb line reveals the pre-
viously unknown offset frequency fCE. The frequency of any comb line can be
calculated from the two radio-frequencies fr and fCE together with the integer
mode number.
   It has been surprising to most experts how far this frequency comb ap-
proach can be pushed. The frequency spectrum of a femtosecond laser oscil-
lator can be broadened in a nonlinear optical medium to span more than an
optical octave without destroying the integrity of the comb lines. In a now
common implementation, the pulse train from a Kerr-lens mode-locked
Ti:sapphire laser is sent through a micro structured silica fiber, with a small

                                                                              157


solid fiber core surrounded by air-filled holes [39, 40]. The large change in re-
fractive index at the silica-air interface permits guiding by total internal reflec-
tion even if the incoming beam is tightly focused to a high intensity. Since part
of the light travels as an evanescent wave in air, an additional engineering pa-
rameter is available in such a fiber to reduce the spreading of an injected
pulse due to group velocity dispersion. Inside the fiber, the pulse spectrum is
broadened by self-phase modulation due to the intensity dependent refractive
index, soliton splitting, shock wave formation, and other nonlinear optical
processes. The emerging white light can be dispersed with a grating to form a
rainbow of colors. However, this is not ordinary white light. Remarkably, the
processes generating the white light can be so highly reproducible that succes-
sive pulses are still correlated in their phases and can interfere in the spec-
trum to form a comb of several hundred thousand sharp spectral lines.
   By now, it has been confirmed in many experiments that the line spacing is
very precisely equal to the repetition frequency fr. With a comb spanning
more than an octave, it is particularly simple to measure the carrier envelope
offset frequency fCE. One can simply select a few thousand comb lines from
the red end of the spectrum and send the light pulses through a frequency
doubling crystal, so that new comb lines are generated which are now dis-
placed by twice the offset frequency fCE. A collective beat note with the corres-
ponding original comb lines near the blue end of the spectrum directly re-
veals the shift fCE. Once this frequency can be measured, it can be controlled,
for instance by adjusting the dispersion in the laser cavity or simply by chang-
ing the pump power. One can even set fCE to zero so that the frequencies of
the comb lines become precise integer multiples of the laser repetition fre-
quency fr.
   So far, we have treated all light waves as classical electromagnetic waves.
The quantum optical aspects of frequency combs, i.e. expected correlations
in the noise due to photons and their entanglement, have not yet been ex-
plored. Such studies may lead to a rich new field of research.
   A laser frequency comb provides a direct link between optical frequencies
and microwave frequencies. This link can be used in either direction. We can
measure or control the repetition frequency fr with a cesium atomic clock to
synthesize several hundred thousand sharp optical reference frequencies
which are precisely known in terms of the primary standard of time. Any un-
known frequency can then be determined by first making a wavelength mea-
surement with a conventional wave meter that is sufficiently accurate to deter-
mine the integer order number m of the nearest comb line. The precise
distance from this reference line is then measured by feeding a beat signal to
a microwave counter. In the reverse direction, we can start with a sharp opti-
cal reference line in some cold trapped ion, cold atoms, or slow molecules,
and lock a nearby comb line to this optical reference. All the other comb line
frequencies are then rational multiples of the optical reference frequency,
and the repetition frequency becomes a precisely known fraction.
   Frequency comb synthesizers act as if we had several hundred thousand
ultra-stable and precisely tuned lasers operating at once. With the help of

158


nonlinear sum and difference frequency generation, they can precisely mea-
sure any frequency from radio waves to the near ultraviolet. They provide the
long-missing clockwork for optical atomic clocks. They can even generate
microwaves with extreme phase stability [41]. As sources of phase-stabilized
femtosecond pulses they have even given us a key to the intriguing field of
attosecond science [42]. With their electronic servo controls, frequency-
comb synthesizers can be relatively simple, robust, and increasingly user-
friendly devices.


THIS IS A SIMPLE IDEA! WHAT TOOK SO LONG?
In hindsight, the ideas behind the optical frequency comb look rather simple
and almost obvious. Why did all the experts, including our own laboratory,
struggle for so long with much more cumbersome harmonic laser frequency
chains?
   The main reason may be that nobody believed seriously that such an ap-
proach could actually work. There were good arguments why it should be im-
possible to bridge the gap between radio frequencies and optical frequencies
in a single step. The phase noise of even the best quartz oscillator is so large
that any comb structure would be completely washed out if one could some-
how multiply its frequency up into the visible region. In a harmonic fre-
quency chain, the intermediate transfer oscillators act as phase noise filters
and electromagnetic “flywheels” to overcome this “coherence collapse” [43].
   Another reason may be that two separate scientific communities have
evolved since the early days of laser science. People interested in precise high
resolution spectroscopy used their ingenuity to perfect the frequency stabili-
ty of continuous wave lasers. On the other side, there were people who in-
vented clever techniques to produce ever shorter pulses with mode-locked
lasers. They applied their spectrally broad light flashes to the study of ultra-
fast phenomena in semiconductors, liquids, or in chemical reaction dynamics
or to generate ever higher peak intensities for experiments in plasma physics.
These two communities went to their own separate conferences, and neither
side felt a strong need to keep track of the other frontier.
   For our own work, I cannot hide behind this latter excuse. I knew since the
early experiments with multi-mode helium-neon lasers [44] that the longitu-
dinal modes of a laser are well defined and their phases can be coupled so as
to produce a short light pulse circulating inside the cavity [45, 46]. Much
shorter pulses were produced some years later with broadband dye lasers by
locking their axial modes with the help of a saturable absorber or by syn-
chronous pumping with a modulated argon laser [47]. At Stanford in the
mid-seventies, I became intrigued by the idea of high resolution spectroscopy
of atomic resonance lines by Ramsey-like excitation with a coherent train of
multiple light pulses [48]. Resonant excitation with separated light pulses has
also been explored at the time by Michael Salour at MIT [49] and by Venia-
min Chebotaev at Novosibirsk [50]. After initial encouraging experiments
with a dye laser pulse injected into a passive cavity [48], our group at Stanford

                                                                             159


with graduate student Jim Eckstein and visiting Lindemann Fellow Allister
Ferguson demonstrated that a synchronously pumped mode-locked picosec-
ond dye laser could produce a stable phase coherent pulse train which we
used for Doppler-free two-photon excitation of atomic sodium [51]. The
comb lines served as a frequency ruler to measure some atomic fine structure
intervals. To improve the precision, we replaced the original radio frequency
driver for the modulator of our argon pump laser with a high quality fre-
quency synthesizer. Much to our delight, the performance of the dye laser im-
proved so much that we were the first to generate sub-picosecond pulses di-
rectly from a synchronously pumped dye laser [52]. At that time we should
have learned an important lesson: what is good for frequency stability is also
good for the generation of ultrashort light pulses! We later explored
Doppler-free polarization spectroscopy with our frequency comb [53], as well
as two-photon spectroscopy with the frequency comb of an FM mode-locked
laser where the phases of the modes adjust so that the intensity remains con-
stant but the frequency is sweeping back and forth periodically [54].
    During the Stanford experiments, we were painfully aware that we could
not know the absolute positions of our comb lines because the dispersion in-
side the laser resonator would lead to unknown phase slips of the carrier
wave relative to the pulse envelope. Such phase slips shift the entire comb
spectrum by an unknown amount fCE, as worked out in considerable detail in
the 1978 Stanford Ph.D. thesis of Jim Eckstein [38]. With a comb spectrum
spanning only 800 GHz, we had no means to observe and measure the offset
frequency fCE. Therefore, we did not know how to measure absolute optical
frequencies with our laser frequency combs in the late seventies.
   The idea of somehow generating much broader frequency combs surfaced
again in my mind after I had moved back to Germany in 1986. In 1990, I pub-
lished a proposal for a synthesizer of sub-femtosecond pulses that would
superimpose the frequencies from separate phase-locked cw laser oscillators
to form a very wide comb [55]. In the early 1990s, the technology of ultrafast
lasers advanced dramatically with the discovery of Kerr-lens mode locking by
Wilson Sibbett at the University of St. Andrews [56]. Soon, commercial
Ti:sapphire femtosecond lasers became available, that made the generation
of ultrashort light pulses much easier. Intrigued by these new sources I dis-
cussed with Peter Lambropoulos at Garching the possibility of finding some
highly nonlinear effect, such as above-threshold-ionization (ATI) , that would
depend on the phase of the electric field relative to the pulse envelope and
could reveal the offset frequency fCE of the laser comb lines. Calculations
soon showed that such effects would be observable only for pulses lasting at
most a few optical cycles [57]. Today, such sources have become available,
and the phase dependence of ATI has since been demonstrated by Gerhard
Paulus and Herbert Walther [58]. In 1994, I also discussed the problem of
the carrier-envelope phase slips with Ferenc Krausz at the Technical
University of Vienna. His group was the first to observe such pulse-to-pulse
phase slips in an interferometric correlation experiment in 1996 [59].
   I remember a trade show in 1994, when I was captivated by an exhibit of a

160


(Coherent Mira) mode-locked Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser with regenera-
tive amplifier. The laser beam was focused into a glass slide to produce a
white light continuum which a prism dispersed into a rainbow of colors. Such
white light pulses are produced by a combination of self-focusing, self phase
modulation, and other nonlinear processes, and they have been used for a
long time in ultrafast pump-probe experiments [60]. A striking feature was
the laser-like speckle pattern in the rainbow colors which indicated a high de-
gree of spatial coherence. It occurred to me that such a system might pro-
duce an octave-spanning frequency comb if the phases of successive pulses
were sufficiently correlated. Such a wide comb could then be used as a ruler
to measure the large interval between a laser frequency and its second har-
monic, which must be equal to the laser frequency itself. Even though the
pulse repetition frequency of a few hundred kHz remained inconveniently
low for frequency comb experiments, I felt sufficiently intrigued to acquire
such a system for our frequency metrology laboratory at Garching in 1994. In
the back of my mind I had the hope that it might somehow be possible to
produce white light directly with the pulses from the laser oscillator, without
the regenerative amplifier with its much lower pulse rate, by sending the
pulse train into a small waveguide made from some highly nonlinear optical
material, so that it would not be necessary to reach the threshold power for
self-focusing.
   We did not pursue the femtosecond laser approach seriously right away, be-
cause we had come quite far in perfecting our alternative scheme of optical
interval division. An accurate measurement of the 1S-2S frequency seemed al-
most within reach. We also felt that we would need an independent tool to
verify any measurement with a femtosecond laser frequency comb, since the
frequency metrology community would otherwise distrust our results. The
hydrogen measurements were finally completed in 1997 [29, 30].
   In February 1997, I visited the European Laboratory for Nonlinear
Spectroscopy, LENS, in Florence, Italy. There, Marco Bellini was working with
an amplified Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser producing pulses of 1 mJ energy
at a rate of 1 kHz. As is common in many ultrafast laboratories, he produced
a white light continuum for pump-probe experiments by focusing part of the
laser beam into a thin plate of CaF2. I asked what would happen if we split the
laser beam in two parts and focus these beams at two spatially separate spots.
Would the two white light pulses interfere?
   In an earlier joint experiment at the Lund Laser Center, we had investigat-
ed the same question for the generation of high harmonic radiation in a gas
jet [61]. From that time, Marco Bellini still had a Michelson interferometer
on his shelve that we could quickly place into the laser beam, somewhat mis-
aligned so that two beams would escape in two slightly different directions. By
adjusting the length of one arm we could make sure that the two focused
pulses arrived on the CaF2 plate at precisely the same time. I felt electrified
when we observed stable interference fringes of high contrast for all the
colors that I could record with my handheld camcorder electronic notebook,
as shown in Fig. 3 [62]. The white light pulses had to be phase-locked to the

                                                                           161


Figure 3. Interference fringes between two white light pulses [Ref. 62].




driving laser field! No matter how complicated the process of white light con-
tinuum generation might be, the process was reproducible. If such pulses
were separated in time rather than in space, they would interfere in the spec-
trum to produce a very broad frequency comb.
    By March 30, 1997, I had written a confidential 6-page proposal for a uni-
versal optical frequency comb synthesizer “…which produces a wide comb of abso-
lutely known equidistant marker frequencies throughout the infrared, visible, and ultra-
violet spectral range. To this end, a white light continuum with a pulse repetition rate
fr is produced by focusing the output of a mode-locked femtosecond laser into an optical
fiber or bulk medium with a third order nonlinear susceptibility. The rate of phase slip-
page of the laser carrier relative to the pulse envelope, fCE, is monitored by observing a
beat signal between the white light continuum and the second harmonic of the laser.”
The envisioned self-referencing scheme could find the carrier-envelope off-
set frequency fCE without any auxiliary laser. I asked Thomas Udem and
Martin Weitz in our laboratory to witness and sign every page on April 4,
1997, since this might become important for later patent applications.
    At Garching, we soon started a serious experimental effort towards optical
frequency measurements with femtosecond laser frequency combs. Even if
we did not yet know how to broaden the spectrum of our Mira laser oscillator
to more than an optical octave, we could always follow the 1988 proposal [27]
and measure the frequency of the dye laser in our hydrogen spectrometer by
implementing a short chain of two or three interval divider stages, using
small semiconductor lasers, to arrive at a frequency gap that could be bridged
with our laser comb. Propelled by such visions, Thomas Udem and Jörg
Reichert investigated the frequency comb spectrum of the Mira femtosecond

162


laser. They were later joined by Ronald Holzwarth. By that time, hundreds of
such lasers were in use in laboratories around the world, but they were most-
ly used to study ultrafast phenomena. Nobody had ever looked for any comb
lines, as far as we could tell. With a repetition frequency of 76.5 MHz, the
comb spectrum of our femtosecond laser was so densely spaced that no spec-
trometer in our laboratory could resolve the comb lines. Therefore, we re-
sorted to heterodyne detection, employing a cw diode laser as a local oscilla-
tor. The diode laser beam and the pulse train were superimposed with a
beam splitter, and a beat signal was detected with an avalanche photodiode
after some spectral filtering. After paying attention to the mechanical stabili-
ty of the femtosecond laser, we could observe stable comb lines. Next, we in-
vestigated the spacing of these lines. We phase-locked two diode lasers to two
arbitrarily chosen comb lines and used an optical interval divider stage to
produce a new frequency precisely at the center. A beat note with the nearest
comb line confirmed, much to our delight, that the comb lines were perfect-
ly evenly spaced, way out into the wings of the emission spectrum, within a
few parts in 1017 [63].
   It was now certain that the frequency comb of such a mode-locked femto-
second laser did not suffer from “coherence collapse” and could serve as a
ruler in frequency space to measure large optical frequency intervals. In a
first demonstration of an optical frequency measurement with a femtosecond
laser comb, we determined the frequency interval between the cesium D1
resonance line and the fourth harmonic of a transportable CH4-stabilized
3.39 µm He-Ne-laser, which had been calibrated with a harmonic laser fre-
quency chain at the PTB Braunschweig [64]. The optical cesium frequency
was needed for a determination of the fine structure constant  from the
atomic recoil energy as measured by atom interferometry in the group of
Steve Chu at Stanford. Soon these experiments found a considerable reso-
nance in newspapers and journals. They demonstrated to the optical fre-
quency metrology community that femtosecond laser frequency combs could
be powerful tools to measure the frequency of light.
   We next turned to the more ambitious goal of measuring the absolute op-
tical frequency of our 486 nm dye laser in the hydrogen 1S-2S spectrometer.
At that time, we had broadened the frequency comb of our mode-locked
laser oscillator by self-phase-modulation in a short length of ordinary optical
fiber to span 60 or 70 THz. Rather than building a few new interval divider
stages, we recognized a more expedient approach for a first proof-of-princip-
le experiment. Our hydrogen spectrometer [29] required only minor modi-
fications to produce two different fractional subharmonics, 4/7 and 1/2, of
the dye laser frequency, which we could bridge with our femtosecond laser
comb [65, 66]. The CH4-stabilized helium neon laser served now as part of an
interval divider and no longer as an intermediate reference standard. The
primary reference for our first absolute frequency measurements was a com-
mercial HP cesium atomic beam clock which we used to determine the pulse
repetition rate fr and the carrier-envelope offset frequency fCE [65]. Once the
optical frequency gap was measured, we knew the absolute frequency of the

                                                                            163


dye laser as well as the absolute frequencies of all the comb lines. To control
the position of the comb lines, we learned how to change the frequency fCE of
our Mira Ti:sapphire laser by tilting an end mirror where the spectrum is
slightly dispersed by a prism pair inside the cavity. In this way, we were the first
to generate femtosecond laser pulses with controlled slips of the carrier-enve-
lope phase.
   In October 1998 we proudly showed our experiment to Norman Ramsey,
who had come to the Max-Planck-Institute as a member of the Scientific
Advisory Board. For the first time, we could compare the hydrogen 1S-2S fre-
quency directly with a cesium atomic clock in our own laboratory, without in-
volving any large harmonic laser frequency chain. Later in the same year, we
demonstrated our experiment to John Hall who had come to Munich to at-
tend a meeting commemorating our mutual friend Veniamin Chebotaev.
John soon became an ardent evangelist for “this goofy technique, that makes
everything obsolete that we have worked on for so long.” He started to assem-
ble a powerful professional team in Boulder to advance research on femto-
second laser frequency combs, and he persuaded his colleague Steve Cundiff
at JILA, an expert on femtosecond lasers from Bell Laboratories, to visit our
laboratory in the spring of 1999. An increasingly heated competition did
much to accelerate the development of the new tools in the coming months
and to ignite a firework of novel applications in the years to follow [3].
   Until the summer of 1999, we had felt as if the new femto-comb playing
ground belonged just to us. Thomas Udem had reported on our experiments
at a conference in Perth, Australia, in late 1998 [43]. But we had delayed pub-
lications such as a first article on “measuring the frequency of light with
mode-locked lasers” [67] to appear after the filing of our first patent applica-
tion in March 1999 because, according to German law, an invention can no
longer be patented once it has been published.
   In June 1999, we could directly compare the hydrogen frequency with a
highly accurate transportable cesium fountain clock (PHARAO), built at the
LPTF (now BNM SYRTE) in Paris [66]. This measurement yielded a new value
of the hydrogen 1S-2S frequency accurate to 1.8 parts in 1014, surpassing all
earlier optical frequency measurements by more than an order of magnitude.
By now, the compelling advantages of laser frequency combs had been clear-
ly demonstrated. A number of different possible approaches for carrier-envel-
ope offset phase control were soon proposed [68].
   As a next step in our own work, we wanted to drastically simplify our setup.
Around that time, a new tool had appeared on the horizon that made it like-
ly that we would no longer need any optical interval dividers. At the CLEO
conference at Baltimore, MD, held in May 1999, researchers from Bell
Laboratories had reported on a novel micro-structured “rainbow fiber” that
could broaden the spectrum of pulses of a Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser os-
cillator without further amplification to a rainbow of colors [40]. After the
white light interference experiments in Florence [62], I felt rather confident
that this magic fiber would preserve the phase coherence of successive pulses
and produce comb lines with a desirable large frequency spacing.

164


   In June 1999, John Hall came to Germany to participate in the annual re-
treat of our research group at the Ringberg Castle near the Tegernsee south
of Munich. Together, we phoned many of our old friends at Bell
Laboratories, to try and obtain a sample of the magic fiber. We were hoping
that we could demonstrate an octave-spanning frequency comb while John
Hall was still in Germany. Unfortunately, this plan was foiled by the lawyers at
Lucent Technologies who did not allow the fiber to leave Bell Laboratories.
Ronald Holzwarth traveled to Bell Laboratories at Holmdel, NJ, during his
1999 summer vacation, but he had to leave without a piece of the fiber. John
Hall’s team in Boulder experienced similar difficulties at first, but in October
1999, they could demonstrate the first octave-spanning self-referencing laser
frequency comb after finally securing some of the holey fiber [69, 70]. At
Garching we realized a similar comb system a few weeks later [71], after we
had received some “photonic crystal fiber” from the group of Philip Russell at
the University of Bath in the UK. We had found out too late that these British
researchers had actually pioneered micro-structured silica fibers some years
earlier [39]. Both laboratories submitted their first short publications on oc-
tave-spanning frequency combs on the same day (Nov. 12, 1999) to the
CLEO/QELS 2000 conference in San Francisco.
   Similar to the Boulder experiments, we used a commercial small Ti:sap-
phire ring laser for our first octave-spanning frequency comb, producing
pulses of about 25 fs duration at a repetition frequency of 625 MHz.
Launching about 170 mW into a 30 cm length of photonic crystal fiber, we
immediately produced a frequency comb spanning more than an octave.
The spectrum showed a complicated structure, with valleys and peaks, but it
offered useable comb lines everywhere. Together with a nonlinear interfero-
meter for control of the offset frequency fCE , the entire optical setup did eas-
ily fit on a single breadboard. While the traditional harmonic frequency
chains with their factory halls full of lasers could measure just one single op-
tical frequency, our new system was ready to measure any frequency through-
out the visible and near infrared.
   Since then, Ti:sapphire femtosecond lasers have been developed that pro-
duce an octave-spanning spectrum directly from the oscillator, without any
need for external spectral broadening [72]. Octave spanning combs can also
be generated with erbium-doped fiber lasers [73], pumped by very reliable
and robust laser diodes developed for telecommunications. As turn-key in-
struments, such fiber comb generators can run for months without human
attention.
   In a first stringent test, Ronald Holzwarth has compared an octave span-
ning frequency comb synthesizer with the more complex frequency synthe-
sizer used in the 1999 hydrogen frequency measurement [71]. By starting
with a common 10 MHz radiofrequency reference and comparing comb lines
near 350 THz, he could verify agreement within a few parts in 1016, limited by
Doppler shifts due to air pressure changes or thermal expansion of the opti-
cal tables. In 2002, a group at the PTB in Braunschweig demonstrated how a
femtosecond laser frequency comb generator can be used as a transfer oscil-

                                                                             165


lator to precisely measure optical frequency ratios [74]. As a test case, they
measured the frequency ratio between the second harmonic of a Nd:YAG
laser and the fundamental frequency, verifying the expected value of 2 with
an uncertainty of 7 parts in 1019. More recently, Marcus Zimmermann in our
laboratory has pushed a related experiment to an uncertainty of 6 parts in
1021 [75]. In 2004, researchers in Boulder compared four different frequency
combs from different laboratories, finding agreement between neighboring
comb lines at an uncertainty level of 10-19 [76]. So far, no systematic error has
been identified which would limit the potential accuracy of future precision
spectroscopy or optical atomic clocks.


NEW FREQUENCY MEASUREMENT OF HYDROGEN 1S-2S IN 2003:
ARE THE FUNDAMENTAL CONSTANTS CONSTANT?
In February 2003, we used an octave spanning comb synthesizer in a new
measurement of the hydrogen 1S-2S transition frequency [21]. Marc Fischer
and Nikolai Kolachevsky had implemented many improvements in the hydro-
gen spectrometer. Light from the dye laser was sent through a fiber into the
frequency metrology laboratory, where an octave-spanning Ti:sapphire
femtosecond laser frequency comb synthesizer was used to compare the opti-
cal frequency to the radio frequency of the Paris PHARAO atomic fountain
clock, which had again been brought to Garching.
   With such immediate absolute frequency calibration, the hydrogen spec-
troscopy could be performed with much confidence. Compared to the 1999
measurements, the statistical error of the data recorded on a given day was
much reduced. Nonetheless, the day-to-day fluctuations of our measurements
remained of similar magnitude as before. They indicate some uncontrolled
systematic errors. After careful further experiments probing for possible causes
of systematic line shifts and after a thorough statistical analysis of all record-
ed data, we believe that the fluctuations are caused by some residual small first
order Doppler shifts. Such shifts are expected if the two counter-propagating
wave fronts of the exciting 243 nm radiation do not match perfectly. A mis-
match may be caused by imperfect mode-matching of the frequency-doubled
dye laser beam that enters the build-up cavity inside the atomic beam appara-
tus through a 2% input coupling mirror. Another cause may be the accumula-
tion of frozen molecular hydrogen on the walls of the cold copper nozzle for
the hydrogen atomic beam, which can grow until it distorts the optical wave
fronts by vignetting and diffraction. A second cause of systematic line shifts in
two-photon spectroscopy with frequency-doubled laser light may be unwanted
correlations between amplitude noise and phase noise that could be caused by
imperfect servo-locks of the enhancement cavities. For the future, we are
preparing an ultraviolet build-up cavity of higher finesse, and we are working
towards an all-solid-state laser source with a line width of only a few Hz.
   From the 2003 measurement, we find a frequency of 2 466 061 102 474 851
± 34 Hz for the F=1 to F’=1 hyperfine component of the hydrogen 1S-2S fre-
quency, with a relative uncertainty of 1.4 parts in 1014. The new results agrees

166


within the error limits with the 1999 measurement of 2 466 061 102 474 880
± 46 Hz. A difference of 29 ± 57 Hz in 44 months corresponds to a relative
drift of the 1S-2S transition frequency of (3.2 ± 6.3)  10-15 per year, i.e. it is
compatible with zero drift.
   This experiment has attracted some attention because it can be considered
as a test for a possible slow variation of the electromagnetic fine structure
constant . During the 2003 experiment, theorist Harald Fritzsch called fre-
quently to get some preliminary results, because he had predicted an observ-
able drift of the microwave frequency of the cesium clock relative to the hy-
drogen frequency [77]. Starting point for his arguments were astronomical
observations of spectral lines in the light of distant quasars performed at the
Keck Observatory [78]. Differential red shifts seemed to suggest that the elec-
tromagnetic fine structure constant  in the early universe was somewhat
smaller than today. Making the simplest assumption of a linear drift, the data
would indicate a drift of (6.4 ± 1.35)  10-16 per year, too small to be observ-
able in our laboratory experiment. However, Fritzsch had argued with ideas
from grand unification and quantum chromodynamics that  cannot change
simply by itself. If all known forces are to remain unified at very high ener-
gies, other coupling constants must change as well. As a result, the masses
and magnetic moments of hadrons (in units of the Bohr magneton) should
change relative to those of the electron. Fritzsch pointed out a possible mag-
nifying effect, that could change the hyperfine transition frequency of the ce-
sium atomic clock about 20 times faster than the optical hydrogen frequency.
So far, we have not found any evidence for such a drift. There are also other
more recent observations of quasar spectra that do not support the evidence
for a changing fine structure constant [79].
   Regardless of such speculations, we have to admit that the hydrogen mea-
surements of 1999 and 2003 do not strictly rule out a changing fine structure
constant . It is conceivable that the magnetic moment of the cesium nucle-
us also changes at just the right rate to give a null result in our experiment.
Fortunately, such measurements are not limited to hydrogen. One can also
measure transition frequencies in heavier atoms with stronger relativistic ef-
fects that respond in a different way to changes in . One such candidate is
the clock transition in a single cold Hg+ ion, that has been compared by Jim
Bergquist and his team at Boulder with a cesium atomic clock in 2000 and
2002, also using a laser frequency comb [80]. In addition, Eckhard Peik and
his team at the PTB have made two separate measurements of the clock tran-
sition in a single Yb+ ion [81]. Together, these laboratory experiments give
now some upper limits for the possible rates of change of the fine structure
constant  and the cesium nuclear magnetic moment Cs on the order of
(–0.3 ± 2.0)  10-15 per year and (2.4 ± 6.8)  10-15 per year, respectively.
   Within the next few years we can expect much more stringent experimen-
tal limits on possible variations of physical constants from such laboratory ex-
periments. If we found such changes it would not have any consequences for
our everyday lives, but it would give reason for fascinating speculations about
the nature of the universe.

                                                                               167


OPTICAL ATOMIC CLOCKS
Sensitive limits for the variations of fundamental constants will be established
in the comparison of different types of optical atomic clocks that are now be-
ing developed by strong professional teams in many industrialized countries.
The perfection of optical frequency standards has been progressing at a
much more rapid pace than that of microwave cesium clocks [82]. With the
femtosecond laser comb now available as a perfect clockwork mechanism,
the efforts must concentrate on ever more perfect laser frequency stabiliza-
tion and on the management of systematic line shifts in precision spec-
troscopy of narrow optical resonances that serve as the “pendulum” of optical
clocks. Much progress has already been made in experiments with cold
trapped ions, notably Hg+, Yb+, In+, and Sr+. Cold neutral atoms such as H,
Ca, or Sr are also appealing candidates because many atoms can be observed
simultaneously without disturbing Coulomb repulsion, improving the signal-
to-noise ratio and the speed with which a resonance frequency can be estab-
lished. A particularly promising approach has been proposed by Hidetoshi
Katori [83]. In his neutral atom clock, many cold neutral Sr atoms are cap-
tured in the microscopic dipole force potential wells of an optical lattice.
Light shifts are minimized by choosing a proper “magic” wavelength of the
lattice field. In 2005, the accuracy of the best optical frequency standards has
become comparable to that of the best cesium fountain clocks. But even if
they are not yet more accurate, optical frequency standards offer one impor-
tant advantage already. It takes hours or days to compare two cesium clocks to
a part in 1015. Two optical frequencies can be compared to this level within
just seconds.
   It is interesting to look at the historical evolution of the accuracy of clocks.
The clocks in medieval church towers were only good to about 20 minutes
per day. In the 18th century, the nautical clock H4 of the legendary watch-
maker John Harrison reached an accuracy of some 100 msec per day. The
best primary cesium fountain clocks of today can be accurate to within 100
psec per day. Some experts hope that optical atomic clocks will reach a hun-
dred or thousand fold higher accuracy within the next decade.
   Better atomic clocks will be enabling tools for many scientific and technical
applications, so that this pursuit will be worthwhile even if we do not discover
any changes of fundamental constants. They can extend the frontiers of pre-
cision spectroscopy and of time and frequency metrology. They will make it
possible to precisely synchronize clocks over large distances. In astronomy,
such synchronized clocks may allow an extension of large baseline interfero-
metry to infrared and optical wavelengths. Better clocks can improve the per-
formance of satellite navigation systems and the tracking of probes in deep
space. Accurate clocks are also needed to synchronize optical telecommuni-
cation networks. In fundamental physics, more accurate clocks will permit
more stringent tests of special and general relativity, as well as other funda-
mental laws.



168


TOWARDS FREQUENCY COMBS IN THE EXTREME ULTRAVIOLET
So far, we have not discovered any fundamental limits for the potential accur-
acy of future clocks. It should even be possible to extend frequency comb
techniques into the extreme ultraviolet and soft X-ray spectral regions, so
that we would be able to slice time into still much finer intervals. High har-
monic radiation that is generated when an intense femtosecond laser pulse is
focused into a gas jet can be harnessed to produce coherent pulse trains at
such wavelengths.
   Since the pioneering work of Charlie Rhodes [84] and Anne L’Huiller
[85] in the late 1980s, high harmonic generation has been studied in many
laboratories. In a simple model first proposed by Paul Corkum [86], gas
atoms are field ionized and the electrons are accelerated by the strong laser
field until the light field reverses direction. Dependent on the time of escape,
such electrons can return to the ion core with substantial kinetic energy
which they can radiate in the form of energetic photons, with one burst emit-
ted during each half cycle of the driving laser wave.
   The mutual phase coherence of short pulses was much on my mind when
I visited the high harmonic experiments of Anne L’Huiller and Claes Göran
Wahlström at the Lund Laser Center in 1995. I wondered if two successive
high harmonic pulses would be mutually phase coherent. As a test I proposed
to split the driving laser beam into two parts that could be focused into the
gas jet at separate spots, and to look for interference fringes in the high har-
monic radiation, similar to the later white light experiments at Florence [62].
At first, there seemed to be good reasons why this was not to be expected, be-
cause the phase of the harmonic radiation should depend strongly on the
varying intensity of the driving laser pulse. But after I left, graduate student
Raoul Zerne tried the experiment and observed some fleeting interference
fringes. With much excitement, we scheduled some serious joint experiments
at Lund. Marco Bellini from LENS agreed to participate and to construct a
stable Michelson interferometer so that the timing of the two laser pulses
could be finely adjusted. We soon observed clean interference fringes of high
contrast up to the 15th harmonic and beyond [61]. In a subsequent experi-
ment we even discovered a regime where the harmonic beam was surround-
ed by a divergent halo beam of very short coherence length. This behavior
could be explained in terms of two different electron trajectories that can
contribute to a given harmonic photon energy [87].
   These results demonstrate that high harmonic pulses can be mutually
phase coherent so that a regular train of such pulses could form a frequency
comb in the extreme ultraviolet. However, the necessary peak intensities of
the order of 1014 W/cm2 could only be produced with amplified femtosecond
laser systems of low repetition frequency. Very recently, Christoph Gohle and
Thomas Udem at Garching have succeeded in producing high harmonic ra-
diation down to wavelengths of 60 nm at a repetition frequency of 112 MHz
[88]. To this end, they stacked the pulses from a mode-locked Ti:sapphire
laser oscillator in a dispersion-compensated passive build-up cavity and


                                                                            169


placed a xenon gas jet at an intra-cavity focus. The high harmonic radiation is
coupled out by external reflection from a thin sapphire Brewster plate, that
has a refractive index smaller than 1 in the extreme ultraviolet. Similar ex-
periments have also been reported by Jun Ye in Boulder [89].
   In a future ambitious project, we plan to apply frequency combs in the
XUV directly to precision spectroscopy of sharp resonances in laser-cooled
trapped ions. The hydrogen-like helium ion with a 1S-2S two-photon transi-
tion near 60 nm is a particularly interesting candidate. In one envisioned sce-
nario, helium ions will be sympathetically cooled by laser-cooled magnesium
ions in the same trap, and the signal might be detected via the production of
doubly charged helium ions due to photo ionization.


CONCLUSIONS
Spectroscopy of the simple hydrogen atom has sparked off the cross fertiliza-
tion of two seemingly unrelated frontiers, precise optical spectroscopy and
the study of ultrafast phenomena. Femtosecond frequency combs are revolu-
tionizing precision measurements of time and frequency. Future optical
atomic clocks will find important applications in many areas of science and
technology. Ultraprecise optical spectroscopy can be harnessed for new tests
of fundamental physics laws. However, many other spectroscopic applica-
tions of laser frequency combs can be envisioned, such as massively parallel
ultra-sensitive cavity ring-down spectroscopy [90] or broadband spectral in-
terferometry. At the same time, frequency comb techniques are also offering
powerful new tools for ultrafast physics. By controlling the phase of the elec-
tric field of intense light pulses lasting for only a few cycles, they make it pos-
sible to study ultrafast electronic processes in light matter interactions, such
as the production of single sub-femtosecond pulses of soft X-rays in high har-
monic generation [42]. Only the future can show what we will discover with
such exquisite new instruments.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
More than ninety students, postdocs, visiting scholars, and senior colleagues
have made essential contributions to our research on precision laser spec-
troscopy during more than 4 decades. I owe particular gratitude to Thomas
Udem and Ronald Holzwarth who played a key role in making the frequency
comb synthesizer become reality. I am also very grateful to John L. Hall, who
has long shared his precious insights on how to make lasers unbelievably stable.




170


REFERENCES
[1]    C. Audoin, and G. Bernard, The Measurement of Time: Time, Frequency, and the Atomic
       Clock, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001
[2]    Th. Udem, R. Holzwarth, and T.W. Hänsch, Nature, 416, 233 (2002)
[3]    Jun Ye, and S. Cundiff, eds., Femtosecond Optical Frequency Comb: Principle, Operation
       and Applications, Springer Verlag, New York, 2005
[4]    P. Hannaford, ed., Femtosecond Laser Spectroscopy, Springer Verlag, New York, 2005
[5]    A. Szöke, and A. Javan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 521 (1963)
[6]    W.E. Lamb, Phys. Rev. 134, 1429 (1964)
[7]    W.R. Bennett, Phys. Rev. 126, 580 (1962)
[8]    V.S. Letokhov, and V.P. Chebotaev, Nonlinear Laser Spectroscopy, Springer Series in
       Optical Sciences, Vol. 4, Springer Verlag, New York, 1977
[9]    T.W. Hänsch, R. Keil, A. Schabert, Ch. Schmelzer, and P. Toschek, Z. Physik, 226,
       293 (1969)
[10]   T.W. Hänsch, and P. Toschek, Z. Physik 236, 213 (1970)
[11]   P.W. Smith, and T.W. Hänsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 26, 740 (1971)
[12]   T.W. Hänsch, M.D. Levenson, and A.L. Schawlow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 26, 949 (1971)
[13]   T.W. Hänsch, Appl. Opt. 11, 895 (1972)
[14]   T.W. Hänsch, I.S. Shahin, and A.L. Schawlow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 27, 707 (1971)
[15]   P.P. Sorokin, and J.R. Lankard, IBM J. Res. Dev. 10, 162 (1966)
[16]   F.P. Schäfer, W. Schmidt, and J. Volze, Appl. Phys. Lett. 9, 306 (1966)
[17]   G.W. Series, Spectrum of Atomic Hydrogen, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1957
[18]   T.W. Hänsch, I.S. Shahin, and A.L. Schawlow, Nature 235, 63 (1972)
[19]   T.W. Hänsch, and A.L. Schawlow, Opt. Comm.. 13,   13, 68 (1975)
[20]   S.G. Karshenboim, F.S. Pavone, F. Bassani, M. Inguscio, and T.W. Hänsch, eds., The
       Hydrogen Atom, Precision Physics of Simple Atomic Systems, Springer Verlag, Lecture
       Notes in Physics, New York, 2001
[21]   M. Fischer, N. Kolachevsky, M. Zimmermann, R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, T.W.
       Hänsch, M. Abgrall, J. Grünert, I. Maksimovic, S. Bize, H. Marion, F. Pereira Dos
       Santos, P. Lemonde, G .Santarelli, P. Laurent, A. Clairon, and C. Salomon, M. Haas,
       U. D. Jentschura, and C. H. Keitel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 230802 (2004)
[22]   E.V. Baklanov, and V.P. Chebotaev, Opt. Comm. 12, 312 (1974)
[23]   T.W. Hänsch, S.A. Lee, R. Wallenstein, and C. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 34, 307
       (1975)
[24]   A. Javan, E.A. Ballik, and W.L. Bond, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 7, 553 (1962)
[25]   K. M. Evenson, J. S. Wells, F. R. Petersen, B. L. Danielson, G. W. Day, R. L. Barger,
       and J. L. Hall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, 1346 (1972)
[26]   H. Schnatz, B. Lipphardt, J. Helmcke, F. Riehle, and G. Zinner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76,
       18, (1996)
[27]   T.W. Hänsch, in The Hydrogen Atom, Proceedings of the Symposium held in Pisa, Italy, June
       1988, G.F. Bassani, M. Inguscio, and T.W. Hänsch, eds., Springer Verlag, New York,
       1989, pp. 93
[28]   H.R. Telle, D. Meschede, and T.W. Hänsch, Opt. Lett. 15, 532 (1990)
[29]   T. Udem, A. Huber, B. Gross, J. Reichert, M. Prevedelli, M. Weitz, and T.W. Hänsch,
       Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2646 (1997)
[30]   A. Huber, T. Udem, B. Gross, J. Reichert, M. Kourogi, K. Pachucki, M. Weitz, and
       T.W. Hänsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 468 (1998)
[31]   M. Kourogi, K. Nakagawa, and M. Ohtsu, IEEE J. Quant. El. 29, 2693 (1993)
[32]   T. Udem, J. Reichert, M. Kourogi, and T.W. Hänsch, Optics Letters, 23, 1387 (1998)
[33]   Z. Bay, G.G. Luther, and J.A. White, Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, 189 (1972)
[34]   R. G. DeVoe, C. Fabre, K. Jungmann, J. Hoffnagle, and R. G. Brewer, Phys. Rev. A 37,
       1802 (1988)
[35]   N.C. Wong, Opt. Lett. 17, 13 (1992)
[36]   D.J. Wineland, J. Appl. Phys. 50, 2528 (1979)


                                                                                           171


[37] A.E. Siegmann, Lasers, University Science Books, Mill Valley, 1986
[38] J.N. Eckstein, Ph.D. Thesis, Stanford University, 1978
[39] T.A. Birks, P.J. Roberts, P. St. J. Russell, D.M. Atkin, and T.J. Shepherd, Electron. Lett.
     31, 1941 (1995)
[40] J.K. Ranka, R.S. Windeler, and A.J. Stentz, Opt. Lett. 25, 25 (2000)
[41] J.J. McFerran, E.N. Ivanov, A. Bartels, G. Wilpers, C.W. Oates, S.A. Diddams, and L.
     Hollberg, Electron. Lett. 41, 650 (2005)
[42] A. Baltuska, Th. Udem, M. Uiberacker, M. Hentschel, E. Goulielmakis, Ch. Gohle, R.
     Holzwarth, V.S. Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi, T. W. Hänsch, and F. Krausz) Nature 421, 611
     (2003)
[43] A.N. Luiten, ed., Frequency Measurement and Control: Advanced Techniques and Future
     Trends, Topics in Applied Physics Vol. 79, Springer Verlag, New York, 2001
[44] L.E. Hargrove, R.L. Fork, and M.A. Pollack, Appl. Phys. Lett. 5, 4 (1964)
[45] A. Yariv, J. Appl. Phys. 36, 388 (1965)
[46] O.P. McDuff and S.E. Harris, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 3, 101 (1967)
[47] C.V. Shank, and E.P. Ippen, in Dye Lasers, F.P. Schäfer. Ed., Topics in Applied Physics,
     Vol. 1, Springer Verlag, New York, 3rd edition, 1990, pp 139
[48] R. Teets, J. Eckstein, and T.W. Hänsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 760 (1977)
[49] M.M. Salour, and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 757 (1977)
[50] E.V. Baklanov and V.P. Chebotaev, Kvantovaya Elektronika 4, 2189 (1977)
[51] J.N. Eckstein, A.I. Fergusons, and T.W. Hänsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 847 (1978)
[52] A.I. Ferguson, J.N. Eckstein, and T.W. Hänsch, J. Appl. Phys. 49, 5389 (1978)
[53] A.I. Ferguson, J.N. Eckstein, and T.W. Hänsch, Appl. Phys. 18, 257 (1979)
[54] T.W. Hänsch, and N.C. Wong, Metrologia 16, 101 (1980)
[55] T.W. Hänsch, Opt. Comm. 80, 71 (1990)
[56] D.E. Spencer, P.N. Kean, and W. Sibbett, Opt. Lett. 16, 42 (1991)
[57] T. Nakajima and P. Lambropoulos, Phys. Rev. A 50, 595 (1994)
[58] G.G. Paulus, F. Lindner, H. Walther, A. Baltuska, E. Gouielmakis, M. Lezius, and F.
     Krausz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 253004 (2003)
[59] L. Xu, C. Spielmann, A. Poppe, T. Brabec, F. Krausz, and T.W. Hänsch, Opt. Lett. 21,
     2008 (1996)
[60] R.L. Fork, C.V. Shank, C. Hirlimann, R. Yen, and W.J. Tomlison, Opt. Lett. 8, 1
     (1983)
[61] R. Zerne, C. Altucci, M.B. Gaarde, A. L’Huillier, C. Lynga, C.-G. Wahlström, M.
     Bellini, and T.W. Hänsch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 79, 1006 (1997)
[62] M. Bellini and T.W. Hänsch, Opt. Lett. 25, 1049 (2000)
[63] Th. Udem, J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, and T.W. Hänsch, Opt. Lett. 24, 881 (1999)
[64] Th. Udem, J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, and T.W. Hänsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3568
     (1999)
[65] J. Reichert, M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, M. Weitz, Th. Udem, and T. W. Hänsch, Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 84, 3232 (2000)
[66] M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, P. Pokasov, Th. Udem, M. Weitz, T. W. Hänsch,
     P. Lemonde, G. Santarelli, M. Abgrall, P. Laurent, C. Salomon, and A. Clairon, Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 84, 5496 (2000)
[67] J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, and T. W. Hänsch, Opt. Comm., 172, 59
     (1999)
[68] H.R. Telle, G. Steinmeyer. A.E. Dunlop, J. Stenger, D.H. Sutter, and U. Keller, Appl.
     Phys. B 69, 327 (1999)
[69] S. A. Diddams, D. J. Jones, J. Ye, S. Cundiff, J.L. Hall, J. K. Ranka, R. Windeler, R.
     Holzwarth, Th. Udem, and T. W. Hänsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5102 (2000)
[70] D.J. Jones, S.A. Diddams, J.K. Ranka, A. Stentz, R.S. Windeler, J.L. Hall, and S.
     Cundiff, Science 288, 635 (2000)
[71] R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, T.W. Hänsch, J. C. Knight, W. J. Wadsworth, and P.St.J.
     Russell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2264 (2000)



172


[72] L. Matos, D. Kleppner, O. Kuzucu, T. R. Schibli, J. Kim, E. P. Ippen, and F.X.
     Kaertner, Opt. Lett. 29, 1683 (2004)
[73] B.R. Washburn, S.A. Diddams, N.R. Newbury, J.W. Nicholson, M.F. Yan, and C.G.
     Jorgensen, Opt. Lett. 29, 250 (2004)
[74] J. Stenger, H. Schnatz, C. Tamm, and H.R. Telle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 073601 (2002)
[75] M. Zimmermann, Ch. Gohle, R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, and T.W. Hänsch, Opt. Lett.
     29, 310-312 (2004)
[76] L.S. Ma, B. Zhiyi, A. Bartels, L. Robertsson, M. Zucco, R.S. Windeler, G. Wilpers, C.
     Oates, L. Hollberg, and S.A. Diddams, Science 303, 1843 (2004)
[77] X. Calmet and H. Fritzsch, Phys. Lett. B 540, 173 (2002)
[78] M.T. Murphy, J.K. Webb, and V.V. Flambaum, MNRAS 345, 609 (2003)
[79] S. Srianand, H. Chand, P. Petitjean, and B. Aracil, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 121302 (2004)
[80] S. Bize, S.A. Diddams, U. Tanaka, C.E. Tanner, W.H. Oskay, R.E. Drullinger, T.E.
     Parker, T.P. Heavner, S.R. Jefferts, L. Hollberg, W.M. Itano, and J.C. Bergquist, Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 90, 150802 (2003)
[81] E. Peik, B. Lipphardt, H. Schnatz, T. Schneider, C. Tamm, and S.G. Karshenboim,
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 170801 (2004)
[82] L. Hollberg, C.W. Oates, G. Wilpers, C.W. Hoyt, Z.W. Barber, S.A. Diddams, W.H.
     Oskay, and J.C. Bergquist, J. Phys. B 38, S469 (2005)
[83] M. Takamoto, F.L. Hong, R. Higashi, and H. Katori, Nature 435, 321 (2005)
[84] A. McPherson, G. Gibson, H. Jara, U. Johann, T.S. Luk, I. McIntyre, K. Boyer, and
     C.H. Rhodes, J. Opt. Soc. Am, B 4, 595 (1987)
[85] M. Ferray, A. L’Huiller, X.F. Li, A. Lompré, G. Mainfray, and C. Manus, J. Phys. B 21,
     L31 (1988)
[86] P. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993)
[87] M. Bellini, C. Lynga, A. Tozzi, M.B. Gaarde, A. L’Huillier, C.-G. Wahlström, and
     T.W. Hänsch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 81, 297 (1998)
[88] Ch. Gohle, Th. Udem, J. Rauschenberger, R. Holzwarth, M. Herrmann, H.A. Schüss-
     ler, F. Krausz, and T.W. Hänsch, Nature, 436, 234 (2005)
[89] R. J. Jones, K. D. Moll, M. J. Thorpe, and J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 193201 (2005)
[90] Jun Ye, private communication

Portrait photo of Theodor W. Hänsch by photographer F. M. Schmidt.




                                                                                       173
