WHAT DOES CP VIOLATION TELL US?

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2008
by
Toshihide Maskawa
Kyoto Sangyo University, Kyoto 603-8555, Japan.




I would first like to thank the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the
Nobel Foundation for awarding me this honour, of which I had never even
dreamt.
   I was born in 1940, the son of a furniture craftsman in the city of Nagoya, in
Japan. My father wanted to change his job and was taking a correspondence
course to become an electrical engineer, while he was a trainee furniture
craftsman. However, he told me that he could not really understand sine and
cosine, since he had not received a basic education. Eventually, though, he
did manage a small furniture factory employing a few craftsmen and worked
there himself. But this came to nothing because of the War, that reckless and
miserable war which our country caused.
   After the War, he displayed in front of his house the door hinges, wood
screws and other pieces of furniture, which remained at hand. They sold
quite well. Getting a taste for selling, he became a merchant dealing with
sugar as an ingredient for cakes.
   He still wanted to boast of his knowledge of electricity, but he could not
find anyone suitable to explain it to. One day, though, he found a good tar-
get: his son.
   In those poor days after the war, almost all the houses were without bath-
rooms and so people went to the public bath. On his way to and from the
public bath, he boasted of his knowledge: Why do three-phase current mo-
tors rotate? Why don’t the solar and lunar eclipses occur every month? He
explained proudly that it was because of the revolution planes of the earth
around the sun, and of the moon around the earth, which are tilted at an
angle of 5 degrees.
   This was the reason why I was a strange pupil at school. I had a poor record
but could answer the teacher’s questions when he digressed and spoke about
subjects outside of the textbooks.
   My parents neither observed their children carefully nor helped with their
study. One day, my mother realised that she had never seen her son studying
at home. So she told my teacher at a parent’s association meeting. “Please
give my son homework at least occasionally. Otherwise, he never studies at
home.” My teacher answered, “Your son has never done his homework de-
spite the fact that I give him homework every day!”

                                                                              93


   Disastrous was that night. I got a two-hour lecture from my parents.
   An event that gave me a strong wish to become a physicist happened after I
went on to high school. I went to high school with no strong motivation. But,
one day when I was in the first or second year, I found a newspaper article ex-
plaining that Professor Shoichi Sakata at Nagoya University had published a
revolutionary theory [1] about the composite model for elementary particles
in which he chose the proton, neutron and Lambda particles as the funda-
mental three constituents.
   I was so childish at that time that I thought that all of science had already
been completed in Europe during the 19th century. If Professor Sakata’s
theory had come from Tokyo, I would have thought it irrelevant to me. But
scientific discoveries were being developed right in Nagoya, where I was liv-
ing! I became eager to join in such research activity there. My father, how-
ever, wanted his son to succeed him in the family business. So I was given only
one chance to take an entrance examination for the university, and could not
fail it. I worked very hard to prepare for the entrance examination to Nagoya
University.
   Fortunately I was accepted. The lectures at the university were very dif-
ferent and much more stimulating than those in high school. The first class
was about mathematical analysis. I learnt about an axiom from Archimedes
explaining that, for any two positive numbers, ε and δ, there is an integer N
such that N × ε > δ. And then the teacher continued the lecture to explain
Dedekind’s Cut. It was a Culture Shock. Everything that I experienced in the
university, including those lectures, was fresh and stimulating. Each time I
begin to study a new field, I was totally absorbed in it and told the people
around me that I would research that subject in future.
   When I was a senior, a Professor in the Mathematics Department told me,
“You will, of course, take an entrance examination for a Mathematics gradu-
ate course, won’t you?” When I answered, “No, I already sent the application
form to a Physics graduate course,” the professor looked upset hearing this
totally unexpected answer. Probably, I had been saying that I was planning to
go on to a Mathematics graduate course until just before.
   This capriciousness of mine did not change even when I went to the phys-
ics graduate course in 1962. I thought that research on the brain was impor-
tant and began a voluntary circle to study a PERCEPTRON with a few friends.
However, when I had to write my Master’s thesis in the second year, I was
preparing a paper on particle physics in Prof. Sakata’s laboratory.
   In this period, research based on dispersion relations resulting from cau-
sality was popular in the world, and a “Bootstrap Model” advocated by G.F.
Chew was in fashion. In Sakata’s laboratory, the composite model [1] for
‘elementary’ particles was popular, which was originally proposed by Prof.
Sakata in 1955.
   At that time the symmetry between leptons and baryons concerning weak
interactions which A. Gamba, R.E. Marshak and S. Okubo [2] had pointed
out at the Kiev Conference in 1951 occupied the interest of the laboratory
[3]; that is,

94


                             (ν, e, μ) ↔ (p, n, Λ).

Following this line, when the muon-neutrino νμ was found, the majority of
the Sakata laboratory naturally began to research the quartet constituent
models. Indeed, in 1964, a quartet constituent model was proposed by Ziro
Maki [4], the associate professor at the laboratory.
   Although I did not write papers during this period, I was very fascinated
by spontaneously broken chiral symmetry after reading Professor Nambu’s
papers [5, 6]. I was also interested in developments in current algebra and
PCAC (partially conserved axial-vector current). Extending my interest
in this direction, I encountered important papers like: “The Axial Vector
Current in Beta Decay” by M. Gell-Mann and M. Levy (1960) [7], and
“Question of Parity Conservation in Weak Interactions” by T.D. Lee and C.
N. Yang (1956) [8].
   As the keystones of my research in particle physics, those papers strength-
ened my interest in observing how particles emerge through their weak
interactions.
   Although I did not publish it, I calculated several physical quantities in the
framework of the Nambu-Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model [6]. For instance, I com-
puted the pion decay constant fπ, but felt it rather small given the fact that it
has a typical quantity characterising the strong interaction. I persistently ex-
amined how the decay constant could be decreased by adjusting the free pa-
rameters in the NJL model: the coupling constant and the UV cutoff. I could
get no definite answer, since the contribution from the momentum region
near the UV cutoff was most dominant. But, I recognised the importance of
renormalisability from this experience.




Figure 1. Box diagram.


Although this research wasn’t being paid much attention in Japan, there
were physicists around the world who were examining higher order effects of
weak interactions. If weak interaction is described by the current-current type
4-fermion interaction, then the higher order effects diverge. So these authors
replaced the 4-fermion interaction by a box diagram as shown in Fig. 1, in
which heavy scalar bosons and heavy fermions propagate in the intermedi-

                                                                              95


ate state. This reduces to the usual 4-fermion interaction in the heavy limit
of scalar and fermion masses. It did not yet provide a satisfactory model, but
it did allow the possibility of making the weak interaction renormalisable by
scalar boson mediation. I was also paying attention to papers which persis-
tently examined the higher order effects of the current-current interaction.
   The laboratory subscribed to only one physics journal, and so many people
wanted to read the latest issue. Partly to resolve this problem, Sakata’s labo-
ratory also had a journal club in which members took turns reading and re-
porting on the new issue. When my turn came for the first time, the journal
contained the paper by Fitch and Cronin [9] reporting the observation of
CP violation. This made a strong impression on me and raised the question:
What is this? However, I had no clue at all how to attack the problem and
thus laid it aside for eight years.
   In the latter half of the 60s, my interest was mainly focused on chiral
symmetry and chiral dynamics. In this period I found, for instance, in the
Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model that the pion decay constant is rather small for a
typical constant characterising the strong interaction, and that pion squared
mass is the quantity of the first order in chiral symmetry breaking. I still
didn’t write any papers about this. I regard them as etudes for a physicist, just
as painters draw variations of changing poses or compositions.
   The idea of Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking in Nambu and Jona-Lasinio’s
paper was very attractive, but there are no massless particles interacting
strongly in reality. So many physicists begin to focus their efforts on evading
the Nambu-Goldstone (NG) Theorem [11, 12]. Higgs was among them. The
reason why the NG massless boson appears is that there are only two form
factors proportional to γ5 pμ and γμ γ5 in the axial current, and the current
conservation condition leads to the existence of a massless pole in one of
the two form factors. This was what the NG theorem describes. Then Higgs
[10] appeared and developed his arguments on the Coulomb gauge where
manifest Lorentz invariance is lost, so that one more form factor can appear
and one can evade the NG theorem.
   It was the paper on the Higgs mechanism with which not only the massless
NG boson disappears but also the gauge boson becomes massive. I could not
follow his logic. Soon, fortunately, Kibble [13] appeared and made clear the
mechanism in a Lorentz covariant manner, which I could understand. Soon,
the electro-weak unified theory by S. Weinberg [14] and A. Salam [15], as
well as the Faddeev-Popov’s paper [16] clarifying the Feynman rule for Yang-
Mills theory, appeared.
   In connection with the four-quark model and from my interest in the
higher order effects of weak interaction, I noticed a paper by GIM (Glashow,
Iliopoulos and Maiani) [17] in 1969 and called the attention of some of my
colleagues to it. This reminded me of the four-quark model once again, al-
though all the graduates of Sakata laboratory already knew about it.
   There is a paper from this period, which was cited as “Z. Maki and T.
Maskawa, RITP-146” [18] in my paper on CP violation with M. Kobayashi
[19]. It was written just before the CP violation paper and the title was

96


“Hadron Symmetries and Gauge Theory of Weak and Electromagnetic
Interactions”. This paper is little known since I never announced that it was
published in Progress of Theoretical Physics, 49 (1973), 1007. If the strong inter-
action chooses a specific direction in the four-quark model, then its interfer-
ence with the weak interaction would have easily caused CP violation. People
came to know after 1974 that the strong interaction is described by QCD
(Quantum ChromoDynamics) and that it has no specific direction other
than the quark mass terms specified by the Higgs field. This was, however,
unknown at that time in 1972, so we needed the analysis of the strong inter-
action given in the paper above.
   When the electro-weak unified gauge theory appeared, I felt intuitively that
the time had come to take up the CP violation problem. After finishing the
graduate course, I became an assistant professor for three years in Nagoya
University and then moved to Kyoto University in 1970. Kobayashi also came
to Kyoto as an assistant professor two years later, in April 1972.
   We have a series of holidays called Golden Week in the beginning of May
in Japan. After the Golden Week, Kobayashi and I started a new collabora-
tion. It was a good opportunity for us to work again in the same laboratory.
I felt that the time was ripe for attacking the CP violation problem as stated
above and proposed it as the theme of our collaboration. Kobayashi had also
been approaching this problem in Nagoya.
   We started to study CP violation based on the quartet quark model in
the electro-weak unified gauge theory. First we had to determine how the
left- and right-handed components of the four quarks transform under the
electro-weak symmetry SU(2) × U(1):

A) 4 = 2 + 2
B) 4 = 2 + 1 + 1
C) 4 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1

There are these three cases for each of left- and right-handed components, so
that we have to consider 9 cases in all. In all the cases except for case (A, B)
where the left-handed component is A) and the right-handed B), we see that
CP violation cannot occur if we take into account the freedom to arbitrarily
choose the phases of the quark fields. The last case (A, B) was an exception.
   I thought that it seemed to work since all the other cases failed and asked
Kobayashi whether he agreed. Kobayashi put his head a little to one side and
answered “I will examine this in detail overnight.” He probably knew the re-
sult already, but answered like that for safety. The next day he told me, “That
case does not work since it predicts the wrong sign for gV /gA contradicting
the experiment.”
   During this time, I was chief secretary of the labour union at Kyoto
University. There was a growing problem related to the dismissal of secretar-
ies in our Faculty of Science. I could not concentrate on my research while
pretending not to see these dismissals, since the secretaries really supported
our young researchers. I discussed physics with Kobayashi in the morning

                                                                                97


and worked at the union in the afternoon. Coming back home in the eve-
ning, I enjoyed dinner with my family and talked with them about the events
of the day. After taking a bath I had time to think about my research. This
was how I was living back in those days.
   After Kobayashi eliminated the possibility of the case (A, B), a search for
the way out began, attempting to explain how CP violation could be under-
stood as a four quark model. We fought a tough struggle for a month or so.
And one day, while taking a bath, I thought: No good model exists which can
explain CP violation in the four-quark model if we stick to the renormalisable
theory of weak interaction. So I made up my mind to write a negative paper,
which proved that CP violation cannot be explained in the four-quark model
in a framework of renormalisable electro-weak theory.
   Deciding to finish this work by writing a poor paper and thinking up an ex-
cuse, I got out of the bath tub. Probably this may have freed me from sticking
to the four-quark model. Suddenly, I recognised that it must work well in the
six-quark model. It was already clear from our many trials and calculations up
until then that a complex phase could remain there.
   In the framework of unified electro-weak gauge theory, there is a scalar
field called the Higgs field. When it develops a non-vanishing vacuum expec-
tation value, the quark fields acquire their masses. If we rewrite the quark
fields into those, which have definite masses, then the charged current oper-
ators in the weak interaction develop a unitary matrix U. If a complex phase
appears in the matrix elements of U, CP violation occurs.
   This explanation may give the wrong impression that the complex phase
always leads to CP violation. Actually, since the quark fields qi are complex,
we have the freedom to change their phases arbitrarily as q i  e iα i q i . Clearly
this leaves physics intact, but the phases of the matrix elements of U are
changed. Recall that the charged weak current has the structure, complex
conjugate of up-type quark ﬁelds, ui times down-type quark fields dj times
the i–j matrix elements Uij of U: uiU ij d j . Here i, j run from 1 to N if there exist
N generations of quarks.

Therefore the phase change of the 2N quark fields,

         ui l eiai ui , d j  eib d j , (1)
                                      j




induces the phase change of the matrix element

         U ij l e  i
                  i a   bj
                             U ij .       (2)

Therefore, among the 2N phase changes for 2N quark fields, 2N − 1 degrees
of freedom can be used to change the phase of U, since a common phase
transformation for all quark fields does not change U.
   The N × N unitary matrix U, which appears in the charged weak current
when the SU(2) × U(1) doublet quark fields are rewritten in terms of the
mass eigenstate quark fields, generally has N(N + 1)/2 degrees of freedom

98


for the complex phase. If we subtract the above freedom of quark ﬁeld phase
change, then we are left with




as the net number of physical complex phases in the matrix U.
   This number vanishes for N = 1 and N = 2, which correspond to the two
and four-quark cases, respectively, explaining that we have no complex phas-
es in the matrix U and thus no CP violation for the two and four-quark cases.
However, when we go to the N = 3 generation case, i.e., the six-quark model,
then this number is 1 and CP violation can occur for the first time!
   We have thus completed our work. The origin of CP violation was revealed
partially at least.
   It, however, took a long time: more than 30 years and vast efforts of many
experimenters to really verify this theory. I would like to thank here all the
people in the world who supported this grand project of humanity.




                                                                           99


REFERENCES
[1] S. Sakata, “On a composite model for new particles”, Prog. Theor. Phys. 16 (1956), 686.
[2] A. Gamba, R. E. Marshak and S. Okubo, “Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on
     High Energy Nuclear Physics”, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 45 (1959), 881.
[3] Z. Maki, M. Nakagawa, Y. Ohnuki and S. Sakata, “A unified model for elementary
     particles”, Prog. Theor. Phys. 23 (1960), 1174.
[4] Z. Maki, “The forth baryon, Sakata model and modified B-L symmetry.1”, Prog. Theor.
     Phys. 31 (1964), 331.
[5] Y. Nambu, “Quasi-particles and gauge invariance in the theory of superconductivity”,
     Phys. Rev. 117 (1960), 648.
[6] Y. Nambu and G. Jona-Lasinio, “Dynamical model of elementary particles based on
     an analogy with superconductivity. I”, Phys. Rev. 122 (1961), 345; 124 (1961), 246.
[7] M. Gell-Mann and M. Levy, The axial vector current in beta decay”, Nuovo Cim. 16
     (1960), 705.
[8] T. D. Lee and C. N. Yang, “Question of parity conservation in weak interactions”, Phys.
     Rev. 104 (1956), 254.
[9] J. H. Christenson, J. W. Cronin, V. L. Fitch and R. Turlay, “Evidence for the 2π decay
     of the K20 Meson”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 (1964), 138.
[10] P. W. Higgs, “Broken symmetries, massless particles and gauge fields”, Phys. Lett. 12
     (1964), 132; “Spontaneous symmetry breakdown without massless bosons”, Phys. Rev.
     145 (1966), 1156.
[11] J. Goldstone, “Field theories with superconductor solutions”, Nuovo Cim. 19 (1961),
     154.
[12] J. Goldstone, A. Salam and S. Weinberg, “Broken symmetries”, Phys. Rev. 127 (1962),
     965.
[13] T. W. B. Kibble, “Symmetry breaking in non-Abelian gauge theories”, Phys. Rev. 155
     (1967), 1554.
[14] S. Weinberg, “A model of leptons”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19 (1967), 1264.
[15] A. Salam, “Weak and Electromagnetic Interactions” in Elementary Particle Theory ed. by
     N. Svartholm (Almqvist & Wiksell, 1968), 367–377.
[16] L. D. Faddeev and V. N. Popov, “Feynman diagrams for the Yang-Mills fields”, Phys.
     Lett. B 25 (1967), 29.
[17] S. L. Glashow, J. Iliopoulos and L. Maiani, “Weak interactions with lepton-hadron
     symmetry”, Phys. Rev. D 2 (1970) 1285.
[18] Z. Maki and T. Maskawa, “Hadron symmetries and gauge theory of weak and electro-
     magnetic interactions”, Prog. Theor. Phys. 49 (1973), 1007.
[19] M. Kobayashi and T. Maskawa, “CP violation in the renormalizable theory of weak
     interaction”, Prog. Theor. Phys. 49 (1973), 652.
Portrait photo of Toshihide Maskawa by photographer Ulla Montan.




100
