THE DISCOVERY OF CHARGE -
CONJUGATION PARITY ASYMMETRY
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1980


VAL L. FITCH
Princeton University, Department of Physics,
Princeton, New Jersey 08540




 Physics as a science has made incredible progress because of the delicate
interplay between theory and experiment. Astonishing predictions based on
 theories devised to account for known phenomena have been confirmed by
experiment. Experiments probing previously unexplored areas often reveal
physical effects which are completely unanticipated by theoretical conjecture.
The incorporation of the new effects into a theoretical framework then follows.
    This year Prof. Cronin and I are being honored for a purely experimental
discovery, a discovery for which there were no precursive indications, either
theoretical or experimental. It is a discovery for which after more than 16 years
there is no satisfactory accounting. But showing as it does a lack of charge-
conjugation parity symmetry and, correspondingly, a violation of time-reversal
invariance, it touches on our understanding of nature at its deepest level.
    The discovery of failure of CP symmetry was made in the system of K
mesons. This observation is especially interesting because it was the study of
these same particles that led to the overthrow of parity conservation, the
notion that interactions and their mirror-reflected counterparts must be equal.
    My own interest in K particles started in 1952-53 while I was at Columbia
working with Jim Rainwater on µ--mesonic atoms. At that time the strange
                                                           (1)
behavior of the particles newly discovered in cosmic rays was a major topic of
conversation in the corridors and over coffee. By strange behavior I am referring
to the copious production but slow decay. Protons bombarded by pions would
                                         13
result in the production of         at 10 times the rate of their decay back to
pions and protons. Pais came to Columbia and talked of his ideas on associated
production to explain this anomaly. (2) Gell Mann visited and discussed the
scheme which he and independently, Nakano and Nishijima, had devised
to account for associated production.(3,4)
    Their idea was implausible and daring in the face of available data. The
scheme assigned the K mesons to two doublets, K + K 0, and the antiparticles
     and      The natural assignment would have been the same as for pions,
a triplet of particles            Nishijimaalso assigned quantum numbers,
subsequently called stangeness, which were conserved in the strong interaction
but not in the weak. The            were assigned + 1, the         as well as the
  0
Λ, - 1


                                       V. L. Fitch                                595


    Standing alone among the particles with positive strangeness were the
 K + and K 0 mesons, and I idly thought that if the situation was ever to be
 understood these objects might be the key. Most often experiments in physics
 are long and difficult. It takes some special tweaking of interest to make the
 commitment to a new area of research. The original motivation is, in the
 end, apt to appear naive. However, I did in fact join the Princeton Cosmic
 Ray Group headed by George Reynolds, and spent the summer of 1954 on a
 mountain in Colorado learning about the ongoing experiments. During the
 same period the energy of the cosmotron at Brookhaven was being raised to
 3 GeV. Associated production was clearly seen by Shutt and his group at
 Brookhaven( and K mesons produced in the cosmotron were identified in
 photographic emulsion.(6) By the end o f the summer I reluctantly decided the
 future was not in studying cosmic rays in the mountains I loved, but with
 the accelerators.
     The following fall, with Bob Motley, a graduate student, we began to design
  an apparatus to detect K mesons using purely counter techniques at the
  cosmotron. As this work progressed the cascading interest in the tau-theta
  puzzle (7) led us naturally to explore the lifetime of the K particles as a function
  of their decay mode. We were successful with our detectors and Motley and
  I published our results simultaneously with those from the Alvarez group at
  Berkeley which was using the bevatron as a source. (8,9) These results showed the
 degeneracy in the lifetime of the tau and theta mesons. Independently the
  masses of tau and theta had been shown to be the same to within 1%. (10)
                                                                          (11)
 The situation then set the stage for the famous work of Lee and Yang followed
  by the experiments with the striking results showing maximal parity violation
  in the weak interactrons.(12) This remarkable story was told by Lee and Yang
 on this occasion in 1957.
     At about this time there appeared a paper by Landau written before the
  results of the beta decay experiments were known. (13) Addressing the tau-
  theta problem, he observed that a simple rejection of parity conservation would
  create difficult problems in physics. However, with what he called “combined
  inversion”, that is, space inversion and the simultaneous transformation of
 particle into antiparticle, the difficulties would be avoided. Indeed, this is a path
that nature appeared to take. Subsequent experiments showed parity violation
 was compensated by a failure of charge conjugation. The weak interactions were
  therefore invariant under the combined operations of particle-antiparticle
  interchange and mirror reflection, charge conjugation-parity, CP.
     One symmetry had been shown to be invalid but had been replaced by
  a still deeper one. This new symmetry was especially appealing because of the
 CPT theorem. This theorem, which is based on little more than special
  relatively and locality and which is the foundation of all quantum field
  theory, says that all interactions must be invariant under C, P, and T, time
  reversal, all combined. If CP is good so also is T, in complete accord with all
 experimental data. The subject was left in a highly satisfactory state. “Who
  would have dreamed in 1953 that studies of the decay properties of the K
  particles would lead to a new revolution in our understanding of invariance


596                                   Physics 1980


principles,” wrote Sakurai in 1963. (14) But then in 1964 these same particles,
in effect, dropped the other shoe.
    It is difficult to give a better example of the mutually complementary roles
of theory and experiment than in telling the story of the neutral K mesons.
For a physicist the pleasures are special because there is scarcely a physical
system which contains so many of the elements of modern physics. Two-state
systems, of which this is an example, abound, but this one has special properties
which give it a unique beauty. I hope that I can convey to you some of the
reasons why this system has held such a fascination for us. The story begins
with the isotopic spin, strangeness assignment of Gell Mann and Nishijima.
The assignment of the K mesons to two doublets makes the K 0 and                 distinct
entities. But both particles decay to two π mesons. If the physicist sees π+ and
π− mesons in his detector, which is the source, the         or     The problem was
solved through the remarkable insight of Gell Mann and Pais in their 1955
paper. (15) In the spirit of quantum mechanics it is necessary that the source of
the π + π − mesons be some linear combination of K 0 a n d               states. They
observed that a π + π − final state is even under charge conjugation. By even
we mean that the wavefunction does not change its algebraic sign upon
interchange of particle and antiparticle. This evenness condition is obviously
met by the combination                This they called the          If this is the case,
there must be another state equally probable, the               the       which is odd
under charge conjugation and, correspondingly, is forbidden to decay to
π + π − . But it can decay to many other states, three-body states such as
π + π − π 0 It was expected that the decay to the three-body states would be
substantially inhibited compared to the two-body. The particle corresponding
to the         would have a longer lifetime than the      by about 500. In addition,
it was expected that the       and     would have somewhat different masses even
though the masses of K” and          are strictly equal by the CPT theorem.
    This long-lived neutral K meson, predicted by Gell-Mann and Pais, was
then looked for and found by a Columbia group working at the Brookhaven
cosmotron. (17) The theoretical model, based on the notion of charge conjugation
invariance in the weak interactions, had been confirmed. Then suddenly parity
was found to be violated in the weak interactions along with charge conjugation!
This dark cloud was almost immediately removed with the observation that
one had only to replace C with CP and the story of the neutral K mesons would
r e m a i n t h e s a m e .(13) With CP invariance the    would continue to be
absolutely forbidden to decay to two pions. The successful1 description of the
neutral system of K mesons has been characterized by Feynman as “one of the
greatest achievements of theoretical physics.“(18)
    Additional features of the              system become evident if we write the
wavefunction including the lifetime and energy terms for the case of production
of a       at t = 0.


                                         V L. Fitch                                    597


It is seen that after a time, long compared to the         lifetime and short compared
                                                                     0
to the      lifetime, the state that was originally a pure K will become a
which in turn is an equal mixture of                and      To give a measure of the
magnitudes involved we should point out that the                      meson, in a typical
experimental situation, travels an average of a few centimeters before it decays,
whereas the           travels tens of meters. At a distance greater than about one
meter from the point ofproduction of a K0 a nearly pure             beam will be present.
   Another important characteristic of the system becomes apparent when we
consider the interaction of              with matter. The             and      by virtue
of their opposite strangeness, have quite different interaction cross sections.
Passing a beam of              through a block of material will result in a mixture
of      and        which, because of differential absorption of the two components,
is no longer 50-50, but instead a mixture equivalent to a new combination of
       and          The newly produced short-lived                 decaying to π + π − will
appear behind the material. This phenomenon is called regeneration.(19) In
                                                                                 0
the case of the absorbing material being completely transparent to K ’s and
opaque to           the intensity of the       after the absorber will be 1/4 the initial
intensity of the        incident on the absorber.
   In the late 1950’s M. L. Good observed that with a very small mass
                                         (20)



difference between the           and     the regeneration phenomena just discussed
would result in a coherent process. By coherent we mean that the scattering
process of        to      would not be from individual nuclei but from the whole
block of scattering material! That is, the block of material would remain in its
initial quantum mechanical state during the scattering process. In this case,
as with ordinary light passing through glass, the regeneration material could
be treated as having an index of refraction. The                 regenerated coherently
would have precisely the same energy as the incident                      and an angular
distribution identical to the incident beam but broadened by diffraction
effects determined by the size of the regenerating material perpendicular to the
beam. A characteristic wavelength for the               mesons in a typical experiment
is about 10     -13
                      cm.  The   transverse   dimensions    are typically 10 cm. The
corresponding diffraction pattern has a width of the order of 10 -14 radians!
In addition, the coherent addition of                 waves has been observed over
distances greater than 1014 wave lengths. The unique feature of this coherently
regenerated           beam is that it can be distinguished from the original beam
since it decays with a short lifetime to π+ π . To my knowledge, it is the only
                                                    −



instance where a forward coherently scattered beam can be distinguished from
the original beam.
   It has become evident to physics students in the audience that the
story has an analogy in polarized light. The       and   correspond to the left
                                                 0
and right circularly polarized light, and the K and       states are equivalent
to the x and y components of linear polarization. The passage of a       beam
through a block of condensed material is equivalent to the passage or left
circular polarized light through a doubly refractive medium like calcite which
has a different index refraction for the x and y components of polarization.
The general picture of regeneration, coherent and incoherent, was confirmed
                                            (21)
in a definitive bubble chamber experiment.


598                                Physics 1980


   There are many associated phenomena still to be explored. For example,
experiments coherently regenerating            from the planes in crystals have
yet to be done. At the particle momenta commonly available the Bragg angles
are exceedingly small, and the extinction factor, the Debye-Waller factor,
comes into play at correspondingly small angles, but the experiments could
be done.
   Unexpectedly, the K”        system provides us with important and highly
precise information about the gravitational interaction. It relates to the question
of strong universality; that is, whether different objects, in this case particle
and antiparticle, with the same inertial mass behave the same in a gravitational
field. As observed by M. L. Good, if the K” and its antiparticle, the          had
                                    (22)



an opposite gravitational potential energy, the K”          system would mix so
quickly that the long-lived particle would never be seen. By analyzing the
system in more detail one can show that if the gravitational interaction of
particle and antiparticle differ by a fraction,     then must be less than 10-10
if we’re dealing with the gravitational field of the earth, 10 -11 for the solar
system, and 10-13 for the galaxy.
   Voyages of discovery can be made in new uncharted waters but also in the
familiar bays close to port provided one has observing apparatus that can see
familiar objects with detail greater than that previously possible. In 1963 we
had the opportunity to investigate the neutral K meson phenomena with
resolution greater than that permitted before. The introduction of spark
chambers as charged particle detectors permitted precise track position
determination, but also the chambers could be selectively triggered on appro-
priate classes of events.
   Using such new devices with our colleagues, Jim Christenson and Rene
Turlay, Jim Cronin and I initiated a systematic study of (1) the regeneration
phenomena, (2) what we called CP invariance, and (3) neutral currents.
We were interested in the regeneration phenomena in particular because of an
anomaly that had just been reported by a group studying the passage of
      through a liquid hydrogen bubble chamber. Not many of our colleagues
                                                  (23)



would have given us much credit for studying CP invariance, but we did anyway,
and neutral currents, of long interest, were discussed by Professor Glashow
 on this occasion one year ago.
   A plan view of the apparatus we used for these studies is shown in Figure 1.
It is a two-armed spectrometer, each arm with spark chambers before and
after a magnet for track delineation. Cerenkov and scintillation counters
in both arms operated in coincidence provided the signals to trigger the spark
chambers, which were recorded photographically. The apparatus was placed
in a beam of neutral particles at the Brookhaven A. G. S. at a distance such
that       would have decayed away leaving               The angle between the
spectrometer arms was chosen to optimize the detection of K” mesons decaying
to two π mesons. In the regeneration studies blocks of various solid materials
were placed in the neutral beam. In the studies of the free decay of              2
pions, the decay volume was filled with helium gas to minimize the interactions.


                                              V. L. Fitch                               599




     PLAN VIEW




Fig. I. Plan view of the apparatus as located at the A. G. S.




                                                                                   1


Fig. 2. Angular distributions of those events in the appropriate mass range as measured by a
coarse measuring machine.


600                                   Physics 1980


   The decay to 2 pions is distinguished from the copious three-body decays
in two ways. The sum of the momenta of the two detected particles must line
up with the direction of the incident         In general this will not happen for
three-body decay. In addition, the mass computed for the parent particle
must match the mass of the       meson. The original data are shown in Figure 2
and 3. Figure 2 shows the data after measurement of the photographic records
on a relatively coarse measuring machine. The presence of the peaking of
events along the beam line stimulated more precise measurements and these
results are shown in Figure 3. Clearly there are about 56 events in the forward
peak in the proper mass interval where the background is 11. From this data we
established that the branching ratio of       to 2 pions relative to all the charge
modes decay was 2x 10 . Here was the first evidence for the decay completely
                         -3



forbidden by CP conservation. (23) We were acutely sensitive to the importance
of the result and, I must confess, did not initially believe it ourselves. We spent
nearly half a year attempting to invent viable alternative explanations, but
failed in every case.




Fig. 3. Angular distribution of the events after measurement by a precise machine in three
relevant mass regions.


                                           V. L. Fitch                                601


   The study of coherent regeneration was important for the CP measurement
for several reasons. First, the results we found were entirely consistent with
expectations; there were no anomalies. The measured coherent regeneration
rates in tungsten, copper, carbon, and liquid hydrogen enabled us to show that
coherent regeneration in the gaseous helium which filled the decay volume
would produce a totally negligible contribution to the signal we observed.
Second, the coherent regeneration of the                    which subsequently decrayed to
π π mesons, provided an invaluable calibration of the apparatus.
 + −



   It is appropriate now to look at the neutral K system in a somewhat more
q u a n t i t a t i v e w a y .(24)Because of the mixing of the   and    through the weak
                                                       0
interaction, the time rate of change of a K wave will not only depend on the
     amplitude, but also on the               amplitude, viz.,




We have let the particle symbol stand for the amplitude of the corresponding
wave. With invariance under CPT, particle and antiparticle masses and life-
times must be precisely identical. In terms of the above equations, A must be
equal to B. Now, CP violation can, in fact, occur in two ways, either through
terms in the set of equations above, or in the amplitudes for the decay.
Subsequent experiments show that most, if not all, of the violation is in the
equations above, involving the so-called mass-decay matrix. Professor Cronin
will discuss the ramifications of the effect being present also in the decay
terms. Suffice is to say here that any departure of p 2 from q2 will result in the
decay of the          2 pions. With CP nonconservation the short and long-
lived particles are no longer the   and    previously defined but rather




The fact that       decays to 2 pions shows that the amplitude for particle to
antiparticle transitions, in this case        does not quite equal the reverse,
            and indeed we now know rather precisely that not only are the
magnitudes somewhat different but that there is a small phase angle between
the two amplitudes. See Figure 4.




Fig. 4. Vector diagram showing schematically the difference in the amplitudes for     and


602


We indicated earlier that, through the CPT theorem, a violation of CP is
equivalent to a violation of time reversal invariance. As Professor Cronin will
show, the CPT theorem has been shown to hold in the neutral K system
independently, so in a self-contained way a violation of time reversal invariance
is demonstrated.
   We are all familiar with the time asymmetry associated with entropy.
Entropy in a closed system increases with time. This kind of time asymmetry
results from the boundary conditions. But for the first time we have in the
neutral K mesons a physical system that behaves asymmetrically in time as a
result of an interaction, not a boundary condition.
   Since the microscopic physical laws had always been thought to be invariant
under time reversal, this discovery opens up a very wide range of profound
questions. Professor Cronin will go into some of these questions in greater
detail. I will mention two. Can this effect be used to decrease the entropy
of an isolated system? We look out from the earth and see a highly ordered
universe. With entropy always increasing how can this be? Is CP violation an
effect that can be used, in effect, to wind up the universe? The answers to
these questions appear to be no.(25)
   At the same time we look out from the earth and see the remains of an earlier
much hotter universe. In that earlier time one expects that matter and
antimatter would condense out in equal amounts and eventually annihilate
to gamma radiation. However no evidence of antimatter is seen. The gauge
theories described on this occasion one year ago allow for the possibility of proton
(and antiproton) decay. This process, coupled with CP violation, drives the
universe towards a preponderance of matter over antimatter and can account
for the observed ratio of the amount of matter to radiation. (26)
   Lewis Thomas, whose essays on science grace our literature, has written,
“You measure the quality of the work by the intensity of the astonishment.”
After 16 years, the world of physics is still astonished by CP and T non-
invariance. I suspect that the Nobel Committee was motivated by considerations
similar to those of Thomas in awarding to Professor Cronin and myself this
highest of honors.


                                               V. L. Fitch                                     603


REFERENCES
 I. For a review ca 19.53 see Rochester, G. D. and Butler, C. C., Reports Progress in Phys. 16, 364
    (1953).
 2. Pais, A. Phys. Rev. 86,663 ( 1952).
 3. Gell-Mann, M. Phys. Rev. 92, 833 (1953).
 4. Nakano, T. and Nishijima, K. Progr. Theoret. Phys. 10, 581 (1953).
 5. Fowler, W. B., Shutt, R. P., Thorndikc, A. M. and Whittemore, W. L. Phys. Rev. 93,861 (1954).
 6. Rochester Conference Proc. (1954).
 7. Dalitz, R. H. Phil. Mag. 44, 1068 (1953); Fahri, E. Nuovo Cimento 11, 479 (1954).
      Among the strange particles some were seen to decay to two and some to three pions.
    By using the analysis of Dalitz and Fahri, it was shown, with very few examples in hand,
    that the parity of the three pion system was opposite to that of the two pion system. If parity
    is conserved in the decay interaction then there must he distinguishable parents of opposite
    parity, the theta that decays to two and the tau that decays to three pions. The puzzle was
    in the question, if the particles are distinct entities why should they have the same mass
    and lifetime? Now with parity violation both are recognized as K mesons,        and
 8. Alvarez, L. W., Crawford, F. S., Good, M. L. and Stevenson, M. L. Phys. Rev. 101, 503
    (1956); Harris, G., Orear, J. and Taylor, S. Phys. Rev. 100,932 (1955).
 9. Fitch, V. and Motley, R. Phys. Rev. 101, 496 (1956); Phys. Rev. 10.5, 265 (1957).
IO. Birge, R. W., Perkins, D. H., Peterson, J. R., Stork, D. H. and Whitehead, M. N. Nuovo
   Pimento 4, 834 (1956).
11. Lee, T. D. and Yang, C. N. Phys. Rev. 104, 254 ( 1956).
12. Wu, C. S., Ambler, E., Hayward, R. W., Hoppes, D. D. and Hudson, R. P. Phys. Rev. 10.5,
    1413 (1957); Garwin, R., Lederman, L. and Weinrich, M. Phys. Rev. 105, 1415 (1957);
    Friedman, J. I. and Telegdi, V. I.. Phys. Rev. 105, 1681 (1957).
13. Landau, L. Nucl. Phys. 3, 254 (1957).
14. Sakurai, J. J. Invariance Principles and Elementary Particles, Princeton University Press
    (1964), Princeton, N. J., p. 296.
15. Gell-Mann, M. and Pais, A. Phys. Rev. 97, 1387.
16. We have changed the notation to correspond to recent custom. Gell-Mann and Pais called
    them    and
17. Lande, K., Booth, E. T., Impeduglia, J., Lederman, L. .M. and Chinowsky, W. Phys. Rev.
    103, 1901 (1956).
18. Feynman, R. P. Theory of Fundamental Processes, Benjamin, W. A. Inc. New York, p. 50.
19. Pais, A. and Piccioni, 0. Phys. Rev. 100, 1487 (1955).
20. Good, M. L. Phys. Rev. 106, 591 ( 1957).
21. Good, R. H., Matsen, R. P., Muller, F., Piccioni, O., Powell, W. M., White, H. S.,
    Fowler, W. B. and Birge, R. W. Phys. Rev. 124, 1223 ( 1961).
22. Good, M. L. Phys.Rev. 121, 311 (1961).
23. Christenson, J., Cronin, J. W., Fitch, V. I.. and Turlay, R. Phys. Rev. Letters 13, 138 (1964).
24. Lee, T. D., Cehme, K. and Yang, C. N. Phys. Rev. 106, 340 (1957).
25. Ne’eman, Y. Erice Summer School Lectures, June 16-July 6, 1972.
26. Sakharov, A. D. JETP Letters 5, 24 (1967). For a non-technical discussion see Wilczek, F. W.
    Scientific American 243, 82 (Dec. 1980).
