                         W A L T E R H. B R A T T A I N

            Surface properties of semiconductors
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1956



First let me say that while I am very proud to be one of the recipients of the
Nobel Award in Physics, I am nevertheless well aware that I am only a repre-
sentative of many others, without whose work and effort I would not be
here today. May I mention first my teachers and in particular the late Prof.
Benjamin H. Brown at Whitman College, who originally inspired me to
take up physics and who also taught my mother and father. Then there are
all the many workers in the field of semiconductors on whose shoulders we
have stood. Finally and more closely connected with our work are all of our
colleagues at the Bell Telephone Laboratories whose efforts and cooperation
made our work possible. In particular here I would like to mention R. S.
Ohl, J. H. Scaff and H. C. Theuerer, whose pioneering work on silicon
made a new class of semiconductors available to physicists. It was Scaff and
Theuerer who, as metallurgists, supplied the silicon and germanium with
which we worked, and Ohl who first discovered a p-n junction in a melt
of silicon prepared for him by the other two. One needs indeed to be very
humble about accepting such an award when he thinks how fortunate he
was to be in the right environment at the right time, to take advantage of
all that had been done before. Let me here express my gratitude to all of
these people.
   I would like to start by emphasizing the importance of surfaces. It is at a
surface where many of our most interesting and useful phenomena occur.
We live for example on the surface of a planet. It is at a surface where the
catalysis of chemical reactions occur. It is essentially at a surface of a plant
that sunlight is converted to a sugar. In electronics, most if not all active
circuit elements involve non-equilibrium phenomena occurring at surfaces.
Much of biology is concerned with reactions at a surface.
   If surfaces are so important, what do we know about them? What is a
surface! What properties does a surface have that a physicist can measure?
Of the various states of matter - solid, liquid, and gaseous - physicists have
long understood and explained the behavior of gases and are now, thanks to
quantum mechanics, making considerable progress with simple homoge-


378                          1 9 5 6 W. H. B R A T T A I N
neous solids. Liquids are still quite obscure and surfaces still more so. It was
Irving Langmuir, a previous Nobel Laureate, who gave us the first model
of a surface, namely clean tungsten in high vacuum, and who further ex-
plored some of the simple adsorption phenomena that take place at such a
surface*. The main physical measurement by which he could characterize
his surface was the electronic work function or potential jump at the tungsten
surface and the changes in this potential due to adsorption of various foreign
atoms or molecules. He could also measure heats of evaporation of these
components. All this points up the essential properties of a surface, namely:
(i) it is a boundary across which the concentration of one or more compo-
nents changes greatly, and (ii) there is a potential jump or energy change
associated with the surface. In the case of a metal all these phenomena take
place in a few ångströms, making such a surface difficult to analyze. The
behavior of a tungsten surface has for some time been a model for the under-
standing of all surface phenomena. When one comes to some of the dirtier
and often more interesting surfaces these have been too remote from clean
tungsten for it to serve well in understanding their behavior.
   The main point of this story is that now as a result of the progress that has
been made in the understanding of semiconductors we have another model
of a surface, namely a p-n junction in a single crystal of a semiconductor
such as silicon or germanium, and that this model is in a sense at the opposite
extreme from clean tungsten. It can also be said that most surfaces lie in be-
tween these two models and either model may be used for understanding the
multitude of surface phenomena, whichever is best.
   In particular one can understand the complicated and dirty germanium
gas surface at least qualitatively in terms of the p-n junction model. Let us
first consider our p-n junction model. It occurs in one of the simplest, purest
and now best understood solids. For example a single crystal of germanium,
its atoms held together by well-understood covalent bonds, serves as a me-
dium in which electrons and holes can exist in equilibrium. The existence of
these components depends on the thermal dissociation of valence bonds
namely

                          (valence bond)      n    p



* The present author got his start working under J. A. Becker who was one of the
early contributors and is still actively working in the field of metal surfaces.


           SURFACE     PROPERTIES       OF   SEMICONDUCTORS                   379
The law governing this reaction is the mass action law


                                    np = K                                    (1)

where n and p represent the concentration of electrons and holes in equilib-
rium at a given temperature. The constant K depends primarily on the ab-
solute temperature (T) and energy (E g) necessary to dissociate a valence
bond creating a hole electron pair:


                             K ~ exp - ( Eg / k T )                           (2)

where k is Boltzmann’s constant. The proportionality constant in this last
equation can be approximately derived from fundamental physical constants
and the density of the crystal. The parameter characterizing the semicon-
ductor is the energy Eg necessary to dissociate a hole electron pair. It is ap-
proximately three quarters of an electron volt for germanium, one electron
volt for silicon and ranges in other semiconductors from a few tenths to
several electron volts.
   The main point here is that while the product of the equilibrium con-
centrations is always a constant at a given temperature, the magnitude of
either concentration can be varied over extreme ranges by solution of impu-
rities in the semiconductor lattice. Substitional solution of a fifth-column
element in the lattice of silicon or germanium, as discussed by Shockley in
the previous lecture, makes n very large and p correspondingly small, the
product remaining constant. Likewise the solution in the lattice of a third-
column element makes p large and n small.
   Consider now a p-n junction, a crystal of germanium, one side of which
is n-type ( n1 > p1) and the other side p-type (p 2 > n 2). At the contact be-
tween the two regions we have the situation that n1 must be greater than n2
and likewise p 2 greater than p 1 since n 1p 1 = n2p 2 = K. Because of this
concentration difference, electrons will tend to diffuse from 1 to 2 and holes
from 2 to 1. This will charge region 1 positive and region 2 negative until
an electric potential difference is built up just sufficient to make the field flow
balance the diffusion flow. The crystal will then be in equilibrium. This po-
tential is given by


                      =                      =


380                        1956 W. H. BRATTAIN

Associated with this potential is a space-charge double layer at the boundary,
between the two regions. The charge density is related to the potential
by Poisson’s equation




where is dielectric constant of the medium. The extent of this space-charge
double layer is large compared to that in a metal. In germanium it has a
characteristic length of about 1 x 10-4 cm.
   This is our model of a surface, a phase boundary across which the con-
centration of the components differ greatly, the associated potential jump,
 at the surface and the necessary charge double layer. Its properties can
be studied by changing the concentration of the components on each side
 of the surface from their equilibrium values. When one does this,
 that the potential difference across the surface changes in a manner
 with Eq. (3) and this change in potential can be measured. If p' 1 and n' 2
 are the non-equilibrium concentrations of holes and electrons on sides 1
2 then the change in potential is given by




Note that it is the change in concentration of the minority carrier on
side of the boundary that is controlling factor. Likewise, by changing from
the equilibrium to the non-equilibrium state, one can measure the flow of
charge into or out of the sample or the corresponding change in charge.4
the double layer. By a consideration of rate processes going on at this inter-
face, one can also write down a current balance equation for this surface.




where Is is the so-called saturation current and is determined by rates of re-
combination and thermal generation of electrons and holes on both sides
of the surface. The non-equilibrium condition may be obtained by flow of
current across the surface, in which case I is this current, or by generation
of electron hole pairs in the neighborhood of the junction, for example by
light, in which case I is the rate of generation of pairs by light multiplied by


          SURFACE      PROPERTIES      OF   SEMICONDUCTORS                  381
the electron charge (e). If both means are used then I is the sum of both
currents. Note that one can eliminate            from Eqs. (5) and (6), getting
the well-known rectifier equation.
    We see that the physical properties of this surface which can be measured
are the changes in potential, changes in concentration occurring at the sur-
face, and rates of return to equilibrium. These are in general the things one
can measure for any surface.
    Let us now consider a germanium surface in a gaseous ambient. By the
Kelvin method one can measure a contact potential difference between it
and a reference electrode. Any change in the potential jump at the surface
 will give a corresponding change in the contact potential. If the equilibrium
at the surface is upset by shining light on the surface the resulting potential
change can be measured. This is the surface photo-effect. If the germanium
is the proper shape, thin and long, one can also measure the photo conduc-
tivity, and from this deduce the change in minority carrier concentration for
a given illumination. On a large sample of germanium one can measure the
lifetime of electrons and holes in the body of the germanium and then, from
 the transient behavior of the thin sample, the surface rate of recombination
of holes and electrons. As a result of all these studies, one finds that there is
in general a space-charge double layer at the germanium surface. It is as if
 the germanium surface was of a given type, p or n, depending on the nature
 of the ambient gas and that the germanium interior must be in equilibrium
 with its surface. All the qualitative phenomena that one would find at a p-n
junction, if one maintained say side 1 at a given fixed n-type and varied side
 2 from p+ to n+, are found at a germanium gas interface. For example in the
 case of an n-(p+) j unction the photo e.m.f is such to make the n-side more
 negative. As one changes the p+ side from p+ to just the same degree of n-
 ness as side 1, the photo e.m.f. goes to zero and when side 2 is made n+
 the photo e.m.f. changes sign. This e.m.f. is largest in magnitude for n-
(p+) case. If side 1had been p-type, similar changes would occur when side
 2 was varied from p+ to n+ but now the photo e.m.f. is largest for the p-
 (n+) case. This is also quite an accurate description of the germanium-gas
 surface. Moreover the magnitude and sign of the photo effects at the ex-
 tremes can be predicted if one knows the density of holes and electrons, the
 body lifetime and the surface recombination for the sample in question.
 Furthermore the experimental results agree with theory.
    From the above results one would predict that, since the surface of a ger-
 manium crystal in a gaseous ambient may be of a different type from the


382                     1956 W.H.BRATTAIN
interior, the electrical conductivity of the surface should be different from
the interior, and, as the surface changes in type, this conductivity should
change. In a thin-enough sample these changes can be measured. Along with
the changes in surface type, there must also be a change in the charge double
layer. One can of course induce such a change in the charge double layer by
applying an electrical field perpendicular to the surface, and one can measure
the change in conductivity induced by this field. This is the field effect which
was predicted by Shockley but which at first one was unable to detect.
   As a result of measurements of this change of conductivity with field and
of the other changes at the surface with change in gaseous ambient, it is found
that there are slow and fast changes at the surface. For example, if one il-
luminates the surface of germanium suddenly, the contact potential changes
quickly to a new value, then slowly decays back towards the original value.
Likewise with the surface conductivity when one suddenly applies the field.
There are of course changes in the charge double layer at the surface cor-
responding to the change in surface photo-effect and surface conductivity.
From these results one gets the concept of slow and fast states at the surface
wherein this charge resides. The fast states are so to speak in good connection
with the germanium body and can get into equilibrium or steady state with
the body very quickly, in a microsecond or less. On the other hand the slow
states are poorly connected with the interior. It takes seconds or minutes for
them to adjust to changes induced by light or field. These may not even be
states at all but changes in adsorption equilibrium or steady state with the
surrounding gas.
   The next step is that, from our knowledge of the properties of germanium,
one can calculate, from the changes in conductivity, the potential difference
across the space layer from the surface into the interior. One can also cal-
culate the change in charge in the space-charge layer. As one changes the
germanium surface from p+ to n +, the conductivity should go through a
 minimum. If in an experiment one can find this minimum, one knows the
potential difference across the space-charge layer and, from the change in
 conductivity from this minimum, one knows the change in this potential.
 Further, from the field-effect experiment, one can determine the total change
in charge at the surface, and from the change in conductivity, how much of
 this change in charge occurred in the space-charge layer. The charge across
the surface must of course add up to zero when there is no field at the surface.
If        and     are the charges in the space-charge barrier layer, the fast
states and the slow states respectively, then


          SURFACE      PROPERTIES      OF   SEMICONDUCTORS                 383




In the case of an applied field, the sum of these charges must be equal to the
field-induced charge. By calculating        and measuring changes in total
charge under slow and fast conditions one can obtain values for both ∑f and
      One can also determine the potential change across the space-charge
layer and the total change in potential across the surface. For this type of
surface one has the chance of taking the surface apart and measuring the
individual parts in some detail. What remains to be done is to determine at
the same time the chemical changes that occur at this surface and to under-
stand the relation between the physical and chemical changes. When this is
accomplished - and I think it will be soon - the germanium surface will be
the most thoroughly understood of all surfaces.
    As an example of what already has been accomplished if one measures on
the same surface at the same time certain quantities as a function of gas am-
 bient, one can deduce the distribution in energy and capture cross-sections
of the fast states or traps for electrons and holes. These quantities are the
photoconductivity, the decay lifetime, the change of conductivity with field
 and the surface photo-effect. From these measurements and a knowledge of
 the body properties of the germanium sample one can then deduce (i) the
 change of charge in the fast states with respect to the surface space-charge
 layer potential difference at zero added carrier concentration, (ii) the change
 of charge in the fast states with added carrier concentration at constant sur-
 face potential, and (iii) the surface recombination, all as a function of am-
 bient gas or surface potential. These quantities all depend on the fast trap
 distribution in energy and on the surface potential. The second depends also
 on the ratio of the capture cross section for holes and electrons and the third
 depends as well on the product of the capture cross sections. The relations
 are integral equations and not easy to solve in general. One question is
 whether the trap distribution is discrete or continuous. An examination of
 all the pertinent data indicates that, at least for energies near the middle of
 the region between the valence and conduction bands, the distribution of
 traps in energy is continuous and that it is fixed and independent of gaseous
 ambient or germanium type, for a given surface treatment. One can calculate
 approximately the ratio of the cross sections obtaining                 and the
 product          x         x            givin,         X                 =
 10 -17 cm 2. Not only are these values reasonable but they suggest that the
 fast trap is acceptor-like, that is, negatively charged when occupied by an


384                        1 9 5 6 W. H. B R A T T A I N

electron and neutral when empty. The attraction between the hole and the
negatively charged trap thus explains the larger cross section for hole capture.
   In conclusion, one can say that the physical nature of the germanium sur-
face in a gas depends primarily on the surface treatment and the nature of
the gas, and not on the type, p or n, of the body material. The reaction of
the surface with the gaseous ambient, in particular the Bardeen-Brattain
cycle of oxygen and water vapor, is an example of a low-grade catalytic
reaction. The understanding of such a simple surface will ultimately contrib-
ute to understanding of other surface phenomena, especially catalysis. It was
the original attempts to understand surface phenomena of this nature that
led to the discovery of the transistor effect. Since then many people have
contributed to the present understanding. Some of these are the work of
Bardeen and his group at the University of Illinois, Henisch and his group
 at the University of Reading, Kingston and his co-workers at Lincoln La-
boratory, Aigrain and Dugas at the École Normale, Many and his group at
the Hebrew University, Israel, and that of my colleague - Garrett. Equally
important is the work of Walter Brown on the field effect and, while not
specifically dealt with here, his earlier work on channel conduction along
with the similar work of Statz and his group at Raytheon.
