                        W ERNER H EISENBERG

        The development of quantum mechanics
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1933


Quantum mechanics, on which I am to speak here, arose, in its formal con-
tent, from the endeavour to expand Bohr’s principle of correspondence to
a complete mathematical scheme by refining his assertions. The physically
new viewpoints that distinguish quantum mechanics from classical physics
were prepared by the researches of various investigators engaged in analysing
the difficulties posed in Bohr’s theory of atomic structure and in the radia-
tion theory of light.
   In 1900, through studying the law of black-body radiation which he had
discovered, Planck had detected in optical phenomena a discontinuous phe-
nomenon totally unknown to classical physics which, a few years later, was
most precisely expressed in Einstein’s hypothesis of light quanta. The im-
possibility of harmonizing the Maxwellian theory with the pronouncedly
visual concepts expressed in the hypothesis of light quanta subsequently
compelled research workers to the conclusion that radiation phenomena can
only be understood by largely renouncing their immediate visualization. The
fact, already found by Planck and used by Einstein, Debye, and others, that
the element of discontinuity detected in radiation phenomena also plays an
important part in material processes, was expressed systematically in Bohr’s
basic postulates of the quantum theory which, together with the Bohr-
Sommerfeld quantum conditions of atomic structure, led to a qualitative
interpretation of the chemical and optical properties of atoms. The accept-
ance of these basic postulates of the quantum theory contrasted uncom-
promisingly with the application of classical mechanics to atomic systems,
which, however, at least in its qualitative affirmations, appeared indispen-
sable for understanding the properties of atoms. This circumstance was a fresh
argument in support of the assumption that the natural phenomena in which
Planck’s constant plays an important part can be understood only by largely
foregoing a visual description of them. Classical physics seemed the limiting
case of visualization of a fundamentally unvisualizable microphysics, the more
accurately realizable the more Planck’s constant vanishes relative to the
parameters of the system. This view of classical mechanics as a limiting case


              DEVELOPMENT OF QUANTUM MECHANICS                            291
of quantum mechanics also gave rise to Bohr’s principle of correspondence
which, at least in qualitative terms, transferred a number of conclusions for-
mulated in classical mechanics to quantum mechanics. In connection with
the principle of correspondence there was also discussion whether the quan-
tum-mechanical laws could in principle be of a statistical nature; the pos-
sibility became particularly apparent in Einstein’s derivation of Planck’s law
of radiation. Finally, the analysis of the relation between radiation theory
and atomic theory by Bohr, Kramers, and Slater resulted in the following
scientific situation:
   According to the basic postulates of the quantum theory, an atomic sys-
tem is capable of assuming discrete, stationary states, and therefore discrete
energy values; in terms of the energy of the atom the emission and absorp-
tion of light by such a system occurs abruptly, in the form of impulses. On
the other hand, the visualizable properties of the emitted radiation are des-
cribed by a wave field, the frequency of which is associated with the dif-
ference in energy between the initial and final states of the atom by the
relation

                               E 1 - E2 = h v

To each stationary state of an atom corresponds a whole complex of para-
meters which specify the probability of transition from this state to another.
There is no direct relation between the radiation classically emitted by an
orbiting electron and those parameters defining the probability of emission;
nevertheless Bohr’s principle of correspondence enables a specific term of
the Fourier expansion of the classical path to be assigned to each transition
of the atom, and the probability for the particular transition follows quali-
tatively similar laws as the intensity of those Fourier components. Although
therefore in the researches carried out by Rutherford, Bohr, Sommerfeld
and others, the comparison of the atom with a planetary system of electrons
leads to a qualitative interpretation of the optical and chemical properties
of atoms, nevertheless the fundamental dissimilarity between the atomic
spectrum and the classical spectrum of an electron system imposes the need
to relinquish the concept of an electron path and to forego a visual descrip-
tion of the atom.
   The experiments necessary to define the electron-path concept also furnish
an important aid in revising it. The most obvious answer to the question
how the orbit of an electron in its path within the atom could be observed


292                          1932 W.HEISENBERG

namely, will perhaps be to use a microscope of extreme resolving power.
But since the specimen in this microscope would have to be illuminated with
light having an extremely short wavelength, the first light quantum from
the light source to reach the electron and pass into the observer’s eye would
eject the electron completely from its path in accordance with the laws of
the Compton effect. Consequently only one point of the path would be
observable experimentally at any one time.
     In this situation, therefore, the obvious policy was to relinquish at first
the concept of electron paths altogether, despite its substantiation by Wil-
 son’s experiments, and, as it were, to attempt subsequently how much of
 the electron-path concept can be carried over into quantum mechanics.
     In the classical theory the specification of frequency, amplitude, and phase
of all the light waves emitted by the atom would be fully equivalent to
 specifying its electron path. Since from the amplitude and phase of an emitted
 wave the coefficients of the appropriate term in the Fourier expansion of
 the electron path can be derived without ambiguity, the complete electron
 path therefore can be derived from a knowledge of all amplitudes and phases.
 Similarly, in quantum mechanics, too, the whole complex of amplitudes
 and phases of the radiation emitted by the atom can be regarded as a com-
 plete description of the atomic system, although its interpretation in the sense
  of an electron path inducing the radiation is impossible. In quantum mechan-
  ics, therefore, the place of the electron coordinates is taken by a complex
  of parameters corresponding to the Fourier coefficients of classical motion
  along a path. These, however, are no longer classified by the energy of state
  and the number of the corresponding harmonic vibration, but are in each
   case associated with two stationary states of the atom, and are a measure for
   the transition probability of the atom from one stationary state to another.
   A complex of coefficients of this type is comparable with a matrix such as
   occurs in linear algebra. In exactly the same way each parameter of classical
   mechanics, e.g. the momentum or the energy of the electrons, can then be
   assigned a corresponding matrix in quantum mechanics. To proceed from
 here beyond a mere description of the empirical state of affairs it was nec-
   essary to associate systematically the matrices assigned to the various para-
   meters in the same way as the corresponding parameters in classical mechan-
   ics are associated by equations of motions. When, in the interest of achieving
    the closest possible correspondence between classical and quantum mechan-
   ics, the addition and multiplication of Fourier series were tentatively taken
   as the example for the addition and multiplication of the quantum-theory


              DEVELOPMENT OF QUANTUM MECHANICS                           293
complexes, the product of two parameters represented by matrices appeared
to be most naturally represented by the product matrix in the sense of linear
algebra - an assumption already suggested by the formalism of the Kramers-
Ladenburg dispersion theory.
   It thus seemed consistent simply to adopt in quantum mechanics the equa-
tions of motion of classical physics, regarding them as a relation between
the matrices representing the classicalvariables. The Bohr-Sommerfeld quan-
tum conditions could also be re-interpreted in a relation between the ma-
trices, and together with the equations of motion they were sufficient to
define all matrices and hence the experimentally observable properties of the
atom.
  Born, Jordan, and Dirac deserve the credit for expanding the mathemati-
cal scheme outlined above into a consistent and practically usable theory.
These investigators observed in the first place that the quantum conditions
can be written as commutation relations between the matrices representing
the momenta and the coordinates of the electrons, to yield the equations (pr,
momentum matrices; qr, coordinate matrices) :




                 for
               0 for


By means of these commutation relations they were able to detect in quan-
tum mechanics as well the laws which were fundamental to classical mechan-
ics: the invariability in time of energy, momentum, and angular momentum.
   The mathematical scheme so derived thus ultimately bears an extensive
formal similarity to that of the classical theory, from which it differs out-
wardly by the commutation relations which, moreover, enabled the equa-
tions of motion to be derived from the Hamiltonian function.
   In the physical consequences, however, there are very profound differ-
ences between quantum mechanics and classical mechanics which impose the
need for a thorough discussion of the physical interpretation of quantum
mechanics. As hitherto defined, quantum mechanics enables the radiation
emitted by the atom, the energy values of the stationary states, and other
parameters characteristic for the stationary states to be treated. The theory
hence complies with the experimental data contained in atomic spectra. In


294                           1932 W.HEISENBERG

  all those cases, however, where a visual description is required of a transient
  event, e.g. wheninterpreting Wilson photographs, the formalism of the theo-
  ry does not seem to allow an adequate representation of the experimental
  state of affairs. At this point Schrödinger’s wave mechanics, meanwhile de-
 veloped on the basis of de Broglie’s theses, came to the assistance of quan-
 tum mechanics.
     In the course of the studies which Mr. Schrödinger will report here him-
 self he converted the determination of the energy values of an atom into an
 eigenvalue problem defined by a boundary-value problem in the coordinate
 space of the particular atomic system. After Schrödinger had shown the
 mathematical equivalence of wave mechanics, which he had discovered,
 with quantum mechanics, the fruitful combination of these two different
 areas of physical ideas resulted in an extraordinary broadening and enrich-
 ment of the formalism of the quantum theory. Firstly it was only wave
 mechanics which made possible the mathematical treatment of complex
 atomic systems, secondly analysis of the connection between the two theo-
 ries led to what is known as the transformation theory developed by Dirac
 and Jordan. As it is impossible within the limits of the present lecture to give
 a detailed discussion of the mathematical structure of this theory, I should
just like to point out its fundamental physical significance. Through the
 adoption of the physical principles of quantum mechanics into its expanded
 formalism, the transformation theory made it possible in completely general
 terms to calculate for atomic systems the probability for the occurrence of a
 particular, experimentally ascertainable, phenomenon under given experi-
 mental conditions. The hypothesis conjectured in the studies on the radia-
 tion theory and enunciated in precise terms in Born’s collision theory, name-
 ly that the wave function governs the probability for the presence of a cor-
 puscle, appeared to be a special case of a more general pattern of laws and
 to be a natural consequence of the fundamental assumptions of quantum
 mechanics. Schrödinger, and in later studies Jordan, Klein, and Wigner as
 well, had succeeded in developing as far as permitted by the principles of
 the quantum theory de Broglie’s original concept of visualizable matter
 waves occurring in space and time, a concept formulated even before the
 development of quantum mechanics. But for that the connection between
 Schrödinger’s concepts and de Broglie’s original thesis would certainly have
 seemed a looser one by this statistical interpretation of wave mechanics and
 by the greater emphasis on the fact that Schrödinger’s theory is concerned
 with waves in multidimensional space. Before proceeding to discuss the


                DEVELOPMENT OF QUANTUM MECHANICS                             295
explicit significance of quantum mechanics it is perhaps right for me to deal
briefly with this question as to the existence of matter waves in three-dimen-
sional space, since the solution to this problem was only achieved by com-
bining wave and quantum mechanics.
    A long time before quantum mechanics was developed Pauli had inferred
from the laws in the Periodic System of the elements the well-known prin-
ciple that a particular quantum state can at all times be occupied by only a
single electron. It proved possible to transfer this principle to quantum me-
chanics on the basis of what at first sight seemed a surprising result: the entire
complex of stationary states which an atomic system is capable of adopting
breaks down into definite classes such that an atom in a state belonging to
one class can never change into a state belonging to another class under the
action of whatever perturbations. As finally clarified beyond question by
the studies of Wigner and Hund, such a class of states is characterized by a
defmite symmetry characteristic of the Schrödinger eigenfunction with re-
spect to the transposition of the coordinates of two electrons. Owing to the
 fundamental identity of electrons, any external perturbation of the atom
 remains unchanged when two electrons are exchanged and hence causes no
 transitions between states of various classes. The Pauli principle and the
 Fermi-Dirac statistics derived from it are equivalent with the assumption
 that only that class of stationary states is achieved in nature in which the
 eigenfunction changes its sign when two electrons are exchanged. According
 to Dirac, selecting the symmetrical system of terms would lead not to the
 Pauli principle, but to Bose-Einstein electron statistics.
    Between the classes of stationary states belonging to the Pauli principle
 or to Bose-Einstein statistics, and de Broglie’s concept of matter waves
 there is a peculiar relation. A spatial wave phenomenon can be treated ac-
 cording to the principles of the quantum theory by analysing it using the
 Fourier theorem and then applying to the individual Fourier component of
 the wave motion, as a system having one degree of freedom, the normal
 laws of quantum mechanics. Applying this procedure for treating wave
 phenomena by the quantum theory, a procedure that has also proved fruit-
  ful in Dirac’s studies of the theory of radiation, to de Broglie’s matter
  waves, exactly the same results are obtained as in treating a whole complex
  of material particles according to quantum mechanics and selecting the sym-
  metrical system of terms. Jordan and Klein hold that the two methods are
  mathematically equivalent even if allowance is also made for the interac-
  tion of the electrons, i.e. if the field energy originating from the contin-


296                         1932 W.HEISENBERG

  uous space charge is included in the calculation in de Broglie’s wave theory.
  Schrödinger’s considerations of the energy-momentum tensor assigned to
  the matter waves can then also be adopted in this theory as consistent com-
 ponents of the formalism. The studies of Jordan and Wigner show that mod-
 ifying the commutation relations underlying this quantum theory of waves
 results in a formalism equivalent to that of quantum mechanics based on the
 assumption of Pauli’s exclusion principle.
    These studies have established that the comparison of an atom with a plan-
 etary system composed of nucleus and electrons is not the only visual picture
 of how we can imagine the atom. On the contrary, it is apparently no less
 correct to compare the atom with a charge cloud and use the correspondence
 to the formalism of the quantum theory borne by this concept to derive
 qualitative conclusions about the behaviour of the atom. However, it is the
 concern of wave mechanics to follow these consequences.
    Reverting therefore to the formalism of quantum mechanics; its applica-
 tion to physical problems is justified partly by the original basic assumptions
 of the theory, partly by its expansion in the transformation theory on the
 basis of wave mechanics, and the question is now to expose the explicit
 significance of the theory by comparing it with classical physics.
    In classical physics the aim of research was to investigate objective pro-
 cesses occurring in space and time, and to discover the laws governing their
 progress from the initial conditions. In classical physics a problem was con-
 sidered solved when a particular phenomenon had been proved to occur
 objectively in space and time, and it had been shown to obey the general
 rules of classical physics as formulated by differential equations. The manner
 in which the knowledge of each process had been acquired, what observa-
 tions may possibly have led to its experimental determination, was com-
 pletely immaterial, and it was also immaterial for the consequences of the
 classical theory, which possible observations were to verify the predictions
 of the theory. In the quantum theory, however, the situation is completely
 different. The very fact that the formalism of quantum mechanics cannot
 be interpreted as visual description of a phenomenon occurring in space and
 time shows that quantum mechanics is in no way concerned with the ob-
jective determination of space-time phenomena. On the contrary, the for-
 malism of quantum mechanics should be used in such a way that the proba-
 bility for the outcome of a further experiment may be concluded from the
 determination of an experimental situation in an atomic system, providing
 that the system is subject to no perturbations other than those necessitated


              DEVELOPMENT OF QUANTUM MECHANICS                            297
by performing the two experiments. The fact that the only definite known
result to be ascertained after the fullest possible experimental investigation
of the system is the probability for a certain outcome of a second experiment
shows, however, that each observation must entail a discontinuous change in
the formalism describing the atomic proces sand therefore also a discontin-
uous change in the physical phenomenon itself. Whereas in the classical
theory the kind of observation has no bearing on the event, in the quantum
theory the disturbance associated with each observation of the atomic phe-
nomenon has a decisive role. Since, furthermore, the result of an observation
as a rule leads only to assertions about the probability of certain results of
subsequent observations, the fundamentally unverifiable part of each per-
turbation must, as shown by Bohr, be decisive for the non-contradictory
operation of quantum mechanics. This difference between classical and
atomic physics is understandable, of course, since for heavy bodies such as
the planets moving around the sun the pressure of the sunlight which is
reflected at their surface and which is necessary for them to be observed is
negligible; for the smallest building units of matter, however, owing to their
low mass, every observation has a decisive effect on their physical behaviour.
   The perturbation of the system to be observed caused by the observation
is also an important factor in determining the limits within which a visual
description of atomic phenomena is possible. If there were experiments
which permitted accurate measurement of all the characteristics of an atomic
system necessary to calculate classical motion, and which, for example, sup-
plied accurate values for the location and velocity of each electron in the
system at a particular time, the result of these experiments could not be
utilized at all in the formalism, but rather it would directly contradict the
formalism. Again, therefore, it is clearly that fundamentally unverifiable part
of the perturbation of the system caused by the measurement itself which
hampers accurate ascertainment of the classical characteristics and thus per-
mits quantum mechanics to be applied. Closer examination of the for-
malism shows that between the accuracy with which the location of a par-
ticle can be ascertained and the accuracy with which its momentum can
simultaneously be known, there is a relation according to which the product
of the probable errors in the measurement of the location and momentum
is invariably at least as large as Planck’s constant divided by 4π. In a very
general form, therefore, we should have


298                           1932 W.HEISENBERG

where p and q are canonically conjugated variables. These uncertainty rela-
tions for the results of the measurement of classical variables form the nec-
essary conditions for enabling the result of a measurement to be expressed
in the formalism of the quantum theory. Bohr has shown in a series of
examples how the perturbation necessarily associated with each observation
indeed ensures that one cannot go below the limit set by the uncertainty
relations. He contends that in the final analysis an uncertainty introduced
by the concept of measurement itself is responsible for part of that perturba-
tion remaining fundamentally unknown. The experimental determination
of whatever space-time events invariably necessitates a fixed frame - say the
system of coordinates in which the observer is at rest - to which all meas-
urements are referred. The assumption that this frame is "fixed" implies
neglecting its momentum from the outset, since "fixed" implies nothing
other, of course, than that any transfer of momentum to it will evoke no
perceptible effect. The fundamentally necessary uncertainty at this point is
then transmitted via the measuring apparatus into the atomic event.
    Since in connection with this situation it is tempting to consider the possi-
bility of eliminating all uncertainties by amalgamating the object, the meas-
uring apparatuses, and the observer into one quantum-mechanical system,
it is important to emphasize that the act of measurement is necessarily vis-
ualizable, since, of course, physics is ultimately only concerned with the sys-
tematic description of space-time processes. The behaviour of the observer
as well as his measuring apparatus must therefore be discussed according to
the laws of classical physics, as otherwise there is no further physical problem
whatsoever. Within the measuring apparatus, as emphasized by Bohr, all
events in the sense of the classical theory will therefore be regarded as deter-
mined, this also being a necessary condition before one can, from a result of
measurements, unequivocally conclude what has happened. In quantum theo-
ry, too, the scheme of classical physics which objectifies the results of ob-
servation by assuming in space and time processes obeying laws is thus car-
 ried through up to the point where the fundamental limits are imposed by
 the unvisualizable character of the atomic events symbolized by Planck’s
 constant. A visual description for the atomic events is possible only within
certain limits of accuracy - but within these limits the laws of classical phys-
ics also still apply. Owing to these limits of accuracy as defined by the un-
certainty relations, moreover, a visual picture of the atom free from am-
 biguity has not been determined. On the contrary the corpuscular and the
 wave concepts are equally serviceable as a basis for visual interpretation.


                DEVELOPMENT OF QUANTUM MECHANICS                            299
   The laws of quantum mechanics are basically statistical. Although the
parameters of an atomic system are determined in their entirety by an ex-
periment, the result of a future observation of the system is not generally
accurately predictable. But at any later point of time there are observations
which yield accurately predictable results. For the other observations
only the probability for a particular outcome of the experiment can be given.
The degree of certainty which still attaches to the laws of quantum me-
chanics is, for example, responsible for the fact that the principles of conser-
vation for energy and momentum still hold as strictly as ever. They can be
checked with any desired accuracy and will then be valid according to the
accuracy with which they are checked. The statistical character of the laws
of quantum mechanics, however, becomes apparent in that an accurate
study of the energetic conditions renders it impossible to pursue at the same
time a particular event in space and time.
   For the clearest analysis of the conceptual principles of quantum mechan-
ics we are indebted to Bohr who, in particular, applied the concept of com-
plementarity to interpret the validity of the quantum-mechanical laws. The
uncertainty relations alone afford an instance of how in quantum mechanics
the exact knowledge of one variable can exclude the exact knowledge of
another. This complementary relationship between different aspects of one
and the same physical process is indeed characteristic for the whole structure
of quantum mechanics. I had just mentioned that, for example, the de-
termination of energetic relations excludes the detailed description of space-
time processes. Similarly, the study of the chemical properties of a molecule
is complementary to the study of the motions of the individual electrons
in the molecule, or the observation of interference phenomena complemen-
tary to the observation of individual light quanta. Finally, the areas of valid-
ity of classical and quantum mechanics can be marked off one from the other
as follows: Classical physics represents that striving to learn about Nature
in which essentially we seek to draw conclusions about objective processes
from observations and so ignore the consideration of the influences which
every observation has on the object to be observed; classical physics, therefore,
has its limits at the point from which the influence of the observation on the
 event can no longer be ignored. Conversely, quantum mechanics makes pos-
sible the treatment of atomic processes by partially foregoing their space-
time description and objectification.
    So as not to dwell on assertions in excessively abstract terms about the
 interpretation of quantum mechanics, I would like briefly to explain with


300                         1932 W.HEISENBERG

a well-known example how far it is possible through the atomic theory to
achieve an understanding of the visual processes with which we are con-
cerned in daily life. The interest of research workers has frequently been
focused on the phenomenon of regularly shaped crystals suddenly forming
from a liquid, e .g. a supersaturated salt solution. According to the atomic
theory the forming force in this process is to a certain extent the symmetry
characteristic of the solution to Schrödinger’s wave equation, and to that
extent crystallization is explained by the atomic theory. Nevertheless this
process retains a statistical and - one might almost say - historical element
which cannot be further reduced: even when the state of the liquid is com-
pletely known before crystallization, the shape of the crystal is not deter-
mined by the laws of quantum mechanics. The formation of regular shapes
is just far more probable than that of a shapeless lump. But the ultimate shape
owes its genesis partly to an element of chance which in principle cannot
be analysed further.
   Before closing this report on quantum mechanics, I may perhaps be al-
lowed to discuss very briefly the hopes that may be attached to the further
development of this branch of research. It would be superfluous to mention
that the development must be continued, based equally on the studies of
de Broglie, Schrödinger, Born, Jordan, and Dirac. Here the attention of the
research workers is primarily directed to the problem of reconciling the
claims of the special relativity theory with those of the quantum theory. The
extraordinary advances made in this field by Dirac about which Mr. Dirac
will speak here, meanwhile leave open the question whether it will be pos-
sible to satisfy the claims of the two theories without at the same time deter-
mining the Sommerfeld fine-structure constant. The attempts made hitherto
to achieve a relativistic formulation of the quantum theory are all based on
visual concepts so close to those of classical physics that it seems impossible
to determine the fine-structure constant within this system of concepts. The
expansion of the conceptual system under discussion here should, further-
more, be closely associated with the further development of the quantum
theory of wave fields, and it appears to me as if this formalism, notwith-
standing its thorough study by a number of workers (Dirac, Pauli, Jordan,
Klein, Wigner, Fermi) has still not been completely exhausted. Important
pointers for the further development of quantum mechanics also emerge
from the experiments involving the structure of the atomic nuclei. From
their analysis by means of the Gamow theory, it would appear that between
the elementary particles of the atomic nucleus forces are at work which dif-


               DEVELOPMENT OF QUANTUM MECHANICS                           301

fer somewhat in type from the forces determining the structure of the atomic
shell; Stem’s experiments seem, furthermore, to indicate that the behaviour
of the heavy elementary particles cannot be represented by the formalism
of Dirac’s theory of the electron. Future research will thus have to be pre-
 pared for surprises which may otherwise come both from the field of expe-
rience of nuclear physics as well as from that of cosmic radiation. But how-
ever the development proceeds in detail, the path so far traced by the quan-
 tum theory indicates that an understanding of those still unclarified features
 of atomic physics can only be acquired by foregoing visualization and ob-
jectification to an extent greater than that customary hitherto. We have
 probably no reason to regret this, because the thought of the great epis-
 temological difficulties with which the visual atom concept of earlier physics
 had to contend gives us the hope that the abstracter atomic physics developing
 at present will one day fit more harmoniously into the great edifice of
 Science.
