                     W   ILLIAM   LAWRENCE BRAGG


            The diffraction of X-rays by crystals
                       Nobel Lecture, September 6, 1922*


It is with the very greatest pleasure that I take this opportunity of expressing
my gratitude to you for the great honour which you bestowed upon me,
when you awarded my father and myself the Nobel Prize for Physics in the
year 1915. In other years scientists have come here to express their thanks to
you, who have received this great distinction for the work of an illustrious
career devoted to research. That you should have given me, at the very out-
set of my scientific career, even the most humble place amongst their ranks,
is an honour of which I cannot but be very proud.
   You invited me here two years ago, after the end of the war, but a series
of unfortunate circumstances made it impossible for me to accept your invi-
tation. I have always profoundly regretted this, and it was therefore with the
very greatest satisfaction that I received the invitation of Prof. Arrhenius a
few months ago, and arranged for this visit. I am at last able to tell you how
deeply grateful I am to you, and to give you my thanks in person.
    You have already honoured with the Nobel Prize Prof. von Laue, to
whom we owe the great discovery which has made possible all progress in a
new realm of science, the study of the structure of matter by the diffraction
of X-rays. Prof von Laue, in his Nobel Lecture, has described to you how he
was led to make his epochal discovery. In trying to think of some way in
which diffraction effects with X-rays might be found, and the question of
their true nature answered, he came to the realization that Nature had pro-
vided, in a crystal, a diffraction grating exactly suited for the purpose. It had
already been surmised that the X-rays, if they were in truth electromagnetic
waves, would be found to have a very short wavelength, of the order of 10-9
centimetre. The work of Sohnke, Fedorov, and others on the geometry of
crystal structure had shown that the atoms or molecules in a crystal must be
arranged in a geometrical pattern with perfect regularity, and it was possible
to calculate that the spacing of the pattern must be of the order of 10-8
* On November 12, 1915, Professor W.L. Bragg was awarded the Nobel Prize in
Physics by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. On September 6, 1922 he made
the following speech in the hall of the Technical University of Stockholm.


                DIFFRACTION OF X-RAYS BY CRYSTALS                              371
 centimetre. The relation between this spacing and the conjectured wave-
length of the X-rays was precisely that required to give diffraction effects.
Von Laue, in collaboration with Friedrich and Knipping, tried the experi-
 ment of passing a narrow beam of X-rays through a crystal, and they were
 immediately successful in obtaining undoubted evidence of regular diffrac-
 tion. The lines of investigation which this discovery opened up have been so
 numerous and fruitful that Prof. von Laue could only give the briefest review
 of them in his address to you. When we consider the advances in our know-
 ledge of the structure of matter which have been made by means of the von
 Laue effect, this discovery must surely be regarded as occupying a unique
 position in the history of science.
    In saying something about the work for which we were awarded the No-
 bel Prize, I feel that I cannot but speak for both my father and myself. It was
 with his inspiration and under his guidance that any contributions of my
 own were made, and it was one of the proudest moments of my life when I
 heard that you had associated my name with his and awarded the prize to us
jointly.
    Prof. von Laue had made some of his earliest experiments with a crystal of
 zinc sulphide, and had obtained results which proved that the diffracted pen-
 cils showed the symmetry of the underlying crystal structure, which in this
 case was cubic. He developed a mathematical theory of diffraction by a space
 lattice, and proved that these diffracted pencils were in directions which were
 to be expected for a series of diffracting points arranged on a cubic space
 lattice. In pursuing the analysis still further, he tried to account for the fact
 that, whereas there were a large number of directions in which one would
 expect to find a diffracted beam, only a certain number of these appeared on
 the photographic plate used to record the effect. He suggested that this might
 be accounted for by the existence, in the X-ray beam, of certain wavelengths
 alone; and that a diffracted beam only appeared when conditions were right
 for diffracting these wavelengths. In studying his work, it occurred to me
 that perhaps we ought to look for the origin of this selection of certain direc-
 tions of diffraction in the peculiarities of the crystal structure, and not in the
 constitution of the X-ray beam; this might be of the nature of white light
 and be composed of a continuous range of wavelengths. I tried to attack the
 problem from a slightly different point of view, and to see what would hap-
 pen if a series of irregular pulses fell on diffracting points arranged on a reg-
 ular space lattice. This led naturally to the consideration of the diffraction
 effects as a reflexion of the pulses by the planes of the crystal structure. The


372                             1915 W.L.BRAGG

points of a space lattice may be arranged in series of planes, parallel and
equidistant from each other. As a pulse passes over each diffracting point, it
scatters a wave, and if a number of points are arranged on a plane the diffract-
ed wavelets will combine together to form a reflected wave front, according
to the well-known Huygens construction.
  The pulses reflected by successive planes build up a wave train, which
analysis shows to be composed of the wavelengths given by the formula



In this expression, n is an integer, λ is the wavelength of the X-rays, d the
spacing of the planes, and ϑ the glancing angle at which the X-rays are re-
flected.
   To regard the diffraction as a reflexion of the X-rays involved no new
principle that was not already contained in von Laue’s mathematical treat-
ment. It still left open the question why certain planes in the zinc blende struc-
ture appeared to reflect strongly, while others which were apparently equally
well adapted to do so were not represented by diffracted pencils. In analysing
von Laue’s result, however, I found that the selection of the effective planes
could be accounted for by assuming that the diffracting centres were ar-
ranged in a face-centred cubic lattice, and not on a simple cubic lattice. The
structural unit of the face-centred cubic lattice is a cube with a point at each
comer and at the centre of each face. When the planes of such a lattice are
arranged in the order of those most densely packed with atoms, and so most
effective for reflexion, this order is rather different to that for a simple cubic
lattice. By assigning a face-centred cubic structure to zinc blende, it seemed
possible to explain satisfactorily the von Laue photograph as due to the dif-
fraction of white radiation with a maximum intensity in a certain part of the
 spectrum. I made a further test of two simple cubic crystals, sodium chloride
 and potassium chloride. While the von Laue photographs obtained with so-
 dium chloride indicated a face-centred lattice, those obtained with potassium
chloride were of a simpler nature, and were such as one would expect from
 an arrangement of points at the corners of cubes. Since it seemed probable
 that these two crystals had a similar structure, I was led to conjecture that the
 atoms were arranged as shown in Fig. 1, where every corner of the cube is
 occupied by an atom, whereas the atoms of one kind considered alone are
 arranged on a face-centred lattice. In potassium chloride the atoms are so
nearly equal in their weight that they act as equivalent diffracting centres and
the structure may be regarded as a simple cubic one.


              DIFFRACTION OF X-RAYS BY CRYSTALS
                                                                               373




               Fig. 1.                                    Fig. 2.

                                         Fig. 1. Rocksalt type (NaCl, KCl, LiF,
                                         etc.). The white balls represent sodium (or
                                         chlorine); the black balls, chlorine (or
                                                           sodium).
                                         Fig. 2. Fluorspar (CaF2). The black balls
                                         represent calcium; the white balls, fluo-
                                                              rine.




                                          Fig. 3. Diamond. Both black and white
                                          balls represent carbon atoms. Each ball is
                                          at the centre of gravity of four others.
               Fig. 3.

Although it seemed certain that the von Laue effect was due to the diffrac-
tion of very short waves, there remained the possibility that there might not
be the X-rays. My father, in order to test this, examined whether the beam
reflected by a crystal ionized a gas; this he found to be the case. He examined
the strength of the reflexion at various angles, and the instrument which was
first used for the purpose was developed later into the X-ray spectrometer
with which we have done the greater part of our work. In this instrument
the X-rays coming from a tube are limited to a narrow beam by slits, and
fall on a crystal at the centre of the spectrometer table by which they are


374                                 1915 W.L.BRAGG

reflected; the reflected beam is received and measured in an ionization
chamber.
   In examining the effect for varying angles of incidence my father discov-
ered that a very strong reflexion appeared when a given crystal face was set
at certain definite angles. Since the relationship which has been mentioned
above must hold between glancing angle and wavelength, this constituted
the first evidence of the existence of characteristic "lines" in the radiation
given off by the anticathode. These same lines could be recognized in the
reflexions from other faces, and the measurement of the angles at which they
appeared proved a most powerful method of finding the arrangement of the
atoms in the crystal. The structures of sodium chloride and potassium chlo-
ride, which had been suggested by the von Laue photographs, were estab-
 ished on a firm basis by means of the spectrometer, and more complex struc-




                 Fig. 4.                                          Fig. 5.


Fig. 4. Iron pyrites (FeS 2 ). The arrangement may be considered as a modification of
 CaF2. The black balls are the iron atoms. Each white ball, now representing a sulphur
atom is displaced from the centre of the cube as in CaF 2 along a diagonal: the diagonal
is chosen in a special way, best grasped from the model. A trigonal axis passes through
the two white balls which lie close together and near the centre of the whole figure.
Fig. 5. Iron pyrites. Viewed from a different angle, which shows the disposition of the
sulphur atoms in horizontal lines. These are parallel to the well-known markings on the
FeS 2 crystal. If the viewpoint is altered, as by turning the model through a right angle
about a vertical axis, or an axis in the plane of the paper, the disposition of the sulphur
          atoms appears vertical instead of horizontal: just as the marking do.


                     DIFFRACTION OF X-RAYS BY CRYSTALS                               375




                 Fig. 6.                                          Fig. 7.

Fig. 6. Calcite (CaCO3 ). The white balls represent calcium; the black balls, carbon; and
                                    the cubes, oxygen.
Fig. 7. Spinel structure (spinel MgAl2O4; magnetite FeFe2O4; gahnite ZnAl2O4; etc.). The
divalent atoms (Mg, Fe, Zn, etc.) are placed with respect to each other in the same way
as the carbon atoms in a diamond and are represented by the black balls. The grey balls
represent the trivalent atoms (Al, Fe, etc.) A grey ball lies at the centre of every hexa-
gonal (benzene) ring of black balls. The light cubes are the oxygen atoms. Every diva-
lent atom touches four oxygen atoms and nothing else. Every trivalent atom touches
six oxygen atoms and nothing else. Every oxygen atom touches one divalent and three
trivalent atoms. The distance between the centres of two neighbouring divalent atoms
                                 in magnetite is 3.60Å.


tures such as calcite, zinc blende, fluorspar, and iron pyrites, were analysed.
On the other hand, since the arrangement of atoms in these crystals was
known, it was possible to calculate the spacings of the reflecting planes and
so to assign a definite wavelength to the characteristic lines in the spectrum.
By using tubes with anticathodes of platinum, osmium, tungsten, nickel, and
other metals, it became clear that each gave off a radiation containing char-
acteristic lines which agreed in their properties with the K- or L-radiations
first discovered by Barkla. Further, Whiddington had measured the energy
of the cathode rays required to excite Barkla’s K- and L-radiations. The re-
sults obtained with the spectrometer gave the frequency of these radiations,
and my father was able to show that the product, of the frequency and
Planck’s constant h, was equal to the cathode-ray energy required to excite
the rays; this was a first proof of the quantum law as applied to X-rays.


376                              1915 W.L.BRAGG




               Fig. 8.                                       Fig. 9.
                                               Fig. 8. Rocksalt (See also Fig. 1).
                                           Fig. 9. Calcite. The large dark ball is the
                                           calcium atom; the small dark ball, carbon;
                                                  and the white ball, oxygen.




                                          Fig. 10. Corundum (Al 2O3). The type of
                                           symmetry is the same as that of calcite.
                                           The axis is vertical. The dark balls repre-
                                           sent aluminium, the white balls, oxygen.
               Fig. 10.

These two lines of investigation, into X-ray spectra and into crystal struc-
ture, are the two great branches of research to which von Laue’s discovery
led. Moseley was the first to make a survey of X-ray spectra. His famous
researches established the law which governs the number and order of the
elements. He found that, in passing from one element to the next in the
Periodic Table, there was a regular progression of the frequency in the K-and
L-radiations given out by the elements, and that its regularity was so great
that it was possible to assign with absolute certainty each element to its prop-
er place in the list, and to find the gaps where an element was not known.
Moseley’s death in the war cut short his brilliant career at its outset. Since


                  DIFFRACTION OF X-RAYS BY CRYSTALS                            377
then the technique of X-ray spectrometry has been very highly developed.
No one has done more in this line than Prof. Siegbahn at your University of
Lund, who has attained such a marvellous accuracy and delicacy in his meas-
urement of X-ray spectra. The establishment of the origin of the K-, L-, and
M-radiations first indicated by Kossel’s relationships, and the examination of
the absorption edges, where the absorbing power of an element, for different
wavelengths, passes through a critical value, have been of vital importance
in the study of atomic structure since they furnish direct evidence as to the
amount of energy-change, when an electron passes from one stationary state
to another in the interior of the atom. The refinement to which wavelength
 measurement can now be pushed has even made it possible to discover that
 there are small differences in the position of these absorption edges, when
 different chemical compounds of an element are used as absorbers, as Dr.
Lindh has shown, and this suggests a new and most powerful method of
examining the chemical composition of substances and the potential energy
 of valency bonds.
    The examination of crystal structure, with the aid of X-rays has given us
 for the first time an insight into the actual arrangement of the atoms in solid
 bodies. The study of structure by means of a microscope is limited by the
 coarseness of the light which illuminates the object, for we can never hope




                Fig. 11.                                       Fig. 12.
                                  Fig. 11. Graphite.
Fig. 12. Ice (H 2O). The white balls represent the oxygen atoms, the black balls the
 hydrogen atoms. The oxygen atoms are arranged like those of carbon in diamond.
         Each hydrogen atom is situated midway between two oxygen atoms.


378                              1915 W.L.BRAGG

to see details smaller than the wavelength of the light. By using X-rays with
their very short wavelengths, this limit of minuteness has at one step been
decreased ten thousand times, for the wavelength of the X-rays is of a smaller
order than the dimensions of the atomic structure. We are actually looking
into the interior of the molecule and the atom with this fine-grained form
of light.
   The limits of the crystal pattern are arranged on a space lattice. Each limit
is repeated over and over again in an identical fashion throughout the struc-
ture, at regular intervals in all directions. In analysing a crystal structure by
X-rays, it is first necessary to find the dimensions of the unit cell of this space
lattice, which has for its sides the primitive translation which the structure
may be supposed to undergo in order to be brought into self-coincidence. It
is a simple matter to achieve this. We find the angle at which a monochro-
matic beam of X-rays of known wavelength is reflected by the various faces
of the crystal. Reflexion takes place only when the relation




is satisfied, and so the spacing d of the planes parallel to any face under exam-
ination can be found by measuring the angle ϑ. The dimensions of the unit
cell can be found by measuring d for several faces. Having determined the
dimensions of the unit cell, we can calculate how many atoms or molecules
are contained within it, using as data the density of the crystal and the mass
of each molecule.
    The second step in analysis consists in the determination of the manner in
which the atoms are grouped together to form each unit of the structure. It
is here that the principal difficulty is experienced. The way in which the
analysis is pursued may be illustrated by an analogy with the spectra ob-
tained with a diffraction grating. It is well known that the form of the lines
ruled on a grating has an influence on the relative intensity of the spectra
which it yields. Some spectra may be enhanced, or reduced, in intensity as
 compared with others. Indeed, gratings are sometimes ruled in such a way
 that most of the energy is thrown into those spectra which it is most desirable
 to examine. The form of the line on the grating does not influence the posi-
 tions of the spectra, which depend on the number of lines to the centimetre,
but the individual lines scatter more light in some directions than others, and
 this enhances the spectra which lie in those directions.
    The structure of the group of atoms which composes the unit of the crystal


                DIFFRACTION OF X-RAYS BY CRYSTALS                          379
grating influences the strength of the various reflexions in exactly the same
way. The rays are diffracted by the electrons grouped around the centre of
each atom. In some directions the atoms conspire to give a strong scattered
beam, in others their effects almost annul each other by interference. The
exact arrangement of the atoms is to be deduced by comparing the strength
of the reflexions from different faces and in different orders.
   In our early work we made certain assumptions in order to unravel the
complex tangle which the reflexions from some crystals represented. We
supposed that the diffraction took place at the centre of each atom, as if the
whole effect were localized there. Further, we supposed that the effect of an
atom was proportional to its atomic weight. Neither of these assumptions is
more than very approximately true, as deeper analysis has shown. However,
theory shows that the strength of the scattered beams varies so greatly with
slight changes in the relative positions of the atoms, that these assumptions
will serve to give an accurate determination of these positions. We analysed
a number of simple crystals in this way, examples of which are given in the
plates at the end of this address.
   A single crystal is employed in the X-ray spectrometer. We used large
crystals in our first experiments, reflecting from natural or artificially pre-
pared faces. It is not essential to do this, however, for the ionization chamber
is so sensitive a detector of X-radiation that small crystals a millimetre or
two in breadth can be examined. In this case the rays are reflected through-
out the whole volume of the crystal, which is not sufficiently thick to absorb
them too much. A small crystal can be set at the centre of the instrument,
adjusted so that a zone is parallel to the axis, and then turned round so that
the reflexion of various faces is observed in turn. The X-ray spectrometer
may be thus used in a manner very similar to that employed by a crystallo-
grapher when he measures a crystal with a goniometer. It is a more search-
ing method, however. The goniometer can only measure the angles between
faces which have been developed on the crystal, whereas the X-ray spectro-
 meter measures the angles between planes of the crystal structure, and the
 spacings of the planes, although the crystal may have no regular external
form.
    In many cases it is impossible to obtain even small perfect crystals. The
beautiful method of analysis initiated by Debye and Scherrer in Germany,
 and by Hull in America, has overcome this difficulty. In their method a
 monochromatic beam of X-rays is allowed to fall on a mass of crystalline
 powder. Some of the minute crystals will be set so as to reflect the rays for


380                               1915 W.L.BRAGG

every face and order, and so to give rise to a series of diffracted haloes which
are recorded on a photographic plate. By means of this method, Hull has
analysed the structure of a very large number of elements, including most of
the metals. The method is admirably adapted to the study of compounds
which do not form large crystals, but whose structure is very simple. By
itself, it is not so well adapted to the analysis of complex crystals, since there
is nothing to indicate which planes have given rise to the diffracted beams
observed on the plate. Very often, however, a clue to the unravelling of the
data can be got by examining the reflexion from an identified plane of a sin-
gle small crystal; this gives us the key which enables us to assign the lines on
the Debye photograph to the correct crystal planes.
   The Debye method of crystal analysis has possibilities of development
which have hardly been touched on as yet. A complex mixture of different
crystals can be analysed, since each substance gives its characteristic series of
haloes. This is an entirely new way of attacking such problems as the struc-
ture of alloys, or of minerals, since it tells us, not only what are the con-
stituents, but how they are built up into solids; their crystallographic as well
as their chemical structure.
   A further development of the powder method which has proved to be
most interesting is the study of colloidal particles. Scherrer has shown that
particles of metals in the colloidal state consist of minute crystals, with a struc-
ture like that of large crystals; he has even formed an estimate of the size of
the particles by observing the broadening of the haloes, this being due to a
loss of resolving power owing to the small number of reflecting planes in
any one particle.
   There seems to be hardly any type of matter in the condition of a true solid
which we cannot attempt to analyse by means of X-rays. For the first time
the exact arrangement of the atoms in solids has become known; we can see
how far the atoms are apart and how they are grouped. The importance of
this consists in the light it throws on chemical composition. Very few crystals
have yet been analysed by means of X-rays, and those that have been done
are of simple composition, but as the knowledge of crystal structure in-
creases we ought to get a far deeper insight into the nature of the forces
which bind atoms together. One type of chemical binding has been already
confirmed. In a structure such as that of sodium chloride (Fig. 1) the atoms
 of sodium and chlorine are not associated into chemical molecules, but are
 arranged alternately equidistant from several neighbours. This is explained
 by supposing that these atoms are ionized in the crystal structure, and that


                 DIFFRACTION OF X-RAYS BY CRYSTALS                               381
the whole is held together by the attraction of oppositely charged ions. This
is in accordance with the theories of Kossel on the constitution of com-
pounds, and the work of Born and Landé has shown that we can make
quantitative comparisons between the electrical potential energy of such an
assemblage of ions, and the heat of formation of the solid from its elements.
This is one of the first steps towards an explanation of chemical affinity in
terms of familiar physical forces.
   On the other hand, the chemical composition of a compound aids in the
determination of its crystal structure. So many dispositions of the atoms are
possible, in the more complex crystals, that one is at a loss where to begin in
trying various arrangements in order to explain the X-ray diffraction effects.
A knowledge of the most probable configuration of the atoms, and of the
distances between them, is of the greatest assistance, however approximate it
may be. This may perhaps be illustrated by the structures of the aromatic
organic compounds, some of which my father has lately succeeded in an-
alysing. The symmetry of the crystals of such substances as naphtalene, an-
thracene, and their derivatives is low, and there are a large number of atoms
in the molecule, so that the analysis of their structures would be very difficult
from first principles. However, it was assumed that the size of the benzene




                Fig. 13.                                      Fig. 14.

Fig.13. Naphthalene (C10H8). The double rings of grey balls represent the double ben-
zene rings of carbon atoms. The positions of the hydrogen atoms are indicated by the
                               black and white balls.
Fig.14. Naphthalene (C10H8). The same model as in Fig. 13, viewed perpendicularly to
                                    the C-axis.


382                                1915 W.L.BRAGG

rings in these crystals was approximately the same as that of the correspond-
ing rings in diamond and graphite. With this assumption, the data on the
size of the unit cell for all these compounds fell into relationship with each
other. The benzene ring could be treated as a single unit, and space had to be
found in the crystal structure for one or more to be packed into each unit
cell. Probably the solutions of many other complex crystals, which appear
almost hopeless at present, will be made along similar lines.
    Finally, there is a still deeper application of the X-ray analysis, to the struc-
ture of the atom itself. Since the wavelength of the X-rays is less than the
"atomic diameter", as it is somewhat vaguely termed, and since the rays are
presumably diffracted by the electrons in the atom, we ought to be able to
get some idea of the distribution of these electrons in the same way that we
draw conclusions as to the grouping of the atoms. Interference between the
waves scattered by the electrons must take place. In order to study this ques-
tion, a much closer analysis of the mechanism of X-ray reflexion must be
made. Many workers have attacked this problem, amongst them Darwin in
England, Debye in Germany, Compton in America. We have been trying
to make some accurate quantitative determinations of the strength of X-ray
reflection, the object in view being the measurement of the amount of radia-
tion scattered by an atom in all directions when an X-ray beam passes over
it. The whole subject bristles with difficulties, and the assumptions on which
the theory of reflexion rests have not been exhaustively proved. On the other
hand there seems to be a prospect that the method will prove a valid way of
testing various models proposed for the atom, since the way, in which these
models should diffract the rays, can be calculated, and compared with that
which is actually observed.
    I have only given in this account a very brief description of the many lines
 of investigation which have arisen from von Laue’s discovery. I wish that
 there were more contributions of my own to this subject which I could have
 described to you, to justify the supreme compliment which you paid me in
 giving me your award, but the war interrupted work for so many years, and
 since then there has been so much reorganization of all university work in
 England that research has been difficult to achieve. I will conclude, then, in
 expressing my thanks to you for giving me this opportunity of addressing
you, and my gratitude for all which I owe to you.
