Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking
in Particle Physics: a Case of Cross
Fertilization

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2008
by
Yoichiro Nambu*1
Department of Physics, Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago,
5720 Ellis Avenue, Chicago, USA.




I will begin with a short story about my background. I studied physics at
the University of Tokyo. I was attracted to particle physics because of three
famous names, Nishina, Tomonaga and Yukawa, who were the founders
of particle physics in Japan. But these people were at different institutions
than mine. On the other hand, condensed matter physics was pretty good at
Tokyo. I got into particle physics only when I came back to Tokyo after the
war. In hindsight, though, I must say that my early exposure to condensed
matter physics has been quite beneficial to me.
   Particle physics is an outgrowth of nuclear physics, which began in the
early 1930s with the discovery of the neutron by Chadwick, the invention of
the cyclotron by Lawrence, and the ‘invention’ of meson theory by Yukawa
[1]. The appearance of an ever increasing array of new particles in the sub-
sequent decades and advances in quantum field theory gradually led to our
understanding of the basic laws of nature, culminating in the present stan-
dard model.
   When we faced those new particles, our first attempts were to make sense
out of them by finding some regularities in their properties. Researchers in-
voked the symmetry principle to classify them. A symmetry in physics leads to
a conservation law. Some conservation laws are exact, like energy and electric
charge, but these attempts were based on approximate similarities of masses
and interactions.
   Nevertheless, seeing similarities is a natural and very useful trait of the
human mind, The near equality of proton and neutron masses and their
interactions led to the concept of isospin SU(2) symmetry [2]. On the other
hand, one could also go in the opposite direction, and elevate a symmetry to
a more elaborate gauged symmetry. Then symmetry will determine dynamics
as well, a most attractive possibility. Thus the beautiful properties of electro-

*
	The Nobel Lecture of Yoichiro Nambu was presented by Giovanni Jona-Lasinio, La Sapienza,
University of Rome, Italy.


                                                                                      57


magnetism were extended to the SU(2) non-Abelian gauge field [3]. But
strong interactions are short range. Giving a mass to a gauge field destroys
gauge invariance.
   Spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB), which is the main subject of my
talk, is a phenomenon where a symmetry in the basic laws of physics appears
to be broken. In fact, it is a very familiar one in our daily life, although the
name SSB is not [4]. For example, consider an elastic straight rod standing
vertically. It has a rotational symmetry; it looks the same from any horizontal
direction. But if one applies increasing pressure to squeeze it, it will bend in
some direction, and the symmetry is lost. The bending can occur in principle
in any direction since all directions are equivalent. But you do not see it un-
less you repeat the experiment many times. This is SSB.
   SSB in quantum mechanics occurs typically in a uniform medium consist-
ing of a large number of elements. It is a dynamical effect. A symmetry allows
some freedom of action to each of them but the interaction among them
forces them, figuratively speaking, to line up like a crowd of people looking
into the same direction. Then it is not easy to change the direction wholesale
even if it is allowed by the symmetry hence does not take energy, because
the action is not a local operator. So the symmetry appears to be lost. It is
still possible to recover the lost symmetry by a global operation, but it would
amount to a kind of phase transition. Some of the examples are:


physical system		         broken symmetry
ferromagnets		            rotational invariance (with respect to spin)
crystals			               translational and rotational invariance (modulo 		
			discrete values)
superconductors           local gauge invariance (particle number)

SSB in a medium then has the following characteristic properties:

1.	The ground state has huge degeneracy. A symmetry operation takes one
   ground state to another.
2.	Only one of the ground states and a complete set of excited states built on
   it are realized in a give situation.
3. SSB is in general lost at sufficiently high temperatures.

In relativistic quantum field theory, this phenomenon becomes also possible
for the entire space-time, for the “vacuum” is not void, but has many intrinsic
degrees of freedom. In this context, it may play an important role in cosmol-
ogy. As the universe expands and cools down, it may undergo one or more
SSB phase transitions from states of higher symmetries to lower ones, which
change the governing laws of physics.



58


   I will now recall the chain of events which led me to the idea of SSB and
its application to particle physics. One day in 1956 R. Schrieffer gave us a
seminar on what would come to be called the BCS theory [5] of supercon-
ductivity. I was impressed by the boldness of their ansatz for the state vector,
but at the same time I became worried about the fact that it did not appear
to respect gauge invariance. Soon thereafter Bogoliubov [6] and Valatin [7]
independently introduced the concept of quasiparticles as fermionic excita-
tions in the BCS medium. The quasiparticles did not carry a definite charge
as they were a superposition of electron and hole, with their proportion
depending on the momentum. How can one then trust the BCS theory for
discussing the electromagnetic properties like the Meissner effect? It actually
took two years for me to resolve the problem to my satisfaction. There were
a number of people who also addressed the same problem, but I wanted to
understand it in my own way. Essentially it is the presence of a massless col-
lective mode, now known by  LPNthe  generic
                                  2008       name of Nambu-Goldstone (NG)
                                       ekvationer…
boson, that saves charge conservation or gauge invariance.

The Bogoliubov-Valatin (BV) quasiparticles
                p. 59 översta                are described
                              raden av tre i ekv.            by the equations [8]
                                                  1 skall vara:
                                Eψ p,+ = ε pψ p,+ + Δψ −† p,− ,                           (1)
(1)
                                Eψ   †
                                     − p,−   = −ε pψ   †
                                                       − p,−   + ∆ψ p,+ ,
                     p. 60 rad 4 i stycket ε +∆
                                     E = efter  2
                                               ekv.2
                                                   p4 skall vara:
                    ”… which breaks chirality ∼ γ5 rather…”
Here, ψ p,+ and ψ −† p,− are the wave functions for     an electron and a hole of
momentum p and spin   dvs.+5 or    εp is nedsänkt
                                –, vara
                             skall                inteenergy
                                         the kinetic   upphöjtrelative to the Fermi
energy, and 2∆ is the energy gap. In terms of spinlike matrices τi the corre-
sponding Hamiltonian and the charge-current are
                 p. 60 översta raden av tre i ekv. 5 skall vara:
                                     0 = ε p Ψ τ 3 Ψ + ∆ΨFτ 1q
                                              †           †
             Γ µ 5 ( p ′, p ) = γ H
                            (     µ γ 5 − 2M λ5 qµ q
                                                       2     Ψ,) ( )
                                                               2
                                                                 , qµ = pµ′ − pµ        (5)
(2)
                                            j0 = Ψ † (p m )Ψ
                            ρ0 = Ψ †τ 3 Ψ, dvs.
                                 ψ → ψ exp ( −iα ) ,
The BV ground state is ! p 0 = 0 for all p. The charge does not commute with
H0, and the continuity equation does       borthold, which is the problem. But it
                                     skallnot
has turned out that the same interaction that led to the BCS-BV ground state
also leads to collective excitations f, which contributes to the charge-current
                   p. 61 översta
and restores the continuity               två icorrect
                                 raden avThe
                              equation.         ekv. 9 skall vara: is
                                                        expression
                        ψ → exp ( iα )ψ ,           ψ1 → ψ exp ( −iα )                  (9)
                                         ρ ρ0 +             ∂t f ,
                                                    α    2



                                             j  j0 − ∇f ,
(3)                         p. 99 rad tre (ekv.) skall vara:
                             2 1 2
                             ∇ − 2 ∂t  f  −2∆Ψ τ 2 Ψ
                                                       †

                                   α
                        N(N + 1)              (N − 1)(N − 2)
                                 − (2N − 1) =
                          2                         2
                                                                                   59


where f represents the NG mode. Physically it corresponds to excitations that
tend to restore the lost symmetry. Its energy goes to zero in the long wave-
length limit as it corresponds to the global symmetry operation. It also hap-
pens that the above NG mode mixes with the Coulomb interaction among
the electrons because of their common long-range nature, and turns into the
well-known plasmons with

(4)                                  ω2 = en2/m

where e, n, m, are respectively the charge, density, and mass of the electron.
The formal similarity of the BV equation to the Dirac equation naturally led
me to transport the BCS theory to particle physics [9]. The gap ∆ goes over
to the mass M, which breaks chirality ∼ γ5 rather than the ordinary charge
∼ 1: The axial current is the analog of the electromagnetic vector current
in the BCS theory. If chirality is a broken symmetry, the matrix elements of
the axial current between nucleon states of four-momentum p and p’ should
have the form

(5)                (                      ) ( )
      ! µ 5 ( p", p ) = ! µ! 5 # 2M ! 5 qµ q 2 F q 2 , ! " ! exp ( #i$ ) , qµ = pµ! " pµ

So chiral symmetry is compatible with a finite nucleon mass M provided that
there exists a massless pseudoscalar NG boson. In reality, there is a pseudos-
calar pion, and the vector and axial vector interactions that appear in weak
decays of the nucleons and the pion had the properties

(6)                        gV  gA     gπ  2M gA G

where gV, and gA are vector and axial vector couplings of the nucleon, gπ is
axial coupling for the pion, G is the pion-nucleon coupling, and M is the
nucleon mass. The second relation was known as the Goldberger-Treiman
relation [10], and it implies that the matrix element of the axial vector part
of nucleon decay is

(7)                    Γ µA  γ µ γ 5 − 2Mγ 5 qµ   (q   2
                                                                 )
                                                            − mπ2 ,

which differs from Eq. (5) by the presence of pion mass. In view of the small-
ness of mπ compared to M, I made the hypothesis that the axial current is an
approximately conserved quantity, the nucleon mass is generated by an SSB
of chirality, and the pion is the corresponding NG boson which should be-
come massless in the limit of exact conservation (Proton and neutron masses
should also become equal.)

The model system [11] I worked out subsequently with Jona-Lasinio is a
concrete realization of the proposed SSB. It has the form similar to the BCS
model


60


                                            dvs.
                                  ψ → ψ exp ( −iα ) ,
                                    skall bort
                   L = −ψγ µ ∂ µψ + g (ψψ ) − (ψγ 5ψ ) 
                                            2          2
(8)
                                                        
                   against
which is invariant p.            raden avnumber
                           the particle
                      61 översta          två i ekv.and chiral
                                                     9 skall    transformations
                                                             vara:
                      ψ → exp ( iα )ψ ,         ψ → ψ exp ( −iα )                      (9)
(9)
                     ψ → exp (iγ 5α )ψ ,         ψ → ψ exp (iγ 5α )

After SSB, the “nucleon” acquires a mass M ~ 2g ψψ . Although the model
                        p. 99 rad tre (ekv.) skall vara:
is non-renormalizable, it is easy to demonstrate the SSB mechanism. The
generated mass M is determined by the “gap equation”
                        2π 2+ 1) − (2N
                       N(N                            − 2)
                                    M 2− 1)= (NΛ−2 1)(N
(10)                        2
                              = 1 −    2
                                         ln  1 + 2 
                        gΛ
                         2           Λ          M 2
where Λ is a cutoff. Bound states of nucleon-antinucleon (meson) and nucle-
on-nucleon (dibaryon) pairs of spin 0 and 1 were also found. In particular,
the masses of 0 − , (~ ψγ 5ψ ) and 0 + , (~ ψψ ) mesons are found to be 0 and 2M
respectively. A more realistic two-flavor model was also considered by gener-
alizing Eq. (8) to

            L = −ψγ µ ∂ µψ + g (ψψ ) − ∑ i (ψγ 5τ iψ )(ψγ 5τ iψ )
                                      2
(11)

with a similar gap equation. We get an isovector 0– pion and an isoscalar
0+. The actual pion mass was generated by a small explicit bare mass in the
Lagrangian of the order of 5 MeV. This also induced a change of axial coup­
ling constant gA in the right direction.

Other examples of the BCS-type SSB are 3He superfluidity and nucleon pair-
ing in nuclei [12]. In general there exist simple mass relations among the
fermion and the bosons in BCS-type theories [13]. The BCS theory also ac-
counts for the generation of the London mass for the electromagnetic field.
This problem is made simple in terms of the Higgs scalar field [14]. The
relativistic analog of the London relation is, in momentum space,

                                  jµ ( q ) = K µ! ( q ) A! ,
(12)                          (                    ) ( )
                       K µν = δ µν − qµ qν q 2 K q 2 ,

                                  ( )
                              K q2 q2           (q − m )
                                                    2          2



The third relation shows the massless NG boson turning into a massive “plas-
mon”, a process corresponding to Eq. (4). This was successfully applied to
weak gauge field in the Weinberg-Salam (WS) theory [15] of electroweak
unification. The fermion masses are also generated and break chiral invari-
ance. These so-called current masses for the up and down quarks play the
role of the bare mass in the NJL model.



                                                                                  61


In the current standard model of particle physics, the NJL model may be
regarded as an effective theory for the QCD with respect to generation of the
so-called constituent masses. One is interested in the low energy degrees of
freedom on a scale smaller than some cut-off Λ~ 1 GeV. The short distance
dynamics above Λ as well as the confinement may be treated as a pertur-
bation. The problem has been extensively studied by many people. The
Lagrangian adopted by Hatsuda and Kunihiro [16] is


(13)                     L = LQCD " LNJL + LKMT + #L


LNJL is for the quarks, and contains “current mass” terms. LKMT refers to the
Kobayashi-Maskawa-t’Hooft chiral anomaly

(14)                              (                             )
                      LKMT = gD det  qi (1 − γ 5 )q j  + h.c.


Both of them contributes to the explicit breaking of chiral invariance
   (δL contains the effects of confinement and one gluon exchange.) The
WS theory resembles the Ginzburg-Landau [17] description of superconduc-
tivity, which was shown to follow from the BCS theory by Gor’kov [18]. In the
same way the NJL model goes over to the model of Gell-Mann and Levy [19].
If this analogy turns out real, the Higgs field might be an effective descrip-
tion of underlying dynamics.
   Finally I will end this lecture with a comment on the mass hierarchy prob-
lem. Hierarchical structure is an outstanding feature of the universe. The
masses of known fundamental fermions also make a hierarchy stretching 11
orders of magnitude. Mass is not quantized in a simple regular manner like
charge and spin. Mass is a dynamical quantity since it receives contributions
from interactions. But we do not see yet a pattern like those in the hydrogen
atom, which led to quantum mechanics, or the Regge trajectories, which led
to the dual string picture.
   The BCS mechanism seems relevant to the problem, as was remarked
earlier. It generates a mass gap for fermions, plus the Nambu-Goldstone and
Higgs modes as low-lying bosons. The bosons may act in turn as an agent for
further SSB, leading to the possibility of hierarchical SSB or “tumbling” [20].
In fact we already have examples of it [21]:
1.	The chain atoms – crystal – phonon – superconductivity. The NG mode
   for crystal formation is the phonon, which induces the Cooper pairing of
   electrons to cause superconductivity
2.	The chain QCD – chiral SSB of quarks and baryons – π, σ and other me-
   sons – nuclei formation and nucleon pairing – nuclear collective modes.
   No further elaboration would be required

I am greatly thankful to G. Jona-Lasinio for his help in the planning of this
lecture.

62


REFERENCES
[1] See, for example, Y. Nambu, J. Phys. Soc. Japan, 76 (2007), 111002.
[2] W. Heisenberg, Z. Phys. 77 (1932) 1.
[3]	C. N. Yang and R. L. Mills, Phys. Rev. 96 (1954), 191.
[4]	The name is due to M. Baker and S. Glashow, Phys. Rev. 128 (1962) 2462.
[5] J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieffer, Phys. Rev. 108 (1957), 1175.
[6]	N. N. Bogoliubov, J. Exptl. Theoret. Phys. (U.S.S.R.) 34 (1958), 58. This is a fermionic
     version of transformation, which he first introduced in a description of superfluidity.
     J. Phys. (1947) Vol. 11, No.1, 23–32.
[7]	G. Valatin, Nuovo Cimento 7 (1958), 843.
[8]	Y. Nambu, Phys. Rev. 117 (1960), 648.
[9]	Y. Nambu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4 (1960), 380.
[10]	M. L. Goldberger and S. Treiman, Phys. Rev. 110 (1958), 117.
[11]	Y. Nambu and G. Jona-Lasinio, Phys. Rev. 122 (1961), 345; Phys. Rev. 124 (1961), 246.
     The first presentation of the model was made at Midwest Conference on Theoretical
     Physics: “A superconductor model of elementary particles and its consequences”, in
     the Proceedings, eds. F. J. Biedenhahn et al., Purdue University, 1960, p. 1.
[12]	A. Arima and F. Iachello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35 (1975), 1069; Ann. Phys. 99 (1976), 253.
[13]	E.g., Y. Nambu, Physica 15D (1985), 147; Phys. Lett. 201 (1988), 1.
[14]	P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 130 (1963), 439; F. Englert and R. Brout, Phys Rev. Lett. 13
     (1964), 321; P. W. Higgs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 (1964), 508.
[15] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett, 19 (1967), 1264; A. Salam, in Elementary Particles, Almqvist
     Förlag AB (1968), 167.
[16]	T. Hatsuda, T. Kunihiro, Phys. Rep. 247, 221 (1994).
[17] V. I. Ginzburg and L. D. Landau, J. Exptl. Theoret. Phys. (U.S.S.R.) 20 (1950), 1064.
[18]	L. P. Gor’kov, J. Exptl. Theoret. Phys. (U.S.S.R.) 36 (1959), 1918.
[19]	M. Gell-Mann and M. Lévy, Nuovo Cimento 16 (1960), 705.
[20] S. Raby, S. Dimopoulos, and L. Susskind, Nucl. Phys. B169 (1980), 373.
[21]	Y. Nambu, Nucl. Phys. A638 (1998), 35c.
Portrait photo of Yoichiro Nambu by courtesy of University of Chicago.




                                                                                           63
