413

THE DOUBLE HETEROSTRUCTURE:  CONCEPT AND ITS APPLICATIONS  IN PHYSICS, ELECTRONICS AND TECHNOLOGY

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2000 by
ZHOnrs I. ALFEROV
A. F. loffe Physico-Technical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, 26 Poli- technicheskaya, St. 
Petersburg 194021, Russian Federation.



1. INTRODUCTION
It is impossible to imagine now modern solid state physics without semicon- ductor  
heterostructures. Semiconductor  heterostructures and,  particularly, double heterostructures, 
including Quantum Wells, Wires and Dots are today the subject of research of 2/3  of the 
semiconductor  physics community.
It can be said that if the possibility of controlling the type of conductivity of a semiconductor  
material  by doping with various impurities and the idea of injecting  nonequilibrium charge  
carriers  were  the  seeds from  which  semi- conductor electronics developed,  heterostructures 
could  make it possible  to solve the considerably more general problem of controlling the 
fundamental parameters inside  the semiconductor  crystals and devices: band gaps, effec- tive 
masses of the charge carriers and the mobilities,  refractive indices, elec- trons energy spectrum 
etc.
Development  of  the  physics  and  technology  for  the semiconductor  hete- rostructures resulted 
in remarkable changes in our everyday life. Heterostruc- ture electronics is widely used in many 
areas of human civilization. It is hardly possible  to  imagine  our  recent  life  without  double 
 heterostructure  (DHS) laser-based  telecommunication systems,  without  heterostructure-based 
light- emitting diodes, heterostructure bipolar transistors, without low-noise HEMT for  high  
frequency  applications  including,  for  example,  satellite  television. The DHS laser enters now 
practically every house with CD-players. Heterostruc- ture solar cells have been widely used for 
space and terrestrial applications.
Our interest in semiconductor  heterostructures was not occasional. Syste- matic studies of 
semiconductors were started  in  the early 1950s at Physico- Technical  Institute  under  the  
direct  leadership  of  it's founder  — Abraham loffe. V. P. Zhuze and B. V. Kurchatov studied the 
intrinsic and impurity con- ductivity of semiconductors in 1952 and  the same year A. F. loffe and 
Ya. I. Frenkel  created  a  theory  of  rectification  in  a metal-semiconductor contact based on  
the tunneling  phenomenon  [1]. In 1931 and 1936, Ya. I. Frenkel published  his famous articles 
where  he predicted, gave the name and devel- oped the theory of excitons in semiconductors and E. 
F. Gross experimental-

414                                      Physics  2000

ly discovered excitons in 1951  [2]. The first diffiision  theory of p-n hetero- junction 
rectification, which became the base for W. Shockley's p-n junction theory, was published by B. I. 
Davydov in 1939 [3]. By A. F. Ioffe's initiative in the late 1940s at the Physico-Technical 
Institute the research into intermetal- lic  compounds  was  started.  Theoretical  prediction  and 
 experimental  dis- covery of semiconductor properties of A'B’ compounds were done indepen- dently 
by H. Welker and on the example of InSb by N. A. Gorunova and A. R. Regel at the Physico-Technical 
Institute [4]. We benefited a lot from the high theoretical, technological and experimental level 
in this area that had already existed at the loffe Institute at that time.

2. CLASSICAL  HETEROSTRUCTURE
The idea of using heterojunctions in semiconductor electronics was put for- ward already at the 
very dawn of electronics. In the first patent concerned with p-n junction transistors W. Shockley 
[5]  proposed a wide-gap emitter to obtain unidirectional injection. A. I. Gubanov at our Institute 
first theoreti- cally  analyzed  volt-current  characteristics  of  isotype  and  anisotype  
hetero- junctions [6], but the important theoretical considerations at this early stage of 
heterostructure research have been done by H. Kroemer, who introduced the concept of quasi-electric 
and quasi-magnetic fields in a graded hetero- junction  and  made  an  assumption  that  
heterojunctions might  exhibit  ex- tremely high injection efficiencies  in comparison  to 
homojunctions  [7] . In the same period there were various suggestions about applying heterostruc- 
tures in semiconductor solar cells.
The proposal of p-n junction semiconductor  lasers [8], the experimental observation of effective 
radiative recombination in a GaAs p-n structure with a possible stimulated emission [9]  and the 
creation of p-n junction lasers and LEDs [10] were the seeds from which semiconductor 
optoelectronics started to grow. However, lasers were not efficient because of high optical and 
elec- trical losses. The thresholds currents were very high and low temperature was necessary for 
lasing. The efficiency of LEDs was very low as well due to high internal losses.
The important step was made immediatly after the creation of p-n junction lasers when the concept 
of double heterostructure laser was formulated in- dependently by us and H. Kroemer [11]. In his 
article H. Kroemer proposed to use the double heterostructures for carriers confinement in the 
active re- gion. He proposed that “laser action should be obtainable in many of the in- direct gap 
semiconductors and improved in the direct gap ones, if it is pos- sible to supply them with a pair 
of heterojunctions injectors”.
In our patent we also outlined the possibility to achieve high density of in- jected  carriers  and 
 inverse  population  by  “double”  injection. We  specially pointed out that homojunction  lasers 
“do not provide CW at elevated tem- peratures” and as an additional advantage of DHS lasers we 
considered the possibility “to enlarge the emitting surface and to use new materials in various 
regions of the spectrum”.

Zh‹rres I.   Alfenni                                                         415

Initially  the theoretical  progress was much  faster  than  the experimental realization.  In 
1966,  [12] we predicted that the density of injected  carriers could by several orders of 
magnitude exceed the carrier density in the wide- gap emitter (“supeijunction” effect). At the same 
year in the paper [13] sub- mitted  to a new Soviet Journal  “Fizika  i  Tekhnika  Poluprovodnikov” 
 (Soy. Phys. Semiconductors) I summarized our understanding  of the main advan- tages of the DHS 
for different devices, especially for lasers and high power rectifiers:  “The  recombination,  
light  emitting,  and  population  inversion zones coincide and are concentrated in the middle 
layer. Due to potential barriers at the boundaries of semiconductors having forbidden bands of dif- 
ferent width, the through currents of electrons and holes are completely ab- sent, even under 
strong forward voltages, and there is no recombination  in the emitters (in contrast to p-i-n, 
p-n-n*, n-p-p* homostructures, in which the recombination  plays the dominant  role)  ... Because  
of a considerable  dif- ference between the permittivities, the light is completely concentrated in 
the middle  layer, which acts as a high-grade  waveguide, and thus there are no light losses in the 
passive regions (emitters)”.
Here are the most important peculiarities of semiconductor  heterostruc- tures we underlined  at 
that time: (i)  superinjection of  carriers,  (ii) optical confinement, (iii) electron confinement.
The realization of the wide-gap window effect was very important for pho- todetectors, solar cells 
and LEDs applications. It permitted to broaden con- siderably and to control precisely spectral 
region for solar cells and photode- tectors  and  to  improve  drastically  the  efficiency  for  
LEDs.  Main  physical phenomena in double and single classical heterostructures are shown in Fig.
1. Then it was only necessary to find heterostructures where these phenome- na could be realized.

’a’                       Electrons          d)
Fz- m                                                    y                         _



Holes
(b)
O—           Electrons










Figure 1. Main physical phenomena in classical heterostructures. (a) One-side injection and su- 
perinjection; (b) Diffusion in built-in quasi-electric field; (c)  Electron and optical 
confinement;
(d)  Wlde-gap window effect; (e)  Diagonal tunneling through a heterostructure interface.

416                  Physics  2000

At that time general  skepticism  existed with respect to the possibility  of creating the “ideal” 
heterojunction with a defect-free interface and first of all with theoretical injection properties. 
Even a very pioneering study of the first lattice-matched epitaxially grown single-crystal 
heterojunctions Ge-GaAs by R.
L. Anderson  [14] did not give any proof of the injection of noneqvilibrium carriers in 
heterostructures. Actual realization of the efficient wide-gap emit- ters was considered  as simply 
close  to the impossible  and the double  he- terostructure laser patent was often referred to as a 
“paper patent”.
Mostly due to this general skepticism there existed only a few groups trying to find out the “ideal 
couple”, which was, naturally, a difficult problem. There should be met many conditions of 
compatibility between thermal, electrical, crystallochemical properties and between the crystal and 
the band structure of the contacting materials.
A lucky combination  of a number of properties, i.e. small effective mass and wide energy gap, 
effective radiative recombination  and a sharp optical absorption edge due to the “direct” band 
structure, a high mobility at the ab- solute minimum of the conduction band and its strong 
reduction of the near- est minimum at the (100) point ensured for GaAs even at that time a place of 
honor in semiconductor physics and electronics. Since the maximum effect is obtained by using 
heterojunctions between the semiconductor serving as the active  region  and  more  wide  band  
material,  the  most  promising  systems looked at in that time were GaP-GaAs and AIAs-GaAs.  To be 
“compatible”, materials  of the “couple” should have, as the first and  the most important 
condition, close values of the lattice constants; therefore heterojunctions in the system  
AlAs-GaAs  were preferable.  However  prior  to starting  work  on preparation and study of these 
heterojunctions one had to overcome a cer- tain psychological barrier. AlAs had been synthesized 
long ago [15], but many properties of this compound remained unstudied since AlAs was known to be 
chemically unstable and decompose in moist air. The possibility of preparing stable specimens 
adequate to applications of heterojunctions in this system seemed to be not very promising.
Initially, our attempts to create DHS were related to a lattice-mismatched GaAsP system. And we 
succeeded in fabricating by VPE the first DHS lasers in this system. However, due to lattice 
mismatch  the lasing like that in homo- junction lasers occurs only at liquid nitrogen temperature 
[16]. From a more curious point of view, I would like to mention that it was the first practical 
re- sult obtained for a lattice mismatched, even partially relaxed, system.
Our experience, which we got from studying the GaAsP system, was very im- portant for understanding 
 many specific heterojunction physical properties and basics of heteroepitaxy. Development of a 
multichamber VPE method for the GaAsP system permitted us to create in 1970 superlattice structures 
with a 200 A-period and to demonstrate the splitting of the conduction band [17].
But from the general point of view at the end of 1966, we came to a con- clusion  that  even  a  
small  lattice  mismatch  in  heterostructures  such  as
GaP0 l5^•0.85—GaAs did  not permitt  to  realize  potential  advantages  of  the DHS. At that time 
my co-worker D. N. Tret'yakov told me that small crystals of

Shores  I.  Alferov                                              417

Al,Ga,     solid solutions of different compositions, which had been prepared two years ago by 
cooling from a melt, were put in the desk drawer by Dr. A. S. Bortshevsky  and  nothing  happened  
to them. It immediately  became  clear that Al,Ga₁     solid solutions turned out to be chemically 
stable and suitable for preparation  of durable  heterostructures and devices.  Studies  of phase 
diagrams and the growth kinetics in this system and development of the LPE method especially for 
heterostructure growth soon resulted in fabricating the first lattice-matched AlGaAs 
heterostructures. When we published the first pa- per on this subject, we were lucky to be the 
first to find out a unique, practi- cally an ideal lattice-matched system for GaAs, but as it 
frequently happened simultaneously  and  independently  the  same  results  were  achieved  by  H. 
Rupprecht and J. Woodall at T. Watson IBM Research Center [18].
Then  the  progress  in  the semiconductor  heterostructure area  was very rapid. First of all we 
experimentally proved the unique injection properties of the wide-gap emitters and the 
superinjection effect [19], the stimulated emis- sion in AlGaAs DHS [20], established the 
band-diagram of AlgGal      —GaAs,
heterojunction, carefully studied luminescence properties, diffusion of carri-
ers in a graded heterostructure and very interesting peculiarities of the cur- rent flow through 
the heterojunction — that is similar, for instance, to diago- nal tunneling-recombination 
transitions directly between holes of the narrow- band and electrons of the wide-band 
heterojunction components [21].
At the same time, we created the maority of the most important devices with realization of the main 
advantages of the heterostructure concepts:
— Low threshold at room temperature DHS lasers [22] (Fig. 2).



1.59  eV
(a)

1.39 eV




(2)           1.59  eV
1.61 eVf        ^ ^



t  .61 eV




7100      7700       8300
Wavelength (I)
(b)










8900         7760            7820

Figure 2. Emission spectrum of the first low-threshold Al Ga, l
DHS laser operating at room tem-

perature (300 K),/,a
-- 4300A/ cm2. The current rises: (a)  from (1) 0.7 A to (2) 8.3 A and then to
2
(3) 13.6 A; (b)  from (1) 13.6 A to (2)  18 A; s —— 2.2 x 10” cm .

418                                      Physics  2000

— High effective SHS and DHS LED [23]
— Heterostructure solar cells [24]
— Heterostructure bipolar transistors [25]
— Heterostructure p-n-p-n switching devices [26].
One of the first successful applications in industrial scale production in our country was 
heterostructure solar cells in space research. We transferred our technology to the “Quant” company 
and since 1974, GaAlAs solar cells have been installed on many of our sputniks. Our space station 
“Mir” (Fig. 4) has been using them for 15 years.
Most of these results were achieved afterwards in other laboratories in 1—2 years and in some cases 
even later. But in 1970, the international competition became very strong. Later on one of our main 
competitors I. Hayashi, who was working together with M. Panish at Bell Telephone Lab in Murray 
Hill, wrote [27]: “In September 1969, Zhores Alferov of the loffe Institute in Leningrad visited  
our  laboratory.  We  realized  he  was  already  getting  a /    ")   of  4.3 kA/cm* with a DH. We 
had not realized that the competition was so close and redoubled our efforts ... Room temperature  
CW operation was reported in May 1970 ...”. In our paper published in 1970, [28] the CW lasing was 
real- ized in stripe-geometry lasers formed by photolithography and mounted on copper plates 
covered by silver (Fig. 3). The lowest/y density at 300 K was 940 A/cm* for broad area lasers and 
2.7 kA/cm* for stripe lasers. Independently, CW operation in DHS lasers was reported by Izuo 
Hayashi and Morton Panish
[29]  (for broad area lasers with diamond  heatsinks)  in a paper submitted only one month later 
than our work. Achievement of CW at room tempera- ture produced  an explosion  of interest in 
physics and technology of semi- conductor heterostructures. If in 19fi9, AlGaAs heterostructures 
were studied just in a few laboratories mostly in USSR and US (A. F. loffe Institute, “Polyus” and 
“Quant” — industrial lab's where we transferred our technology for appli- cations in USSR; Bell 
Telephone, D. Sarnoff RCA Research Center, T. Watson IBM Res.Center  in US), in the beginning of 
1971, many Universities, indu- strial  labs in USA,  USSR,  United KingdomsJapan and even  in  
Brazil  and
Poland started investigations of III—V  Heterostructures and Heterostructure
Devices.











Figure 3. Schematic view of the structure of the first injection DHS laser operating in the CW 
regime at room temperature.

419




















Figure 4. Space station “Mir" equipped with heterostructure solar cells.


At  this early stage of  the development  of  the  heterostructure physics and technology  it 
became clear  that we needed  to look for  new lattice-matched heterostructures in order to cover a 
broad area of the energy spectrum. The first important step was done in our laboratory in 1970: in 
the paper (30] we reported  that  various  lattice-matched  heterojunctions based  on  quaternary 
III—V solid  solutions  were possible,  which  permitted  independent  variation between lattice 
constant and band gap. Later on  G. Antipas with co-workers
[31] came to the same conclusions. As a practical example utilizing this idea we  considered  
different  InGaAsP  compositions  and  soon  this  material  was recognized  among  the  most  
important  ones,  for  many  different  practical applications: photocathodes [32] and especially 
lasers in infra-red  re   on for fiber optical communications [33] and the visible [$4] .

2.8



AlSb

GaAs



0.4
5.40           5.56            5.72            5.88            6.04            6.20
Lattice constant (1)
Figure S. Energy gaps ve lactice constant for III-V Semiconductors. Lattice matched 
heterojunctions:               1959 (R.L. Anderson); AIG       1967 (Zh. Alferov e/ nt, J. M. 
Woodall & H. S. Rupprecht);
Quaternary HS (InGaAsP & AlGaAsSb): Proposal—1970 (Zh. Alferov e/ a£);
First experiment—1972 (Antipas ct at)

420                                                 Physics  2000

In the early 1970s a “world map” of ideal lattice-matched heterostructures was shown (Fig. 5). Not 
before a decade later this “world map” was drastical- ly changed (Fig. 6). Nowadays, it is 
necessary to add III-nitrides.
The main ideas of a semiconductor distributed-feed-back laser were for- mulated by us in the patent 
in 1971 [35]. The same year H. Kogelnilk and C.
V. Shank considered the possibility of replacing the Fabry—Perot or similar types of resonator in 
dye-lasers with volume periodical inhomogeneities [36]. It is necessary to note, that their 
approach is not applicable to semiconductor lasers and all laboratories that carried out research 
in DFB and DBR semi- conductor lasers used the ideas formulated in [35]:
1. Diffraction  grating created  not in volume, but on  a surface  waveguide layer
2. Interaction of waveguide modes with a surface diffraction grating, giving not only distributed 
feedback but also highly collimated light output.
Detailed theoretical analyses of the semiconductor  laser with surface dif- fraction grating was 
published in 1972 (37]. In this paper the authors esta- blished  the  way  for  the  
single-frequency generation.  First  semiconductor lasers with surface diffraction grating and 
distributed feedback were realized practically  simultaneously  at the  Physico-Technical Institute 
 [38],  Caltech
[39] and Xerox Lab in Palo Alto [40].
In the early 1980s H. Kroemer  and G. Griffiths published  a paper  [41] which stimulated strong 
interest in staggered line-up heterostructures (type II heterojunction). Spatial separation of 
electrons and holes at the interface re- sults in a tunability of their optical properties [21(c), 
42]. Staggered band alignment gives a possibility to realize optical emission with a photon energy 
much smaller than the band-gap energy of each of the semiconductors form-



3.6

3.0



AIP

Q(MnSe)


(MfiTe)




(EuTe)


1.8       i
CdSeQ       Sb


so 1.2

0.6


Ge     PbSQ


GaSb
nAs          '



'  iPbTe

GeTe O —  PbSe
O     O
HgS         HgSe
-  -  —               InSb
•  x     Sn
cr"    b
SnTe   HgTe

—0.6
5.4           5.6
6.0       6.2        6.4        6.6
Lattice constants (&)
Figure 6. Energy gaps vs lattice constants for semiconductors of IV elements, III—V and II(lV)—VI 
compounds and magnetic materials in parentheses. Lines connecting the semiconductors, solid for  
the III—V’s  and dotted for the others, indicate quantum  heterostructures that have been in- 
vestigated.

Zhmes  I.  Alferov                                              42t

ing  a  heterojunction. The  demonstration  of  an  injection  laser  based  on  a type-II 
GaInAsSb-GaSb  heterojunction [42] opens good perspectives for  the creation  of  effective  
coherent  light  sources  in  the  infrared  optical  range. Radiation in such a device is due  to 
the recombination  of electrons and holes localized  in  self-consistent  potential  wells  at  
different  sides  of  the  hetero- interface.  Thus,  type-II  heterostructures open  possibilities 
 both  for  funda- mental  physics  and  for  device  applications,  which  cannot  be  realized  
with type-I heterostructures in the III—V material system. However, practical appli- cations  of  
these  structures  are  still  hampered  by  a  poor  understanding  of their  fundamental  
properties  and  the  few actual  systems,  which  have  been studied experimentally up to now.
To  summanzé  this  brief  review  of  the  classical  heterostructures develop-
ment, it would be very convenient to classify the most important results in the following way:

Clâssical Heterostructures
I. Fundamental Physical Phenomena (Fig. 1)
•  One-side injection
•  Superinjection
•  Diffusion in Built-in Quasi-Electric Fields
•  Electron confinement
•  Optical confinement
•  Wide-gap window effect
•  Diagonal  tunneling through  heterostructure interface

II. Important Applications in Electronics
•  Semiconductor lasers — Low threshold and CW at  room  temperature, DFB and  DBR Lasers, Vertical 
 Surface  Emitting  Lasers,  IR II-type  Heterostruc- ture Lasers
•  High efficient LED
•  Solar cells and  photodetectors, based on  the wide-gap window effect
•  Semiconductor  integrated  optics,  based on  semiconductor  DFB and  DBR lasers
•  Bipolar wide-gap  transistors
•  Transistors,  thyristors, dynistors with photonic signal transmission
•  High power diodes and  thyristors
•  Infra-red  to visible converters
•  Efficent cold cathodes.

III. Important  Technological Peculiarities
•   Lattice-matched structures are a necessity of principle
•  Multi-component solid solutions are used for lattice-matching
•  Epitaxial  growth  technology is needed of principle.
Concluding   this  concise   summary   of   early  development   of   bulk   he- terostructures one 
 may  say  that  the  invention  of  an  “ideal”  heterojunction

422                                                 Physics  2000

and  the  introduction  of  the  heterostructure  concept  into  semiconductor physics and 
technology have led to the discovery of new physical effects, car- dinal improvement  of 
characteristics of practically all known semiconductor devices, and  the  invention  of new ones.

3. HETEROSTRUCTURE QUANTUM WELLS AND SUPERLATTICES
Owing to electron confinement in DHS, the double-heterostructure laser be- came an important 
precursor of a quantum well structure: when a middle- layer had a thickness of some hundred 
angstroms, the electron levels would split due to the  quantum-size  effect.  The development  of 
heterostructure growth  techniques  gave  a  possibility  to fabricate  high  quality  double  he- 
terostructures with ultrathin layers. Two main methods of growth with very precise control of 
thickness, planarity, compositions etc. were developed in the 70s. A modern molecular  beam epitaxy 
method became practically im- portant for III—V heterostructure technology first of all due to the 
pioneering work of A. Cho [43]. Metallo-organic chemical vapor deposition originated from an early 
work of H. Manasevit [44] and found broad application in III-V heterostructure research after R. 
Dupuis and P. Dapkus reported the room temperature injection of AlGaAs DHS lasers which had been 
grown by the MOCVD method [45].
Clear  manifestation   of  the  quantum-size   effect  in  optical  spectra  of G      AlGaAs  
semiconductor  heterostructures  with  ultrathin  GaAs  layers (quantum wells) was demonstrated by 
Raymond Dingle rI at. in 1974 [46]. The authors observed a characteristic step-like behavior in 
absorption spectra and systematic shifts of the characteristic energies with a quantum well width 
decrease.
Studies of superlattices were started by the work of L. Esaki and R. Tsu in 1970 [47] who 
considered the electron transport in a superlattice, i.e. an ad- ditional periodic potential 
created by doping or changing the composition of semiconductor materials with the period bigger, 
but comparable with a lattice constant of a crystal. In this, as Leo Esaki called it “man-made 
crystal”, a para- bolic band would break into mini-bands separated by small forbidden gaps and 
having Brillouin zones determined by this period. Similar ideas were de- scribed by L. V. Keldysh 
in 1962 [48] when considering the periodic potential produced on a semiconductor surface by an 
intense ultrasonic wave. At the Physico-Technical Institute R. Kazarinov and R. Suris theoretically 
considered the current flow in superlattice structures in the early 1970s [49]. It was shown that 
the current between wells is determined by tunneling through the poten- tial barriers separating 
the wells and the authors predicted a very important phenomena: tunneling under electric field when 
the ground state of a well co- incides with an excited state of the next well and stimulated 
emission resulting from photon-assisted tunneling between the ground state of one well and ex- 
cited state of a neighboring well, which is lower by the energy due to applied electric field. At 
that time L. Esaki and R. Tsu independently considered reso- nant tunneling in superlattice 
structures [50].

Zhi›res I.  Alfemu                                            423

The pioneering  experimental  studies of the superlattice  structures  were carried out by L. Esaki 
and R. Tsu: the superlattices were grown by VPE in the system GaP       ,—GaAs. At the same time in 
our laboratory we developed the first multichamber apparatus and, as it was mentioned before, 
prepared a su- perlattice structure GaP  EAU y—GaAs with the thickness of each layer equal to 100 A 
and total number of the layers being 200 [17]. Observed peculiarities of the volt-current 
characteristics, their temperature dependence and photo- conductivity were explained by the 
splitting of the conduction  band due to the one-dimensional periodic potential of the 
superlattice. These first super-
lattices  were  also  the  first  strained-layer  superlattices. E.  Blakeslee  and J Matthews who 
were working with L. Esaki and R. Tsu at IBM succeeded in the
mid-70's in growing strained-layer superlattices with a very low concentration of defects. But many 
years later, after G. Osbourn's theoretical study [51] at Sandia lab and the first successful 
preparation of a high quality strained-layer superlattice GaAs—Int $Ga        by M. Ludowise at 
Varian, N. Holonyak at the University  of  Illinois  achieved  the  CW  room-temperature  laser  
action  on those structures[52]. It became clear that in a strained-layer superlattice the lattice  
strain  became  an additional  degree  of freedom  and  by varying  the layer  thicknesses  and  
compositions  one  can  vary  continuously  and  inde- pendently of one another the forbidden gap, 
lattice constant etc. of the over- all superlattice.
In the early 1970s L.Esaki with co-workers passed to MBE technology in the
AlGaAs system [53] and in March 1974, they submitted a paper on resonant tunneling [54]. It was the 
first experimental demonstration of quantum well heterostructure physics. They measured  the 
tunneling current and conduc- tance as a function of an applied voltage in GaAs-GaAlAs double 
barriers and found current maxima associated with resonant tunneling. Later in the same year L. 
Esaki and L. L. Chang observed resonant tunneling in a superlattice
[55]. Strong interest in resonant tunneling obviously was connected with its potential applications 
in high-speed electronics. In the late 1980, picosecond operation has been achieved in a double 
resonant tunnel diode and oscilla- tions up to 420 GHz were reported in a GaAs resonant tunnel 
diode at room temperature.
The restriction of the electron motion to two dimensions in field effect tran- sistors were 
recognized long time ago [56] and for trapped electrons in inver- sion layers was first verified by 
the magneto-conductance experiment by A. B. Fowler et at. in 1966 [57]. Spectral effects due to 
spatial quantization were ob- served in thin bismuth films in 1968 by V. N. Lutskii and L. A. Kulik 
[58].
The pioneering work on modulation-doped superlattices [59] demonstrat- ing a mobility enhancement 
with respect to the bulk crystal, stimulated re- search data on application of the high-mobility 
two-dimensional electron gas for microwave amplification. In France and Japan practically 
simultaneously
new types of transistors based on a single nAlGaAs—nGaAs modulation-doped
heterostructure were created  that were labeled TEGFET  (two dimensional electron gas FET) in 
France [60] and HEMT (high electron mobility transi- stor) in Japan [61].

424                                         Physics  2000

The first quantum well laser operation was demonstrated by J. P. van der Ziel et al. [62] but 
parameters of the lasing were much worse than for average DHS  lasers.  In  1978,  R.  Dupuis  and  
P.  Dapkus  in  collaboration  with  N. Holonyak first reported about the quantum well laser with 
parameters com- parable with conventional  DHS lasers  [63]. The name  “quantum  well” was used in 
that paper. Real advantages of quantum well lasers were demonstrat- ed much  later by W. T. Tsang 
at Bell Telephone  Lab. Thanks  to many im- provements of MBE growth technology and introducing an 
optimized struc- ture (GRIN SCH) he found threshold currents as low as 160 A/cm° [64].
We started to develop MBE and MOCVD methods of growth of III—V he- terostructures only in the late 
1970s.  First of all, we stimulated the design and construction  of  the  first  Soviet  MBE  
machine  in  our  electronic  industry. During a few years there were developed three generations 
of MBE machine and the last, which  had the name  “Cna”  (the nice  river not very far from Ryazan  
—  the  city  where  NITI  —  industrial  laboratory  of  the  Electronic Industry was located, 
this NITI carried out development of MBE machine) were good enough for our goals. In parallel, 
later on, we started  to develop MBE system with NTO  AN - scientific Instruments company of the 
Academy of Sciences in Leningrad. In the middle of the 80's we got a few systems of this version. 
Both types of MBE systems are still working at the loffe Institute and other laboratories.
The MOGVD systems we developed just in our Institute and later, in the 1980s, a Swedish company 
“Epiquip” specially designed with our participation a couple of systems for our Institute, which 
are still used in our research.
The strong  interest  in experimental  study  of low-dimensional structures and lack of equipment 
for MBE and MOCVD growth technology stimulated our  research  on  the  development  of  LPE  
suitable  for  quantum  well  he- terostructures.
However,  until  the  late  1970s  it  seemed  impossible  to  grow  III—V  he- terostructures with 
an active-region  thickness of less than 500 & by LPE be- cause of the existence near the 
heterojunction of extended interface regions with varying chemical compositions.
The situation was changed due to work of N. Holonyak  et  al.  [65] for su- perlattice like InGaAsP 
structures by using a rotating boat system. In our la- boratory we developed a new LPE method with 
the usual translational motion in a standard horizontal system for InGaAsP heterostructures [6fi] 
and a low- temperature LPE method for AlGaAs heterostructures [67]. These methods permitted us to 
prepare practically any kind of excellent quality quantum well heterostructures with the thickness 
of the active region up to 20 & and with the size of the interface regions comparable to one 
lattice constant. Of great practical importance for InGaAsP laser heterostructures was the creation 
of a record threshold current density for InGaAsP/InP (k = 1.3 and 1.55 ptm) and for InGaAsP/GaAs  
(Z = 0.65—0.9 km) single quantum well separate confine- ment lasers [68]. For high power 
InGaAsP/GaAs (Z = 0.8 km) lasers a total ef- ficiency of fi6 % with GW power 5 W for 100 Jim width 
of the strips, a stripe- geometry laser was achieved [69]. In this lasers effective cooling of the 
semi-

425

conductor power device by recombination radiation was for the first time re- alized as it had been 
predicted much earlier [ l3). Another important con- clusion about InGaAsP heterostructure was its 
unusual resistance to multipli- cation of dislocations and defects (Fig. 7) [70]. It was this 
research that made a start to broad application of Al-free heterostructures.











= 90 min
Figure 7. Time evolution of DHS active region under high level photoexcitation. AlGaAs/GaAs (a), 
InGaAsP/GaAs  (b). Diameter of Kr*-laser excitation  beam -  4O pm. Excitation  level (a) 10⁴ 
W/cm*,  (b) 10* W/cm*.


A most complicated quantum well laser structure, which combined a single quantum  well  with  short 
 period  superlattices  (SPSL),  for the  creation  of GRIN SCH (the most favourable for the lowest 
Jg) was demonstmted in our laboratory in 1988 [71] (Fig. 8). Using SPSL we achieved not only the 
desir- able profile of a graded wave-guide region, thus creating a barrier for dislo- cation 
movement to the active layer, but also got a possibility to grow different
















Figure 8. MBE grown SPSL Q_WSCH laser structure.

426                                                       Physics  2000

parts of the  structure  at sufficiently large differences of  the  temperature.  In this way, we 
have obtained both an excellent surface morphology and  a high internal quantum efficiency on  a 
planar GaAs  (100) surface. The  lowestJp = 52 A/cm° and, shortly after some small optimization, 40 
A/cm° was for a long time a world  record  for semiconductor  injection  lasers and  a good  demon- 
stration  of  the  application  of  quantum  wells and  superlattices  in  electronic devices.
The  idea of stimulated emission in superlattices that had been published by
R. Kazarinov and  R. Suris  [49] was realized  nearly a quarter of century after the proposal, by 
Federico Capasso [72] . The  proposed structure was strongly improved  and  a cascade laser 
developed  by F. Capasso gave rise to a new ge- neration of unipolar lasers operating in the 
middle-infrared range.
The history of the semiconductor lasers is, from a certain point of view, the history  of evolution 
 of  the  semiconductor  laser current  threshold,  which  is shown  in  Fig. 9. The  most dramatic 
 changes  happened just after  the  intro- duction  of  the  DHS concept.  Impact  of SPSL  QW led  
practically  to a  theo- retical limit of this most important parameter. What can happen as a 
result of application  of  new quantum  wires and  quantum  dots structures  will  be dis- cussed 
in the next part of our  paper.



4.3 kA/cm2
I@                 (1968)         Impact of double
heterostructures
Impact of



102
900 A/cm2
(1970)


160 A/cm2
quantum wells

Impact of quantum dots
(1981)        4o ogpz
10                                                    (1988)
19 A/cm2

Impact of  SPSL QW
(2000)


960   65      70     75      8
85      90      95   2000
S
Figure 9. Evolution of the threshold current of semiconductor lasers.


Maybe  the  crown  of  the  quantum  well  studies  was  the   discovery  of  the Quantum  Hall  
effect  [73] . This discovery  and  its comprehensive  studies  in AlGaAs-GaAs  heterostructures, 
which  shortly  led  to  the fractional  quantum Hall effect discovery  [74] , had  a  principal 
effect on  the  whole physics of the solid state. Observation of the effect which deals only with 
fundamental quan- tities and  does not  rely on  peculiarities of the  band structure, carrier 
mobili- ty and   densities in a semiconductor, has shown  that heterostructures can be used to 
model some very basic physical effects. Recently many studies in this area  have  been  
concentrated  on  understanding  condensation  of  electrons and search of Wigner crystallization.

Zh‹rtes I.  Alferov                                              42Y

To summarize  this part of our  paper we present the summary in a way like that in the previous 
classical heterostructure part.

Heterostructure Quantum Wells and Superlattices
I. Fundamental Physical Phenomena
•   2D electron gas
•  Step-like density-of-state function
•  Quantum Hall effect
•   Fractional Quantum Hall effect
•  Excitons at room temperature
•  Resonant tunneling in double-barrier structures and superlattices
•  Energy spectrum in superlattices is determined  by choice of potential and strain
•  Stimulated emission  at resonant tunneling in superlattices
•  Pseudomorphic  growth of strained structures.

II. Important Consequences for Applications
•  Shorter emission wavelength, reduced threshold current, larger differential gain  and  reduced  
temperature  dependence  of  the  threshold  current for semiconductor  lasers
•  IR quantum cascade laser
•  SPSL QW laser
•  Optimization  of  Electron  and  Light  Confinement  and  Waveguiding  for semiconductor lasers
•  2D electron gas transistors  (HEMT)
•  Resonant-tunneling diodes
•  Precise resistance standards
•  SEEDs and  electro-optical modulators
•  IR photodetectors based on quantum size level absorption.

III. Important Technological Peculiarities
•   Lattice-match  is unnecessary
•  Low growth-rate technology  (MBE, MOCVD)  is needed of principle
•  Submonolayer growth technique
•  Blockading  mismatch dislocations during epitaxial growth
•  Sharp increase of the variety of heterostructure components.


4. HETEROSTRUCTURE QUANTUM WIRES AND QUANTUM  DOTS
The principal advantage of application of quantum-size heterostructures for lasers originates from 
the  noticeable increase of the  density of states with re- ducing dimensionalities for the 
electron gas (Fig. 10).
During  the  1980s,  progress  in  2D-quantum  well  heterostructures physics and  its applications 
attracted many scientists to studying systems of far less di- mensionality  —  quantum  wires  and  
quantum  dots.  In  contrast  to  quantum

428                                     Physics  2000

ID






Figure 10. Density of states for charge carriers in structures with different dimensionalities.


hells" where carriers are localized in the direction perpendicular to the lay- ers but move freely 
in the layer plane, in quantum Cres" carriers are local- ized in two directions arid move freely 
along the wire axis. And being con- fined in all three directions quantum “dots” — “artificial 
atoms” with a totally discrete energy spectrum are created (Fig. 11).
Experimental work on fabrication and investigation of quantum wire and dot structures began  more 
than  l5 years ago. In 1982, Y. Arakawa and H. Sakaki  (75]  theoretically  considered some effeca  
in lasers based on hete- rostructures  with size quantization  in one, two, and three directions. 
They wrote: “Most important, the threshold current of such a laser is reported to be far lees 
sensitive than that of a conventiona) laser reflecting the reduced di- mensionality  of the 
electronic state.” The authors performed experimental studies on a O_W laser placed in 
high-magnetic fields directed perpendicular to the QW plane and demonstrated that the 
characteristic temperature ( Tq j describing the exponential growth of the threshold current with 
temperature increases in a magnetic field from 144 to 313 °C. They pointed to a possibili- ty to 
weaken the threshold current dependence  on temperature  for QWR lasers and full temperature 
stability for JD lasers (Fig. 12). By now there is a significant number of both theoretical and 
experimental papers in this field.







e lectron



gaps



Atom            Semiconductor


Figure 11. Schematic representation of energy diagrams in case of a tingle atom (left), a bulk 
crystal (center), and a quantum dot (right).




1.5



0  i.o — (d)
(c)
Zh‹nes  I.  Alferov


/ (o) =  exp (   j
429

fi             (b)

p               (a)


(a)  T   = 104 °C
(b)  T   = 285 °C (c)  'r  = 481 °C
(d)  'rd =        °C

0.5       ›   ›   ›   ‹   ›   ‹   ‹   ‹   ‹   ‹
V0    -40   -20     0    20    40    60
Temperature  (°C)
Figure l2.  Normalized temperature dependence of the threshold current for various DHS lasers.
(a)  Bulk; (b) with QWs;  (c)  with QWRs,  (d) with QDs.



The  first semiconductor  dots based on  II—VI  microcrystals  in glass  matrix were  proposed  and 
 demonstrated  by  A.I.  Ekimov  and  A.A.  Onushchenko [7fi]. However, since the semiconductor 
quantum dots were introduced in an insulating  glass  matrix  and  the  quality  of  the  interface 
 between  glass  and semiconductor dot was not  high, both fundamental studies and  device appli- 
cations were  limited.  Much  more exciting  possibilities  appeared  after  three dimensional 
coherent quantum dots had been fabricated in a semiconductor matrix  [77].
Several  methods  were  proposed  for  the  fabrication  of  these  structures. Indirect methods, 
such as the  post-growth  lateral patterning of 2D quantum wells suffer  often  from  insufficient  
lateral  resolution  and  interface  damage caused by the  patterning procedure. A more promising 
way is the  fabrication by direct methods, i.e., growth in V-grooves and  on  corrugated surfaces 
which may result in formation  of quantum wires and  dots. The  groups of the  loffe Institute  and 
 Berlin  Technical  University  — last years we carried  out  this  re- search in close cooperation 
— contributed significantly to the  last direction.
Finally we came to the conclusion  that the most exciting method of the for- mation  of ordered  
arrays of quantum wires and  dots is the  self-organization phenomena  on crystal surfaces. Strain 
relaxation  on step or facet edges may result in formation of ordered arrays of quantum wires and  
dots both for lat- tice-matched  and  lattice-mismatched growth.
The first very uniform arrays of three dimensional quantum dots exhibiting also lateral ordering 
were realized in the system IriAs—GaAs both by MBE and MOCVD growth  methods [78, 79].
Elastic  strain  relaxation   on  facet  edges  and   island  interaction  via  the strained 
substrate are driving forces for self-organization of ordered arrays of uniform, coherently 
strained islands on crystal surfaces [80].
In lattice-matched heteroepitaxial systems the growth mode is determined

430                                      Ph si‹:s  2D00

solely by the relation between the energies of two surfaces and the interface energy. If the sum of 
the surface energy of epitaxial layer y  and energy of in- terface y,  is lower than the substrate 
surface energy, y  + y,p < y , i.e., if the material 2 being deposited wets the substrate, then we 
have the Frank—van der Merve growth. Changing the y2 • 7„  value may result in a transition from
the Fralik—van dcr Merve mode to on Volmer—Weber  one where 3D islands
are formed on a bare substate.
In  a  heteroepitaxial system  with  lattice  mismatch  beseen  the rnatcrial being dep‹isited and 
the substrate the growth may initially proceed in a layer- by-layer rr ode.
However, a thicker layer has a higher elastic energy, and the elastic energy tends to be reduced 
via formation of isolated islands. In these islands the ela- stic strains relax and, 
correspondingly, the elastic energy decreases.  This re- sults in a Stranski—Krastanow growth mode 
(Fig. IS). The characteristic size of islands is determined by the minimum in the energy of an 
array of 3D co- herently strained islands per unit surface area as a function of the island size 
(Fig. 14)  [80]. Interaction  between islands via elastically strained substrate would results in 
lateral island ordering typical of the square lattice.
Experiments show in most cases rather narrow size distribution of the is- lands, and on top of that 
coherent islands of InAs form under certain condi- tions a quasi-periodic square lattice (Fig. 15) 
The shape of quantum dots can be significantly  modified  dunng regrowth  or post-growth  
annealing,  or by applying complex growth sequences. Short period alternating deposition of 
strained materials leads to a splitting of QDs and to formation of vertically coupled quantum dot 
superlattice structures (Fig. 15) [81 ] . Ground state QD emission,  absorption  and  lasing  
energies  are  found  to  coincide  [78].






Figure 13. (a) Frank-van der Merve,  (b)  Volmer-Weber,  (c) Stranski—Krastanow growth  modes.





Figure 14. Energy of a sparse array of 3D c‹›lie- rently strained islands per unit surface area as 
a function of island size. The parameter ct is the ratio between the change in the surfacc energy 
upon  island  formation  and  the  contribution from island edges to the elastic relaxation ener- 
gy. When ct > 1, the system  tends thcrmodyna- mically toward island coalescence. When ‹x < I , 
there  exists  an  optimal  island  sixe  and  the system r›f islands is stable against 
coalescence.

Zhmes  I.   Alferov



{0 )




0aAs

view

Arrangement
ofquantum

3-ditriensional tetragonai lattice
20 rim



(010J

Figure 15. Vertical and transverse or- dering of coupled QDs in the system InAs-GaAs.

Observation  of  ultranarrow  (<  0.15  meV)  luminescence  lines  from single quantum dots [78], 
which d‹› not exhibit broadening with temperature, is the proof of the formation of an electronic 
quantum dot (Fig. 1 6).









1.375              l.3te              isg5
Energy teV)


3D           kBT,           2D







0      10      20      30      40      5       6G
Lattice temperature (K)

Figure 16. (a) High-resolution cathodolu- minescence  (CL)  spectrum  of InAs-GaAs QD  structures.  
(b)   ’l'emperatore  depen- dense of the full width at half-maximum of the cathodoluminescense 
peak.

432

Quantum dot lasers are expected to have superior properties with respect to conventional QW lasers. 
High differential gain, ultralow threshold current ilensity and higih temperature stability of the 
threshold current density are ex- pected  t‹i  ‹›cciir  simultaneously.  Additionally  t›rdered  
arrays  of  scattercrs formed in aIi optical waveguide region may result in distributed feedback 
and (or) in stabilizatit›n of single-mode lasing. Intrinsically buried quantum dtit strictures 
spatially localise carriers and prevent them from recombining non- radiatively at resr›nat‹ir 
faces. Overheating ‹›f facets, being one of‘ the most im- portant problems tor high-power and high 
efficiency operation t›f AlGaAs— GaAs and AlGMs—InGaAs lisers, may thus be avoidable.
Since the first realization t›f QD lasers [82] , it has become clear that the QD size uniformity  
Was sufficient to achieve good device rerformance.But cven at that time, it was recognized  that 
the main obstacle for    DHS laser
operati‹›n at room and clcvated temperatures was connected t‹› tempcrature- induced evap‹›ration  
‹›f  carriers from QD's. Different methods  were devel- oped to imprt›ve  the laseI  performance:  
(i)  the increase  of the density  of QD's by stacking of    D's (Fig. 17); (ii) the insertion of   
D's into a   W sheet;
(iii) the use of‘ a matrix material with a higher bandgap energy. As a result, we got many 
parameters ‹›f QDHS lasers better than ones for @WHS lasers basest on  the same  materials. As an 
examplesthc world-rerord  thrcshold-current density of‘ 3 9 A/cm* has heen recently achieved [83J . 
Further; the cw«›utput power up to 3.5—4.0 W (CW) ft›r a 1()0-pm strip wi‹ith, the quantum 
efficien- cy of 95 &u and the wall-plug efficiency of '›0 % were obtained [84].
Significant activities in theoretical understanding of QD lasers with realistic parameters  have 
been  performed. i't›r a    D size dispersion  o1‘ about 10 No and other  practical  structure  
parameters,  the  theory  [80]  predicts  typi‹:al
threshol‹l-current dcnsities of S A/crn2 at room temrerature.Thc value of’ 10 A/cm* at 77 n [  6  
and even 5 A/cm° at 4 K [S7] have been experimentally
oliserveil.






















Qli
Figure  i 7. ”l”ran  niissi‹›n electron microscopy image of the active i'cgion of”h igh-power    
T0fJ° Jascr.





Tntracavity  Light oH‘t me\a] contacts
AIO
1.75 X. n)£iaAs s
QD pcaviiy
l.7f.X(n)GaAs s  acer
AIGaAs/AIO DB









s      200



(10 W)




6     7            9    10

Figure l8. Schematic view of the @D VGSEL structure (a).
Basic advantages of quantum dots: (i)  no interface recombination at oxide-defined apertures;
(ii) reduced lateral spreading of carriers out of the aperture region. Single QD laser at ultralow 
threshold current is possible.
Dependence of the threshold current on the aperture size in a QD VCSEL (b).
(i) low threshold current densities (170 mcm° at 300 K): Ui) low threshold currents at ultraamall 
apertures; (iii) 1.3 pm range on GaAt substrate?

In view of the advanced device applications of QD's, the incorporation of QD's in vertical-cavity 
surfacmmitting lasers (VCSEL's) seems to be very im- portant. JD VCSEL's with parameters, which fit 
to the best values for QW de- vices  of  the  similar  geometry,  have  been  demonstrated  (Fig.  
18)  [88) . Recently, very promising results for l.3-pm QD VCSEL's on a GaAs substrate to use in 
fiber optical communications have been obtained (Fig. 19) (89].
In a free-standing 3D island formed on a lattice-mismatched substrate, the strains cari relax 
elastically, without the formation of dislocations. Thus, suffi- ciently large volume of a coherent 
narrow-gap QD material can be realized. This makee it possible to cover a spectral range of l.II.5 
pm using a GaAs substrate and to develop wavelength-multiplexing systems on the basis of JD VGSEL's 
in the future.

434
Physics  2000


250
3.5
















Figure  l9.  GaAs-based  QD VCSEL emitting at 1.3 pm.





It ts very important  to emphasize  that we always realized  the DHS concept for QWR and  QD 
structures because in both cases we have a narrow gap-band material in a wide-gap matrix.
Let us summarize  this part again  by the  same way as it  had  been done for other parts.

Heterostructure Quantum Wires and Dots
I. fundamental Physicat Phenomena
•   lD  electron gas (wires)
•  Density-of-state function with sharp maximums  (wires)
•  0D-electron gas (dots)
•  delta-function type of density-of-state function  (dots)
•  Increasing binding energy of excitons.

II. Important  Applications in Electronics
•   Reduced lasing threshold current and larger differential gain
•  Reduced  temperature dependence of threshold current  (wires)
•  Temperature stability of the threshold current (dots)
•  Discrete amplification spectrum and a possibility of obtaining performance characteristics 
similar to those of solid-state or gas lasers (dots)
•  Higher modulation factor in electro-optical modulators
•  A possibility of creation “single-electron” devices
•  A new possibility for  the development of FET transistors.

III. Important Technological Peculiarities
•  The application of self-organization effects for growth
•   Epitaxial growth in V-groves  (wires)
•   High resolution lithography of HSQWL.

Zh‹rres I. Alfero                                                435

5. FUTURE TRENDS
Recently very impressive  results for short wave-length light sources have been achieved on  the 
basis of II—VI selenides and III—V nitrides. The success in this research  was  mostly determined  
by application  of  heterostructure concepts and  methods of growth  which  had  been developed  
for III—V quantum  wells and  superlattices. The  natural and  most predictable  trend  is the 
application of  the  heterostructure concepts as well as technological  methods and  pecu- 
liarities  to  new materials.  Different  III—V,  II—VI  and    IV—Vl  heterostructures, developed  
in recent time, are  good examples of this statement.
But from a general and  more deep point of view, heterostructures (it con- cerns all of them: the 
classical, O_Ws and   SLs, QWRs and  QDs) are  a way of the creation  of  new  types  of  materials 
 —  Heterosemiconductors.  By  using  Leo Esaki words — instead  of “God  made crystals”  we create 
 by ourselves  — “Man made crystals”.
The  classical  heterostructures, quantum  wells  and  superlattices  are  quite mature and we 
exploit many of their unique properties. Quantum wires and dots structures are still very young: 
exciting discoveries and  new unexpected applications  are  awaiting  us on  this way.  Even  now 
we  can say  that ordered equilibrium arrays of quantum dots may be used in many devices: lasers, 
light modulators,  far-infrared  detectors and  emitters, etc. Resonant  tunneling via 
semiconductor  atoms introduced  in larger  band-gap  layers  may lead  to sig- nificant 
improvement in device characteristics. More generally speaking, QD structures will be developed 
both “in width” and  “in depth”.
In niidth means  new material  systems  to cover  new energy spectrum.  The life-time problems of 
the green and blue semiconductor lasers and  even more general problems of the  creation of 
defect-free structures based on  wide-gap II—VI  and   III—V  (nitrides)  would  be solved  by 
using QDs structures in  these systems.
As  to  itt  depth it is  necessary  to  mention  that  the  degree  of  ordering  de- pends on 
very complicated  growth conditions,  materials constants, concrete values of the  surface free 
energy. The  way to  resonant tunneling and “single” electron  devices  including optical ones is a 
 deep detailed  investigation  and evaluation  of these  parameters in order to achieve  the 
maximal  possible de- gree of ordering. In general, it is necessary to find out more strong 
self-orga- nization  mechanisms for ordered arrays of QDs creation.
In  the early 1980s I was invited  to deliver a lecture about heterostructures and applications at 
the Amoco Photonic Center near Chicago.
The  summary of my lecture was as follows:
1.  Heterostructures — a new kind of semiconductor  materials:
—  expensive, complicated  chemically & technologically but most efficient
2.  Modern optoelectronics is based on  heterostructure applications
—  DHS laser — key device of the  modern optoelectronics
—  HS PD — the    most efficient & high speed photo diode
-   OEIC — only solves problem of high information density of optical com- munication  systems

436                                               Physics  2000

3. Future high speed microelectronics will mostly use heterostructures
4.  High temperature,  high speed power electronics — a new broad field of
heterostructure applications
5.  Heterostructures in solar  energy  conversion:  the most expensive  photo-
cells and the cheapest solar electricity producer
6.  In the 21st century heterostructures in electronics will reserve only 1 % for
homojunctions.
And 20 years later I do not like to change any word there.
It is hardly  possible  to describe  even  the  main  directions  of  the  modern physics  and  
technology  of semiconductor  heterostructures. There  is  much more  than  was  mentioned.  Many 
scientists  contributed  to  this  tremendous progress which not only defines to a great extent the 
future prospects of con- densed matter physics and semiconductor  laser and communication  techno- 
logy but, in a sense also, the future of the human society. I would like also to emphasize the 
impact of scientists of previous generations who prepared our way. I am very happy that I had a 
chance  to work in this field from  the very beginning. I am even more happy that we can continue  
to contribute  to the progress in this area now.

REFERENCES
(l ]   V. P. Zhuze and I. V. Kurchatov, “Two questions about conductivity of cuprous oxide”.
Zh. Eksp.  Teor.  Fix.  ].E.T.P.) 2, p. 309, 1932.
V. P. Zhuze and B. V. Kurchatov, “Zur electrischen LeiMahigkeit von Kupferoxydul”.
Phys.  Zs. SU 2, No 6, p. 453, 1932.
Ya. I. Frenkel, A. loffe, “On the electrical and photoelectric  properties of contacts between a 
metal and semiconductor”. f'/iys. Z. SU 1, No 1, p. 60, 1932.
Ya. I. Frenkel, “On the transformation of light into heat in solids”. Plys.   eu. 37, p. 17, 1276, 
1931.
Ya. I. Frenkel, “Light absorption and electrons and holes sticking in dielectric cry- stals”. Zh. 
Eksp.  Teor. Fix. b,  p. 647, 1936.
E. F. Gross, N. A. Karryev, “Light absorption by cuprous oxide crystal in infrared and visible 
spectrum”. DAN SSSR (Doklady  Academii Nauk) 84, p. 261, 1952.
E. F. Gross, N. A. Karryev, “Exciton optical spectrum”. DAN SSSR  84, p. 471, 1952.
[5]   B. I. Davydov, “Contact resistance of semiconductors”. ZA. £ns§. Teor. Fix.  9, p. 451, 1939.
[4]  N. H. Welker, “Uber neue halblestende Verbindungen  (New semiconductor com- pounds)”. Zs. 
Naturforsch.,  lo,   p. 744, 1939; A.  Naturforsch.,  8a, p. 248, 1953.
N. A. Goryunova, “Seroe olovo (Gray tin)”, Thesis, Leningrad State University-Phy- sico-Technical 
Inst., 1951.
A. I. Blum, N. P. Mokrovsky, A. R. Regel, “The study of the conductivity of the semi- conductors 
and intermetallic compounds in solid and liquid state”. Proc. of the VII Conference on 
semiconductor properties. Kiev, 1950. Iz:u.  AN USSR,  Ser. Fix. XVI, p. 139, 1952.
[5]  W.  Shockley,  “Circuit  Element  Utilizing  Semiconductor  Material”,  U.S.  Patent 2269347, 
September 25, 1951.
[6]  A. I. Gubanov, “Theory of the contact between two semiconductors with different types of 
conduction”. ZS. Tekh. Fix. 20, p. 1287, 1950.
A. I. Gubanov, “Theory of the contact of two semiconductors of the same type of con- ductivity”. 
ZA. Tell. Fix. 21, p. 304, 1951.

Zh‹zres I.  Alferov                                              437


[7]


[8)


[9]


[10]





[11]



[12]


[l3]


[14]



[15]


[l6J



[17)


[18)





[19)


[20]


[21)

H. Kroemer,  “Theory of a wide-gap emitter for transistors”,  f'rnc. Inf, 45, p. 1535, 1957;  
“Q_uasi-electric and quasi-magnetic fields  in a non-uniform  semiconductor,” RCA Reu., 28, p. 332, 
1957.
N. G. Basov, O. N. Krokhin and Yu. M. Popov, “The possibility of use of indirect tran- sitions to 
obtain negative temperature in semiconductors”, Soviet Physics -fETP (USA), 12, p. 1033, (May, 
1961).
D. N. Nasledov, A. A. Rogachev, S. M. Ryvkin and B. V. Tsarenkov, “Recombination ra- diation of 
galium arsenic”, Fix. Toerd.  Te/a, 4, p. 1062—1065, 1962 (Soviet Physics- Solid State (USA), 4, 
pp. 782—784, 1962.)
R. H. Hall, G. E. Fenner, j. D. Kingsley, T.j. Soltys and R. O. Carlson, “Coherent light emission 
from GaAs junction”, Phys. M.    Lett., 9, pp. 366—378, 1962.
M.   I.  Nathan,  W. P. Dumke,  G.  Burns, F. H.  Dill Jr and G.  I.  Lasher,  “Stimulated emission 
of radiation from GaAs p-n junctions”. Appl. Phys. Lett.,  l , pp. 62—64, 1962.
N.  Holonyak  jr. and  S. F.  Bevacgua,  “Coherent  (visible)  light  emission  from  Ga (As;  P ) 
junctions”, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1, pp. 8S-83, 1962.
Zh. I. Alferov  and  R. F. Kazarinov,  “Semiconductor laser  with  electric  pumping,” Inventor's 
Certificate No. 181737 [in Russian] , Application No. 950840, priority as of March 30, 1963; H. 
Kroemer, “A proposed class of heterojunction injection lasers”. Proc. /fEE, 51, p. 1782, 1963.
Zh. I. Alferov, V. B. Khalfin, and R. F. Kazarinov, “A characteristic feature of injection into 
heterojunctions,” Fix.  Tverd.  Tela, 8, pp. 3102—3105, 1966 i Sov. Phys.  Solid State, 8, p. 2480, 
1967].
Zh. I. Alferov, “Possible development of a rectifier for very high current densities on the bases 
of a p-i-n (p-n-n*, n-p-p*) structure with heterojunctions,” Fix.  Tekh. Polupro- oodn., 1, pp. 
436-438, 1966  [Son. Phys.  Semicond. 1, pp. 358—361, 1967.]
R. L. Anderson, “Gemanium-gallium arsenide heterojunctions”. IBM  J.  Res. Develop. 4,
p. 283, 1960.
P. L. Anderson, “Experiments on Ge-GaAs heterojunctions”. Solid  State Electron.  5, p.
341, 1962.
G. Natta, L. Passerini, Gnzz. Chim. Ital. 58, p. 458, 1928.
V. M. Goldschmidt, “Crystal structure and chemical constitution”. Traits. Farad.  Soc.
25, p. 253, 1929.
Zh.  I. Alferov,  Garbuzov  D.  Z., Grigor'eva  V. S.,  Zhilyaev Yu. V., Kradinova  L. V., 
Korol'kov V. I., Morozov E. P., Ninua O. A., Portnoy E. L., Prochukhan V. D., Trukan
M. K  “Injection luminescence of epitaxial heterojunctions in the GaP-GaAs system”.
Son. Phys.  Sol.  State. 9, p. 208—210, 1967.
Zh. I. Alferov, Yu. V. Zhilyaev and Yu. V. Shmartsev, “The splitting of the conduction band in 
’superlattice' on the base GaP,As, ,”. Fix.  Tekh.  Polupr.  5, p. 196, 1971  [Soc. Phys.- 
Semicond. 5, p. 174, 1971).
Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, V. I. Korol'kov, D. N. Tret'yakov, and V. M. Tuchkevich, 
“High-voltage  p-n  junctions  in  Ga„A3, ,As  crystalls,”  Liz.  Tekh.  Poluprorodn.,  1,  pp. 
1579—1581, 1967 [Son. Phys.  Semicond.  l , pp. 131S—13l4, 1968] ;
H. S. Rupprecht,  j.  M. Woodall,  and G. D. Pettit, “Efficient  visible  electrolumine- scence at 
300 K from Ga, „AU    p-n junctions grown by liquid-phase epitaxy,”  Appl. Phys. Lett., 11, p. 81, 
1967.
Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, V. I. Korol'kov, E. L. Portnoi, and D. N. Tret'yakov, “Injection 
properties of n-Al,Ga, ,As-p-GaAs heterojunctions,” Fix.  Tekh. Poluprovodn., 2, pp. 101 €›—1017, 
1968 [Son. Phys.-Semicond.  2, pp. 843-844, 1969.]
Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, V. I. Korol'kov, E. L. Portnoy, and D. N. Tret'yakov, “Cohe- rent 
radiation of epitaxial heterojunction structures in the        GaAs system,” Liz. Tekh. Polufra  
odn.  2,  pp. 1545—1547, 1968 [Sini. Phys.-Semicond.  Z, pp. 1289—1291, 1969) .
(a)  Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, V. I. Korol'kov, E. L. Portnoi, and D. N. Tret'yakov, 
“Recombination radiation in epitaxial structures in the system AlAs-GaAs,”  in f'roc. Ninth Int.  
Conf.  on Semiconductor  Structwes,  Moscow, july 23—29, 1968,  l  [in Russian] (Nauka, Leningrad, 
1969) , pp. 534-540;

438                                   Physics  2000

(b) Zh. I. Alferov, “Electroluminescence of heavily-doped heterojunctions p Al,Ga, nGaAS,” in Proc. 
Int. Conf. on Luminescence, Newark, Delaware, August 25—29, 1969,/. Lumin., 1, pp. 869—884, 1970-,
(c) Zh. I. Alferov, D. Z. Garbuzov, E. P. Morozov, and E. L. Portnoi, “Diagonal tunne- ling and 
polarization of radiation in Al,Ga,_    -GaAs heterojunctions and in GaAs p- n junctions,” Fiz. 
Tekh. Poluprovodn., 3, pp. 105W1057, 1969  Sov. Phys.-Semicond. 3, pp. 88M887, 1970];
(d)  Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, V. I. Koro1'kov, E. L. Portnoi, and A. A. Yakovenko, 
“Recombination radiation in Al,Gaj      solid solutions with variable forbidden gap” FT. Tech. 
Polufm uodn. 3, pp. 541-645, 1969 [So. Phys.-Semicond. 3, pp. 46     63, 1970].
122]   Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, E. L. Portnoy, and M. K. Trukan, “AlAs-GaAs  hete- rojunction 
 injection  lasers  with  a  low  room-temperature  threshold,”  his.   Tekh. Poluprooodn.,  3, pp. 
1328—1332, 1969 [Son. Phys.  Semisond. 3, pp. 1107-1110, 1970] .
[23]   Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, V. I. Korol'kov, E. L. Portnoi, and A. A. Yakovenko, 
“Spontaneous  radiation  sources  based  on  structures  with  AlAs-GaAs  heterojunc- tions,” Fix.  
Tekh.  Polupnniodn.,  3, pp. 930-933, 1969  I S‹ni.-Phys.  Semicond.  8, pp. 785— 787, 1970] .
[24]   Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, M. B. Kagan, I. I. Protasov, and V. G. Trofim, “Solar- energy 
converters based on p-n AI Ga,           aAs heterojunctions,” Fix.  Tech.  Polupro- uodn., 4, pp. 
2378—2379, 1970 [Son. Phys.-Semicond. 4,  pp. 2047—2048, 1971] .
[25]  Zh. I. Alferov, F. A. Ahmedov, V. I. Korol'kov, and V. G. Nikitin, “Phototransistor utili- 
zing a GaAs-AlAs  heterojunction,” Fix.  Tekn.  Polupriniodn.,  1,  pp. 1159-1163, 1973 [Son. 
Phys.-Semicond., 7, pp. 780-782, 1973].
[26]   Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, V. I. Korol'kov, V. G. Nikitin, and A. A. Yakovenko, “p-n- 
p-n structures based on GaAs and on Al,Ga,      solid solutions,” Fix.  Tekn.  Polupro- oodn., 4, 
pp. 578—581, 1970 [San. Phys.-Semicond., 4,  pp. 481—483, 1971] .
[27]  I. Hayashi, “Heterostructure lasers,” Z ES Tran. £frctmn Devices,  ED-31,  pp. 1630— 1645, 
1984.
[28]  Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, D. Z. Garbuzov, Yu. V. Zhilyaev, E. P. Morozov, E. L. Portnoi, 
and V. G. Trofim, “Investigation of the influence of the AlAs-GaAs hetero- structure parameters on 
the laser  threshold current and the realization  of conti- nuous emission at the room 
temperature,” Liz.  Tekh. Poluprovodn., 4, pp. 1826-1829, 1970 [Sour. Phys. Semicond.  4, pp. 
157Ml575, 1971] .
[29]   I. Hayashi, M. B. Panish, P. W. Foy, and S. Sums    “Junctionlasers which operate con- 
tinuously at room temperature,” Apal. Phys. Lett., 17, pp. 109—111, 1970.
[30]  Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, S. G. Konnikov, V. G. Nikitin, and D. N. Tret'yakov, 
“Heterojunctions on the base of  A'I'B* semiconducting and of their solid solutions,” in Proc.  
Int.  Conf. Phys.  Chem.  Semicond.  Heterojunctions and Layer Strictures,  Budapest, October, 
1970, 1, G. Szigeti, Ed. (Academiai Kiado, Budapest, 1971), pp. 93-106.
[31]  G. A. Antipas, R. L. Moon, L. W. James, J  Edgecumbe and R. L. Bell, “In gallium ar- senid 
and related compounds”. Conf.Ser. IOP, 17, p. 48, 1973.
(52]   L.J    es, G. Antipas, R. Moon,J Edecumbe, R. L. Bell, ‘Photoemission from cesium- 
oxide-activated InGaAsP”. Appl. Phys. Lett. 22, p. 270, 1973.
[33]  A. P. Bogatov, L. M. Dolgiriov, L. V. Druzhinina, P. G. Eliseev, L. N. Sverdlova, and E.
G.  Shevchenko,   “Heterolasers  on  the  base  of  solid  solutions  Ga„Jn;        P     and

Al,Ga
1281,
q," Kvantouaya EActn›n. 1, p. 2294, 1974 [Son. J.  Quantum Electn›n, 1, p.
J J. Hsieh, “Room-temperature operation GaInAsPJInP double-heterostructure dio-
de  lasers emitting at 1.1 pm,” Appl. Phys. Left., 28, p. 283, 1976.
[34]   Zh. I. Alferov, I. N. Arsent'ev, D. Z. Garbuzov, S. G. Konnikov, and  V. D. Rumyantsev, 
“Generation    of    coherent    radiation    in    nGao I•o."-pGa   . s'nj     ,-o N"›,r nGa  
₅Inq₅P" Asia Zfi. Tech. Fix., 1, pp. 30M310, 1975  [Son. Phys.-Tech.  Phys.  Lett., 1,
pp. 147-148, 1975];
“Red injection  heterolasers  in the Ga-In-As-P  system,”  Anno H.  Tech.  Fix.,  1, pp. 40€›-408, 
1975   Son. Phys.-Techn. Phys. Lett., 1, pp. 191-192, 1975];

439

W. R. Hitchens, N. Holonyak Yr., P. D. Wright, and J J  Coleman, “Low-theshold LPE In, ,,Ga,,P, 
,,As,,/Inj  Gary @,/In, .Ga .P; ,As,,  yellow  double-heterojunction  laser diodes (/< 10’ A/cm°, 
/= 5850 A, 77 K),” Appl. Phys. Lett., 27, p. 245, 1975.
[35]    Zh.  I. Alferov,  V.  M. Andreev,  R. F.  Kazarinov,  E. L. Portnoi,  and  R.  A. Suris, 
“Semiconductor optical quantum generator,” Inventor's Certificate No. 392875 [in Russian] , 
Application No. 1677436, priority as of july 19, 1971.
[36]  H. Kogelnik and C. V. Shank, “Stimulated emission  in a periodic structure,”  Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 18, p. 152, 1971.
[37]  R. F. Kazarinov and R. A. Suris, “Injection heterolaser with diffraction grating on con- tact 
surface”. Fix. Tekh. Polupr. 6, p. 1359, 1972 (Soy. Phys.-Semicond. 6, p. 1184, 1973).
[38]  Zh. I. Alferov ct al. “Laser with supersmall divergens of radiation”. Fix. Tekh. Polupr. 8, 
p. 832, 1974 (Soy.Phys.-Semicond. 8, 541, 1974) .
Zh. I. Alferov et al. “Semiconductor laser with distributed feedback in second order”.
Pisma Zh. Tech. Liz. 1, p. 645, 1975 (Tech. Phys. Lett. 1, p. 286, 1975).
[39]  M. Nakamura, A. Yariv, H. W. Yen, S. Somekh and H. L. Garvin, “Optically pumped GaAs surface 
laser with corrugation feedback”. Appl. Phys. Lett. 22, p. 315, 1973.
[40]  D. R. Scifres, R. D. Burnham and W. Streifer, “Distributed-feedback single heterojun-
ction GaAs diode laser”. Appl. Phys. Lett. 25, p. 203, 1974.
(41]  H. Kroemer and G. Griffiths, “Staggered-lineup heterojunctions as sources of tunable 
bellow-gap  radiation:  Operating  principle  and  semiconductor  selection”.  ZfE Electron Deuice 
Lett. EDU-4, p. 1, 20, 1983.
[42]  A. N. Baranov et al. “Generation of the coherent radiation in quantum-sizeed struc- ture of 
the single heterojunction”. Liz.  Tekh.  Polupr.  20, p. 2217, 1986  (Soy.Phys.- Semicond. 20, 
1385, 1986) .
[43]  A. Y. Cho, “Film deposition by molecular beam techniques,”/. Yac. Sci. Technol., 8, p. 31, 
1971.
A. Y. Cho, “Growth of periodic structures by the molecular-beam method”. Appl. Phys. Len. 19, p. 
467, 1971.
[44)  H. M. Manasevit, “Single crystal GaAs on insulating substrates,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 12, p.
156, 1968.

[45j


(46]


[47j [48j [49]





[50]



[52]

[53]
R. D. Dupuis and P. D. Dapkus, “Room temperature operation of Ga; „AJ,As/GaAs 
double-heterostructure lasers grown by metalloorganic chemical vapor deposition,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 
31, p. 466, 1977.
R. Dingle, W. Wiegmann, and C. H. Henry, “Quantized states of confined carriers in very thin Al,Ga, 
,As-GaAs-Al Ga,      heterostructures,” Phys.  Reu.  Lett.,  33, p. 827, 1974.
L. Esaki and R. Tsu, “Superlattice and negative differential conductivity”. IBM J.  Res. Dan. 14, 
p. 61, 1970.
L. V. Keldysh, “Effect of ultrasonics on the electron spectrum of crystals”. Fiz. Tverd. Tela 4, p. 
2265, 1962 (Soy.Phys.-Sol.State 4, 1658, 1963) .
R. F. Kazarinov and R. A. Suris, “Possibility of the amplification of electromagnetic waves in a 
semiconductor with a superlattice,” Fix. Tekh. Poluprooodn., 5, pp. 797—800, 1971 (So. Phys.  
Semicond., 5, pp. 707—709, 1971] ; “Electric and electromagnetic pro- perties of semiconductors 
with a superlattice,” Fix. Tekh. Poluprmiodn., 6, pp. 148—162, 1972  San. Phys.  Semicond., 6, pp. 
120—131, 1972]; “Theory of  electrical properties of semiconductors with superlattices,” Fix. Tekh. 
Polupnniodn., 7, pp. 48M98, 1973 [San. Phys.  Semicond., 7, pp. 347—352, 1973].
R. Tsu and L. Esaki, “Tunneling  in finite superlattice”. Off. Phys.  Lett.  22, p. 562, 1973.
G. Osbourn, “Strained-layer superlattices from lattice mismatched materials”. J  Appl. Phys. 53, p. 
1586, 1982.
M. Ludowise ct aL “Continuous 300 K laser operation of strained superlattices”. Appl. Phys. Lett. 
42, p. 487, 1983.
L. L. Chang, L. Esaki, W. E. Howard and R. Ludke, “Growth of GaAs-GaAlAs super- lattices”. J. Yoc. 
Doc. ' ecAtiof. 10, p. 11, 1973.

440


[54]

fssl
L.  L.  Chang,  L.  Esaki,  R. Tsu,  “Resonant  tunneling  in  semiconductor  double  bar- riers”. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 24, p. 593, 1974.
L. Esaki and L. L. Chang,  Neiu Transport  phenomenon  in a semiconductor ’Superlattice”’.
Phys. Rev. W//. 33, p. 686, 1974.
[56]   J  R. Shriffer, "Semiconductor surface physics"  (R. H. Kingston; ed.), p.68, University of 
Pennsylvania  Press, Philadelphia.
[57)   A. B. Fowler,  F. F. Fang, W. E. Howard  and     J  Stiles,  “Magnetooscillatory conduc- 
tance in silicon surfaces“. Phys. Reu. Lett. 16, p. 901, 1966.
[58]   V. N. Lutskii, “Quantum-size  effect — present state and  perspective  on experimental 
investigations“. Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) l,  p. 199, 1970.
[59]   R. Dingle, H. L. Stormer,  H. L. Gossard  and W. Wiegmann,  “Electron  mobilities in 
modulation-doped semiconductor  heterojunction superlatticies". Appl. Phys. Lett. 33, p. 665, 1978.

[60]

[61]

[62]


[63]


[64]


[65]


[66j


[67]


[68]






[69]



[70j
D. Delagebeaudeuf et al. “Two-dimensional electron gas MESFET structure". Electron Lett. 16, p. 
667, 1980.
T. Mimura, S. Hiyamizu, T. Fuji and K. Nanbu, “A new field-effect  transistor with se- lectively 
doped GaAs/n-Al Ga, ,As heterojunctions“.      .J.  Appl. Plys. 19, L225, 1980.
j.  P. van  der  Ziel,  R.  Dingle,  R.  C.  Miller,  W. Wiegmann,  and  W. A.  Nordland, Jr., 
“Laser  oscillations  from  quantum  states  in  very  thin  GaAs-All  Gap gAs  multilayer 
structures,”  Appl. Phys. Lett., 26, pp. 46M65, 1975.
R. D. Dupuis, P. D. Dapkus,  N. Holonyak, Yr., E. A. Rezek and R. Chin, “Room  tem- perature 
operation of quantum-well  Ga, ,Al      GaAs laser diodes grown  by metalor- ganic chemical vapor 
deposition,“  Appl. Phys. Lett., 32, pp. 295—297, 1978.
W. T. Tsang,  “Extremely  low  threshold  (AlGa)As  graded-index  waveguide  separate- confinement  
heterostructure lasers  grown  by  molecular-beam  epitaxy,”  Appl.  Phys. Lett., 40, pp. 217—219, 
1982.
E. Rezek, H. Shichijo, B. A. Vojak and N. Holonyak, “Confined-carrier luminescence of a thin In,   
Ga,}'; ,As, well (x₀ -  0.13, z -  0.29, -  400 A) in an InP p-n-junction”. Appl. Phys. Lett. 31, 
p. 534, 1977.
Zh.  I.  Alferov  et  al.  “Auger-profiles  and  luminescence  investigations  LPE  grown 
InGaAsP-heterostructures with active regions  (1.5-5)  x 10* cm”. Fix. Tekh. Polupr. l9, p. 1108, 
1985 (Soy. Phys.-Semicond. l9,  p. 679, 1985) .
Zh. I. Alferov et aL “AlGaAs-heterostructure quantum wells grown  by low temperatu- re LPE“.  Etna  
Zh.  Tekh.  Fix. 12,  p. 1080, 1986  (Soy.  Phys.-Techn.  Phys.  Lett. 12,  p. 450,1986).
Zh. I. Alferov ct at. “Low threshold  InGaAsP/InP separate confinement  lasers k =1.3 tim and  k = 
1.55 qm  (j„ = 600—700 A/cm°)".  Pisma  2h. Tekhn. Fix. 12,  p. 210, 1986 (Soy.  Phys.-Techn.  
Phys.  Lett. 12,  p. 87, 1986).  Zh.  I. Alferov  ct  aL  “Low  threshold quantum    well   
InGaAsP/GaAs   separate   confinement   double   heterostructures lasers formed  by the LPE  (X = 
0.86  pm, y,¿ = 90 A/cm°,  ñ = -;   j„  = 165 A/cm',  L -- 1150 pm, 300 K)". Fix. Tekh. Polupr. 21, 
p. 914, 1987 (Soy.Phys.-Semicond. 21, p. 914,
1987).
Zh. I. Alferov et aL “Quantum-well  InGaAsP/GaAs  (X = 0.86: 0.78 qm) separate con- finement  
lasers  (j,¿ = 100 A/cm2, efficiency  = 59 to)".  Fix.  Tech. f'ofu;t›r.  22,  p. 1031, 1988 (Soy. 
Phys.-Semicond. 22, p. 650, 1988). D. Z. Garbuzov et al. "Technical Digest CLEO", paper THU44, p. 
396, 1988.
D. Z. Garbuzov et al. Conf. Digest  I2th Intern. Semicond. Laser Conf., Davos, Switzerland, paper 
L-33, 238, 1990.
[71]   Zh. I. Alferov ei at “Reducing  of the threshold current in GaAs-AlGaAs DHS SCH
quantum well lasers (j,¿ = 52 A/cm', T= 300 K)  with quantum well restriction by short period 
superlattice  of variable period”. Prime Zft.  left. Fix.  14, p. 1803, 1988 (Soy. Phys.-Technical 
Physics Lett. 14, p. 782, 1988) .
[72]   j. Faist, F. Capasso, D. L. Sivco, C. Sirtori, A. L. Hutchinson, A. Y. Cho “Quantum ca- 
scade laser," Science, 264, pp. 553-556, 1994.
[73]   K. v. Klitzing, G. Dorda and  M. Pepper,  “New method for high-accuracy  determina-

Zh‹nes  I.  Alferov                                              441

tion of the fine-structure constant based on quantized Hall resistance“. Phys. Rec. Lett.
45, p. 494, 1980.
[74]   D. C. Tsui, H. L. Stormer and A. C. Gossard, “Two dimensional magnetotransport in the 
extreme quantum limit”. Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, p. 1559, 1982.
[75]   Y. Arakawa  and  H. Sakaki,  “Multidimensional quantum  well laser and  temperature 
dependence of its threshold current,”  Appl. Phys. Lett., 40, pp. 939—941, 1982.
[76]   A.  I.  Ekimov and  A. A.  Onushchenko,  “Quantum  size  effect  in  three  dimensional 
microscopic semiconductor  crystals,“fETP Lett., SA, p. 345, 1981.
[77]   L. Goldstein,  F. Glas, j.  Y. Marzin, M.  N. Charasse and  G. Le Roux, “Growth  by mo- 
lecular beam epitaxy and characterization of InAs/GaAs strained-layer superlattices,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 47, pp. 1099—1101, 1985.
[78]   N.  N. Ledentsov,  M. Grundmann,  N. Kirstaedter, J.  Christen,  R. Heitz, J.  Bohrer,  F.
Heinrichsdorff,  D.  Bimberg,  S.  S.  Ruvimov,  P.  Werner,  U.  Richter,  U.  Gfisele, J. 
Heydenreich,  V.  M.  Ustinov, A. Yu.  Egorov,  M. V.  Maximov,  P. S. Kop'ev  and  Zh. I. Alferov, 
“Luminescence  and structural properties of (In,Ga)As-GaAs quantum dots,” in Proc.  22nd Int. Conf. 
on the Physics of Semiconductors, Vancouver, Canada, 1994, D.j. Lockwood, Ed. (World Scientific, 
Singapore, 1995), 3, p. 1855.
[79]   Zh. I. Alferov, N. Yu. Gordeev, S. V. Zaitsev, P. S. Kop'ev, I. V. Kochnev, V. V. Khomin,
I. L. Krestnikov,  N. N. Ledentsov, A. V. Lunev, M. V. Maksimov, S. S. Ruvimov, A. V. Sakharnov, A. 
F. Tsatsul'nikov, Yu. M. Shernyakov, and D. Bimberg, “A low-threshold injection  heterojunction  
laser  based  on quantum  dots,  produced  by gas-phase  epi- taxy from organometallic compounds,”  
Fix. Tekh. Polufrauodn., $0, pp. 357—363, 1996 [Semiconductors, 30, pp. 197—200,  1996].
[80]   V. A. Shchukin,  N. N. Ledentsov,  P. S. Kop'ev and D. Bimberg, “Spontaneous order- ing of 
arrays of coherent strained islands,” flys.    eu. Lett., 75, pp. 2968-2972, 1995.
[81]   Zh. I. Alferov, N. A. Bert, A. Yu. Egorov, A. E. Zhukov, P. S. Kop'ev, A. O.  Kosogov, I. L. 
Krestnikov,  N.  N.  Ledenuov,  A.  V.  Lunev,  M.  V.  Maksimov,  A.  V.  Sakharov,  V.  M. 
Ustinov, A. F. Tsatsul'nikov, Yu. M. Shernyakov,  and  D. Bimberg,  “An injection  hete- rojunction 
 laser  based on arrays of vertically coupled  InAs quantum  dots in a GaAs matrix,”  Fix.  Tekh.  
Polufmn odn., 30,  pp. 351—356,  1996  [Semiconductors, 30, pp.  l94— 196, 1996).
[82]   N. Kirstaedter ci at., “Low threshold, large  Tq injection  laser emission from  (InGa)As
quantum dots,” Electron. Lett., 30, pp. 141€›-1418, 1994.
[83]   G. Park, O. B. Shchekin, D. L. Huffaker, and D. G. Deppe, “Low threshold oxide-con- fined 
1.3 pm quantum dot laser,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 33, p. 230, 2000.
[84]   A. E. Zhukov, A. R. Kovsh, S. S. Mikhrin, N. A. Maleev, V. M. Ustinov, D. A. Lifshiu, I.
S. Tarasov,  D. A.  Bedarev,  M. V.  Maximov,  A. F. Tsatsu1'nikov, I.  P. Soshnikov,  P.  S. 
Kop'ev, Zh. I. Alferov,  N. N. Ledentsov, and D. Bimberg, “3.9 W CW power from sub- monolayer 
quantum dot diode laser,” €frctmn.  Lett., 35, pp. 1845—1846, 1999.
[85]   L. V. Asryan and R. A. Suris, “Inhomogeneous line broadening and the threshold cur- rent  
density  of  a semiconductor  quantum  dot  laser,”  Semicond.  Sci.  Tehnol.  11,  pp. 554-569, 
1996.

[86j



[87]


[88]


[89]
A. E. Zhukov, V. M. Ustinov, A. Yu. Egorov, A. R. Kovsh, A. F. Tsatsul'nikov, N. N. Ledentsov, S. 
V. Zaitsev, N. Yu. Gordeev, P. S. Kop'ev, and Zh. I. Alferov, “Negative characteristic temperature 
of InGaAs quantum dot injection laser,"J§ti. J. A ppl. Phys., pt. l , 36, pp. 421M218, 1997.
G. Park, O. B. Shchekin, S. Csutak, D. L. Huffaker, and D. Deppe, “Room-tempera- ture 
continuous-wave operation of a single-layered 1.3 ttm quantum dot laser,” A ppl. Phys. Lett., 75, 
pp. 3267—3269, 1999.
j. A. Lott, N. N. Ledentsov, V. M. Ustinov, A. Yu. Egorov, A. E. Zhukov, P. S. Kop'ev, Zh.
I. Alferov, and D. Bimberg, “Vertical cavity lasers based on vertically coupled quan-
tum dots,” Enctr‹m. L‹ti., 33, pp. i 1s0—l1sl, 1997.
j. A. Lott, N. N. Ledentsov, V. M. Ustinov, N. A. Maleev, A. E. Zhukov, A. R. Kovsh, M. V. Maximov, 
B. V. Volovik, Zh. I. Alferov, and D. Bimberg, “InAs-InGaAs  quantum  dot VCSELs on GaAs substrates 
emitting at 1.3 pm,” Wfrcfron. Lett., 36, pp. 1384-1385, 2000.
