FROM MACROMOLECULES TO BIOLOGICAL
ASSEMBLIES
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1982

by
AARON KLUG
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
Cambridge CB2 2QH, U.K.




 Within a living cell there go on a large number and variety of biochemical
 processes, almost all of which involve, or are controlled by, large molecules, the
 main examples of which are proteins and nucleic acids. These macromolecules
 do not of course function in isolation but they often interact to form ordered
 aggregates or macromolecular complexes, sometimes so distinctive in form and
 function as to deserve the name of organelle. It is in such biological assemblies
 that the properties of individual macromolecules are often expressed in a cell. It
 is on some of these assemblies on which I have worked for over 25 years and
 which form the subject of my lecture today.
    The aim of our field of structural molecular biology is to describe the
 biological machinery, in molecular, i.e. chemical, detail. The beginnings of this
 field were marked just over 20 years ago in 1962 when Max Perutz and John
 Kendrew received the Nobel prize for the first solution of the structure of
 proteins. In the same year Francis Crick, James Watson, and Maurice Wilkins
 were likewise honoured for elucidating the structure of the double helix of
 DNA. In his Nobel lecture Perutz recalled how 40 years earlier, in 1922, Sir
 Lawrence Bragg, whose pupil he had been, came here to thank the Academy
 for the Nobel prize awarded to himself and his father, Sir William, for having
 founded the new science of X-ray crystallography, by which the atomic struc-
 ture of simple compounds and small molecules could be unravelled. These men
 have not only been my predecessors, but some of them have been something
 like scientific elder brothers to me, and I feel very proud that it should now be
 my turn to have this supreme honour bestowed upon me. For the main subjects
 of my work have been both nucleic acids and proteins, the interactions between
 them, and the development of methods necessary to study the large macromo-
 lecular complexes arising from these interactions.
    In seeking to understand how proteins and nucleic acids interact, one has to
 begin with a particular problem, and I can claim no credit for the choice of my
 first subject, tobacco mosaic virus. It was the late Rosalind Franklin who
 introduced me to the study of viruses and whom I was lucky to meet when I
joined J.D. Bernal’s department in London in 1954. She had just switched from
 studying DNA to tobacco mosaic virus, X-ray studies of which had been begun


 78                                        Chemishy 1982




                 Fig. 1. Diagram summarizing the results of the first stage of structure
                 analysis of tobacco mosaic virus (71). There are three nucleotides
                 per protein subunit and         subunits per turn of the helix. Only
                 about one-sixth of the length of a complete particle is shown.




      06




Fig. 2. Diagram showing the ranges over which particular forms of TMV protein participate
significantly in the equilibrium (17). This is not a conventional phase diagram: a boundary is
drawn where a larger species becomes detectable and does not imply that the smaller species
disappears sharply. The “lock washer” indicated on the boundary between the 20S disk and the
helix is not well defined and represents a metastable transitory state observed when disks are
converted to helices by abrupt lowering of the pH.


                                      A. Klug                                   79


by Bernal in 1936. It was Rosalind Franklin who set me the example of tackling
large and difficult problems. Had her life not been cut tragically short, she
might well have stood in this place on an earlier occasion.


TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS

Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) is a simple virus consisting only of a single type
of protein molecule and of RNA, the carrier of the genetic information. Its
simple rod shape results from its design, namely a regular helical array of these
protein molecules, or subunits, in which is embedded a single molecule of
RNA. This general picture was already complete by 1958 when Rosalind
Franklin died (Fig. 1). It is clear that the protein ultimately determines the
architecture of the virus, an arrangement of          subunits per turn of a rather
flat helix with adjacent turns in contact. The RNA is intercalated between
these turns with 3 nucleotide residues per protein subunit and is situated at a
radial distance of 40 Å from the central axis and is therefore isolated from the
outside world by the coat protein. The geometry of the protein arrangement
forces the RNA backbone into a moderately extended single-strand configura-
tion. Running up the central axis of the virus particle is a cylindrical hole of
diameter 40 Å, which we then thought to be a trivial consequence of the protein
packing, but which later turned out to figure prominently in the story of the
assembly.
   At first sight, the growth of a helical structure like that of TMV presents no
problem of comprehension. Each protein subunit makes identical contacts with
its neighbours so that the bonding between them repeats over and over again.
Subunits can have a precise built in geometry so that they can assemble
themselves like steps in a spiral staircase in a unique way. Subunits would
simply add one or a few at a time onto the step at the end of a growing helix,
entrapping the RNA that would protrude there and generating a new step, and
so on. It was in retrospect thus not too surprising when the classic experiments
of Fraenkel-Conrat and Williams in 1955 (6) demonstrated that TMV could be
reassembled from its isolated protein and nucleic acid components. They
showed that, upon simple remixing, infectious virus particles were formed that
were structurally indistinguishable from the original virus. Thus all the infor-
mation necessary to assemble the particle must be contained in its components,
that is, the virus “self assembles”. Later experiments (‘7) showed that the
reassembly was fairly specific for the viral RNA, occuring most readily with the
RNA homologous to the coat protein.
   All this was very satisfactory but there were yet some features which gave
cause for doubt. First, other experiments (8) showed that foreign RNAs could
be incorporated into virus-like rods and these cast doubt on the belief that
specificity in vivo was actually achieved during the assembly itself. Another
feature about the reassembly that suggested that there were still missing
elements in the story was its slow rate. Times of 8 to 24 hours were required to
give maximum yields of assembled particles. This seemed to us rather slow for
the assembly of a virus in vivo, since the nucleic acid is fully protected only on


80                                 Chemistry 1982


completion. These doubts, however, lay in the future and before we come to
their resolution, I return to the structural analysis of the virus and the virus
protein.



X-ray analysis of TM V: the protein disc
After Franklin’s death, Holmes and I continued the X-ray analysis of the virus.
Specimens for X-ray work can be prepared in the form of gels in which the
particles are oriented parallel to each other, but randomly rotated about their
own axes. These gels give good X-ray diffraction patterns but because of their
nature the three-dimensional X-ray information is scrambled into two dimen-
sions. Unscrambling these data to reconstruct the 3-dimensional structure has
proved to be major undertaking, and it was only in 1965 that Holmes and I
obtained the first 3-dimensional Fourier maps to a resolution of about 12 Å. In
fact, only recently has the analysis by Holmes and his colleagues in Heidelberg
(where he moved in 1968) reached a resolution approaching 4 Å in the best
regions of the electron density map, but falling off significantly in other parts
(9). At this resolution it is not possible to identify individual amino-acid
residues with any certainty and ambiguities are too great to build unique
atomic models. However, the map, taken together with the detailed map of the
subunit we obtained in Cambridge (see below) yields a considerable amount of
information about the nature of the contacts with RNA (10).
   These difficulties in the X-ray analysis of the virus were foreseen, and by the
early 1960’s I came to realize that the way around this difficulty was to try to
crystallize the isolated protein subunit of the virus, solve its structure by X-ray
diffraction and then try to relate this to the virus structure solved to low
resolution. We therefore began to try to crystallize the protein monomer. In
order to frustrate the natural tendency of the protein to aggregate into a helix,
Leberman introduced various chemical modifications in the hope of blocking
the normal contact sites, but none of these modified proteins crystallised. The
second approach was to try to crystallize small aggregates of the unmodified
protein subunits. It had been known for some time, particularly from the work
of Schramm and Zillig (11), that the protein on its own, free of RNA, can
aggregate into a number of distinct forms, besides that of the helix. I chose
conditions under which the protein appeared to be mainly aggregated in a form
with a sedimentation constant of about 4S, identified by Caspar as a trimer
(12). We obtained crystals almost immediately but we found (13) them to
contain not the small aggregate hoped for, but a large one, corresponding to an
aggregate with a sedimentation constant of 20S. The X-ray analysis showed
that this was built from two juxtaposed layers, or rings, of 17 subunits each and
we named this form the two-layer disc (Fig. 3 and 4). Our inital dismay in
being faced with such a large structure, of molecular weight 600,000, was
tempered by the fact that the geometry of the disc was clearly related to that of
the virus particle. The cylindrical rings contained 17 subunits each compared
with         units per turn of the virus helix, so that the lateral bonding within
the discs was therefore likely to be closely related to that in the virus. We also


                                               A. Klug                                               81




Fig. 3. The disk viewed from above at successive stages of resolution. From the centre outward there
follow (i) a rotationally filtered electron microscope image at about 25 Å resolution (72); (ii) a slice
through the 5 Å electron density map of the disk obtained by X-ray analysis, showing rod-like
helices (26) and (iii) part of the atomic model built from the 2.8 Å map (Bloomer et al., ref. 15).


82                                        Chemistry 1982




Fig. 4. Section through a disk along its axis reconstructed from the results of X-ray analysis to a
resolution of 2.8 Å (15). The ribbons show the path of the polypeptide chain of the protein subunits.
Subunits of the two rings can be seen touching over a small area toward the outside of the disk but
opening up into the “jaws” toward the centre. The dashed lines at low radius indicate schematical-
ly the mobile portion of the protein in the disk, extending in from near the RYA binding site to the
edge of the central hole



showed, by analysing electron micrographs, that the disc was polar, i.e. that its
two rings faced in the same direction as do successive turns of the virus helix.
   This was the first very large structure ever to be tackled in detail by X-ray
analysis and it took about a dozen years to carry through the analysis to high
resolution. The formidable technical problems were overcome only after the
development in our laboratory of more powerful X-ray tubes and of special
apparatus (cameras, computer-linked densitometers) for data collection from a
structure of this magnitude. (In fact we had begun building better X-ray tubes
in London to use on weakly diffracting objects like viruses). The 17-fold
rotational symmetry of the disc also gives rise to redundant information in the
X-ray data, which was exploited in the final analysis (14), to improve and
extend the resolution of a map based originally on only one heavy atom
derivative. The map at 2.8 Å resolution (15) has been interpreted in terms of a
detailed atomic model for the protein (Figs. 3 and 4), although the individual
interactions upon RNA binding have yet to be deduced.

Protein polymorphism
These results on the structure of the disc which showed that it was fairly closely
related to the virus helix made me wonder whether the disc aggregate might
not be fulfilling some vital biological role. It had been easy to dismiss it as
perhaps an adventitious aggregate of a sticky protein or a storage form. The
polymorphism of TMV protein was first considered in some detail by Caspar in
1963 (12) who foresaw that some of the aggregation states might give insight
into the way the protein functions. Quantitative studies of aggregation started
by Lauffer in the 1950’s (16) concentrated upon a rather narrow range of
conditions, the main interest being in understanding the forces driving the
aggregation (these are largely entropic). Because of the scattered nature of the
earlier observations, Durham, Finch and I began a systematic survey of the
aggregation states as a result of which the broad outline became clear (17, 18).
The results can be summarised as a phase diagram (Fig. 2).


                                      A. Klug                                      83


   At low or acid pH, the protein alone will form helices of indefinite lengths
that are structurally very similar to the virus except for the lack of the RNA.
Above neutrality the protein tends to exist as a mixture of smaller aggregates
from about trimer upwards, in rapid equilibrium with each other, commonly
referred to as A-protein. Near pH 7 and at about room temperature the
dominant form present is the disc which is in a relatively slow equilibrium with
the A-form in the ratio of about 4:1. The dominant factor controlling the state
of aggregation of the coat protein is thus the pH. The control is mediated
through groups, probably carboxylic acid residues, as identified by Caspar
(12), that bind protons abnormally in the helical state, but not in the disc or A-
form. Thus the helical structure can be stabilised either in the virus by the
interaction of the RNA with the protein, or, in the case of the free protein, by
protonating the acid groups. These groups thus act as a “negative switch”,
ensuring that under physiological conditions the helix is not formed, and thus
that enough protein in the form of discs or A-protein is available to interact
with the RNA during virus assembly.

A role for the disc
The disc aggregate of the protein therefore has a number of significant proper-
ties. It is not only closely related to the virus helix, but also is the dominant
form of the protein under “physiological” conditions; moreover, disc forms had
also been observed for other helical viruses. These strengthened my conviction
that the disc form was not adventitious but might play a significant role in the
assembly of the virus. What could this role be?
   Assembly of any large aggregate of identical units such as a crystal can be
considered from the physical point of view in two stages: first nucleation and
then the subsequent growth, or, in more biochemical language, as initiation
and subsequent elongation. The process of nucleation - or, crudely, getting
started - is frequently more difficult than the growth. Thus, a simple mode of
initiation in which the free RNA interacts with individual protein subunits does
pose problems in getting started. At least 17 separate subunits would have to
bind to the flexible RNA molecule before the assembling linear structure could
close round on itself to form the first turn of the virus helix. This difficulty could
be avoided if a preformed disc were to serve as a jig upon which the first few
turns of the viral helix could assemble to reach sufficient size to be stable. This
mode of nucleation of helix assembly could also furnish a mechanism for the
recognition by the protein of its homologous RNA. The surface of the disc
presents a set of 51 (= 17 × 3) nucleotide binding sites which could interact with
a special long run of bases, resulting in an amplified discrimination that might
not be possible with a few nucleotides. It thus seemed that the disc could solve
both the physical and biological requirements for initiating virus growth and
conferring specificity on the interaction. This hypothesis is illustrated in Fig. 5.
It turned out that all the details in this diagram are wrong, but yet the spirit is
correct. As A.N. Whitehead once observed, it is more important that an idea
should be fruitful than it should be true.
   This proposed mechanism of nucleation required that the disc be able to


84                                        Chemistry 1982




Fig. 5. The role of the disk as originally conceived: the specific recognition of a special (terminal)
sequence of TMV-RNA initiates conversion of the disc form of the protein into two turns of helix,
(See Fig. 7, for the mechanism finally established.)


dislocate into a two-turn helix to form the beginning of the growing nucleopro-
tein rod. To test this, we carried out a very simple experiment, the pH drop
experiment ( 19). This showed that an abrupt lowering of the pH would convert
discs directly, within seconds, into short helices - or lockwashers (Fig. 2), which
stack on each other to give longer nicked helices, which in due course anneal to
give more perfect hehces. This conversion is an in situ one, not requiring
dissociation and then reassociation into a different form. The success of this
experiment encouraged us to proceed to experiments with RNA itself, the
natural “substrate” of the virus protein.
   The first reconstitution experiments carried out by Butler and myself proved
to be dramatic (20). When a mixture was made at pH 7 of the viral RNA and a
disc preparation, complete virus particles were formed within 10 to 15 minutes,
rather than over a period of hours, as was the case in the early reassembly
experiments in which protein had been used in the disaggregated form (6).
   The notion that discs are involved in the natural biological process of
initation was strengthened by companion experiments (20) in which assembly
was carried out with RNAs from different sources. These showed a preference,
by several orders of magnitude, of discs for the viral RNA over foreign RNAs or
synthetic polynucleotides of simple sequence. It is thus the disc state of the
protein that is needed to achieve specificity in the interaction with the RNA. In
the experiments cited earlier, in which virus-like rods were made containing
TMV A-protein and foreign RNA (8), reactions were carried out at an acid
pH, and under these artificial conditions the protein alone would tend to form
helical rods and so could entrap any RNA present.
   Besides this effect of discs on the rate of initiation, which had been predicted,
we also found to our surprise that the discs appeared to enhance the rate of
elongation, and we concluded that they must be therefore actively involved in
growth. This result has been questioned by some other workers in the field and
is still the subject of argument (21, 22), but recent discoveries on the configura-
tion of RNA during incorporation into a growing particle, discussed below,
have made the involvement of discs in the elongation, as well as in nucleation,
much more intelligible.
   The disc form of the protein therefore provided the elements which were
missing from the simple reconstitution experiments using disaggregated pro-


                                               A. Klug                                           85




Fig, 6. Postulated secondary structure ofthr RNA in the nucleation region (24). This gives a weakly
bonded double-helical stem and a look at the top probably the actual origin of assembly. The
sequence at and near the top contains a repeating motif of three bases having G in the middle
position and A, or U in the outer positions.



tein, namely speed and specificity. We now knew what the disc did, the next
question was how did it do it?

The interaction of the protein disc with the initiation sequence on the RNA
Specificity in initiation ensures that only the viral RNA is picked out for coating
by the viral protein. This must be brought about by the presence of a unique
sequence on the viral RNA for interaction with the protein disc. Zimmern and
Butler isolated the nucleation region containing this site by supplying limited
quantities of disc protein, sufficient to allow nucleation to proceed, but not
subsequent growth, then digesting away the uncoated RNA with nuclease (23,
24). With the varying protein: RNA ratios and different digestion conditions,
they found they could isolate a series of RNA fragments, all of which contained
a unique common core sequence with variable extents of elongation at either
end. These fragments could be rebound to the coat protein when it was in the
form of discs. Among this population of fragments was a fragment only about
60 nucleotides long - just over the length necessary to bind round a single disc
- and it appeared to represent the minimum protected core. Because of the
strong rebinding of this fragment back to the disc, it seemed likely that it
constituted the “origin of assembly”, where the normal nucleation reaction
began.
   However, the work on the RNA produced, in turn, another puzzle: the
obvious expectation that the nucleation region would be near one end of the
RNA turned out to be wrong. The nucleation occurs about one sixth of the way
along the RNA from the 3’ end (25), so that over 5000 nucleotides have to be


86                                        Chemistry 1982




Fig. 7. Nucleation of virus assembly occurs by the insertion of a hairpin of RNA (Fig. 6) into the
central hole of the protein disk and betwecn the two layers of subunits. The loop at the top of the
hairpin binds to form part of the first turn, opening up the base-paired stem as it does so, and
causes the disk to dislocate into a short helix. This presumably “closes the jaws”, entrapping the
RNA between the turns of protein subunits, and gives a start to the nucleoprotein helix (which can
then elongate rapidly to some minimum stable size).




coated in the major direction of elongation (3’-5’) and 1000 have to be coated
in the opposite direction. Yet growing nucleoprotein rods observed in the
electron microscope (20) were always found to have all the uncoated RNA only
at one end: why were rods never seen with a tail at each end? The resolution of
this conundrum came from considering the structure of the protein disc, to
which I now turn.
   Although the structure of the disc was solved in detail only in 1977, an earlier
stage in the X-ray analysis gave the clue as to how it might interact with the
RNA. At 5 Å resolution (26) the course of the polypeptide chain could be
traced and the basic design of the disc established (cf Fig. 4). The subunits of
the upper ring of the disc lie in a plane perpendicular to the disc axis while
those of the lower ring are tilted downward towards the centre, so that the two
rings touch only towards the outside of the disc. In the neighbourhood of the
central hole they are thus far apart, like an open pair of jaws which could, as it
were, “bite” a stretch of RNA entering through the central hole. Moreover,
entry through the centre would be facilitated because the inner region of the
protein, from around the RNA binding site inward, was found to be disordered
and not packed into a regular structure.
   It therefore looked very much as though the disc were designed to permit the
RNA to enter through the central hole, effectively enlarged by the flexibility of
the inner loop of protein, and intercalate between its two layers. The RNA
which would enter thus would of course be the nucleation sequence which lies
rather far from an end of the RNA molecule. This could, however, be achieved
if the RNA doubled back on itself at a point near the origin of assembly and so
entered as a hairpin loop. Indeed, the smallest RNA fragment that is protected
during nucleation has a base sequence which can fold into a weakly paired
double-helical stem with a loop at the top, that is a hairpin (Fig. 6). This was
proposed by Zimmern (24). The loop and top of the stem have an unusual


                                      A. Klug                                    87


sequence, containing a repeating motif of three nucleotides, with guanine G in
one specific position, and usually A or some times U in the other two. Since
there are three nucleotide binding sites per protein subunit, such a triplet
repeat pattern will place a specific base in a particular site on the protein
molecule and could well lead to the recognition of the exposed RNA loop by the
disc during the nucleation process.

Nucleation and growth
The hypothesis for nucleation (27) then is that the special RNA hairpin would
insert through the central hole of the disc into the jaws formed by the two layers
of protein subunits (Fig. 7). The dimensions are quite suitable for this to occur
and the open loop could then bind to the RNA binding sites on the protein.
More of the rather unstable double helical stem would melt out and be opened
as more of the RNA was bound within the jaws of the nucleating disc. Some, as
yet unknown, feature of this interaction would cause the disc to dislocate into a
short helical segment, entrapping the RNA and, after the rapid addition of a
few more discs (23), would provide the first stable nucleoprotein particle.
   The subsequent events after nucleation can be called growth and as stated
above there is a controversy about the particular way in which this proceeds.
Our view is that elongation in the major direction of growth very likely takes
place through the addition of further discs, as indeed our first reconstitution
experiments drove us to conclude. The special configuration generated during
the insertion of the loop into the centre of the disc must be perpetuated as the
rod grows, by pulling further RNA up through the central hole. Thus, elonga-
tion could occur by a substantially similar mechanism to nucleation, only now,
rather than requiring the specific nucleation loop of the RNA, it occurs by
means of a “travelling loop” which can be inserted into the centre of the next
incoming disc. This mechanism therefore overcomes the main difficulty in
envisaging how a whole disc of protein subunits could interact with the RNA in
the growing helix. There is now more evidence for growth by incorporation of
blocks of subunits of roughly disc size (22), but the subject is still controversial
and I will therefore not proceed further with it.
   On the other hand, there is now clear experimental confirmation of our
hypothesis for the mechanism of nucleation. This predicts (1) that two tails of
the RNA will be left at one end of the growing nucleoprotein rod formed, and
(2) that one of these tails would project directly from one end but the other
would be doubled back all the way from the active growing point at the far end
of the rod down the central hole of the growing rod. Both of these predictions
have now been confirmed. Hirth’s group in Strasbourg has obtained electron
micrographs of growing rods in which the RNA is spread by partial denatur-
ation, and many particles show two tails protruding from the same end (28). In
Cambridge my colleagues have used high resolution electron microscopy, in
which the two ends of the rods can be identified by their shapes to show that it
is indeed the longer tail that is doubled back through the growing rod (29).
Other experiments show that the RNA configuration has a substantial effect on
the rate of assembly (29).


88                                Chemistry 1982


Design and construction: physical and biological requirements
We have seen that the formation of the protein disk is the key to the mechanism
of the assembly of TMV. The protein subunit is designed not to form an
endless helix, but a closed two-layer variant of it, the disc, which is stable and
which can be readily converted to the lockwasher or helix-going form. The disc
therefore represents an intermediate sub-assembly by means of which the
entropically difficult problem of nucleating helical growth is overcome. At the
same time the nucleation by the disc sub-assembly furnishes a mechanism for
recognition of the homologous viral RNA (and rejection of foreign RNAs) by
providing a long stretch of nucleotide binding sites for interaction with the
special sequence of bases on the RNA. The disc is thus an obligatory intermedi-
ate in the assembly of the virus, which simultaneously fulfils the physical
requirement for nucleating the growth of the helical particle and the biological
requirement for specific recognition of the viral RNA. TMV is self-assembling,
self-nucleating and self-checking.
   There are a number of morals to be derived from the story of TMV assembly
(1). The first is that one must distinguish between the design of a structure and
the construction process used to achieve it. That is, while TMV looks like a
helical crystal and its design lends itself to a process of simple addition of
subunits, its construction actually follows a more complex path that is highly
controlled. It illustrates the point that function is inextricably linked with
structure and how much can be done by one single protein. A most intricate
structural mechanism has been evolved to give the assembly an efficiency and
purposefulness whose basis we now understand. The general moral of all this is
that not merely does nature once again confound our obvious preconceptions,
but it has left enough clues for us to be able to puzzle out finally what is
happening. As Einstein once put it, “Raffmiert ist der Herr Gott, aber bösartig
ist er nicht: The Lord is subtle, but he is not malicious”.


CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC OR FOURIER ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

In 1955, Finch and I in London, and Caspar, then in Cambridge, took up the
X-ray analysis of crystals of spherical viruses. These had first been investigated
by Bernal and his colleagues just before and after the war, using “powder” and
“still” photography. Finch and I worked on Turnip Yellow Mosaic virus and
its associated empty shell, and Caspar on Tomato Bushy Stunt virus. Crick and
Watson had predicted that spherical viruses ought to have one of the forms of
cubic symmetry, and we showed that both viruses had icosahedral symmetry.
Later, when Finch and I showed that poliovirus also had the same symmetry,
we realised that there was some underlying principle at work, and this eventu-
ally led Caspar and me to formulate our theory of virus shell structure (30).
   When my research group moved to Cambridge in 1962, we turned to
electron microscopy for the speed with which it enables one to tackle new
subjects, and also because it produces a direct image, or so we thought. Armed
with a theory of virus design and some X-ray data, we had some notion of how
spherical shells of viruses might be constructed and thought we would be able


                                    A. Klug                                  89


to see the fine detail in electron micrographs. Thus, we knew what we were
looking for, but we soon found that we did not understand what we were
looking at: the micrographs did not present simple direct images of the speci-
mens. We soon discovered the limitations of electron microscopy. First, there
were preparation artefacts and also radiation damage during observation.
Secondly, artificial means of contrast enhancement had to be used as the
majority of atoms in biological specimens have an atomic number too low to
give sufficient contrast on their own. Thirdly, the image formed depends on the
operating conditions of the microscope and on the focussing conditions and
aberrations present. Above all, because of the large depth of focus of the
conventional microscope, all features along the direction of view are superim-
posed in the image. Finally, in the case of strongly scattering or thick speci-
mens, there is multiple scattering within the specimen, which can destroy even
this relation between object and image.
   For these reasons, the detail one sees in a raw image is often unreliable and
not easily interpretable without methods which correct for the operating condi-
tions of the microscope and which can separate contributions to the image from
different levels of the specimen. It is also important to be able to assess the
degree of specimen preservation in each particular case. These procedures for
image processing of electron micrographs were developed by myself and my
colleagues over a period of about 10 years. Their aim is to extract from the
information recorded in electron micrographs the maximum amount of reliable
information about the 2- or 3-dimensional structures which are being exam-
ined. Some applications of these methods to various problems studied in the
MRC laboratory over the first 15 years are given in Table 1. Electron micro-
scopy combined with image reconstruction, supplemented wherever possible


90                                    Chemistry 1982

by X-ray studies on wet, intact material, has provided what are now generally
 accepted models of the structural organisation of a large number of biological
 systems such as those listed in the table. In this lecture I will describe a limited
 number of examples which serve to demonstrate the power of various tech-
 niques and the nature of the results they can give. Fuller accounts of the
 methods and the theory are given elsewhere (2, 3), but I would like to
 emphasize here that these methods arose out of practical concerns and grew in
 the course of tackling concrete problems; nervertheless they have proved to be
 of wide application.

 Two dimensional reconstruction: digital computer processing
We began our studies on viruses, both spherical and helical, using the method
of negative staining which had been recently introduced by Huxley, and by
Brenner and Horne (31). In this method the specimen is embedded in a thin
amorphous layer of a heavy metal salt which simultaneously preserves and
maps out the shape of the regions from which it is excluded. Much fine detail
was to be seen, but one could not easily make sense of it in most cases. People
simply thought that the specimens were being disordered, because it was
assumed that the negative stain gave, as it were, a footprint of the particle. We
gradually came to realise that the confusion arose, not so much because of the
disorder that the stain produced, but because there was a superposition of
detail from the front and back of the particle; i. e., the stain was enveloping the
whole particle, so forming a cast rather than a footprint. This interpretation
was proved in two different ways which proceeded in parallel. First, in the case
of the spherical viruses, one could build a model and compute or otherwise
display it in projection and we found that this could account for many if not all
of the previously uninterpretable images (32). The uniqueness of the model
could be proved by tilting experiments in which the specimens on the grid and
the model were tilted in the same manner through large angles (cf. Fig. 10, ref.
73). The second approach was applied to helical structures, which are transla-
tionally periodic and therefore lend themselves to a direct image analysis,
which I shall now illustrate.
   Figure 8a shows an electron micrograph of a negatively stained specimen of a
“polyhead”, which is a variant of the head of T4 bacteriophage, consisting
mainly of the major head protein. The particle has been flattened and so its
original tubular form lost. The image clearly shows some structural periodici-
ties, but these are difficult to discern and such interpretations used to be left to
subjective judgement. I realised that the optical (Fraunhofer) diffraction
pattern produced from such an image would allow an objective analysis of all
the periodicities present to be made (33). This is shown in Figure 8b. Here
clear diffraction maxima can be seen: these fall into two sets which can be
accounted for as arising respectively from the near and far sides of the speci-
men. In this way it was established that the negative stain was producing a
complete cast of the particle rather than a one sided footprint of it (33). Since
this is a helically periodic structure, the diffraction maxima tend to lie on a
lattice and so they pick out genuine repeating features within the structure. In


                                               A. Klug                                             91




Fig. 8. Optical diffraction and image filtering of thr tubular structures known as “polyheads”,
consisting: of the major head protein of T4 bactriophagc (35). (a) Electron micrograph of
negativcly stained flattened particle x 200,000.
  (h) Optical diffraction pattern of (a), with circles drawn around one set of diffraction peaks
corresponding to one layer of the structure.
  (c) Filtered image of one layer in (a) using the diffaction mask shown in (b). The aperatures in
thr mask are chosen so that the averaging here extcnds locally only over a few unit cells. Individual
molecules arranged in hcxamers can be seen.



this case the regular diffraction maxima extended to a spacing of about 20 Å
which demonstrated that the long range order in the specimen was preserved to
this resolution, which is indeed sufficient to resolve individual protein mole-
cules.
   The confusion in the image is largely due to the superposition of the near and
far sides of the particle, and any one such side can be filtered out in an optical
system by a suitably positioned mask which transmits only the desired diffract-
ed rays (34). The filtered image, Figure 8c, is immediately interpretable in
terms of a particular arrangement of protein molecules (35).
   The clarity of the processed image derives also from the fact that the
background noise in the diffraction pattern has been filtered out. This noise
arises because of the individual variations between molecules in the specimen,
i.e. the disorder, and these contribute randomly in all parts of the diffraction
pattern. Indeed, what has been done is that the signal to noise ratio in the
image has been enhanced by averaging over the copies of the molecules present
in the arrangement. This idea of averaging over many copies of a repeated
motif is central to the most powerful techniques developed so far for producing
reliable images of biological specimens, and the three dimensional procedures
which I will describe later can also use this technique.
   The essence of image processing of this type is that it is a two-step procedure
after the first image has been obtained. First the Fourier transform of the raw


92                                 Chemistry 1982


image is produced. Fourier coefficients are then manipulated or otherwise
corrected and then transformed back again to reproduce the reconstructed
image. These operations can be carried out most easily on a digital computer,
and digital imaging processing as first introduced by DeRosier and myself (36)
allows a much greater flexibility than our original optical method and makes
three dimensional procedures possible.

Three-dimensional image reconstruction
The first example I have given (Fig. 8) is of a relatively simple case where the
problem is essentially that of separating contributions from two overlapping
crystalline layers and we have seen how the method of Fourier analysis resolves
the superposition in real space into separated sets of contributions in Fourier
space. It was, however, already clear from the simple analysis of spherical
viruses that in order to get a unique or reliable picture of a three dimensional
structure one must be able to view the specimen from very many different
directions (32). These different views were often provided by specimens lying in
different orientations but they can also be realised by tilting the specimen in the
microscope, as mentioned above. Originally, as described above, the different
views were interpreted by the building of models, but eventually I saw that a
set of transmission images taken in different views could be combined objec-
tively to give a reconstruction of a three-dimensional object.
   This happened when DeRosier and I were studying the tail of bacteriophage
T4 and our analysis showed that there were contributions to the image from the
internal structure as well as from the front and back surfaces (36). To work in
three dimensions a generalised form of the two-dimensional filtering process
had to be found, and - by making a connection with X-ray analysis - I realised
that what is required is a three-dimensional Fourier synthesis. In the analysis
of the X-ray diffraction patterns of TMV, I had used the idea that a helical
structure could be built up mathematically out of a set of cylindrical harmonic
functions; there is a relation between the number of functions that could be
obtained and the number of different views available. Each new view would
give additional harmonics of higher spatial frequency, and so, if one had
enough views, one could build up the complete structure. Later we came to see
(36) that this synthesis was only a special case of a general theorem known to
crystallographers as the projection theorem.
   The general method of reconstruction which we developed (Fig. 9) is based
on the projection theorem, which states that the two-dimensional Fourier
transform of a plane projection of a three-dimensional density distribution is
identical to the corresponding central section of the three-dimensional trans-
form normal to the direction of view. The three-dimensional transform can
therefore be built up section by section using transforms of different views of the
object, and the three-dimensional reconstruction then produced by Fourier
inversion. The important feature of the method is that it tells one how many
different views are needed for a required resolution and how these are to be
recombined into a three-dimensional map of the object (36, 37). The process is
both quantitative and free from arbitrary assumptions. The approach is similar


                                         A. Klug                                         93




Fig. 9. Scheme for the general process of 3-D reconstruction of an object from a set of 2-D
projections (36).




to conventional X-ray crystallography, except that the phases of the X-ray
diffraction pattern cannot be measured directly, whereas here they can be
computed from a digitised image. Were it not for radiation damage, the
different views could be collected from a single particle by using a tilting stage
in the microscope, but more realistically one must use several particles in
different but identifiable orientations. In general, it is desirable to combine
data from different particles so that imperfections can be averaged out.
   The Fourier method is only one way out of several for solving the sets of
mathematical equations which relate the unknown three dimensional density


                                              Chemistry 1982


                                          direction of tilt axis




a




    Fig. 10. (a) Electron micrographs of the same field of negatively-stained close-packed particles of
    human wart virus (HWV) before (i) and after (ii) tilting the specimen grid through an angle close
    to       (73). x 100,000.
         (b) A three-dimensional reconstructed image of human wart virus (38, 39). Alongside is shown
    the underlying icosahedral surface lattice (30) with the 5-fold and 6-fold vertices marked.



    distribution with known projections in different directions (37), but in fact no
    other reliable method has been shown to be superior and it is used in the CAT
    scanner. Moreover, the Fourier method has the advantage that because it is
    carried out in steps, i.e. formation of the two-dimensional transforms, and then
    recombination in three dimensions, it is possible as described above, to assess,
    select, and correct the data going into the final reconstruction.
       Many applications have been made. The first application was in fact to the
    phage tail of T4, the problem in which it had arisen. Particles with helical
    symmetry are the most straightforward to reconstruct, because a reconstruc-
    tion can be made from a single view of the whole particle, to a limited
    resolution, set by the helix symmetry. In physical terms, this is because a single
    image of a helical particle presents many different views of the repeating


                                      A. Klug                                     95


subunit, and it was this simplification that led us to use the phage tail as a first
specimen for 3-D image reconstruction. Generally, more than one view is
necessary, but any symmetry present will reduce the number required. Typi-
cally for small icosahedral viruses, three or four views are sufficient, but many
more specimens must be investigated before the appropriate number can be
found and averaging carried out (38). A n example, from Crowther and Amos
(39), is given in Fig. 10.

Phase contrast microscopy
Electron microscopy, combined with some method of image analysis, when
applied to negatively stained specimens, has proved ideal for determining the
arrangement and shape of small protein subunits within natural or artificial
arrays, including two dimensional crystals and macromolecular assemblies
such as viruses and microtubules (2). The structural information obtainable
has proved to be highly reliable with respect to detail down to about the 20 Å or
15 Å level. It became clear, however, that the degree of detail revealed was
limited by the granularity of the negative stain and the fidelity with which it
follows the surface of the specimen (40). T o obtain much higher resolution
information, better than about 10 Å, one should dispense with the stain and
view the protein itself. At high resolution, there is a second problem: irradiation
damage. This can be reduced by cutting down the illuminating beam, but the
statistical noise is then increased, and the raw image becomes less and less
reliable. However, this difficulty can be overcome satisfactorily by imaging
ordered arrays of molecules, so that the information from the different mole-
cules can be averaged, as described above, to give a statistically significant
picture. The first problem of replacing the negative stain, yet avoiding dehy-
dration, can be solved in two ways. One, now being intensively studied, is to
use frozen hydrated specimens (41). The second, tried method is that of Unwin
and Henderson, who, in their radical approach to determining the structure of
unstained biological specimens by electron microscopy (42, 43) used a dried-
down solution of glucose to preserve the material.
   The question then arose as to how this unstained specimen, effectively
transparent to electrons, is to be visualized. In the light microscopy of transpar-
ent specimens the well-known Zernike phase contrast method is used. Here the
phase of the scattered beams relative to the unscattered beam are shifted by
means of a phase plate and then the scattered and unscattered beams are
allowed to interfere in the image plane to produce an image. A successful
electrostatic phase contrast device for electron microscopy, quite analogous to
the phase plate used in light microscopy, was constructed by Unwin (44), but it
is not easy to make or use. A practical way of producing phase contrast in the
electron microscope is simply to record the image, with the objective lens
undcrfocussed, and this was the method used by Unwin and Henderson.
   The defocussing phase contrast method arose out of an academic study by
Erickson and myself of image formation in the electron microscope (45). This
was undertaken because of a controversy that had developed concerning the
nature of the raw image itself. When three-dimensional image reconstruction


96                               Chemistry 1982


was introduced and applied to biological particles embedded in negative stain,
objections were raised by various workers in the field of materials science,
accustomed to dynamical effects in strongly scattering materials, to the premise
that the image essentially represented the simple projection of the distribution
of stain. It was asked whether multiple or dynamical scattering might not
vitiate this assumption. To investigate this question, Erickson and I undertook
an experimental study of negatively stained thin crystals of catalase as a
function of the depth of focussing (45). We found that a linear or first order
theory of image formation would explain almost entirely the changes in the
Fourier transform of the image. We concluded that the direct image, using a
suitable value of underfocus dependent on the frequency range of interest, is a
valid picture of the projection of the object density. When greater values of
underfocus were used to enhance the contrast, the image could be corrected to
give a valid picture.
   This study, although confined to the medium resolution range, included a
practical demonstration that a-posteriori digital image processing could be used
to measure and compensate for the effects of defocussing, and we suggested that
this approach could be directly extended to high resolution to compensate for
the effects of spherical aberration as well as defocussing. It also provided a
convenient way of producing phase contrast in the electron microscope in the
case of unstained specimens. The image is recorded with the objective lens
underfocussed, so changing the phases of the scattered beams relative to the
unscattered (or zero order) beam. Defocussing does not however act as a
perfect phase plate analogous to that of Zernike, since the phases are not all
changed by the same amount, and successive bands of spatial frequencies
contribute to the image with alternately positive and negative contrast. In
order to produce a “true” image, the electron image must be processed to
correct for the phase contrast transfer of the microscope so that all spatial
frequencies contribution with the same sign of contrast.
   To produce their spectacular three-dimensional reconstructed image of the
purple membrane of Halobacterium to a resolution of about 7 Å (44), Hender-
son and Unwin took a series of very low-dose images of different pieces of
membrane tilted at different angles. The final map represented an average over
some 100,000 molecules. The small amount of contrast present in the individ-
ual micrographs was produced by underfocussing which was then compensated
for in the computer reconstruction by the method described above. For the first
time the internal structure of a protein molecule was “seen” by electron
microscopy.


THE STRUCTURE OF CHROMATIN

The work on viruses has given results not only of intrinsic interest, but as I
indicated above, the difficulties in tackling large molecular aggregates led to
the development of methods and techniques which could be applied to other
systems. A recent example of this approach, and one which I think would not
have gone so fast without our earlier experience, is that of chromatin. Chroma-


                                       A. Klug                                     97


tin is the name given to the chromosomal material when extracted. It consists
mainly of DNA, tightly associated with an equal weight of a small set of rather
basic proteins called histones. We took up the study of chromatin in Cambridge
about ten years ago when the protein chemists had shown that there were only
five main types of histones, the apparent proliferation of species being due to
post-synthetic modifications, so that the structural problem appeared tracta-
ble.
   The DNA of the eukaryotic chromosome is probably a single molecule,
amounting to several centimeters in length if laid out straight, and it must be
highly folded to make the compact structure one can see in a chromosome. At
the same time it is organised into separate genetic or functional units, and the
manner in which this folding is achieved, genes organised and their expression
controlled, is the subject of intense study throughout the world. The aim of our
research group has been to try to understand the structural organisation of
chromatin at various levels and to see what connections could be made with
functional controls.
   The large amounts in which histones occur suggested that their role was
structural, and it was shown over the years 1972-1975 that the four histones
H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 are responsible for the first level of structural organisa-
tion in chromatin. They fold successive segments of the DNA about 200 base
pairs long into compact bodies of about 100 Å in diameter, called nucleosomes.
A string of nucleosomes or repeating units is thus created and when these are
closely packed they form a filament about 100 Å in diameter. The role of the
fifth histone H1 was at first not clear. It is much more variable in sequence than
the other four, being species and tissue specific. In the years 1975-1976 we
showed that HI is concerned with the folding of the nucleosomc filament into
the next higher level of organisation, and later how it performed this role.
    This is not the place to tell in detail how this picture of the basic organisation
of chromatin emerged (4), but the idea of a nucleosome arose from the conver-
gence of several different lines of work. The first indications for a regular
structure came from X-ray diffraction studies on chromatin which showed that
there must be some sort of repeating unit, albeit not well ordered, on the scale
of about 100 Å (46, 47). The first biochemical evidence for regularity came
from the work of Hewish and Burgoyne (48) who showed that an rndogenous
nuclease in rat liver could cut the DNA into multiples of a unit size, which was
later shown by Noll, using a different enzyme, micrococcal nuclcasc, to be
about 200 base pairs (49). The fact that the nuclcasc cuts the DNA of chroma-
tin at regularly spaced sites, quite unlike its action on free DNA, is attributed to
the fact that the DNA is folded in such a way as to make only short stretches of
free DNA between these folded units available to the enzyme. The third piece
of evidence which led to the idea of a nuclcosome was the observation by
Kornberg and Thomas (50) that the two highly conserved histones, H3 and
H4, existed in solution as a specific oligomrr, the tetramer (H3)2(H4) 4, which
behaved rather like an ordinary multi-subunit globular protein. On the basis of
these different lines of evidence, Kornbrrg in 1974 (51) proposed a definite
model for the basic unit of chromatin as a bead of about 100 A diameter,


98                                Chemistry 1982

containing a stretch of DNA 200 base pairs long condensed around the protein
core made out of 8 histone molecules, namely the (H3) 2(H4) 2 tetramer and 2
each of H2A and H2B. The fifth histone, H1, was somehow associated with the
outside of each nucleosome. A quite unexpected feature of the model was that it
was the DNA which “coated” the histones, rather than the reverse.
   However, in 1972, when Kornberg came to Cambridge, all this lay in the
future. We began using X-ray diffraction to follow the reconstitution of histones
and DNA, because the X-ray pattern given by nuclei, or by chromatin isolated
from them, limited as it was, was the only assay then available to follow the
ordered packaging of the DNA. These X-ray studies showed that almost 90%
reconstitution could be achieved when the DNA was simply mixed with an
unfractionated total histone preparation, but all attempts to reconstitute chro-
matin by mixing DNA with a set of all four purified single species of histone
failed, as if the process whereby the histones were being separated was denatur-
ing them. We therefore looked for milder methods of histone extraction and
found that the native structure could be reformed readily if the four histones
were kept together in two pairs, H3 and H4 together, and H2A and H2B
together, but not once they had been taken apart. It was this work which led
Kornberg to investigate further the physicochemical properties of the histones
and to the discovery (50) of the histone tetramer (H3) 2(H4) 2, which in turn led
him to the model of the nucleosome as described above.

The structure of the nucleosome
Approaches such as nuclease digestion and X-ray scattering on unoriented
specimens of ch romatin or nucleosomes in solution could reveal certain features
of the nucleosome, but a full description of the structure can only come from
crystallographic analysis, which gives complete three-dimensional structural
information. In the summer of 1975 my colleagues and I therefore set about
trying to prepare nucleosomes in forms suitable for crystallisation. Nucleo-
somes purified from the products of micrococcal nuclease digestion contain an
average of about 200 nucleotide pairs of DNA, but there is a rather wide
distribution about the average, and such preparations are not homogeneous
enough to crystallize. However, this variability in size can be eliminated by
further digestion with micrococcal nuclease. While the action of micrococcal
nuclease on chromatin is first to cleave between nucleosomes, it subsequently
acts as an exonuclease on the excised nucleosome, shortening the DNA first to
about 166 base pairs, where there is a brief pause in the digestion (52), and
then about 146 base pairs, where there is a clear plateau in the course of
digestion, before more degradation occurs. During this last stage the histone
Hl is released (52), leaving as a major metastable intermediate a particle
containing 146 base pairs of DNA complexed with a set of 8 histone molecules.
This enzymatically reduced form of the nucleosome is called the core particle
and its DNA content was found to be constant over many different species. The
DNA removed by the prolonged digestion, which had previously joined one
nucleosome to the next, is called the linker DNA.
   A core particle therefore contains a well-defined length of DNA and is


                                      A. Klug                                    99

homogeneous in its protein composition. We naturally tried to crystallize
preparations of core particles, but we were not at first successful probably
because of small traces of the fifth histone Hl. Eventually my colleague
Leonard Lutter found a way to produce exceptionally homogeneous prepara-
tions of nucleosome core particles, and these formed good single crystals (53).
The conditions for growing the crystals were based on our previous experience
in crystallising transfer-RNA, because we reasoned that a good part of the
nucleosome core surface would consist of DNA. These experiments perhaps
surprised biologists in showing dramatically that almost all the DNA in the
nucleus is organised in a highly regular manner.
   The derivation of a three-dimensional structure from a crystal of a large
molecular complex is, as for the TMV disk, a process that can take many years.
We have therefore concentrated on obtaining a picture of the nucleosome core
particle at low resolution by a combination of X-ray diffraction and electron
microscopy, supplemented where possible by biochemical and physicochemical
studies. We first solved the packing in the crystals by analysing electron
micrographs of thin crystals and then obtained projections of the electron
density along the three principal axes of the crystals, using X-ray diffraction
amplitudes and electron microscope phases (53, 54). The nucleosome core
particle turned out to be a flat disc-shaped object, about 110 Å by 110 Å by 57
Å, somewhat wedge-shaped, and strongly divided into two layers. We proposed
a model in which the DNA was wound into about                   turns of a shallow
superhelix of pitch about 27 Å around the histone octamcr. There are thus
about 80 nucleotides in each turn of the superhelix. This model for the organi-
sation of DNA in a nucleosome core also provided an explanation for the results
of certain enzyme digestion studies on chromatin (53, 55) thus showing that
what we had crystallised was essentially the native structure.
   The first crystals we obtained were found to have the histone proteins within
them partly proteolysed, but their physicochemical properties remained very
similar to those of the intact particle. We have since grown crystals from intact
nucleosome cores which diffract to a resolution of about 5 Å and a detailed
analysis is in progress (56). Over the years Daniela Rhodes, Ray Brown and
Barbara Rushton have grown crystals of core particles prepared from seven
different organisms: all give essentially identical X-ray patterns testifying to the
universality of nucleosomes. There is a dyad axis of symmetry within the
particle, which is not surprising since the 8 histones occur in pairs and DNA is
studded with local dyad axes. High angle diffuse X-ray scattering from the
crystals shows that the DNA of the core particle is in the B-form.
   An electron density map of one of the principal projections of the crystal is
shown in Fig. 11a. This map gives the total density in the nucleosome, the
density of the DNA not being distinguished from that of the protein. The
contributions of protein and DNA can be distinguished by using neutron
scattering combined with the method of contrast variation and such a study
was therefore begun by John Finch and a group at the Institute Laue
Langevin, Grenoble, when sufficiently large crystals were available (57).
They obtained maps of the DNA and protein along the three principal
projections (see Figs.


100




Fig. II. Fourier projection maps of the nucleosome core particle. (a) Map from X-ray data (56); (b)
and (c) from neutron scattering data using contrast variation (57): (b) the DNA component with
the path of the superhelix drawn superimposed on the density; (c) the protein core component.




11b and c). The map of the DNA is consistent with the projection of about
superhelical turns as proposed earlier, and the map of the protein shows that
the histone octamer itself is consistent with a wedge shape.

Three dimensional image reconstruction of the histone octamer and the spatial arrangement
of the inner histones
An alternative to separating the contributions of the DNA and the protein by
neutron diffraction is to study the histone octamer directly. The histone oc-
tamer which forms the protein core of the nucleosome can exist in that form free
in solution in high salt, which displaces the DNA (58). In the course of
attempts to crystallize it, we obtained ordered aggregates - hollow tubular
structures - which were investigated by electron microscopy (59). The image
reconstruction method described above was used to produce a low resolution
three-dimensional map and model of the octamer (fig. 12a). As a check that the
removal of DNA had not led to a change in the structure of the histone octamer,
projections of this model were calculated and compared with the projections of
the protein core of the nucleosome obtained from the neutron scattering study
mentioned above. There was a good agreement between the three maps show-
ing that the gross structure was not altered.
    To the resolution of the anlysis (20       it was shown that the histone octamer
 possesses a two-fold axis of symmetry, just as does the nucleosome core particle
 itself. Like the nucleosome core, the histone octamer is a wedgeshaped particle
 of bipartite character. Its periphery shows a system of ridges which form a
 more or less continuous helical ramp of external diameter 70 Å and pitch about
 27 Å, exactly suitable for it to act as a spool on which could be wound about
       turns of superhelix of DNA in the appropriate dimensions (Fig. 12b).


                                             A. Klug                                            101




Fig. 12. (a) Model of the histone octamer obtained by three-dimensional image reconstruction from
electron micrographs (59). The dyad axis is marked. The ridges on the periphery of the model form
a left-handed helical ramp on which 1 3/4 to 2 turns of a superhelix of DNA could be wound.
  (b) The histone octamer structure (a) with two turns of a DNA superhelix wound around it.
(Note that for clarity, the diameter of the plastic tube has been chosen smaller than the true scale
for DNA.) Distances along the DNA are indicated by the numbers -7 to +7, taking the dyad axis
as origin, to mark the 14 repeats of the double helix contained in the 146 base pairs of the
nucleosome core. The assignment of the individual histones to various locations on the model is
described in the text.




   The resolution of the octamer map is too low to define individual histone
molecules, but we have exploited the relation of the octamer to the superhelix of
DNA to interpret them in terms of individual histones (59). This interpretation
uses the results of Mirzabekov and his colleagues (60) on the chemical cross-
linking of histones to nucleosomal DNA, and also information on histonel
histone proximities given by protein crosslinking. This data cannot be inter-
preted reliably without a three-dimensional model because a knowledge of the
points of contact of histones along a strand of the DNA is not sufficient to fix a
spatial arrangement of the histones in the nucleosome core. Furthermore,
because the two superhelical turns of DNA are close together the pattern of
histone/DNA crosslinks need not directly reflect the linear order of histones
along the DNA. The three-dimensional density map restricts the number of
possiblities and enables choices to be made.
   In the spatial arrangement proposed, the helical ramp of density in the
octamer map is composed of a particular sequence of the eight histones, in the
order H2A-H2B-H4-H3-H3-H4-H2B-H2A, with a dyad in the middle.
The (H3)2(H4) 2 tetramer has the shape of a dislocated disc or single turn of a


102                               Chemistry 1982


helicoid, which defines the central turn of a DNA superhelix. The structure for
the histone tetramer explains the findings of many workers, expanding on the
original observations of Felsenfeld (61), that H3 and H4 alone, in the absence
of H2A and H2B, can confer nucleosome-like properties on DNA, in particular
supercoiling and resistance to micrococcal nuclease digestion, whereas H2A
and H2B alone cannot. It also explains the asymmetric dissociation of the
histone octamer when the salt concentration is lowered: the octamer dissoci-
ates, through a hexameric intermediate, into a (H3) 2(H4) 2 tetramer and two
H2A.H2B dimers (58, 62).

The role of H1 and higher order structures
These studies have given a fairly detailed picture of the internal structure of the
nucleosome, but until 1975 there was still no clear idea of the relation of one
nucleosome to another along the nucleosome chain or basic chromatin fila-
ment, nor of the next higher level of organisation. It had been known for some
time that the thickness of fibres observed in electron microscopical studies of
whole mount chromosome specimens varied from about 100 to 250 Å in
diameter, depending on whether chelating agents had been used or not in the
preparation. Taking this as a clue, Finch and I carried out some experiments in
vitro on short lengths of chromatin prepared by brief micrococcal digestion of
nuclei (63). In the presence of chelating agents this native chromatin appeared
as fairly uniform filaments of 100 Å diameter. When Mg++ ions were added,
these coiled up into thicker, knobbly fibres about 250-300 Å diameter, which
are transversely striated at intervals of about 120-150 Å, corresponding appar-
ently to the turns of an ordered, but not perfectly regular helix or supercoil.
Since the term “supercoil” had already been used up in a different context, we
called it a solenoid, because the turns were spaced close together. On the basis
of these micrographs and companion X-ray studies (64), we suggested that the
second level of folding of chromatin was achieved by the winding of the
nucleosome filament into a helical libre with about 6 nucleosomes per turn.
Moreover, we found that when the same experiments were carried out on H1-
depleted chromatin, only irregular clumps were formed, showing that the fifth
histone H1 is needed for the formation or stabilisation of the ordered libre
structure.
    These experiments told us the level at which H1 performs its function of
condensing chromatin, but the way in which the H1 molecule mediates the
coiling of the 100 Å filament into the 300 Å libre only became clear later by
 putting together evidence from the biochemistry, from the crystallographic
 analysis, and from more relined electron microscope observations.
    From observations on the course of nuclease digestion, taken in conjunction
with the known X-ray structure of the nucleosome core, one can deduce where
 the Hl might be on the complete nucleosome. I have mentioned that there is an
 intermediate in the digestion of chromatin by micrococcal nuclease at about
 166 base pairs of DNA and it is during this step from 166 to 146 base pairs that
 Hl is released (52). Since the 146 base pairs of the particle correspond to
 superhelical turns, we therefore suggested that the 166 base pair particle


                                              A. Klug                                           103




Fig.   13. (Top) If the 146 base pairs of DNA in the nucleosome core correspond to 1 3/4 superhelical
turns, then the 166 base particle corresponds to about 2 full superhelical turns. Since the 166 base
pair particle is the limit point for the retention of H1 (52), it must be located as shown. (Bottom)
Schematic diagram of the nucleosome filament at low ionic strength, showing origin of the zigzag
structure (Fig. 14). At the right of the drawing is shown a variant of the zigzag structure which is
often observed: this is formed by flipping a nucleosome by 180° about the filament axis.



contains two full turns of DNA (53). This brings the two ends of the DNA on
the nucleosome close together so that both can be associated with the same
single molecule of H 1 (Fig. 13). A particle consisting of the histone octamer and
166 base pairs has been called the chromatosome (65) and has been suggested
by us and others to constitute the basic structural element of chromatin. In this
particle, the H 1 would therefore be on the side of the nucleosome in the region
of the entry and exit of the DNA superhelix.
   This location follows in logic: but was histone H 1 really there? Although H 1
is too small a molecule to be seen directly by electron microscopy, its position in
the nucleosome can be inferred from its effect on the appearance of chromatin,
in the intermediate range of folding between the 100 A nucleosome filament
and the 300 Å solenoidal fibre. These intermediate stages were revealed in the
course of a systematic study by Thoma and Koller (66), of the folding of
chromatin with increasing ionic strength. By employing monovalent salts
rather than divalent ones, they exposed a range of structures showing increas-
ing degrees of compaction as the ionic strength was raised. Thus, from the
filament of nucleosomes around 1 mM, the extent of structure increased
through a family of intermediate helical structures until, by 60 mM, the
compact 300 Å fibre structure was formed, in all respects identical to that
originally observed by Finch and myself.
   The location of Hl can be deduced by considering the difference between the
structures observed in the range of ionic strength l-5 mM in the presence or


104                                        Chemistry 1982




Fig. 14. The appearance of chromatin with and without H1 at low ionic strength (66). When H1 is
present the first recognizable ordered structure is (a) a loose zigzag in which the DNA enters and
leaves the nucleosomc at sites close together; at a somewhat higher salt concentration (b) the zigzag
is tighter. In the absence of H1, there is no order in the sense of a defined filament direction; (c) at
the lower salt concentration, nucleosome beads are no longer visible, the structure having opened
to produce a fibre of DNA coated with histones; (d) at a higher ionic strength, beads are again
visible but the DNA enters and leaves the nucleosome more or less at random. The bar represents
100 nm.




absence of H1 (Fig. 14). In chromatin containing H1, an ordered structure is
seen in which the nucleosomes are arranged in a regular zigzag with their flat
faces down on the supporting grid. The zigzag form arises because the DNA
enters and leaves the nucleosome at sites close together, as one would expect
from the combination of X-ray and biochemical evidence mentioned in the last
paragraph (Fig. 13). In chromatin depleted of H1, entrance and exit points are
more or less on opposite sides and in any case randomly located. Indeed, at
very low ionic strength, the nucleosomal structure unravels into a linearised
form in which individual beads are no longer seen. When H1 is present this is
prevented from happening. We therefore concluded that H1, or strictly part of
it, must be located at, and stabilises, the region where DNA enters and leaves
the nucleosome, as was predicted.
    In the zigzag intermediates the H1 regions on adjacent nucleosomes appear


                                             A. Klug




Fig, 15. “Exploded” views of the nucleosome, showing the roles of the constituent histones. The
patches on the histone core indicate locations of individual histone molecules, but the boundaries
between them are not known and are thus left unmarked. (a) the (H3) 2 ( H 4 )2 tetramer has the
shape of a lock washer and can act as a spool for 70-80 b.p. of DNA, forming about one
superhelical turn. (b) an H2A.H2B dimer associates with one face of the tetramer. (c) H2A.H2B
dimers on opposite faces each bind 30-40 b.p. DNA, or one-half a superhelical turn, to give a
complete P-turn particle. (d) histone HI interacts with the unique configuration of DNA at the
entry and exit points to seal off the nucleosome.


106                                Chemistry 1982


to be close together or touching. We therefore suggested that, with increasing
ionic strength, more of the Hl regions interact with one another, eventually
aggregating into a helical polymer along the centre of the solenoid and thus
accounting for its geometrical form. Polymers of H1 have indeed been shown to
exist by chemical crosslinking experiments at both low and high ionic strength
(61), but it remains to be shown that they are located in the centre of the libre.
The important point, however, is that it appears to be the aggregation of H1
which accompanies, and indeed may control, the formation of the 300 Å fibre.

The roles of the histones
From the spatial arrangements of molecules proposed for the histone octamer
and from the location deduced for histone H1, one can see (59) the roles of the
individual histones in folding the DNA on the nucleosome (Fig. 15). The
(H3) 2(H4) 2 tetramer has the shape of roughly a single turn of a helicoid and
this defines the central turn of the DNA superhelix. H2A and H2B add as two
heterodimers, H2A.H2B, one on each face of the H3-H4 tetramer, each
binding one extra half-turn of the DNA, thereby completing the two-turn
superhelix. Finally, H1 then binds to the unique region at the side of the two-
turn particle where three segments of DNA come together, stabilizing and
“sealing off’ the nucleosome, and also mediating the folding to the next level of
organisation. Such a sequence of events in time would provide a structural
rationale for the temporal order of assembly of histones on to newly replicated
DNA (68, 69, 70).
   We now have arrived at a moderately detailed model of the nucleosome and
a description for the next higher level of folding. There is thus a firm structural
and chemical framework in which to consider the dynamic processes which
take place in chromatin in the cell, that is, transcription, replication and
mitosis.


CONCLUDING REMARKS

I particularly wanted to outline the chromatin work because it may serve as a
contemporary paradigm for structural studies which try to connect the cellular
and the molecular. One studies a complex system by dissecting it out physical-
ly, chemically, or in this case enzymatically, and then tries to obtain a detailed
picture of its parts by X-ray analysis and chemical studies, and an overall
picture of the intact assembly by electron microscopy. There is, however, a
sense in which viruses and chromatin, which I have described in this lecture,
are still relatively simple systems. Much more complex systems, ribosomes, the
mitotic apparatus, lie before us and future generations will recognise that their
study is a formidable task, in some respects only just begun. I am glad to have
had a hand in the beginnings of the foundation of structural molecular biology.

Acknowledgements

It will be obvious that I could not have accomplished all that has been
summarised here without the help of many highly able and valued colleagues


                                              A. Klug                                          107


and collaborators. After Rosalind Franklin’s death, I was able to continue and
extend the virus work with John Finch and Kenneth Holmes, who were then
students, and who became colleagues. Over the years I have had a transatlan-
tic association with Donald Caspar and have benefitted from his advice,
criticism and insights. I can mention here only some of the names of my other
collaborators in the several branches in which I have been involved: in the
study of virus chemistry and assembly, Reuben Leberman, Tony Durham, Jo
Butler and David Zimmern; in virus crystallography, William Longley, Peter
Gilbert, John Champness, Gerard Bricogne and Anne Bloomer; in electron
microscopy and image reconstruction, David DeRosier, Harold Erickson, Tony
Crowther, Linda Amos, Jan Mellema, Nigel Unwin and, throughout, John
Finch; in the structural studies on transfer RNA, Brian Clark, who provided
the biochemical background without which the work could not have begun, Jon
Robertus, Jane Ladner and Tony Jack; in chromatin, Roger Kornberg, whose
skill and insight transformed a “messy” project into a clear problem, Markus
Noll, Len Lutter, and also Daniela Rhodes and Ray Brown, who fruitfully
transferred their experience from tRNA to nucleosomes, and finally Tim Rich-
mond and John Finch who are engaged in the higher resolution X-ray studies
now in progress.




REFERENCES
Reviews
 (1)      Klug, A. The assembly of tobacco mosaic virus: structure and specificity. The Harvey
          Lectures, 74, 141-172, (1979).
 (2)      Crowther, R. A. and Klug, A. Structural analysis of macromolecular assemblies by image
          reconstruction from electron micrographs. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 44, 161- 182, (1975).
 (3)      Klug, A. Image analysis and reconstruction in the electron microscopy of biological
          macromolecules. Chemica Scripta, 14, 245-256 (1979).
 (4) a. Kornberg, R. D. Structure of chromatin. Ann Rev. Biochem. 46,931-954 (1977).
       b . Kornberg, R. D. and Klug, A. The nucleosome. Scientilic American, 244, 52-64 (1981).
 (5)      Butler, P. J. G. and Klug, A. The structure of nucleosomes and chromatin. in “Horizons in
          biochemistry and Biophysics”. (ed. F. Palmieri), Wiley, 1983 in press.


Others
 (6) Fraenkel-Conrat, H. and Williams, R. C. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 41, 690-698 (1955).
 (7) Fraenkel-Conrat, H. and Singer, B. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 33,359-370 (1959).
 (8) Matthews, R. E. F. (1966) Virology 30,82-96 (1966).
 (9) Strbbs, G., Warren, S., and Holmes, K. Nature (London) 267, 216-221 (1977).
(10) Holmes, K. C. J. Supramolec. Structure 12, 305-320 (1979).
(11) Schramm, G., and Zillig, W. Z. Naturforsch. Ser. b. 10, 493-498 (1955).
(12) Caspar, D. L. D. Adv. Protein Chem. 18,37- 121 (1963).
(13) Finch, J. T., Leberman, R., Chang, Y.-S., and Klug, A. Nature (London), 212, 349-350
     (1966).
(14) Bricogne, G. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. A32,832-847 (1976).
(15) Bloomer, A. C., Champness, J. N., Bricogne, G., Staden, R., and Klug, A. Nature (London)
     276, 362-368 (1978).
(16) Lauffer, M. A., and Stevens, C. L. Adv. Virus Res. 13, l-6 (1968).
(17) Durham, A. C. H., Finch, J. T., and Klug. A. Nature (London) New Biol. 299,37-42 (1971).


108                                       Chemistry 1982


(18) Durham, A. C. H. and Klug, A. Nature (London), New Biol. 299, 42-46 (1971).
(19) Klug, A., and Durham, A. C. H. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 36, 449-460
      (1971).
(20) Butler, P.J. G., and Klug, A. Nature (London), New Biol. 229, 47-50 (1971).
(21) Fukuda, M., Ohno, T., Okada, Y., Otsuki, Y., and Takebe, I. Proc. Natl. Acad, Sci. U.S.A.
      75, 1727-1730 (1978).
(22) Butler, P. J. G., and Lomonossoff, G. P. Biophys. J. 32, 295-312 (1980).
(23) Zimmern, D., and Butler, P. J. G. Cell II, 455-462 (1977).
(24) Zimmern, D. Cell II, 463-482.
(25) Zimmern, D., and Wilson, T. M. A. FEBS Lett. 71, 294-298 (1976).
(26) Champness, J. N., Bloomer, A. C., Bricogne, G., Butler, P. J. G., and Klug, A. Nature
     (London) 259, 20-24 (1976).
(27) Butler, P. J. G., Bloomer, A. C., Bricogne, G., Champness, J. N., Graham, J., Guiley, H.,
      Klug, A., and Zimmern, D. In “Structure-Function Relationships of Proteins” (R. Markham
      and R. W. Home, eds.), 3rd John Innes Symp. pp. 101-l 10. North-Holland/Elsevier,
      Amsterdam.   (1976).
(28) Lebeurier, G. (1976), Nicolaieff, A., and Richards, K. E. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 74,
      149-153 (1977).
(29) Butler, P.J. G., Finch, J. T., and Zimmern, D. Nature (London) 265, 217-219 (1977).
(30) Caspar, D. L. D., and Klug, A. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 27, l-24 (1962).
(31) Brenner, S., and Home R. W. Biochim. Biphys. Acta. 34, 103- 110 (1959).
(32) Klug, A., and Finch, J. T. J. .Mol. Biol. 11, 403-423 (1965).
(33) Klug, A., and Berger, J. E. J. Mol. Biol. 10, 565-569 (1964).
(34) Klug, A. and DeRosier, D. J. Nature (London). 212, 29-32 (1966).
(35) DeRosier, D.J. and Klug, A. J. Mol. Biol. 65, 469-488 (1972).
(36) DeRosier, D. J., and Klug, A. Nature (London), 217, 130- 134 (1968).
(37) Crowther, R. A., DeRosier, D. J., and Klug, 4. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A. 317, 319-340
      (1970).
(38) Crowther, R. A., Amos, L. A., Finch, J. T., DeRosier, D. J., and Klug, A. Nature (London)
     226, 421-425 (1970).
(39) Crowther, R. A., and Amos, L. A. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 36, 489-494
      (1971).
(40) Unwin, P. N. T. J. Mol. Biol. 87, 657-670 (1974).
(41) Taylor, K. A. and Glaeser, R. M. J. Ultrastructure Res. 55, 448-456 (1976).
(42) Unwin, P. N. T., and Henderson, R. J. Mol. Biol. 94, 425-440 (1975).
(43) Henderson, R., and Unwin, P. N. T. Nature 257, 28-32 (1975).
(44) Unwin, P. N. T. Proc. Roy. Soc. Land. A. 329, 327-359 (1972).
(45) Erickson, H. P., and Klug, A. Ber. Bunsenges, Phys. Chem. 74, 1129-1137 (1970); Phil.
     Trans. Roy. Soc. ser B. 261, 105-118 (1971).
(46) Wilkins, M. H. F., Zubay, G., and Wilson, H. R. J. Mol. Biol. I, 179-185 (1959).
(47) Luzzati, V., and Nicolaieff, A. J. Mol. Biol. I, 127-133 (1959).
(48) Hewish, D. R., and Burgoyne, I.. A. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 52, 504-510 (1973).
(49) Noll, M. Nature (London) 251, 249-251 (1974)
(50) Kornberg, R. D., and Thomas, J. O. Science 184, 865-868 (1974).
(51) Kornberg, R. D. Science 184, 868-871 (1974).
(52) Noll, M., and Kornberg, R. D. J. Mol. Biol. 109, 393-404 (1977).
(53) Finch, J. T., Lutter, L. C., Rh o des, D., Brown, R. S., Rushton, B.. Levitt, M., and Klug, A.
      Nature (London) 269, 29-36 (1977).
(54) Finch, J. T., and Klug, A. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 42, I- 15 (1978).
(55) Lutter, L. C. J. Mol. Biol. 124, 391-420 (1978).
(56) Finch, J. T., Brown, R. S., Rhodes, D., Richmond, T., Rushton, B., Lutter, I,. C., and Klug,
     A. J. Mol. Biol. 14.5, 757-769 (1981).
(57) Finch, J. T., Lewit-Bentley, A., Bentley, G. A., Roth, M., and Timmins, P. A. Phil. Trans.
      Roy. Soc. Lond. B. 2901,635-638 (1980).
(58) Thomas, J. O., and Kornberg, R. D. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 72, 2626-2630 (1975).


                                             A. Klug                                         109


(59) Klug, A., Rhodes, D., Smith, J., Finch, J. T., and Thomas, J. 0. Nature (London) 287,509-
     516 (1980).
(60) Mirzabekov, A. D., Shick, V. V., Belyavsky, A. V., and Bavykin, S. G. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
     U.S.A. 75, 4184-4188 (1978).
(61) Camerini-Otero, R. D., and Felsenfeld, G. Nucleic Acids Res. 4, 1159- 1181 (1977a).
(62) Thomas, J. O., and Kornberg, R. D. FEBS Lett. 58, 353-358 (1975).
(63) Finch, J. T., and Klug, A. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 73, 1897- 1901 (1976).
(64) Sperling, L., and Klug, A. J. Mol. Biol. 112, 253-263 (1977).
(65) Simpson, R. T. Biochemistry 27, 5524-5531 (1978).
(66) Thoma, F., Keller, Th., and Klug, A. J. Cell Biol. 83, 403-427 (1979).
(67) Thomas, J. O., and Khabaza, A. J. A. Eur. J. Biochem. 112, 501-511 (1980).
(68) Worcel, A., Han, S., and Wong, M. L. Cell 15, 969-977 (1978).
(69) Senshu, T., Fukuda, M., and Ohashi, M. J. Biochem. (Japan) 84,985-988 (1978).
(70) Cremisi, C., and Yaniv, M. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 92, 1 1117- 1123 (1980).
(71) Klug, A., and Caspar, D. L. D. Adv. Virus Res. 7, 225-325 (1960).
(72) Crowther, R. C., and Amos, L. A. J. Mol. Biol. 60, 123-130 (1971).
(73) Klug, A., and Finch, J. T. J. Mol. Biol. 31, 1-12 (1968).
