                             A DOLF W     INDAUS



   Constitution of sterols and their connection with
         other substances occurring in nature
                       Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1928


 The exceptional distinction which the Royal Academy of Sciences has ac-
 corded to my work "on the sterols and their relationship to other natural
 products" places upon me the honour and duty of giving an account of my
 research to this assembly.
    The sterols are nitrogen-free secondary alcohols of high molecular weight
 which contain in their molecules a number of alicyclic systems. A sharp
 distinction between the sterols and other naturally occurring hydroaromatic
 alcohols is not always possible.
    The sterols are widely distributed in the animal, vegetable, and fungal king-
 doms. The best-known sterolis cholesterol, which was first discovered in human
 gall-stones, and received the name cholesterol because of its presence in bile.
It is a mono-unsaturated alcohol, with the formula C 27H 46O, found in all
the higher animals, partly as free alcohol, and partly as fatty acid esters; it is
present in particularly large quantities in the brain and the adrenal cortex and
as a pathological deposit in gall-stones, sclerotic aorta, and other organs af-
fected by fatty degeneration. The fluctuations of cholesterol content to which
human blood serum is subject are very surprising; during pregnancy the
quantity is considerably increased, while during most infectious diseases it is
noticeably reduced.
   In the lower animals, the insects, the echinodermata, and the sponges a
number of sterols occur which are collectively known, together with choles-
terol, as zoosterols. The majority have the same formula as cholesterol and
are very similar to it; only the spongosterol, discovered by Henze in Suberites
domunculu, appears not to be an unsaturated compound, and is more clearly
differentiated from cholesterol than the other zoosterols.
   In the vegetable kingdom, too, wherever they have been sought, sterols
have always been found. They are grouped together as phytosterols and occur
in plants partly as free alcohols and partly as glucosides. The most widely
distributed are phytosterols (sitosterols) which have the same formula as
cholesterol; there are, however, also phytosterols which contain not one, but


106                             1928 A.WINDAUS

two double bonds, and saturated phytosterols are also frequently mixed in
small quantities with unsaturated ones. Somewhat apart from the typical
sterols are sterol-like alcohols, which are differentiated from sitosterols by
the number of carbon atoms, and, finally, those which contain more than one
hydroxyl group. The variety of the phytosterols is therefore great, and it is
noticable that, despite this great variety, animal cholesterol has never been
discovered among the numerous plant sterols.
   Specific sterols are also found in fungi and are classified as mycosterols. Ergo-
sterol was first isolated from ergot by Tanret, and it is also found in numerous
other fungi and especially in yeast. It has the formula Ca 27H42O and contains,
in contrast to cholesterol and sitosterol, not merely one, but three double
bonds. It is particularly significant that this ergosterol is mixed in very small




 quantities ( about 1/10%) with all zoosterols and phytosterols. In addition
 to ergosterol still other sterols are found in fungi - zymosterol in yeast, and
fungisterol in ergot. There are certainly many more.
    It is surprising that in bacteria, as far as they have been examined, no sterols
 occur. Panzer noted their absence from tuberculous and diphtheria bacilli,
 and I can confirm this result for the tubercule bacilli, as I have worked on
 several kilogrammes of these. I have shown by physiological means that ergo-
 sterol does not occur even in traces in tubercle wax.
    Chemically by far the most thoroughly examined is the sterol of the higher
 animals, cholesterol. The laborious and protracted investigation of its con-
 stitution has shown that it probably possesses the structure (I). According to
 Wieland’s research this formula may be resolved into the complete structural
 formula (II). This formula is very complicated and has no similarity to the
 formulae of sugar, fatty acids, or the amino acids which occur in protein.
    The synthesis of such a substance appears to the chemist particularly diffi-


                        CONSTITUTION OF STEROLS                             107
cult, and up till now I have not dared to attempt it, as success is extremely
improbable. Furthermore, the majority of physiologists have not been in-
clined to believe the animal organism capable of such a synthesis, for it is
known that other, seemingly simpler, syntheses - e.g. that of tyrosine and
tryptophan - have not succeeded in the animal organism.
   If the human and animal organism were really not in a position to produce
cholesterol from other constituents, then the cholesterol of the higher animals,
the carnivores and herbivores, would necessarily originate in their food. But
as the herbivore does not receive cholesterol but phytosterol in its food, it
must possess the ability to absorb the phytosterol of its vegetable nourishment
and to convert it to cholesterol.
   To test this assumption Schonheimer carried out experiments on rabbits




in the Institute of Pathology in Freiburg. He found 96.9% of the ingested
sitosterol (0.2 g per day) in the excrement, and concluded from this that sito-
sterol is not absorbed by the intestinal canal of the rabbit. There can there-
fore be no question of the herbivore using the phytosterol in its food to form
the cholesterol of its body substance. On the contrary, it must be in the posi-
tion to form cholesterol from other components of its nourishment.
   Whether or not mycosterols behave like phytosterols still remains to be
accurately established. On the other hand, it is known that cholesterol, which
is so extremely similar to sitosterol in its physical and chemical properties,
behaves physiologically in quite a different manner. It is absorbed by both
herbivores and carnivores and particularly easily when bile salts are available
in abundance. Schonheimer found only 50% of the ingested cholesterol (0.2 g
per day) in the excrement of rabbits. Furthermore, the cholesterol content
of the blood is greatly increased after feeding with cholesterol, and it is no-
ticeable that after long periods offeeding with cholesterol symptoms of disease


108                            1928 A.WINDAUS

appear in the animal. Mice, rats, and cats accumulate cholesterol, which is in-
troduced with the food, principally in the liver, so that the cholesterol content
of this organ can increase to more than five times normal, and a severe
anisotropic fatty degeneration of the liver becomes apparent. If small doses
of cholesterol are fed to rabbits deposits occur at first only in the intima of
the blood vessel, which is the organ most sensitive to cholesterol in the
rabbit. This observation is of very great interest, for according to Aschoff
a disease pattern arises at this point which is identical with that of arterio-
sclerosis in man. The hypothesis of a genetic connection between ingested
cholesterol and arteriosclerosis in man thus cannot be dismissed. Since phyto-
sterols, which cannot be absorbed, bring about no such symptoms, it should be
investigated whether or not true arteriosclerosis presents itself in societies
which are truly vegetarian (abstaining also from milk and eggs).
   Although the animal thus is in a position to absorb cholesterol from its food
with the aid of bile salts, nevertheless not even the carnivore is dependent on
this cholesterol introduced from outside. As Beumer has demonstrated, pup-
pies fed on a diet deficient in cholesterol exhibit after four weeks an increase
of cholesterol which is twenty times greater than the amount given in the
food. Particularly painstaking have been the investigations of Randles and
Knudson into the question of a cholesterol synthesis. They have succeeded in
maintaining white rats on a diet completely free of sterols, on the basis of the
discovery that pulverized alfalfa, on extraction with cold ether, relinquishes
its sterols completely, but retains enough vitamins for the maintenance of
rats. The scientists mentioned reached the incontestable conclusion that the
cholesterol content of fully-grown rats fed on a diet free of cholesterol is
many times greater than the cholesterol content of new-born rats. The only
possible explanation for this is that the organism of the rat is capable offorming
cholesterol from substances which are different from the sterols and other
substances soluble in ether.
   There is thus in the animal organism a cholesterol synthesis, and the syn-
thetic capabilities of the animal have been gravely underestimated here, as in
many other cases.
   In the animal organism some substances are found which according to their
formulae could be related to cholesterol. These are isocholesterol, coprosterol,
the bile acids, and bufotoxins.
   About isocholesterol, which occurs in the lanolin of sheep, only very little
is known.
   Coprosterol is found in the faeces of carnivores; it must be formed from


                       CONSTITUTION OF STEROLS                              109
cholesterol through the action of intestinal bacteria. However, it has remark-
ably not been possible outside the intestinal canal to change cholesterol into
coprosterol by the use of putrefactive bacteria.
   Coprosterol is according to its formula a dihydrosterol, but it is not iden-
tical with the normal dihydrocholesterol which, according to Willstatter’s
research, arises from the catalytic hydrogenation of cholesterol, and which is
likewise found in small quantities in faeces.
   According to the long-continued research which I have been engaged on,




                                                                            (III)




dihydrocholesterol and coprosterol appear to differ from each other by the
position of the substituents in the carbon atom 1 of the carbon-skeleton shown
in formulae (III). An artificial conversion of cholesterol into coprosterol can
be achieved by means of changing cholesterol into an isomer with hydro-
chloric acid. This has been named allocholesterol, and probably possesses one
of the two formulae (IV). From the hydrogenation of allocholesterol under-
taken in a neutral solution coprosterol is formed, the only or almost the only
product of the hydrogenation. Allocholesterol has not yet been found in the
animal organism, but it is nevertheless quite possible that it is in fact present
there. For it is very easily converted into ordinary cholesterol under the most
diverse circumstances; and in the reactions which are involved in the isolation


110                              1928 A.WINDAUS

of cholesterol from animal matter, this transformation would certainly take
place.
   Using coprosterol as a starting-point, an important conversion from the
sterols to bile acids has also been discovered. The familiar bile acids (formulae
(V)) derive from an acid C24H 40O 2, Wieland’s cholanic acid; that is, they
contain 3 carbon atoms less than cholesterol and coprosterol. These three car-
bon atoms may be separated out of coprosterol as acetone via the correspond-
ing hydrocarbon, coprostane, by using an oxidizing agent; and in this way




  or




Wieland’s cholanic acid is arrived at, as formula (VI) indicates. Moreover,
some time ago Wieland carried out the appropriate synthesis, and succeeded
in returning from cholanic acid to coprostane.
   The chemical connection between cholesterol and bile acids is completely
clarified by this, and it is interesting that bile acids also derive not from normal
cholesterol, or rather dihydrocholesterol, but allocholesterol, or coprosterol.
   Does this close chemical relationship correspond to a biological connection?
That is, are the bile acids produced through the degradation of cholesterol
within the organism as well? Upon this question Thannhauser and his col-
leagues have recently been engaged, and have produced important results.
First they demonstrated on a dog with a gall-bladder fistula that the chole-
sterol ingested with the food is by no means sufficient as a source for the bile


                       CONSTITUTION OF STEROLS                                 III




                                                                                 (V)

acids. It is, moreover, never transformed into bile acid in the animal organism
even in the case of intravenous injection; on the contrary, isomeric allo-
cholesterol and coprosterol bring about an increase of the bile acids correspond-
ing to the quantity injected. This discovery is of very great significance; it
shows first of all that the animal organism is not capable of forming allo-
cholesterol from cholesterol. It does, however, make it probable that allo-
cholesterol plays an important part in the intermediate metabolism. Perhaps
things are so placed that the organism synthesizes, not the cholesterol, but the
allocholesterol, and that this represents the parent substance of coprosterol as
well as of the bile acids. Perhaps, the sterol secreted in the intestinalcanal, which


II2                            1928 A.WINDAUS




                                                                            (VI)


is hydrogenated to coprosterol, is not cholesterol at all, but the unstable allo-
cholesterol, and perhaps the formation of gall-stones in bile depends on the
fact that the easily soluble allocholesterol is prematurely transformed into the
difficultly soluble cholesterol.
    At any rate the attempt to prepare coprosterol with putrefactive bacteria
outside the intestinal canal should be repeated on allocholesterol.
    In place of the bile acids of the type of oxycholanic acid, there is found in
the bile of sharks a scymnol sulphuric acid, which is an acid ester of scymnol, a
polyvalent alcohol of the formula C27H46O5. The assumption suggests itself
that this scymnol is a multiply hydroxylated cholesterol, but that has not yet
been established; and likewise it is very probable that the basic component of
bufotoxin, bufotalan, is an oxylactone of the formula Ca24H 38O 3, closely re-
lated to the bile acids.
    What, then, is the biological role of cholesterol itself? Many attempts have
 been made to solve this question. A number of scientists place in the fore-
 ground the physical - especially the colloid-chemical - properties of choles-
 terol, and they point to the ability of cholesterol to emulsify fat, and to its
 importance for the permeability of the cell. The conditions prevailing here
 still badly need explanation.


                          CONSTITUTION OF STEROLS                                 113
   We are well informed about one biological property of cholesterol, but it
is uncertain whether this is of any significance for the organism. It concerns
the ability of cholesterol to detoxicate a series of haemolytic poisons, and to
increase the resistance of the red blood corpuscles.
   It was Ransom who first discovered that blood serum is in a position to
detoxicate haemolytic poisons like, for example, saponin, and that the cho-
lesterol present in the blood serum is the effective factor in this. Later, it was
found that cholesterol forms easily characterized and easily crystallized addi-
tive compounds with a number of saponins, especially with the digitalis-
saponins, and that these additive compounds are not toxic. The detoxication
thus depends on the formation of complex compounds. Some of the complex
compounds are so difficultly soluble that they make an exact evaluation of
 cholesterol possible; a separation of the cholesterol ester from cholesterol may
be carried out also with the help of the digitonin method.
    In recent years a fact which has come to excite the interest of chemists and
physiologists above all is the connection between the sterols and the anti-
rachitic vitamin. The antirachitic vitamin is present in comparatively large
quantities in the unsaponifiable portion of fish-liver oils, which is an effective
remedy for rickets. The German physician Huldschinsky was as far as I know
the first to discover that as well as fish-liver oils, irradiation with ultraviolet
light constitutes a remedy for rickets. Two American scientists, Hess and
 Steenbock, then discovered independently of each other that it is not even
necessary to irradiate the diseased organism, but that it is sufficient to irradiate
 the food with which it is to be nourished. These scientists, and at about the
 same time two English scientists, Rosenheim and Webster in London, next
 established that the substance which can be activated is situated in the un-
 saponifiable part of the nutriment, and is identical with the sterols.
    It was at first believed that all sterols - animal, vegetable, and fungal sterols -
 would be activated by ultraviolet light; but it then became apparent from
 physical measurements (Heilbron, Pohl) and from biological experiments
 (Rosenheim and Webster, Hess and Windaus), that cholesterol and sitosterol
 contain in traces an admixture which renders activation possible, and that
 cholesterol may comparatively easily be freed from this contamination. Proof
 was then successfully given that this admixture is identical with the ergosterol
 of fungi, or, to put it more circumspectly, manifests exactly the same absorp-
 tion spectrum .and exactly the same physiological behaviour as ergosterol.
    The biological effect of ergosterol is extremely surprising. A fortnight’s
 admixture of 1/20,000 mg daily of irradiated ergosterol to "rachitogenic"


114                             1928 A.WINDAUS

nutriment is sufficient to protect a rat from rickets. Irradiated ergosterol is
more than 100,000 times more effective than good fish-liver oil. All the scien-
tists who have tested this result are in a position to confirm its accuracy.
Opinions are still divided only about whether ergosterol is the only substance
which is transformed into antirachitic vitamin under irradiation, or whether
there are other precursors.
   Jendrassik and Kemenyffr in Budapest take the view that the capacity of
cholesterol for being activated should be attributed for by far the greater part
to an admixture of ergosterol, but that cholesterol itself is self-activating,
however small this effect may be. And Bills and his co-workers have likewise
reported that by painstaking refinement the susceptibility of cholesterol to
activation can indeed be depressed to a thirtieth part, but there would remain
constant. The view that cholesterol itself may be activated does not hold good.
It is certainly true that when cholesterol is refined with blood-charcoal or by
way of dibromide a certain susceptibility remains; but this depends on the




             Fig. 1. Absorption coefficient. Ergosterol 0.04% in ether.


                         CONSTITUTION OF STEROLS                                115
exceptional difficulty of separating-or rather, destroying-the last remnants
of ergosterol. By repeated purification of cholesterol via crystallized allo-
cholesterol, a cholesterol was successfully obtained the activity of which is
at least 300,000 times less than that of ergosterol; and Kon and Steenbock
have by repeated oxidation of cholesterol with potassium permanganate simi-
larly obtained a completely inactive cholesterol. Other substances which are
similar in structure to ergosterol - zymosterol, cholatrienic acid methyl ester, and
digitaligenin - cannot be activated. The assertion that digitaligenin might be
activated was propounded by Holtz and myself.
   Thus up till now the only precursor of vitamin D in existence is ergosterol.
   For the transformation of ergosterol into antirachitic vitamin, ultraviolet
light of a wavelength of between 253 and 302m is suitable; light of a longer
wavelength than 313m or shorter than 248m has no definite effect. This
result is easily understood if we consider the absorption spectrum of ergosterol
(Fig.I).
   Activation was still obtained at -183o. Some 700-1000 erg are necessary
to produce the quantity of vitamin D which has an immediate physiological
effect (about 1/50,000mg). If irradiation continues too long the vitamin D
is destroyed.
   Besides ultraviolet light, cathode rays are also suitable for the activation
of ergosterol. Knudson and Coolidge obtained the transformation when they
caused high-tension cathode rays of 100,000 to 350,000 volts to act upon the
sterol for 30 seconds. After 900 seconds, however, the vitamin had disinte-
grated. Whether a-rays are effective appears not yet to have been attempted,
but it is indeed very probable. With so-called dark electrical discharge or
with X-rays we have obtained no activation of ergosterol.
   We also attempted, with sensitizers, to make ergosterol sensitive to long-
wave light. In this certain light reactions were successfully produced ; but they
are principally of a nature different from that of the ultraviolet reaction, and
do not lead to vitamin D.
   If ergosterol and eosin are irradiated with visible light, a stoichiometrical
reaction takes place between the ergosterol and the eosin, by which eosin
hydrogenates and ergosterol is dehydrated under the formation of a pinacol,
C54H82O2. If all the eosin is hydrogenated the reaction is brought to a stand-
still. If ergosterol and eosin are treated with visible light in the presence of
oxygen, the eosin acts as a catalyst and straight away a crystallized ergosterol-
peroxide arises. But both products are ineffective against rickets; thus, no
vitamin formation has been observed using visible light.


116                             1928 A.WINDAUS

   Equally small has been our success so far in obtaining the transformation
of ergosterol into vitamin D by chemical means. It is, however, not apparent
why this method should not still be successful. On the contrary, a whole series
of scientists believe that vitamin D can be produced in the vital functions even
without ultraviolet light. Thus Volt, indicated that grass seedlings cultivated
in darkness, derived from vitamin-free seeds of Lolium perenne, contained a
small quantity of antirachitic protective material. These experiments need re-
examination. Opinions are also divided over whether the abundance ofvitamin
D in cod-liver oil originates in the nutriment of the cod, which is rich in vita-
mins, or whether the vitamin is formed synthetically within the organism.
   What, then, takes place when ergosterol is irradiated? Of course there is a
chemical alteration along with the physiological activation; this announces
its presence in that, when irradiated, ergosterol, which, like all sterols, yields
with digitonin an insoluble additive compound, gradually loses its precipita-
bility through digitonin. The course of the chemical transformation is even
easier to follow in the alteration of optical rotation. In the usual solvents
ergosterol manifests a strong laevorotation which under irradiation slowly
diminishes and finally is transformed into a weak dextrorotation As an ex-
ample the curve for ligroin may be given (Fig. 2).




Fig. 2. Irradiation of ergosterol in normal benzine (Kahlbaum) 0.35% solution. Period
                                 of irradiation in hours.


CONSTITUTION    OF   STEROLS   117




          Fig. 3.




          Fig. 4.


118                           1928

   At       same time as the alteration of the optical rotation, an alteration of
the ultraviolet absorption spectrum and a remarkable increase in solubility
ensue. In order to obtain from irradiation            which may be easily repro-
duced, it is necessary not only to exclude oxygen completely, which is very
difficult, but also to irradiate all parts of the solution as far as possible uni-
formly. First of all we attempted the activation by putting a quartz-spiral
around the mercury lamp and sending through it a 0.25            alcoholic solution
of ergosterol under nitrogen               (Figs. and
   Later we heated the etherized solution of ergosterol to boiling point in a
double-walled quartz vessel, and led through it pure nitrogen, while within
the quartz vessel a magnesium spark gap was generated (Fig.               We then
worked up the irradiation products so obtained in an air-sealed container,
freed them of unprocessed ergosterol, and investigated their rotation,




                                      Fig.


                        CONSTITUTION OF STEROLS                              II9
sorption spectrum, physiological effect, and analytical composition. While the
physiological effect was entirely good, we made the surprising observation
that our irradiation products always contained between 2% and 4%. too little
carbon; moreover, the numerous nitrogen-containing esters which we have
examined did indeed yield a correct atomic relation between C and N, but
always in too low percentages. The deficit can only be based on an absorption
of oxygen by the activated ergosterol. We therefore proceeded to refine our
nitrogen with even greater care, and for that purpose we made use of Kauts-
ky’s apparatus. Here we had success in so far as the deficit in carbon decreased
to between 0.5% and 1.5%, depending on the period ofirradiation. But even
so, we never obtained entirely correct analytical composition. We first ob-
tained incontestable values when we irradiated solutions of ergosterol in high-
ly evacuated, sealed quartz vessels, with constant agitation. Under these con-
ditions irradiation products arise which not only give an analytical composi-
tion exactly of the formula Ca27H42O, but also yield a number of crystallized
derivatives of correct analytical composition.
   There can, then, remain no doubt that ergosterol does not change its ana-
lytical composition under irradiation. The only remaining possibility is that
ultraviolet light has either a polymerizing or an isomerizing effect upon er-
gosterol. In order to test experimentally the possibility of a polymerization, we
undertook to ascertain themolecular weight ofirradiated ergosterol, and found
values which fall within the margin of error for the simple molecular weight.
Thus a demonstrable polymerization does not take place during irradiation.
   There are a number of possibilities for the process of isomerization. First,
it might be assumed that a displacement of the secondary alcohol group to a
double-bond took place, by which the unsaturated alcohol group(VII) would
be transformed into a saturated ketone group (VIII).




   In this process the hydroxyl group would thus disappear. We therefore
tested whether the hydroxyl content of the irradiation product of ergosterol
is the same as of ergosterol itself, and for this we made use of Zerewitinoff’s
method. Unirradiated ergosterol gave in a series of determinations a mean
value of 1.02 active hydrogen atoms, irradiated ergosterol gave a mean value
of I. II active hydrogen atoms per molecule. The determinations thus demon-


120                            1928 A.WINDAUS

strate that the hydroxyl group does not disappear during irradiation, and that
therefore the first of the possibilities under discussion for isomerization col-
lapses. Moreover, we have prepared the isomer in question here, ergostadie-
none, and established that it is ineffective antirachitically.
   As a second possibility for an isomerization, it must be taken into consider-
ation that during irradiation a double bond rearranges itself as a ring bond.
Stobbe discovered a similar reaction to light (see (IX)) in the phenylfulgids,
which are transformed into dihydro-naphthalene derivatives.




In the photoisomerization of carvone (X) even two double bonds would
disappear (XI).
  In order to test whether the number of double bonds alters during the ultra-
violet irradiation of ergosterol, we employed titration with perbenzoic acid
and quantitative catalytic hydrogenation. The measurements gave the result
that, like the hydroxyl group, the number of double bonds remains unaltered
with irradiation, and even with excessive irradiation.




The isomerization therefore is based on a displacement of double bonds or
a steric rearrangement here or at another position in the molecule.


                        CONSTITUTION OF STEROLS                          121
   The nature of these displacements or rearrangements has not yet been de-
termined; for as yet too little is known about the more detailed structure of
ergosterol. It is, however, important that also the saturated perhydration
products of ergosterol, and of its irradiation product, which both have the
formula C27H 48O, are different.
