274

FEMTOCHEMISTRY
ATOMIC-SCALE  DYNAMICS  OF THE CHEMICAL BOND
USING ULTRAFAST LASERS

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1999 by
MED  H.    ZEWAIL

California Institute of Technology,  Pasadena, USA.



Over many millennia, humankind  has thought to explore phenomena on an ever shorter time scale. In 
this race against time, femtosecond  resolution  (1 fs
= l0’’5  second)  is the  ultimate achievement for studies of the fundamental  dy- namics of the 
chemical bond. Observation  of the  very act that brings about che- mistry — the  making  and  
breaking of  bonds on  their  actual  time and  length scales  — is  the  wellspring  of  the  
field  of Femtochemistry, which  is  the  study  of molecular  motions in  the  hitherto unobserved 
 ephemeral  /ronstitoa  states of physical, chemical and  biological changes. For molecular 
dynamics, achieving this atomic-scale  resolution  using ultrafast lasts as strobes is a triumph, 
just as x-ray and  electron  diffraction,  and, more  recently, STM and  NMR,  provided that  
resolution  for  static  molecular  structures.  On  the  femtosecond   time scale,  matter  wave  
packets  (particle-type)  can  be  created  and  their  coherent evolution  as a sttigk-mokmfr  
trajectory can  be observed. The  field  began  with simple systems of a few atoms and  has reached 
the realm of the very complex in isolated, mesoscopic and  condensed  phases, and  in biological 
systems such as proteins  and  DNA.  It  also  offers  new  possibilities  for  the  control  of  
reac- tivity  and   for  structural  femtochemistry  and  femtobiology.  This  anthology gives an 
overview of the  development of the field from a personal perspective, encompassing our  research 
at Caltech and focusing on  the evolution of tech- niques, concepts, and  new discoveries.

Ahmed  H.  Wroi/
275

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract
I.     Prologue
II.    Dynamics and Arrow of Time
(l)    Origins — From Kinetics to Dynamics The  Arrhenius Seminal Contribution
The London, Eyring and  Polanyi Contributions Transition State and  Definition
Transition State and  Spectroscopy
(2)  Arrow of Time
III.  Femtochemistry: Development of the  Field
(l)   The  Early Years of Coherence New Techniques for Molecules
Optical Analogue of NMR: Controlling  the Phase
(2)  The  Marriage with Molecular Beams
The  Anthracene  Discovery: A Paradigm Shift The  Successful 036 Laboratory
Changing A Dogma: Development  of RCS
(3)  The Transition  to the Sub-Picosecond Regime
A New Beam Machine: Pump-Probe Mass Spectrometry The First ICN Experiment: Sub-picosecond 
Resolution
(4)  The  Femtosecond  Dream
A Piece of Good Fortune
The Classic Femtosecond  ICN Discovery
The  NaI Discovery: A Paradigm for the Field The  Saddle-Point Transition State
The  Uncertainty Principle Paradox
Bimolecular,  Bond Making & Breaking: Bernstein's Passion Ultrafast Electron  Diffraction  (UED)
Clusters, Dense Fluids & Liquids, and  New Femtolands Theoretical Femtochemistry
Experimental  Femtochemistry
(5)   Femtocopia — Examples from Caltech Elementary Reactions & Transition States Organic Chemistry
Electron  & Proton Transfer Inorganic & Atmospheric Chemistry
The  Mesoscopic  Phase: Clusters & Nanostructures
The Condensed  Phase: Dense Fluids, Liquids & Polymers

276                                               Chemistry  1999

(6)   Opportunities for the Future
Transient Structures from Ultrafast Electron  Diffraction Reaction Control
Biological Dynamics
IV.   Impact and Concepts — A Retrospective
Time Resolution  — Reaching the Transition-State Limit Atomic-Scale  Resolution
Generality of the Approach Some Concepts
(l)  Resonance  — Non-equilibrium Dynamics
(2)  Coherence — Single-molecule-type Dynamics
(3) Transition Structures — Landscape Dynamics
(4)  Reduced Space — Directed  Dynamics
V.    Epilogue Acknowledgments References
Bibliography:
The  Caltech Research Some General References

I. PROLOGUE
In  the history of human  civilization,  the measurement  of time and  recording the order and 
duration of events in the natural world are  among the earliest endeavors that might be classified 
as science. The  development of calendars, which  permitted  the tracking of yearly flooding of  
the  Nile valley in ancient Egypt and  of the  seasons for planting and harvesting in Mesopotamia, 
can be traced  to the dawn of written  language.  Ever since, time has been an impor- tant  concept 
 [1] and  is  now  recognized  as one  of  the  two fundamental  di- mensions  in  science.  The  
concept  of  time  encapsulates  an  awareness  of  its duration and of the  passage from  past to 
present to future and  surely must have existed from  the very beginning with  humans searching for 
 the meaning of birth, life and  death and, in some cultures, rebirth or recurrence.
My ancestors contributed  to the beginning of the  science of time, develop- ing what Neugebauer  
[1] has described as “the only intelligent calendar which inier existed  in future history”. The   
“Nile Calendar” was an essential part of life as it defined  the  state  of  yearly  flooding  with 
 three  seasons,  the   foundation  or Flooding, Planting, and  Harvesting, each four months long. 
A civil year lasting 365 days was ascertained  by about 3000 BC or  before,  based  on  the average 
time between  arrivals of  the flood at Heliopolis, just north of Cairo; nilome- ters were used in 
more recent times, and some are still in existence  today. By the  time of the First Dynasty of 
United Egypt under Menes in ca. 3100 BC, the scientists of the  land introduced  the concept of the 
“Astronomical  Calendar” by  observing  the  event  of  the  helical  rising  of  the  brilliant  
star  Sothis  (or

Ahmed  H.   Zeuiail                                                   277

Sirius). Inscribed on the Ivory Tablet, dating from the First Dynasty and now at the University 
Museum in Philadelphia, were the words,  “Sothis Bringer of the Year and of the Inundation” [1,  
Winlockl  On the Palermo Stone, the an- vats of the kings and their time-line of  each year's chief 
events were document- ed from  pre-dynastic  times  to the middle  of  the  Fifth  Dynasty  [1,  
Breasted]. Thus,  as early as  3100  BC,  they recognized  a definite  natural  phenomenon for 
accurate  timing  of  the  coming  flood  and  recounted  the  observed  reap- pearance of the star 
as the New Year Day — real-time  observation  of daily and yearly events with  the zero-of-time  
being well defined!'
In  about  1500  BC,  another  major  contribution  to  this science  was  made, the  development  
of  Sun-Clocks,  or  Sundials,  using  moving  shadows  [Fig.  1]. Now in Berlin, the sun-clock 
bearing the name of Thutmose III  (or Thothmes after the Egyptian  God Thoth  of wisdom  and 
enlightenment) , who  ruled at Thebes  from   1447—1501   BC,  shows  the  graduation   of  hours  
for  daytime measurements.  This clock with uneven  periods for hours was man-made and 
transportable. For  night  time,  the water-clock  was  invented,  and  the  device provided even 
periods for timing. With these developments,  the resolution  of time  into  periods  of  yeah  
month,  day  and  hour became  known  and  has  now been  used  for more  than  three  millennia.  
The durations  of  minutes  and se- conds followed,  using the Hellenistic sexagesimal  system, and 
this division, ac- cording  to Neugebauer,  “is  the result  of a Hellenistic  modification  of  an 
Egyptian practice combined with Ba@lontan numerical procedures. ”About  1300 AD, the me- chanical 
clock [1, Whitrow] was advanced in Europe, ushering in a revolution in precision and 
miniaturization; Galileo began studies of pendulum motions and their clocking,  using his 
heartbeats  (seconds) , in  1582 AD. Our present time standard  is the cesium  atomic clock', which 
 provides precision  of about 1:10’3, i.e., the clock loses or gains one second every 1.6 million 
years. For this work, Norman  Ramsey shared the 1989 Nobel Prize in Physics.
Until  1800 AD,  the ability  to  record  the  timing  of individual  steps  in  any
process was essentially limited  to time  scales amenable  to direct sensory per- ception — for 
example,  the eye’s ability to see the movement of a clock or the

'  Recognizing  the incommensurability of  the lunar  month  and  the solar year,  they abandoned 
the lunar  month  altogether  and used a 30-day month. Thus the year is made of 12 months, 30 days 
each, with 5 feast days at the end of the year. The “Civil Calendar” was therefore 365 days per 
year and differs from the astronomical calendar of Sothis by approximately a 1/4  day every year. 
The two calendars must coincide at intervals of 365 x  4=l460 years, and  historians, based on re- 
corded  dates of the reappearance of Sothis in dynastic periods, give the four dates for the coin- 
cidence of both calendars: 139 AD, 1317 BC, 2773 BC, and 4233 BC (+139-3 x 1460 = 4241 BC). Even  
though  the  Egyptians  discovered  the  astronomical  calendar,  365-1/4  days,  they decided, 
presumably  for  “bookkeeping”,  to  use  the  civil  calendar  of  365 without  leap years.  They  
also divided the day into two periods of 12 hours each for day and night time. The remarkable 
calen- dar of years, months, days, and hours was adapted  throughout history and formed  the  basis 
for the 3fi5.25-day Julian  (46 BC, Alexandria  school)  and 365.P4P2-day  Gregorian  {from 1582 
AD, Pope Gregory XIII)  calendars. In the words of the notable EgyptologistJ. H. Breasted [1], “It 
has thus  been  in use uninterruptedly over six  thousand  years. ” Many  historians  regard  the  
date  around 4241  BC as  the  beginning  of  histor   itself  as it defines  the  period  of 
written  records;  anything earlier is prehistory.
'  Since 1967 one second  has been  defined as the  time during which  the cesium  atom  makes ex- 
acdy 9, 192,631,770 oscillations.

278                                             Chemistry 1999


















Figure 1. Timeline of some events in the history of measurements of' time, from yearly calendars to 
the femtosecond  regime  (see text).



ear's ability to recognize a tone. Anything  more fleeting than  the blink of an eye  (-0.1 second) 
 or the response of the  ear  (-0.1 millisecond)  was simply be- yond  the  realm of inquiry. In  
the  nineteenth  century,  the  technology  was  to change  drastically,  resolving  time intervals 
into  the sub-second  domain. The famous motion pictures by Eadweard Muybridge  (1878)  of a 
galloping horse, by  Etienne-Jules   Marey  (1894)   of  a  righting  cat,  and  by  Harold  
Edgerton
(mid-1900’s)  of  a  bullet  passing  through  an apple  and  other objects  are  ex-
amples of  these developments, with millisecond  to microsecond  time resolu- tion,  using snapshot 
 photography,  chronophotography and stroboscopy,  re- spectively [2]. By the  1980’s,  this 
resolution  became  ten orders of magnitude better  [see Section 112] , reaching the femtosecond 
scale’, the  scale for  atoms and  molecules in motion.
The  actual  atomic motions involved  in  chemical  reactions had  never  been observed in real 
timc dcspite the rich history of chemistry over two millennia [3), as khem became khemia,  then 
alchemy, and  eventually chemistry  [3,4] — see    the    Stockholm  Papyrus in Fig. 2. Chemical  
bonds break, form, or geome- trically  change  with  awesome  rapidity.  Whether  in  isolation  or 
 in  any  other phase,  this  ultrafast  transformation  is  a  dynamic  process  involving  the  
me- chanical motion  of electrons and atomic nuclei. The speed of atomic motion


" The  prefix milli comes from Latin  (and  French),  micro  and nano from  Greek, and pico from 
Spanish. Fenn to is Scandinavian,  the root of the word for “fifteen”;  nuclear physicists  call 
fernto- meter, the unit for t}ie dimensions of atorrilc nuclei, fermi. Atto is also Scandinavian.

Ahmed  H.  Natl
































Figure 2. A page of the Stockholm papyrus (300 AD)  describing the recipe for “making”  (actual- ly 
imitating)  emerald. Note that change has been at the heart of chemistry from its millennia-old 
definition  KM,  to Chémia  and Alchemy,  and  to Chemistry.  [Ref. B26,  and  references  therein] 
Equilibrium,  kinetics and dynamics are the foundation for the describtion of chemical changes.



is     1 km/second  and, hence,  to record atomic-scale  dynamics  over a distan- ce of an 
ângstrom,  the average time required is     100 fs. The very act of such atomic motions as 
reactions unfold and pass through their transition  states is the focus of the field of 
femtochemistry. With fs time resolution we can  “free- ze” structures far from equilibrium  and 
prior to their vibrational and rotatio- nal motions, or reactivity. The pertinent questions about 
the dynamics of  the chemical  bond are  the  following:  How does  the  energy  put  into  a 
reactant molecule  redistribute  among the different degrees of freedom,  and how fast does this 
happen?; What are the speeds of the chemical  changes connecting individual quantum  states in the 
reactants and products?; What are the detai-

280                                             Chemistry 1999



















Figure  3. Time scales.  The relevance  to physical,  chemica),  and  biological  changes.  The fu: 
 da- mental  limit  of the  vibrational  motion  defines  the  regime  for  femtochemistry.  
Examples  are given  for each change and scale. [Ref. B4, B10)



led nuclear motions  that chart the reaction  through  its transition  states,  and how rapid are 
these motions? As pointed out by J      Baggott,  “the entire histor y
of chemical reaction dynamics  and kinetics has been about providing some approxima-
te answers  to these three questions [4].”
In  femtochemistry, studies  of physical,  chemical or biological changes  are at the fundamental  
time scale of molecular vibrations: the actual nuclear mo- tions  [Fig.  3].  In  this  sense,  
femtoscience  represents  the  end  of  the  race against time, or, as the report of Ref. [5]  puts 
it,  “... reaching the end o]’the road”. For this same  reason,  Martens stated,  “all chemistry  
is femtochemistry [5]”.  The ephemeral  transition  states,  denoted  in  the past by a bracket  
[TS]   for  their elusIveness,  can now be clocked as a molecular species TS  . Moreover, on this 
time scale,  the time-dependent description  of a coherent,  single-molecule tra- jectory 
represents  the classical  nuclear “motion picture” of the reaction  as its wave packet proceeds 
from  the initial state,  through  transition  states, and on to final  products — the language  of 
 the actual  dynamics!  The  fs time  scale  is unique for the creation  of such coherent matter 
waves on the atomic scale of length,  a basic  problem  rooted  in  the  development  of  quantum  
mechanics and  the  duality  of  matter.  Figure  (4)  highlights  some  steps  made  in  the  de- 
scription of the duality of light-matter and time scales, and the Appendix dix cusses the 
importance of coherence for localization.

Ahmed  H.  Zeiuail                                               281


Matter Waves
Particle-type Control & Dynamics

de Broglie (1924)
Einstein's light wave/particle E = h v       R= e p
Similarly, matter particle/wave Sehrñdinger (1926)
The Wave Equation — Stationary waves HW = E'F
Schrodinger (1926)
Micro- to Macro-mechanics Quantum to Newton Mechanics 'F to wave group
Femtochemistry & Quantum Limit (h): Particle-type
\#  Bpg„  (initial localization) = h/p uncertainty in time measurement
Ax Ap *  h/(2z)      At AE *  h/(2s) for force free

At -  10 fs    Ax -  0. I A
At -  10 ps    Ax -  100 &

Figure  4.  Matter  waves  and   particle-type  limit  of  dynamics.  The  atomic-scale  de  
Broglie  wave- length in the coherent preparation  of a quantum system and  in the uncertainty of 
probe measu- rements are both reached on  the fs time scalc. Scc also the Appendix and its Figure.






















Figure 5. A femtochemistry apparatus  typical of early Femtolands.  (A, above)  The  laser system. 
(top)  the  first CPM oscillator  used in Femtoland I;  (bottom)  the continuum  generation  to the 
right and  the experimenJal  layout for clocking  to the  left.  (B,  next page)  The  molecular  
beam apparatus of Femtoland  III, together with a view of the  beam/laser arrangement.  [Ref. BI,  
B16, B28, 49]

282
























This powerful  concept  of  coherence  lies at  the  core  of femtochemistry and was a key advance 
in observing  the dynamics at atomic resolution.  The realiz- ation of its importance and its 
detection  by selectivity in both preparation  and probing  were  essential  in  all studies,  
initially of  states  and  orientations,  and culminating  in atomic motions in reactions. With 
these concepts in mind, the
marriage of ultrafast lasers with molecular beams [Fig. 5A, B]  r••••d to be es- sential  for  the  
initial  development.  Laser-induced  fluorescence  was  the  first
probe  used,  but later we  invoked  mass spectrometry  and  non-linear  optical techniques. Now 
numerous methods of probing are known  [Fig. 6) and used in laboratories around  the world;  
Coulomb  explosion  is the most recent po- werful probe developed by Will Castleman  [5]  for 
arresting reactive interme- diates, as mentioned  in Section  III.
Applications of femtochemistry have spanned the different types of  chemi- cal bonds -  covalent,  
ionic, dative  and metallic,  and  the weaker ones,  hydro- gen and van der Waals bonds. The 
studies have continued  to address the vary- ing  complexity  of  molecular  systems,  from  
diatomics  to  rrotein.s and  DNA.

Ah      d  H.   Leif
283


-    Laser-induced Fluorescence



Infrared Pumping


Stimulated Emission Pumping


Nonlinear Spectroscopies



Multiple Pulses

Femtochemistry

Frequency             Mass    p

TIME

Velocity       Orientntio.

Structure                    q


Diffraction
Laser Multiphoton Ionization


Mass Spectrometry
Time, Velocity  &  Angular Resolutions


Transient Absorption


Photoelectron Spectroscopy
(Conv., ZEKE, Coincidence)


Coulomb Explosion

Figure  6. Techniques for probing in femtochemistry. Both excited and ground states have been 
probed by these methods. The correlations of time with frequency, mass, velocity and orientation 
were essential in  the studies of complex systems. Diffraction  represents  the new effort for 
prob- ing structures  (see text and Fig. 29).



Studies have also been made in all phases of matter: gases and molecular be- ams;  mesoscopic  
phases  of  clusters,  nanostructures, particles  and droplets; condensed phases of dense fluids, 
liquids, solids, surfaces and interfaces; and in sibling fields of femtoscience such as 
femtobiology [Fig. 7].
Twenty-four  centuries  ago,  the  Greek  philosopher  Democritus  and  his teacher Leucippus gave 
birth to a new way of  thinking about matter's invisible and elementary entity, the atom. Richard 
Feynman once asked, if you had on- ly one sentence  to describe  the most important scientific 
knowledge  we pos sess,  what  would  that  sentence  be?  He  said,   ’everything  is  made  of  
atoms. Democritus’  atomism,  which was rejected by Aristotle,  was born  on a purely philosophical 
 basis, surely without anticipating  some of the twentieth  centu- ry's most triumphant scientific 
discoveries. Atoms can now be seen, observed in  motion, and manipulated  [6]. These  discoveries  
have  brought  the micro- scopic  world  and  its  language  into  a  new  age,  and  they  cover  
domains  of length, time and number. The tenth (spatial)  resolution, down  to the scale of atomic  
distance  (ângstrom),  and  the  time  resolution,  down  to  the  scale  of atomic  motion  
(femtosecond), have  been  achieved.  The trapping and spec- troscopy of a single  ion  (electron)  
and  the  trapping  and cooling  of neutral atoms have also been achieved. All of these 
achievements have been recogniz- ed by the awarding of  the Nobel Prize to STM (1986), to 
single-electron and
-ion trapping and spectroscopy  (1989) , to laser trapping and cooling  (1997), and to laser 
femtochemistry (1999).

284                                            Gbemistry 1999













Femtochemistry







Femtobiology

Elementary Phenomena: Transition Stetes, Energy Redlstributions (IVR) & Rates (k(E)) Chemical Bond: 
Covalent, Ionic, Dative, Metallic, Hydmgen & *an der Waals  Molecular Slze.  Two Atoms to DNA & 
Pmteins
Moletulnr 8tntc. Otound & Encltcd, Neuttsl & lori (negah*e or poiiti*e)

Figure 7. Femtochemistry and the scope of applications.



II. DYNAMICS AND ARROW OF TIME
(1)  Origins -  From kinetics to Dynamics
The Atrhenius Seminal Contribution
At the turn of the 20th century, the study of reactivity was dominated  by the question’:   How  do 
 reocttom  proceed   and   what  are  their  #inettc  rates?  Svante Arrhenius ['I] gave the 
seminal description of the change in rates of chemical


4  The  main  focus  of prior  smdies was  on  the  thermodynamics and equilibrium  
characteristics. Interestingly, chemical  equilibrium  was akeady established  a century  before  
(1798)  by Claude Berthollet,  during  a visit  to  the Natron  Lakes in  Napoleonic  times,  
through  his studies  of the reaction NICO   + CaCl        2NaCl + CaCO   [S. W. Weller,  Bull. 
Hist.  Chem. 24, 61  (1999)].

285

reactions  with  temperature  and formulated  in  1889  the  familiar  expression for the rate 
constant,
k = A exp (—E  /RT)                                             (1)
which, as Arrhenius acknowledged,  had its roots in van't Hoffs (1884) equa- tions [7]. For any two 
reactants,  the  rate constant  (k)  depends on  tempera-
ture (T)  according to an energy of activation  (Ea’' Which is different from the thermodynamic  
net energy change between  reactants and products, and the
dependence  is exponential  in  form.  (R is the  universal  gas  constant).  If we think of the 
reaction as a finite probability of reactant A colliding with B, then the rate is simply the 
collision frequency times the fraction of successful colli-
sions with an energy equal  to or more than Ea‘ Besides  the value of equation
(1)  through  the well-known  plots of “ln k es. l/T” to obtain  the energy of ac-
tivation  Ea'     rhenius  introduced  a “hypothetical  body”,  now known  as  the “activated  
complex”,  a  central  concept  in  the  theory  of reaction  rates:  the
reaction, because of collisions or other means, proceeds only if the energy is sufficient  to 
exceed  a barrier  whose  energy  is defined  by the  nature  of the complex.  Since then, various 
experimental data for different temperatures T
were treated with equation  (1), yielding Ea  and the pre-exponential factor A.
A few years after Arrhenius’ contribution, Bodenstein  (1894) ['I] published
a landmark  paper on  the hydrogen/iodine system,  which  has played  an  im- portant role in the 
development of gas-phase  chemical kinetics, with  the aim of  understanding   elementary  reaction 
 mechanisms.  In  the  twenties,  Linde- mann  (1922), Hinshelwood  (1926), Tolman  (1920), and 
others [7&8] devel- oped, for unimolecular gas-phase reactions, elementary mechanisms with dif- 
ferent steps describing  activation,  energy redistribution, and chemical  rates. By  1928,  the  
Rice-Ramsperger-Kasse1  (RRK)   theory  was  formulated,   and Marcus, starting in 1952, blended 
RRK and transition  state theory in a direc- tion which brought into focus the nature of the 
initial and transition-state vi- brations in what is now known as the RRKM theory [8].
The rate constant,  k(T), does not provide a detailed  molecular picture of the reaction. This is 
because k(T), which was obtained from an analogy with van't Hoffs description  of the change with  
T of the equilibrium  constant  K (thermodynamics), is an average of the microscopic, reagent-state 
 to product- state  rate coefficients  over all possible  encounters.  These  might include  dif- 
ferent  relative   velocities,   mutual   orientations,   vibrational   and  rotational phases, and 
impact parameters.  A new way was needed to describe,  by some quantitative measure, the process of 
the chemical reaction itself: How reagent molecules approach,  collide,  exchange  energy,  
sometimes  break  bonds and make  new ones, and finally separate  into products.  Such a 
description  is the goal of molecular reaction dynamics [9].

The London, Eyring and Polanyi Contributions
For some  time, theory was ahead of experiment  in studies of  microscopic  mo- lecular reaction 
dynamics.  The effort started shortly after the publication  of the Heitler-London 
quantum-mechanical treatment  (1927)  of the hydrogen

286                                               Chemistry 1999

molecule [10], a breakthrough in thinking not only about the stable structure of the chemical bond, 
but also about how two atoms can interact at different separations.  One year later  (1928), for 
Sommerfeld's  Festschrift  (60th  birth- day),  London  [10]  presented  an  approximate  
expression  for  the  potential energy of triatomic systems, e.g., H₃  in terms of the coulombic 
and exchange energies of the  “diatomic” pairs. In  1931  Henry Eyring  and Michael  Polanyi [10], 
using  the London  equation,  provided a semiempirical  calculation  of a potential energy surface 
(PES) of the H + H   reaction describing  the journey of nuclei  from  the reactant state  of the 
system  to the product state,  passing through  the  crucial  transition  state  of  activated  
complexes.  The  birth  of “reaction  dynamics”  resulted  from  this  pioneering  effort  and,  
for  the  first time, one could think of the PES and the  trajectories  of dynamics on  it — in 
those days  often, expressed to atomic units of time! But no one could have dreamed in  the  1930’s 
 of observing  the  transient  molecular  structures  of a chemical reaction, since the time scale 
for those far from equilibrium activated complexes in the transition  state was estimated to be 
less than a picosecond  (ps).
The time scale was rooted in the theory developed for the description of re- action  rates.  
Building  on  Arrhenius’  work  and  the  work  of  Polanyi  and Wigner  (1928)  [11], in  1935, 
Eyring,  and independently  Evans and Polanyi, formulated   transition-state   theory,   which   
gave   an   explicit   expression   for Arrhenius’ pre-exponential factor [11]:

k --                                  exp(—@ /kT)                    (2)

where k is Boltzmann's constant, h is Planck's constant and @ is the partition function.  The  key 
idea here is to assume  the  equilibration  of the  population between  reactants and the 
transition  state: A + B      [TS]+      products. Thus, the rate constant can be related to the 
equilibrium  constant for formation of the   transition   state,   K ,  and   hence   AG  ,  AH    
and  AS  ;   physically,   AG* (AH —TAS+)  in  the exponent gives  the barrier  energy  (through  
fiH  )  along the  reaction  coordinate,  and  the  pre-exponential  entropic  term  which  re- 
flects the change  in vibrational  modes perpendicular  to the reaction  coordi-
nate. By comparing  (2)  with Arrhenius’  equation  (1), A can be identified{  Ea' the activation  
energy, and Eg,  the barrier energy, with zero-point energy cor-
rections, are related [8, Laidler] . Kramers’  (1940) classic work [11] modified the 
pre-exponential factor to include friction from the surrounding medium, with  transition  state  
theory giving  an  upper  limit,  and Casey  Hynes,  in  the 1980’s, provided a dynamical  theory 
of friction with emphasis on  time scales in  the transition-state region  and for solvent 
interaction  [11]. In  the  1950’s, Marcus [11] obtained a transition-state type expression  for 
reactions of elec- tron transfer in solutions with  the Gibbs free energy of activation  expressing 
the dependence  on solvent reorganization energies.  This work was awarded the 1992 Nobel Prize.
According  to transition  state  theory,  the fastest reaction  is given  by kT/h, which is 
basically the “frequency” for the passage  through  the transition  state

Ahmed  H.  fail                                             28Y

[Equation 2]. At room temperature  this value is 6 x  101° second ',  correspond- ing  to     170 
fs;  the  time  scale  of molecular  vibrations  is typically  10—100  fs. This  estimate  is  
consistent  with  knowledge  of the  speeds  of nuclei  and  the distance change involved in the 
reaction. In 1936 the first classical  trajectory from   Hirschfelder-Eyring-Topley  molecular   
dynamics   simulations   of  the H+H2  reaction  showed  the  fs  steps  needed  to  follow  the  
reaction  profile, albeit on  the wrong  PES. Later,  Karplus,  Bunker and others showed  a range 
for  the  time  scales,  ps  to  fs,  depending  on  the  reaction  and  using  more realistic 
PES's [see 9 and 26].

Transition State and Definition
In general, for an elementary reaction  of the type,
A + BC      [ABC]•     AB + C                                      (3)
the whole journey from reagents to products involves changes in internuclear separation  totaling   
 10A. If the atoms moved at 10‘—105 cm/sec then  the en- tire  l0A trip would take 10 1*—l0‘l I  
sec. If the  ‘transition  state’,  [ABC]  , is de- fined  to encompass  all  configurations  of  
ABC  significantly  perturbed  from the po- Central-energf  of the reagents  A + BC  or the 
products  AB  +  C,  then  this period  of 1—10  ps is  the  time  available  for its observation.  
To  achieve  a resolution  of
-  0.1 A, the probe time window must be 10-100 fs.
The above definition of the transition state follows the general description given byJ   hn Polanyi 
and the author [12], namely the full family of configur- ations through  which  the  reacting  
particles evolve  en route from  reagents  to products. This description  may seem broad to those 
accustomed to seeing the TS  symbol,      displayed  at  the  crest  of  the  energy  barrier  to  
a  reaction.  As
stated in Ref. 12, even if one restricts one's interest to the over-all rates of che- mical  
reactions,  one  requires  a  knowledge  of  the  family  of  intermediates sampled by reagent 
collisions of different collision  energy, angle and  impact parameters.  The  variational   theory 
 of  reaction  rates  further  extends  the range of TS of interest, quantum considerations extend 
the range yet further, and  the concern with rates to yield products in specified quantum states 
and angles extends the requirements most of all. A definition  of the  TS that em- braces  the  
entire  process  of  bond-breaking  and  bond-making  is  therefore likely  to  prove  the  most 
enduring.  This is specially  important  as we address the energy landscape of the  reaction, as 
discussed in Section IV.
The   cardinal  choice  of  the  transition  state at  the saddle  point, of  course, has its 
origin in chemical kinetics — calculation  of rates — but it should  be re- membered  that this is 
a mathematical ‘single-point’ with the division made to define the speed of a reaction [8]. Even in 
thermal reactions, there is enough of an energy distribution  to ensure many types of  
trajectories.  Furthermore, transition state theory is not  a quantum theory, but a classical one, 
because of the assertion of a deterministic point. Quantum uncertainty demands some de- 
localization  [8, Hase] and, as mentioned above,  the theory invokes the equi- libration  of  
reactants and  transition  state  populations,  using statistical  ther- modynamics.  In  fact,  
the  term  transition  state  is used  ambiguously  to  refer

288                                               Clunnisty  1999

both to the quasi-equilibrium state of the reaction and to the molecular  struc- ture of the saddle 
point. As discussed in Ref. 13 [Williams, Doering, Baldwin], the molecular species at the saddle 
point perhaps could be referred to as the transition structure; the activated  complex is even more 
descriptive.
The  location  at  the  saddle  point  provides  the  highest  energy  that  must be reached, 
defining the exponential probability factor; the dynamics  (forces and  time  scales)  are  
governed  by  the  nature  of  the  TS  region.  Provided that  the  energy landscape  of the  
reaction  is  controlled  by a narrow  region, the structure of the transition  state becomes 
important in structure-reactivity correlations;  rates  rs. Gibbs energy between  the TS and the 
ground state. (It is also  useful  in  designing  TS analogs  as enzyme  inhibitors  and TS comple- 
ments as catalysts [13]). The position of the TS and its energy relative  to that of reactants  and 
products along  the reaction  path  becomes  relevant.  In  the mid  1930’s,  the  
Bell-Evans-Polanyi  principle  gave  a  predictive  correlation between   changes   in   barrier   
heights   and   the   enthalpies   of   reactions, especially  for a series of related  reactions;  
the TS for an  exoergic  or an  en- doergic reaction  is very different.  In  1955, this led to 
Hammond's  postulate which characterizes a reactant-like TS (so called “early” TS) for exoergic 
reac- tions, product-like TS (so called “late” TS) for endoergic reactions, and “cen- tral”  TS  
for  energy  neutral  reactions  [8,  Shark].  John  Polanyi,  the  son  of Michael,  formulated 
some  concepts regarding  energy disposal  in relation  to the position of the TS on the PES [14], 
using molecular dynamics simulations and experimental studies of chemiluminescence.
It should be recognized that selectivities, efficiencies, and stereochemistries are quantified  
only when  the dynamics  on  the global  energy landscape  are understood.  For example,  the 
picture for simple  reactions of a few (strong) bonds being made and broken  is changed when  the 
energy surface is nearly flat or there is a significant entropic contribution.  Many transition  
states will exist in the region as in the case of protein folding [13, Fersht]. Finally, in the 
transition state, chemical bonds are in the process of being jade and broken. In  contrast,  for  
intermediated,  whose  bonds  are  fully formed,  they are  in  po- tential wells,  typically  
“troughs” in  the TS region.  However,  the  time  scale  is crucial. In many cases, the residence  
time in intermediates approaches the fs regime  characteristic  of  TS  structures  and  the  
distinction   becomes  fuzzy. Moreover, for a real multidimensional PES, the non-reactive nuclear 
motions can  entropically lock the system  even  though  there  is no well  in  the energy 
landscape.  And  the  presence  of  shallow wells in  the energy  landscape  does not guarantee  
that trajectories will visit such wells.

Transition State and  Spectroscopy
Various  techniques  have  been  advanced  to  probe  transition  states  more  di- rectly, 
especially for elementary reactions. Polanyi's analogy [14] of transition- state spectroscopy, from 
“spectral wing emission”, to (Lorentz)  collisional line broadening studies, made earlier by A. 
Gallagher and  others [see 121, set the stage for the use of CW spectroscopic  methods as a probe.  
(In  this way, only about one part in a million of the  population can be detected.)  Emission, ab-

Ahmed  H.  Zeuiail                                             289

sorption,  scattering  and  electron  photodetachment  are  some  of  the  novel methods  presented 
 for such  time-integrated spectroscopies, and  the  groups ofJim Kinsey, Philip Brooks and  Bob 
Curl, Benoit Soep and Curt Wittig, Dan Neumark, and  others, have made important contributions  to 
this area of re- search. The  key idea was  to obtain, as Kinsey [15] puts it,  short-time dynamics 
from long-time experiments.  (The  renaissance  of wave  packet dynamics in  spec- troscopy,  
pioneered  by  Rick  Heller,  will  be  highlighted  in  Section  III4 and III6). With  these 
spectroscopies in a CW mode, a distribution  of spectral fre- quencies provides the clue to the 
desired information  regarding the distribu- tion of the TS over successive configurations and 
potential energies. Recently, this subject has been reviewed  by Polanyi and  the  author and 
details of these contributions are given therein [12], and  also in  [26].

(2) Arrow of  Time
In over a century of development,  time resolution  in  chemistry and  biology has witnessed  major 
 strides,  which  are  highlighted  in  Fig.  8  [16].  As  men- tioned  before,  the  Arrhenius  
equation  (1889)  for  the  speed  of  a  chemical reaction  gave  information  about  the  time  
scale  of  rates,  and  Eyring  and Michael Polanyi's  (1931)  microscopic  theoretical  
description  made chemists think of the  atomic motions through  the transition state and  on  the 
vibratio- nal time scale. But the focus naturally had  to be on what could  be measured in  those  
days,  namely the slow rates of  reactions. Systematic studies of  reac- tion velocities were 
hardly undertaken  before the middle of the 19th century; in 1850 Ludwig Wilhelmy  reported  the 
first quantitative  rate  measurement, the hydrolysis of a solution of sucrose to glucose and 
fructose [8, Laidler]. In 1901, the first Nobel Prize for chemistry was awarded  to van't Hoff for, 
among other contributions, the theoretical  expressions  (chemical  dynamics)  which were 
precursors to the  important work of Arrhenius on  rates. Arrhenius  too received  the Prize in 
1903 for his work on  electrolytic  theory of dissociation.
A major advance  in experiments  involving sub-second  time resolution  was made with flow tubes in 
1923 by H. Hartridge and F.J.W. Roughton for solu- tion  reactions.  Two  reactants  were  mixed  
in  a flow  tube,  and  the  reaction products were observed at different distances. Knowing the 
speed of the flow, one   could  translate  this  into  time,  on  a scale  of  tens  of  
milliseconds.  Such measurements  of  non-radiative  processes were a real  advance  in view of  
the fact  that  they  were  probing  the  “invisible”,  in  contrast  with  radiative  glows which  
were  seen  by  the  naked  eye  and  measured  using  phosphoroscopes. Then came the stopped-flow 
method  (B. Chance, 1940)  that reached the milli- second scale. The  stopped-flow method is still 
used today in biological kinetics. Around 1950, a stride forward for time resolution in chemistry 
came about when Manfred Eigen in Germany and  R. G. W. Norrish and  George Porter in England 
developed techniques reaching the microsecond  time scale [17]. For this contribution,  Eigen  and  
Norrish  & Porter shared  the 1967 Nobel  Prize. The  method  of flash  photolysis was developed  
by Norrish  and  Porter  a few years after World War II, using electronics developed  at  the  
time. They  pro-

290                                                 Chemistry 1999






























Figure 8. Arrow of Time in chemistry and  biology, some steps over a century of development  (see 
text) . [Ref. BU


duced an intense burst of light and created radicals in  the sample, and, using other light,  they 
recorded  the  spectra  of these  radicals.  They achieved  kine- tics on  this time scale and 
observed some relatively stable intermediates.
Before the turn of  the 20th century, it was known  that electrical sparks and Kerr cell shutters  
could have response  times as short as ten  nanoseconds.  In an ingenious  experiment,  Abraham  
and Lemoine  (1899)  [18] in  France  de- monstrated  that the Kerr response of carbon  disulfide 
was faster than  ten na- noseconds;  it  has  now  been  measured  to  be  about  two  picoseconds  
(wIth femtosecond response)  [18]. They used an electrical pulse which produced a spark and 
simultaneously activated  a Kerr shutter.  Light from  the  spark was collimated  through a 
variable-delay path and through the Kerr cell (polarizer,

Ahmed  H.    fail                                                   291

CS₂ cell and analyzer). The rotation of the analyzer indicated the presence of birefringence in the 
cell for short optical delays; this birefringence disappear- ed  for  pathlengths   greater  than   
several   meters,   reflecting   the   total  op- tical/electrical response  time of 2.5 ns. In 
this landmark "pump-probe" expe- riment,  they demonstrated  in  1899  the importance  of 
synchronization. The setting  of  time  delays was  achieved  by varying  the  light path.  
Bloembergen
[18] has recently given a historical perspective of short-pulse generation  and Shapiro has 
reviewed  the early developments,  including  mechanical,  streak, spark, stroboscope,  and other 
high-speed photography methods [see Refs. 2 &  18]. As pointed  out in  these  references  [18],  
flash  photolysis  utilized  the above approach  but one of the flashes was made very strong to 
generate high concentrations of free radicals and hence  their utility in  chemical  and spec- 
troscopic applications.
Eigen developed "the relaxation method", which reached the microsecond and  close  to  the 
nanosecond  scale.  By disturbing  the equilibrium  of a solu- tion  by either a heat jump,  a 
pressure jump,  or an  electric  field,  the system shifts from equilibrium. This is the point of 
time zero. Then  the system  equi- librates, and its kinetics can be followed.  (At about the same 
time, shock-tube methods were  used  to provide  kinetics  on  similar  time scales.)  Eigen  
called these reactions "immeasurably fast" in his Nobel lecture. There was a feeling that this time 
resolution  was the fastest that could be measured or that need- ed to be measured for relevance  
to chemistry (Section IV).  The invention  of the laser has changed the picture.
Shortly after the realization  of the first (ruby) laser by Maiman  (1960), the generation  of 
giant  and  short  pulses  became  possible:  nanoseconds  by  Q- switching  (Hellwarth,  1961) and 
picoseconds  (De Maria,  et al 1966)  by mode- locking  (1964). Sub-picosecond  pulses  from  dye  
lasers  (Schafer  &  Sorokin, 1966)  were  obtained  in  1974 by Chuck  Shank  and  Eric  Ippen  at 
Bell Labs, and in  1987  a six  fs pulse  was  achieved  [19]. In  1991,  with  the discovery  of 
femtosecond  pulse  generation  from  solidstate  Ti-sapphire  lasers  by  Sibbett and colleagues 
[19], dye lasers were rapidly replaced and femtosecond  pulse generation  became a standard  
laboratory  tool; the state-of-the-art [19], once 8  fs,  is  currently  about  4  fs and  made  it 
into  the  Guinness  Book  of World Records  (Douwe  Wiersma's  group  [19]).  The  tunability  is  
mastered  using continuum generation [19, Alfano & Shapiro]  and optical parametric ampli- 
fication.
In  the  late  sixties  and  in  the  seventies,  ps  resolution  made  it possible  to study 
non-radiative processes, a major detour from the studies of conventional radiative processes  to 
infer  the non-radiative  ones. As a beginning  student,  I recall  the exciting  reports  of the 
photophysical  rates of internal  conversion and biological  studies by Peter Rentzepis  [20]; the 
first ps study of chemical reactions  (and orientational  relaxations)  in solutions by Ken 
Eisensthal  [21]; the  direct   measurement   of  the   rates   of   intersystem   crossing   by  
Robin Hochstrasser [22]; and the novel approach for measurement of ps vibrational relaxations  (in  
the ground state of molecules)  in liquids by Wolfgang  Kaiser and colleagues [23]. The groups of 
Shank and Ippen [19) have made impor-

292                                               Chemistry 1999

tant contributions  to the  development of dye lasers and  their applications in the  ps and  into 
the fs regime. Other studies of chemical and  biological  non- radiative  processes followed  on  
the  ps time scale,  the scale  coined  by G. N. Lewis as the  ‘jiffy” — the    time needed for a 
photon  to travel 1 cm, or 33 pico- seconds [24].
At about the same  time in the sixties, molecular-beam studies of reactions were being developed, 
and, although I was not  initially a member of this com- munity, beams later became  part of our  
effort in femtochemistry. Molecular collisions occur on a shorter  time scale  than  a ps and  real 
 time studies were not  possible at  the  time. Crossed  molecular  beams and  chemiluminescence 
techniques  provided  new approaches  for examining  the  dynamics  of single collisions  using  
the  post-attributes of  the event,  the  reaction  products.  The
contributions  by  Dudley  Herschbach,  Yuan  Lee  and  J   hn  Polanyi  [14,  25] were  
acknowledged  by the  1986  Nobel  Prize.  From state  and   angular  distri-
butions  of  products,  information  about  the  dynamics  of  the  collision  was deduced and 
compared with theoretical calculations of the  PES and  with mo- lecular  dynamics  simulations;  
the  goal  was  to  find  self-consistency  and   to deduce an estimate of the  lifetime of the  
collision complex. Crossed molecu- lar beam-laser  studies  have  probed  dynamics via careful 
analyses  of  product internal  energy  (vibrational  and   rotational)   distributions  and  
steady-state alignment  and  orientation  of products. The  contributions  to  this important area 
are highlighted  in  the article by Dick Zare and  Dick Bernstein  [25] and in  the  book  by Raphy 
 Levine  and  Bernstein  [9]. An  overview  of femtoche- mistry  (as of 1988)  in connection with 
these other areas is given in a feature article [26] by Zewail and  Bernstein.

III. FEMTOCHEMISTRY: DEVELOPMENT  OF THE FIELD
The  development  of  the  field  is  highlighted  in  this section,  from  the  early years of 
studying coherence to the birth of femtochemistry and the explosion of research, or, as the  report 
of Ref. 5 puts it,  “... the resolution in  chemistry  and adjocea/  sNences. ”On   the  way, there 
were conceptual and experimental  prob- lems  to overcome  and  many members  of our  Caltech  
group  have  made  the successful  evolution  possible. The  review article  published  in  the 
Journal of Physical  Chemistry  [B14]  names  their  contributions  in  the  early  stages  of 
development.  Here,  references  are  given  to  the  work  and  explicitly  in  the Figure 
Captions.

(1) The Early Years of  Coherence
When  I arrived in  the  US as a graduate student in 1969, nine years after the invention of the  
first laser, I had no idea of what lasers were about. When ap- pointed  to  the  Caltech  faculty  
as  an  assistant  professor  in  1976,  I  was  not thinking or dreaming of femtosecond  time  
resolution. But I had  the idea of exploring  coherence as a new concept in dynamics, intra- and  
inter-molecular. This proved  to be vital and  fruitful.

Ahmed  H.   Znuail                                                   293

Near Techniques  for Molecules
The Caltech  offer included  start-up  funds of $50,000 for capital  equipment ($15K  for  shop  
services) ,  an  empty  laboratory  of two  rooms  and  an  office next to it. A few months before 
moving to Caltech in May of 1976, I made the decision  not  to  begin  with  the  type  of 
picosecond  research  I  was  doing  at Berkeley as a postdoctoral fellow. Instead, the initial 
effort was focused on two directions:  (i)  studies of coherence  in  disordered  solids,  and  
(ii)  the devel- opment of a new laser program for the studies of the phenomena of (optical) 
coherence.  Prior  to  the  final  move,  I came  down  from  Berkeley  for several visits  in  
order  to  purchase  the  equipment  and  to  outline  the  laboratories’ needs for electricity, 
water, gases and so on; my feeling was that of a man  left out in  a desert with  the  challenge  
to make  it fertile.  We  spent  a significant fraction of the $50K on setting up the apparatus for 
optical detection of mag- netic resonance  (ODMR)  to study disordered solids. My experience  at 
Penn with  Professor  Robin  Hochstrasser  and  at  Berkeley  with  Professor  Charles Harris  was  
to  culminate  in  these  experiments.  The  key  questions  I  had  in mind were: What is the 
nature of energy migration  when  a crystal is systema- tically disordered? Is it coherent, 
incoherent or partially coherent? Is there a relationship between optical and spin coherence?
While the ODMR apparatus was being built, I was thinking intensely about new laser techniques to 
probe  the coherence of optical  transitions  (so-called optical coherence) . I had  the intuitive  
feeling  that this area was rich  and at the time had in mind several issues which were outlined in 
my research  pro- posal to Caltech. Laser experiments were designed with objectives focused on the 
same  issues outlined in  the proposal. First, in  the work I published  with Charles Harris, and 
alone at Berkeley,  the coherence probed had been that of spin  (triplet  excitons)  and  I  felt  
that  we  should  directly  probe  the  optical coherence,  i.e.,  the  coherence  between  the  
excited  electronic  state  and  the ground state, not that between  two spin states of the same 
excited state [Fig. 9]. Second, I did not believe that the /tm scale of spin coherence was the same 
as that of optical coherence. Later, I wrote a paper on  the subject which was published  in  the 
Journal  of Chemical  Physics  (1979)  with  the  title:  Are  the homogeneous  lin       dths of 
s§tzi resonance and optical transitions  related?
I  was  convinced  that essentially  all  molecular  optical  transitions  in  solids
are inhomogeneous, that is, they do not reflect the true dynamics of a homo- geneous ensemble, but 
rather the overlapping  effects of sub-ensembles. This was the key point outlined in my research 
proposal to Caltech. If the new set of laser experiments  at Caltech  proved successful,  we should 
be able  to find the  answer  to  these  important  (to  me)  questions.  However,  the  funds  re- 
maining  were  insufficient  to  realize  our  dream  for  the  new  experiments. Fortunately,  
Spectra  Physics,  started in  1961 and now a huge laser company, was proud of a new product and 
was interested in helping us demonstrate the usefulness  of  one  of  the  first  single-mode   dye 
 lasers  they  produced.  At Caltech, we had the pump argon-ion laser, from Wilse Robinson's 
Laboratory, and added the dye laser we obtained from Spectra Physics with  the idea that we  would  
purchase  it  if  the  experiments  were  successful.  David  Evans  of

294                                             Chemistry 1999



























TA (M)
Figure  9. Molecular  coherence  and  dephasing.  Coherent  transients  from  the  superposition  
of states,  and control  of pulse phase  (x or x)  in  multiple  pulse  experiments,  the optical  
analog of NMR spectroscopy.  The photon  echo of iodine gas was observed  on  the spontaneous  
emission using the described pulse sequence.  [Ref. B9, Bl3, B22, B23, 50]


Spectra Physics was instrumental in helping us achieve this goal. What was left were  the  
low-temperature  cryostat  and  electronics.  We  could  not  afford  a real metal cryostat, so we 
custom-made  a glass Dewar  that could go down  to
1.8 Kelvin. Most of the  electronics were obtained on loan for several months. To generate laser 
pulses we used switching methods developed atJILA (}oint Institute  for  Laboratory  Astrophysics)  
and  IBM.  The  work  at  IBM  by  Dick Brewer's   group   triggered   our   interest   in   using  
 electro-optic   switching melods.
We succeeded in making the laser perform according to specifications and
began  the first experiments with phenazine crystals. This system, phenazine, has unique properties 
which I learned about in Robin Hochstrasser's labora- tory. At Berkeley  I  published  a  paper  
outlining  the  nature  of  coherence  in multidimensional systems and  used  phenazine  as a 
prototype  experimental

Ahmed  H.  Zewail                                             295

system.  Our  first laser  transient at Caltech  was  beautiful.  Unfortunately, the transient was 
from  the electronics, not from the crystal, but  we soon realized this! We decided  to abandon  
this particular  system for  a while and  to  try an impurity crystal of pentacene in a host of 
terphenyl. We also decided to study gases, and  some success came our way.
With  the  theoretical  knowledge  acquired  in  handling  coherence  effects, which requires 
expertise with density matrix formalism and  its manipulation in geometrical frames, I had a novel 
idea: we should  be able to detect coheren- ce on   the   incoherent  emission  at  optical 
frequencies.  From  many  discussions with Alex Pines and  Charles Harris at Berkeley, I knew the  
power of “adding” pulses in NMR and  ESR. This idea was successful and  indeed we were able to 
observe  the  photon  echo on  the spontaneous  emission  [Fig. 9] using  three optical pulses. 
Only months after my arrival in May of 1976, we published our first scientific paper from Caltech. 
This success gave us confidence in the ap- proach and in our understanding of the  principles of 
coherence and its prob- ing in  molecular  systems. We applied  it to larger  molecules with 
success but also encountered  some disappointments. This work was followed  by a variety of 
extensions  to studies in gases and  solids and  also  in  a home-made  (from glass)  effusive  
molecular  beam. The  small group in our laboratory of optical coherence  became  productive  and  
we had an exciting  time. Our  group and that  of  Douwe  Wiersma  in  Holland  were  then  the  
two  most  active  in  these areas of chemical research.
In the  meantime, the work on disorder in solids began to yield interesting results  and,  
surprisingly,  we  observed  an  unusual  change  in  the  degree  of energy transfer with 
concentration, which we published as evidence of Ander- son  localization,  a  hot  topic  in  the  
1970’s.  This  was  followed  by  detailed studies  of  several  systems  and   I  wrote  my  first 
 research   proposal   to  the National Science Foundation  (NSF). The  research was funded! The 
then pro- gram director at NSF, Fred Stafford, was supportive of the  effort and we have maintained 
 our  support from  the Division  of Materials Research  to  this day; the  NSF's Chemistry 
Division continues  to support our research. Knowledge of  energy  transfer  was  also  helpful  in 
 another  area.  Terry  Cole,  a  visiting scholar at Caltech, and  I initiated work on  the  
studies of Luminescent Solar Concentrators  (LSC)  using energy  transfer  between  dyes as a key 
principle. This  idea,  too,  was  successful  and  funding  for  this  research  came  in  from 
SERI  and   from  ARCO.  The  work  on  LSC  resulted,  ultimately,  in  a  patent (with  Sam  
Batchelder;  issued  in  1980)  and  in  several  publications.  My  re- search group was rapidly 
expanding.
After a year-and-a-half at Caltech, I was pleased  to learn  that my colleagues were considering  
my case for tenure. Tenure was granted a few months later, two years after my arrival at the 
Institute. I was both appreciative and  pleased. We  continued  research  in  four  areas:  optical 
 coherence  phenomena  and dephasing; disorder in solids; picosecond  spectroscopy; and  LSC. In my 
own department, some colleagues were  not  too excited about ‘this stuff of cohe- rence and 
dephasing’ — thinking that it was not rehn›ant to chemistry!  Many che- mists on the outside were 
also unsure what this was all about. In fact, a notab-

296                                               Chemistry 1999

le chemist once said publicly at a conference I attended  that coherence  and dephasing  had 
nothing  to do with  chemistry!  On  the physics  side,  I was in- vited  to numerous  conferences, 
 including  one in which  the Nobel Laureate Willis Lamb asked me to have dinner to discuss our 
research. This was a spe- cial experience!
I was  not convinced  by these  doubts  and  my faith  helped  us  to  continue along with the 
development.  The concept of coherence  turned out to be fun- damental  in femtochemistry, and it 
is now well accepted that coherence  is a key process in the probing  and controlling  of molecular 
dynamics.  With the success  we  had  with  observations   and  studies  of  coherence   in  
different systems, I wrote an Account of Chemical Research  article, published in 1980, with the 
title: Optical Molecular Dephasing — Principles of and Probings @ Coherent Laser  Spectroscopy.   I 
 felt  that  the  nanosecond  time  scale  we  had  mastered should be extended  to the picosecond  
time scale, but did not wish  to repeat the Berkeley experience with glass lasers. Fortunately,  
the design  for the first sub-picosecond dye laser was reported in 1974 and we decided to build one 
to study the phenomena of coherence — but now on a shorter time scale.

Optical Analogue ofNMR  Controlling the Phase
From  the  studies  of  optical  transients,  we  learned  that  coherence  can  be probed directly 
 in real time in gases  (and solids)  and that incoherent  decay (e.g.  fluorescence)  can  be  
used  to  monitor  such  coherences  provided  that the laser pulse(s)  is capable of forming  a 
coherent superposition  of states. For two states of a transition  (say pa and     b), the coherent 
state can be written as
coherent  ( t)   =  a(  t)       a      b (t)       b                                            
(4)
where  the coefficients,  a(t)  and b(t)  contain  in  them  the familiar quantum- mechanical  
phase  factors,  exp(-iEat//i)  and  exp  (-iEbt/fi) ,  respectively  [see Fig. 9].
With  pulse  sequences,  we  could  directly  monitor  the  behavior  of the  en- semble-averaged 
coefficients  of 'P  -'P*,  (a(t)  b* (t)), which  contain  informa- tion on  the coherence  decay 
time  (optical T  ) ; they are the off-diagonal  ele- ments of a density matrix, pab. The term 
(a(t) a* (t)) is the population  of state
a And  represents  the diagonal  density-matrix element,    aa*   a(t)  a*(t)) de- cays with 
optical T,.  We were thus able to demonstrate  the power of the opti-
cal analogue of NMR pulse techniques in learning about coherence and the origin  of optical 
dephasing  in  molecular  systems  of interest  to chemical  dy- namics. This advance changed the 
thinking of many with the recognition  that it was impossible to deduce T  and Tq from measurements 
of the line width of inhomogeneous transitions.
One  feature  of this work which  later  helped  us in  the study of molecular reaction  dynamics  
was  the  realization  of  the  importance  of the  pulse phase (shape)  in  studies  of coherence. 
 With  the  acousto-optic  modulation  techni- ques we developed  earlier,  it became  possible  to 
make  optical  pulse sequen- ces with well-defined phases. This development  took us into the 
domain of se- lective and prescribed pulse sequences which could then be used to enhance

29’7

coherences  or suppress  them — the Qhca/ analogue  of NMR    multiple pulse  spec- trosc      . We 
published several papers on phase control and extended  the ap- plications  to include  photon  
locking. We were eager to extend  these techni- ques to the picosecond time domain  in order to 
study solids, but, for several reasons, our attention was diverted to gas-phase  molecular 
dynamics.
By this time, our group's efforts were narrowing  on two major areas. (Dick Bernstein, who was on 
the Visiting Committee  for our Division,  hinted that I was doing  too much in  too many areas!)  
The work on disorder  and LSC was gradually  brought  to completion.  Picosecond spectroscopy  of 
rotational dif- fusion  and  energy  transfer  in  liquids were  similarly  handled.  I  felt  that 
 the latter  area of  research  was  too crowded with  too many scientists,  a characte- ristic I 
do not enjoy when venturing into a new area. I must add that I was not too thrilled by the 
exponential  (or near exponential)  decays we were measur- ing and by the lack of molecular 
information. Our effort began  to emphasize two directions:  (i) the studies of coherence and 
dynamics of isolated molecu- les in supersonic  beams and  (ii)  the development  of the optical 
analogue of NMR spectroscopy.  The low-temperature facility was put to use  to study  the dephasing 
 and  polarization  of highly vibrationally-excited molecules  in  the ground  state.  Coherence  
in  chemical  dynamics was occupying  my thinking, and I made a detour in the applications  that 
turned out to be significant.

(2) The Marriage with Molecular Beams
The  Bell Labs design for the dye laser  (passively mode-locked,  CW, and  cavi- ty dumped)  was  
too  restrictive  for  our  use  and,  even  though  we  published several  papers on  studies in  
the condensed  phase with  0.6 ps resolution, we decided to change to a new system. The  
synchronously pumped  mode-locked (CW) dye laser allowed for  tunability and also for 
photon-counting detection techniques.  The  power  of  single-photon-counting  became  apparent,  
and  a new laser system, a synchronously pumped, cavity-dumped  dye laser was con- structed for 
studies of gas-phase molecular dynamics, but  now with  the bene- fit of all  the  expertise we had 
gained from  building  the first system  used *or studies in the condensed phase and for probing 
the torsional rigidity of DNA. Stimulated  by the  work on  coherence,  and  now with  the  
availability  of  pi- cosecond pulses, I thought of an interesting problem relating to the question 
of intramolecular es. intermolecular dephasing. In large, isolated  molecules (as opposed to 
diatomics), there are the so-called heat bath modes which can be  a  sink  for  the  energy.  The  
question  arose:  Could  these  bath  modes  in isolated large molecules dephase the 
optically-excited initial state in the same way  that  phonons  of a  crystal  (or  collisions in 
gases)  do? This problem  has some roots in the question of state preparation, and I was familiar 
with its re- lationship  to the description  of radiationless  transitions through  the work of
Joshua Jortner,   Wilse  Robinson  and  others. There was much  theoretical  ac- tivity about 
dephasing,  but I felt that they were standard extensions and  they
did not allow for surprises. We decided on a new direction for the studies of coherence in a 
supersonic molecular  beam.

298                                               Chemistry  1999

Rick  Smalley  came  to  Caltech  in  May  of  1980  and  gave  a  talk  entitled ’Yibrational  
Relaxation  in Jet-Cooled  Polyatomics”.  He  spoke  about  his ex- citing work on  the naphthalene 
spectra. From the line width in the excitation spectra, he inferred the “relaxation  time”. At the  
time, the work by Don Levy, Leonard  Wharton,  and  Smalley  on  CW  (or  nanosecond)  laser  
excitation  of molecules in supersonic jets was providing new ways to examine  the spectros- copy 
of molecules and  van der  Waals complexes. Listening to Rick and  being biased by the  idea of 
coherence, I became convinced  that the way to monitor the homogeneous dynamics was not  through  
the apparent width but by using coherent  laser  techniques.  This  was further  kindled  by  the  
need  for  direct measurement  of energy redistribution rates; we were encouraged  by Charlie 
Parmenter,  after  he  had  reported  on  a chemical  timing method  using  colli- sions as a 
“clock” to infer the rate of energy redistribution. The first “real” su- personic molecular beam 
was huge. We did not know much about this kind of technology. However, in a relatively short time, 
it was designed and built from scratch,  thanks  to  the  effort  of  one  graduate  student  who  
must  have  con- sumed  kilos of coffee! The  molecular  beam and  picosecond  system  were in- 
terfaced with  the  nontrivial addition of a spectrometer  to resolve fluorescen- ce in frequen‹J  
and   fzx. This was crucial to much of the  work to come.

The Anthracene Discovery.’ A Paradigm Shift
Our  goal in the  beginning was to directly measure  the rate of IVR  (Intramo- lecular 
Vibrational-energy Redistribution), expecting  to see a decrease  with time (exponential decay)  in 
the population of the initially-excited vibrational
state and  to possibly see a rise in population  in the state after  the  redistribu- tion,  thus 
obtaining TI  directly. What we saw in  these large systems was con-
trary to the popular wisdom and  unexpected. The population during IVR was
oscillating  coherently  back  and  forth  [Fig.  10]  with  well-defined  period(s) and  phases! 
We were very excited because  the results revealed the significan- ce of coherence  at its best in  
a complex  molecular  system,  now  isolated  in  a molecular beam, with many degrees of freedom. I 
knew this would receive at- tention  and  skepticism.  We  had  to be  thorough in our experimental 
 tests of the  observation and  three of us went to the laboratory  to see how robust the 
observation  was. We  published  a Communication  in  the Journal  of  Chemical Physics (1981) . 
Earlier  there had been attempts by another group  to observe such  a  “quantum  coherence  effect” 
 in large  molecules,  but  the  observation turned out to be due  to an artifact. Some scientists 
in the field were skeptical of our  new observation  and  the theorists argued  that the molecule 
is too big to see such quantum  coherence effects among the ei6rattoaof states. Further- more, it 
was argued  that rotational effects should wash out  such an observa- tion.
We followed  the  initial  publication  with  several  others  and  the  effect  be- came even  
more pronounced with shorter  time  resolution.  Physicists appre- ciated  the  new results. We  
published  a  Physics       zm Letter on   the  nature  of non-chaotic motion in isolated systems, 
and  Nico Bloembergen and I wrote a review  (1984)  on  the  relevance  to  laser-selective  
chemistry  [B21].  We  and

Ahmed  H.   Zeuiail                                                     299

other  groups  subsequently  showed  the  prevalence  of  this  phenomenon  in large  molecules. As 
is often  the case in  science,  after  the facts and in  retro- spect, the phenomenon  was clear 
and was soon accepted; to some it even be- came  obvious!  Looking  back,  this  novel  and  
unexpected  observation  was  a paradigm shifi of critical importance, for a number of reasons:
First, the observation was the first to clearly show the presence of “quantum coherence  effect” in 
 isolated  complex chemical  systems  and only among  se- lected vibrational  states. In other 
words, out of the expected  chaotic tnofioa in the vibrational and rotational phase space we could 
see ordered and £0     PZit TO- tion despite  the presence of numerous vibrational degrees of 
freedom  (from St and S  states). This point was theoretically appreciated by only a few scien- 
tists.  In  fact,  at one  point Stuart Rice  and I drafted  a paper  on  the subject, thinking  of 
 clarifying  the  point. At  the  time,  researchers  in  high-resolution spectroscopy were 
observing complex spectra and attributing this complexity to chaotic vibrational  motion in the 
molecule.  Stuart and I argued that spec- tral complexity does not mean  chaos, and the anthracene  
experiment was a clear demonstration  in real time.
Second,  the  observation  demonstrated  that  coherence  had  not previously been detected in 
coriiplex  systems, not because  of its absence  but due to the inability to devise a proper probe. 
Detection of total absorption or total emir sion  (at all wavelengths)  from molecules gives a 
non-selective window on the dynamics and in this way coherence cannot be detected. This was a key 
point for the success of the anthracene  experiment  for which  both  itme and  wave- lengthwere  
resolved and correlated. For all subsequent work on wave packet dynamics,  nuclear  motion  in  
chemical  reactions,  and  femtochemistry,  this concept of “window probing” was essential. The 
concept was further elucidat- ed by resolving  the phase character.  By probing at two different 
wavelengths, we  found  that  the  quantum  oscillations  exhibit  identical  periods,  but were 
phase  shifted  by exactly  180°  (i.e.,  they are out-of-phase)  [Fig.  10]. The  two wavelengths  
resolved  were  those  corresponding   to  emission  of  the  initial vibrational  state  and to 
that of  the vibrational  state  to which  the population goes  by IVR.  Thus, if “total detection” 
was invoked,  the in-phase and out-of- phase  oscillations  will  add  up  to  cancel  each  other  
and  coherence  would have remained undiscovered.
Third,  observation  of phase  coherent dynamics  gave  us a new dimension. The phase shift 
indicates a true transfer of population,  in contrast with  con- ventional  quantum  beats, and by 
analyzing  the phases we could understand the nature of IVR:  “converted”,  i.e. going at the same 
time to all states, or ‘non- concerted”  i.e., going  in  a sequential  redistribution  of 
vibrational  energy.  We could  also  obtain  the  time  scale  and  the  effect  of  molecular  
rotations  on coherence of the vibrational  motion.
Fourth,  the  observation  illustrated  the  importance  of the  “preparation  of non-stationary 
states” in molecules. This issue was of  fundamental importan- ce in radiationless transition  
theories involving multiple electronic states, and
experiments byJan Kommandeur and by Doug McDonald have shown this in- terstate coupling. The 
question of interest to us was: what nuclear states do we

300                                               Chemistry 1999

IYR -Cdurent  andDissipativeR@mes


Clossical-2

Vg b












Quantum- N


ft                   fb                  fd     fe


Time (nsecl
Figure  10. Dynamics of IVR, intramolecular vibrational-energy redistribution. The coherent,  re- 
stricted and the dissipative regimes. Note the exact in-phase and out-of-phase oscillatory behavior 
between  the vibrational  states of the system  (anthracene  in  a molecular  beam). The  theory 
for classical  and quantum  pictures  (to the left)  has been discussed  in detail in  the 
literature.  [Ref. 51] ; See also ref B20, B2l.


prepare in the isolated molecule on a single surface? The anthracene experi- ment taught us that a 
coherent source spanning the stationary states can pre- pare a non-stationary state which evolves 
with  time. Moreover, we can prepa- re molecules in-phase at time zero to observe  the subsequent 
coherent dyna- mics. This concept indicates  that the description,  in  terms of  Schrodinger's 
molecular  stationary states,  is not cardinal and that the time-dependent pic- ture is real and 
directly relevant to dynamics.  Most textbooks describe dyna- mics in  terms of stationary states 
and it took some time for this concept of a time-dependent description  to be appreciated. I 
recently found a theoretical article by Roy Gordon published in  the  1960’s touching on similar 
issues. In femtochemistry, the concept of time-domain  dynamics  is what describes ele- mentary 
motions.
Fiflh, by directly probing coherence and its extent in isolated, complex mo- lecular systems we 
advanced some concepts regarding  the nature of IVR and its regions.  We divided  the  regions  of  
IVR into  three  basic  ones:  no OR,  re- stricted IVR, and dissipative TVS  We also established 
that the IVR picture of one vibrational state coupled to a continuum of vibrational levels is not 
adequate. Instead it is a multi-tier coupling among vibrational  states.

301

This work and  its implications were  published  in  two series of  papers and reviewed in two book 
chapters.

The Successful 036 Laboratory
The   laboratory  known  as  036  was  in  the  sub-basement  of  Noyes.  In  this laboratory,  the 
initial work on IVR was followed by fruitful applications span- ning (i) studies of IVR in other 
systems,  (ii)  radiationless transitions, and  (iii) reaction  rates of a variety of systems. One  
of our  first studies of reactions on the ps time scale, isomerization  of stilbene, was stimulated 
 by discussion with Robin  Hochstrasser  about  his work on  stilbene  vapor at  room  temperature. 
He  felt  that  if we  could  resolve  the  low-frequency  modes  in  the  molecular beam, we would 
derive a great deal of information on the torsional potential. We  resolved  these  torsional  
modes.  Furthermore,  we  decided  to  study  the rates as a function of energy and in the process 
found the barrier for twisting around  the  double  bond  and  observed  coherent  IVR  in  
reactions,  the first such observation. Even now, stilbene remains a member of our  molecular fa- 
mily and  continued studies have been  pursued  by us and  others, also on  the fs time scale.
The  following list highlights some of  the work [Fig. 11] done in this initial
period from 1981 to 1983:  (1)  IVR in  anthracene  and stilbene;  (2)  trans-cis isomerization  of 
stilbene;  (3)  quantum  beats and  radiationless  transitions in pyrazine;  (4)  intramolecular 
hydrogen  bonding  in  methyl salicylate;  (5)  in- tramolecular electron transfer in 
donor-bridge-acceptor systems;  (6) IVR and dissociation  of intermolecular hydrogen-bonded 
complexes;  and  (7)  isome- rization of diphenylbutadiene and styrene.
Over the years, in the same laboratory  (036 Noyes) , members of our  group have made new 
extensions covering the following topics: isomerization in iso- lated molecules vs. in bulk 
solutions; nonchaotic  multilevel vibrational  ener- gy flow; mode-specific  IVR in large 
molecules;  IVR dynamics in alkyl-anthra- cenes;  isotope   effects  on   isomerization   of  
stilbene;  charge   transfer   and exciton  dynamics in isolated  bianthracene; isotope effects on  
the intramole- cular dephasing and molecular states of pyrazine; IVR dynamics in alkylanili- nes  
(the  ”ring  +  tail”  system) ;  mode-specific  (non-RRKM)  dynamics  of  stil- bene-rare  gas  
vdW  complexes;  solvation  effects  on  intramolecular  charge transfer;  IVR dynamics in 
p-difluorobenzene and  p-f1uorotoluene (real  time vs. chemical  timing); IVR dynamics in  
deuterated  anthracenes;  dynamics of interstate coupling in chromyl chloride; dynamics of IVR and 
vibrational pre- dissociation  in anthracene-Are (n = 1,2,3) ; structural effects on  the dynamics 
of  IVR and   isomerization  in stilbenes;  and  dynamics of IVR and   vibrational predissociation 
in n-hexane solvated  iroti+stilbene. The  research resulted in a series of publications.

Changing A Dogma: Development of RCS
The  success with  the anthracene experiment made us ask a similar question, but  now regarding  
the coherent  rotational  motion of isolated, complex  mole- cules. There were  theories around  
which discarded its possibility  because of

302
Chemistry 1999














Electrwi Transfér Reaction


















N-'
(HO—R)
Base •-- Acid





Figure 11. Some  examples  of studies in  the 036 Laboratory.  The isomerization  of stilbene,  in- 
tramolecular electron  transfer, and solvation in clusters are examples of the studies made in  the 
early 1980’s  (see text); IQ = isoquinoline.  [Ref. B3, 52].


the general  belief that Coriolis interactions,  anharmonicity  and other  inter- actions would 
destroy the coherence. We worked out the theoretical implica- tions and the results suggested 
po.ssibly another surprise: if we could align the molecules with a polarimd picosecond pulse and 
probe (polarization-selective) the rotating  molecules,  we should be able  to observe  rotational  
recurrences which would give the full period of rotations of the isolated (large) molecule. 
Classically,  it is as if the molecule rotated back to its initial configuration. This rotation  
period  gives  the  moment  of  inertia  and,  since  the  masses  of  the atoms are known, we can 
deduce distances, and hence obtain information on molecular structures of very large molecules.
Indeed the recurrences in stilbene were observed with high precision, and its molecular structure 
deduced. Coherence in rotational motion was clearly

Ahmed  H.    Zewail                                                     303

evident and could be probed  in  a manner similar  to what we had done with vibrational coherence. 
The approach was again met with some skepticism  re- garding its generality  as a molecular 
structure  technique.  However,  it is now accepted by many as a powerful Doppler-free  technique; 
more than 120 struc- tures have been  studied  this way. The method [Fig.  121 is  termed  
“Rotational Coherence  Spectroscopy   (RCS) ”  and  is  successfully  used  in  many  laboratories. 
Some book chapters and review articles have been  published on  the subject [see Bibliography] .
Out  of  this  first  marriage  between  ultrafast  lasers  and  molecular  beams came  the 
developments  and concepts discussed  above. We were  now poised to study molecules and reactions 
with even shorter time resolution. We could study their vibrational  and rotational  dynamics and 
align  (“orient”)  them  by controlling  time.


Rotational £ofietettce Spettroicopy








i-0
                   Time                         




















Time  (ns)










Figure  12. Rotational Coherence Spectroscopy  (RCS) , the concept and first experimental  obser- 
vation  made in a beam of trans-stilbene. [Ref. B7, B13, 53]

304                                               CUmistry 1999

(3) The Transition to the Sub-Picosecond Regime
By the  early 1980’s, our  laser time resolution for studying molecules in super- sonic jets was 15 
picoseconds and  detection was made using a microchannel plate ( -  40 ps). With this resolution, 
we had already studied reactions such as the isomerization  (twisting)  of stilbene, 
charge-transfer, and intra- and  inter- molecular  proton  and  hydrogen  atom  transfer.  How  
could  we improve  the time resolution and study, in a general way, the elementary steps of 
reactions? The  only approach  I knew of was  to use  two  pulses, one  to  “pump” and  the other 
to “probe”. Unlike liquid-state studies, where the approach was proven successful,  in  this case, 
the  density of a molecular  beam is very low. Further- more, it was not  clear how to establish  
the zero of time in site in the molecu- lar beam and  how to avoid  temporal broadening due to 
propagation effects.


A Nem Beam Machine: Pump-Probe Mass Spectrometry
I  thought  we should  build  a second  generation  beam  apparatus  to  house  a time-of-flight 
mass spectrometer. From the physics literature, it was clear  that single-atom  detection  could  
be  observed  using  ionization  techniques  with lasers,  and   such  detection  had  already  
been  successful  with  nanosecond lasers.  Unlike  many nanosecond  studies, we should  propagate  
the  two pico- second  (and  later femtosecond)  pulses  in  the  same direction,  otherwise  we 
would  lose  the  ultrashort  time  resolution!  The  same  beam  machine  was equipped  with  
optics for  laser-induced  fluorescence  detection.  We  began  a new  direction  of  research  in  
a separate  laboratory  of  our  group.  The  new beam  was  built  and  integrated  with  two  
independently  tunable  dye  lasers. This proved to be a precursor to the femtochemistry work as 
this taught us to master  pump-probe  picosecond  and  sub-picosecond experiments on  chemi- cal 
reactions. In this same laboratory, we studied with a resolution of a few ps:
(1)  dissociation  reactions;  (2)  ground-state,  overtone-initiated reactions;  (3) van der  
Waals reactions and  others [Fig. 13]. We wrote a series of papers on state-to-state microcanonical 
rates, k(E), and addressed theoretical consequences and deviations from the statistical regime.
It  was  in  two  of  these  systems  (reactions  of  NCNO  and  ketene)  that  we found  that  the 
statistical  phase-space  theory,  although  successful  in describ- ing product-state  
distributions, failed in describing the  microcanonical rates k(E)  as a function of energy. 
Moreover, we made careful studies of  the effect of rotational population  on k(E) , and  the  
effect was dramatic near the thres- hold.  Rudy  Marcus,  stimulated  by  these studies of  k(E) , 
applied  variational RRKM  theory and  we  published  some  papers in  a collaborative  effort. The 
key point  here is that  the TS “moves”  to different  (shorter)  distances  along the reaction 
coordinate at different energies; the cardinal definition is relax- ed  [see above, Section II]. In 
another system  (H2O2), we studied  the ground-
state (“thermal”)  reaction for the first time in real  time by initiating the reac-
tion with direct excitation  of the  overtones of  the OH stretch vibration  [Fig. 13). The  
coupling between  theory and experiment stimulated  my interest in

Ahmed  H.    Zeniail
305








’     ..          .               ._.

*                              ”
n-                      jp    •<s.e swiz«jas



o



Reaction Bats ofN€N0as a Friction ofEnegy
















Figure  13. Microcanonical Rates of Reactions:  (top)  Ground-state  reaction  of H  O   initiated 
by local-mode  excitation;  (bottom)  the dissociation  of NCNO  as a function  of energy, showing  
the breakdown  of conventional phase-space  theory at energies above  threshold.  [Ref. Bl,  541


the nature of transition states which generally live for less than a picosecond. The  thirst for 
even shorter time resolution  became real!

The First ICN Experiment: Sub-picosecond Resolution
In  the  early 1980’s,  the  technology  of  pulse  compression  became  available and  we ordered, 
from Spectra Physics, a pulse  compressor  — a fiber optic ar- rangement  to reduce  the laser  
pulse width  to sub-picosecond. The  company indicated  that it would  take them several  months  
to build one, and  that  the only  one  available  was  at  Purdue  University  in  the  laboratory 
 of  Professor Duane Smith, one  of  the first two graduate students I had at Caltech. I men- 
tioned to Duane my excitement about the experiment, which was intended  to directly monitor  the 
elementary bond breakage  in a molecule, and  asked if it was  possible  to  borrow  his  
compressor.  The   triatomic  molecule  ICN  was chosen  because  the CN radical could be 
conveniently monitored  by laser-in-

Ahmed  H.    Zeniail
305








’     ..          .               ._.

*                              ”
n-                      jp    •<s.e swiz«jas



o



Reaction Bats ofN€N0as a Friction ofEnegy
















Figure  13. Microcanonical Rates of Reactions:  (top)  Ground-state  reaction  of H  O   initiated 
by local-mode  excitation;  (bottom)  the dissociation  of NCNO  as a function  of energy, showing  
the breakdown  of conventional phase-space  theory at energies above  threshold.  [Ref. Bl,  541


the nature of transition states which generally live for less than a picosecond. The  thirst for 
even shorter time resolution  became real!

The First ICN Experiment: Sub-picosecond Resolution
In  the  early 1980’s,  the  technology  of  pulse  compression  became  available and  we ordered, 
from Spectra Physics, a pulse  compressor  — a fiber optic ar- rangement  to reduce  the laser  
pulse width  to sub-picosecond. The  company indicated  that it would  take them several  months  
to build one, and  that  the only  one  available  was  at  Purdue  University  in  the  laboratory 
 of  Professor Duane Smith, one  of  the first two graduate students I had at Caltech. I men- 
tioned to Duane my excitement about the experiment, which was intended  to directly monitor  the 
elementary bond breakage  in a molecule, and  asked if it was  possible  to  borrow  his  
compressor.  The   triatomic  molecule  ICN  was chosen  because  the CN radical could be 
conveniently monitored  by laser-in-

506                      Chemistry 1999

duced fluorescence;  we had been  encouraged  by the positive  experience  we had had with CN from 
NCNO  and with  earlier ps results on ICN. Also, ICN had  been  central  to studies of dissociation 
 reactions  and  to photofragment spectroscopy.  Previous work, without time resolution,  had 
provided a measu- rement of the so-called anisotropy parameter § and, hence, inference of the time 
scale.
All that we needed was a factor of  10-100 improvement  in  time  resolution from what we currently 
had in the group. Duane shipped the compressor and joined  us for  two  weeks.  We  observed  the  
first  ICN  sub-picosecond  transient, thus establishing  the  new methodology.  In  the  same  
year, we wrote  a paper which was accepted and published  (December  1985) in the Journal of 
Physical Chemistry. We did not resolve the transition states of this reaction, but only de- tected  
the rise of the product. The last paragraph  in  this paper summarized what it would be possible  
to do if the time resolution  could be improved by a further  order of magnitude:  “Since the 
recoil  velocity  is  -   2 x  10    cm/s,  the frag- ment  separation  is -   ION  on the time 
scale of the experiment  (-500 fs).  lYi/h this time resolution,  me must, therefore,  consider the 
proximity  of fragments at the time of probing,
i.e., the iniolution of the tronst/ioti state to final products. ”I wrote  this sentence hav- ing 
in mind that the fs resolution  is the ideal one and that our next step in re- search should be in 
this direction.
Several factors influenced the fast entry into femtochemistry. The develop- ment in 1981 by Richard 
Fork, Ben Greene and Chuck Shank of the colliding pulse mode-locked  (CPM)  ring dye laser took the 
pulse duration  into the 90- fs regime. By 1985, when we were involved  in the ICN experiment,  
?7-fs pul- ses were generated with the help of intracavity pulse compression.  Soon after, in  
1987,  6-fs pulses were obtained  by amplification  and extracavity  compres- sion  [19]. With  
such  short  pulses  and  with  the  help  of the  earlier  develop- ment of continuum generation  
by Bob Alfano and Stanley Shapiro [19], con- tinuously  tunable  fs pulses became  available  and 
only (!)  required  expertise in ultrafast lasers and nonlinear optics.
The interaction with several colleagues was a stimulating force in  the initi- al effort. With Rudy 
Marcus and Vince McKoy, my colleagues at Caltech, I dis- cussed many experiments  and theories, 
especially on our way to lunch at the Athenaeum,  Caltech’s faculty club. John Polanyi came to 
Caltech in 1982 as a Fairchild Scholar. John saw the importance of (CW)  transition-state spectros- 
copy,  and  his  paper  in  a  book  I  edited  (proceedings  of the  conference  in Alexandria)  
was on this subject, for the reactions H + Hq and Nal dissociation (wing  emission) . For some  
reason, we did not discuss fs transition-state spec- troscopy at this time, but instead we (with J  
 hn providing all the notes in writ-
ing)  were  interested  in  intense-laser-field  stimulated   emission  in  the  NaI
system  and in  the field  “dressing” of the potentials. I do not know why I did not think of this 
system as the first one for femtosecond  transition-state spec- troscopy. This may have  been due  
to the earlier experience  we had with  the
ICN  picosecond  experiments.  Later,  the  potentials J   hn  sent from  Toronto were helpful in 
my thinking of the NaI experiment.
At nearby UCLA,  the arrival  of Dick Bernstein  to the area was a real bles-

Ahmed  H.   Zewail                                                   307

sing. He was extremely excited about the developments  and the possibilities for  real-time  
studies  of molecular  reaction  dynamics.  It was  at  his house  in Santa Monica that the word 
femtochemtstr   was coined, helped by a discussion in  the  company  of  his  wife  Norma  and  
brother  Ken.  Dick  also  came  to Caltech as a Fairchild Scholar in  1986, and in  1988 we wrote 
a feature article together  (published  in  Chemical  X   Engineering Nems [26)). We had great fun 
writing  this  article  and  we  learned  an  enormous  amount  about  molecular reaction dynamics. 
We also had a genuine collaboration  on bimolecular reac- tions and published a paper in 1987. Dick 
came to Caltech again in 1990, but sadly died before ending his sabbatical; a number of 
experiments, particular- ly the new direction  of surface femtochemistry, were designed as part of 
our plan.  Finally,  the  collaboration  I  had  with  Rich  Bersohn,  while  he  was  at Caltech  
as a Fairchild  Scholar,  was  enlightening.  We  discussed  the  classical picture  of fs 
spectroscopy  of dissociating  molecules,  and Rich  and I wrote  a theoretical paper on this 
subject.

(4)  The Femtosecond Dream
A  Piece of Good Fortune
To achieve  the fs time  resolution, we  needed a new laser system. A piece of good fortune came 
our way at a time when funding was limited and when  the establishment of fs lasers and molecular 
beam technologies required a “quan- tum jump” in support. Shaul Mukamel invited me to a workshop in 
Rochester (October  1985)  on  intramolecular  vibrational  redistribution  and  quantum chaos. I 
spoke about “IVR and chemical reacuvity”, and there in the audience were two program directors from 
the Air Force Office of Scientific Research: Larry Davis and Larry Burggraf.  They requested  a 
preliminary  proposal  im- mediately,  and  I  sent  one  in  October,  followed  by  a  complete  
proposal  in January of 1986.
The  proposal  was  funded  and  approved  in  August  of  1986,  to  start  in November  of  the  
same  year.  Larry  Davis  saw  to  it  that  we  could  order  the equipment needed as soon as 
possible and made the necessary arrangements to do so; AFOSR continues to support our program. We 
did not have labora- tory space to house the new equipment, but Caltech responded. Fred Anson, our  
Division  Chairman  at  the  time,  arranged  for  the  space  (which  once housed  the  X-ray  
machines  of Linus  Pauling)  and  Murph  Goldberger,  our President,  provided  funds for  the 
renovation  without delay — Murph  appre- ciated  the  physics and Fred saw the importance  of the 
new research  to che- mistry. By Thanksgiving  (1986) , we entered the new laboratory, and the CPM 
laser was operational  at the  “femtosecond  party” on December  11,  1986. We focused again on the 
ICN reaction,  but this time on the fs time scale in FEM- TOLAND I.

The Classic Femtosecond  ICN   Discovery
The  goal  of the  ICN  experiment  was  to  resolve  in  time  the  transition-state 
configurations en route to dissociation:

808                  Clumiistry 1999


P.oteniia1EnergySurfaca

t=200 Is


t=100 Is





































Displacement in C-I (au)

1 g0

Time Delay (Is)

J¥0

Figure 14. Femtochemistry of the ICN reaction, the first to be studied. The experimental results 
show the probing of the reaction in the transition state region  (rise and decay)  and the final CN 
fragment  (rise and  leveling)  with  precise clocking of  the process;  the total  time is 200 fs. 
The I fragment was also detected  to elucidate  the translational energy change v4th time. 
Classical and quantum calculations are shown  (see text).  [Ref. Bl,  B4, B6, B14, B16, BI8, Bl9, 
B28, 55]


ICN*     -I-   CN*        I + CN                                       (5)
Not only did we wish  to monitor  the final CN, free of the force field of iodine (which we did in 
1985) , but   also the transitory species I-   CN*  [Fig. 14]. The first  I-   CN** transient  
surprised  us,  but after long and  late  hours  of  discus- sions  and  control  experiments  it  
became  clear  that,  indeed,  the  ti ansition

Ahmed  H.   Zeuiail                                                     309

configurations  or  the  final  products  could  be  separately  monitored  in  real time. We 
submitted our first communication  to the Journal of Chemical Physics (received June 3, 1987) , and 
it was accepted on June  15, 1987. The referee of this paper was not only prompt,  but also, in  
retrospect,  visionary.  His report was ultrashort:  “It (the manuscript)  has the smell that the 
authors are onto some very exciting no     stuff. . .  This  manuscript  meets  off requirements  
for a communication. II
may  turn out to be a  classic. Publish Cth   all dispatch. ”
Our thinking  about the process of bond breakage was intuitive  and relied on  classical  concepts, 
 as discussed  in  the  prologue.  The  basic  observations made [Fig.  14] in  the ICN experiment  
could be related to the fs nuclear dy- namics; the delayed appearan-ce  of the CN (on-resonance) 
and the build-up and decay of transition  configurations (off-resonance) was understood using 
simple  classical  mechanics  and even  a helpful  kinetic picture  of A      B      C, describing  
the  “elementary”  steps of  the reaction.  Two papers  (I  and II  of a series) , published in the 
Journal of Chemical Physics, outlined the methodology of “femtosecond  transition-state 
spectroscopy  (FTS) ” with applications  to the ICN  dissociation  reaction.  From  these  first  
experiments,  we  expressed  the change  in  internuclear  separation  with  time, i.e.,  the  
reactin  trajectory,  and the time of bond breakage:


&  v(R’)
    AV(R  )    
vR' F(R'
'6'
For  a given  potential  of interaction  V,  the velocity  is v and  the  force  is F =
-dV/dR.
We obtained  the time of  the motion  to final products  (z)  and during  the transition  state  (i 
 ) , as well as the distance of separation  R(t). Thus, for a gi- ven total energy E, we expressed 
the distance of separation  between I and CN and  the  time of  bond  breakage,  and  compared  
these with  experimental  re- sults,  hitherto  unmeasured  directly.  Significantly, we were  
able,  for the  first time,  to  observe  the  passage  through  the  transition  state,  potential 
 energy window AV(R’), and measure its “lifetime” or transit time z  with fs resolution. This 
experiment on the dynamics of bond breaking and another one on  the dynamics of bond making  (H + 
COC      OH + CO) events were generally well received by colleagues in the scientific community 
worldwide. They even had impact on  the public press with  significant write-ups  in popular  
newspapers and magazines such as New York Times, Los Angeles Times, Discover,  ... etc. Isaac 
Asimov,  H. C. von Baeyer,  Gary Taubes,  Philip Ball, and other notable science  writers  gave  an 
 exposition  of this  published  work.  Many  books and textbooks referred and continue  to refer 
to this 1987 discovery.
The quantum picture was intuitive too. On the basis of the experience out- lined above, we could 
understand that coherent preparation  can lead to non- stationary states which  evolve with  time  
(motion!)  [Section II]. Extension  to chemical  reaction dynamics gives the following 
non-stationary wave packet:

'(R,t)= Z•i    y,(R) -exp(-i£it/6)                   (7)

310                                               Chemistry 1999

which evolves in time, similar to the two-level problem [Equation 4], but now with  spatial  R 
localization  because  of  the sum over many energy-states. This principle  of  superposition  
holds because  of  the linearity of  the  time-depen- dent Schrodinger  equation. The phases in 
[Equation 7] give rise to the inter- ferences  (quantum  coherence)  and  their  fluctuations,  due 
 to  intrinsic  an- harmonicities  or  interactions  with  the  environment,  lead  to  the  
delocaliza- tion.  Since  the  packet  can  be  synthesized  easily  when  the  sum  criterion  is 
satisfied,  the fs pulse becomes the ideal initiator of the motion  of nuclei in a reaction.
The concept  of describing  quantum  systems  using  wave  packets  is funda- mental  and goes  
back  to  the  1920’s  [Fig.  4] when  the  connection  between quantum  mechanics  and  classical  
phenomena  was  the  subject  of discussion and  correspondence  among  many  notable  scientists  
such  as  Schrfidinger, Lorentz and others'; Sections HI4 and HI6 highlight the theoretical 
develop- ments  since  then. The ICN  results demonstrated  the experimental  observa- tion of wave 
packets in molecular systems, and since then they have been  syn- thesized in atoms, complex 
molecules, and biological systems, as well as in the different  phases of gases, liquids, clusters 
and solids. The behavior observed for ICN was found in other studies,  the most recent is an 
elegant series of ex- periments of “bubbles in solids” by Majed Chergui's group in Lausanne.
The question  then was: would quantum  calculations reproduce  the experi- mental results obtained 
for ICN? Dan Imre, being skeptical in the beginning, did  the first of  such  calculations,  and 
the results were important  in showing the influence of the wave packet motion  and spreading  on  
the observed FTS transients.  Horia  Metiu  addressed  the  role  of  rotations.  We  compared  the 
quantum results with those obtained from the classical model of Bersohn and Zewail [Fig 14]. The 
model described the experimental  trends quite well, just as did  the  quantum  picture.  This was  
followed  by  reports  of  tr@ectory  cal- culations  from  Kent  Wilson's  group  and  a 
density-matrix  description  from Shaul Mukamel's group. The latter emphasized  the different 
limits of depha- sing  and  the  time  scale  for nuclear  motion. All theoretical  results  
exhibited the general  trends  observed  experimentally. In  our early papers on ICN, we suggested  
that  the  6-function  limit  of  wave  packet  dynamics  could  be  ob- tained if proper 
deconvolution was made, knowing  the temporal response of the pulses. Very recently, Volker Engel 
and Niels Henriksen  reported  a quan- tum  theoretical  agreement with  this simple picture and 
discussed its genera- lity.

The Nal Discovery: A Paradigm for the Field
There were two issues that needed to be established on firmer bases: the  issue of the uncertainty 
principle and  the influence of more complex potentials on


5  Schrñdinger  wrote  a theoretical  paper  [Naturwissenschaften 14, 664  (1926) ], pointing out  
the transition  from micro- to macro-mechanics using  the superposition  of eigenstates. There was 
a correspondence between Schrodinger and Lorentz on this problem and the difficulty of making wave 
groups or wave packets.

Ahmed  H.    fail                                                   311

the ability of the  technique  (FTS)  to probe  reactions.  The  alliali  halide reac- tions were 
thought of as perfect prototypes.  Because they involve two potenti- als  (covalent  and ionic)  
along  the  reaction  coordinate,  I thought we would have  fun  with  these  systems.  Moreover,  
their  unique  historical  position  in crossed  molecular  beam  experiments  (‘the Alkali  Age”)  
made  them  good candidates for the “femto age”. The reaction of NaI, unlike ICN, involves two 
electronic  coordinates  and one  nuclear  coordinate,  the separation  between Na and I. The 
resonance motion between  covalent and ionic configurations is the key to the dynamics of bond 
breakage. How could we probe such tnoftoa in re- al time? We did  the  FTS  experiments  on  NaI  
and NaBr,  and  the  results,  pu- blished  in  1988,  were  thrilling  [Fig.  15]  and  made  us  
feel  very  confident about the ability of FTS to probe transition states and final fragments. The 
re- sults also illustrated the importance of coherent wave packets in quasi-bound systems.  The  
Nal  experiment  was  a watershed  event  leading  to  an  entirely new paradigm in  the field of 
femtochemistry and establishing some new con- cepts for the dynamics of the chemical bond.
First, we could show experimentally that the wave packet was highly localiz- ed in space, -  0.1A, 
thus establishing the concept of dynamics at atomic-scale re- solution.  Second,  the spreading of 
the wave packet was minimal up to a few pi- coseconds,  thus  establishing  the  concept  of 
single-molecule trajectory,  i.e.,  the ensemble  coherence  is  indufed  effectively,  as  if the  
molecules  are glued  to- gether, even though we start with a random and noncoherent ensemble — the 
world of dynamics,  trot kinetics. Third, vibrational  (rotational)  coherence was observed  during 
 the  entire  course  of  the  reaction  (detecting  products  or transition  states),  thus  
establishing  the  concept  of  coherent  trajectories  in  reac- tions, from reactants to 
products. Fourth,  on the fs time scale,  the description of the dynamics follows an intuitive 
classical picture (marbles rolling on poten- tial surfaces)  since the spreading of the packet is 
minimal. Thus, a time-evolv- ing profile of the reaction  becomes parallel  to our thinking  of the 
evolution from reactants,  to transition  states, and then  to products. The emerging pic- ture is 
physically and chemically  appealing,  and compellingly demonstrated that conversion  from the 
energy space to the time domain is not needed.
Finally,  the NaI case was  the  first to demonstrate  the  resonance  behavior,  in real time, of 
a bond converting  from being covalent to being ionic along the reaction coordinate. From  the 
results, we obtained the key parameters of the dynamics  such  as  the  time  of bond  breakage,  
the  covalent/ionic  coupling magnitude,  the branching  of trajectories,  etc. In  the  1930’s, 
Linus Pauling's description of this bond was static at equilibrium; only now can the dynamics be 
described in real time by preparing structures far from equilibrium.  I still reflect on  the 
beauty of these NaI experiments  and the rich  number of con- cepts they brought to dynamics.  Some 
of the concepts were not as clear when we  hrst  made  the  observations  as  they are  now.  The  
paradigm  shift  in  our thinking is linked and similar in value to the work on IVR [Section HI2], 
but the difference  is major — for IVR we studied coherence of states, but for reac- tions we 
observed coherence of the nuclear motion with atomic resolution.
After  the initial set of experiments,  we continued  on  this system  for some

312                Chemistry 1999



Traje‹ttriu  R,t






Covalent:  Na + I








5                 10               15
Internuclear Separation tAj






Free-fragment detemion





Activated-complex
detectlon


-2       -J         0        1        2        3        4        S        6        7        8
Tmedeay(ps)


Figure  15.  Femtochemistry  of  the  NaI  reaction,  Ltte  paradigm  case.  The  experimental  
results show the resonance motion between  the covalent and ionic structures ot the bond, and the 
time scales for the reaction and for the spreading of the wave packet. Two transients are shown for 
the activated complexes in transition states and for final fragments. Note the “quantized” behavior 
of the signal,  not simply an exponential  rise  or decay of  the ensemble. The classical  motion  
is si- mulated as trajectories in space and time  (top). [Ref. BI, B4, B12, B14, B17, B19, B28, 56)


time,  exploring  other  phenomena  of  interest.  The  studies  included:   (1) direct observation 
 of the  reaction  trajectory in R and  t, and   the resolution of the motion  into and Jom  the  
transition state  (this work was first published  in Nature, London) ;  (2)  direct observation  of 
recurrences  (echo-type),  reflect- ing rephasing at long times  (t = 20-40 ps), and  their 
relationship to quantum interference  effects due  to the  resonance  behavior of the motion  on  
the co-

Ahmed  H.  Zewail                                             313

valent  and  ionic  potentials  (this  work  was  published  in  Chemical  Physics Letters) ; (3) 
studies of the effect of the velocity of the  nuclei on  the crossing- to-products  probability,  
providing  the  interaction  matrix  element  for  the coupling  between  the  covalent  and  ionic 
 potentials,  and  the  classical  and quantum  treatment  of  the  dynamics  (these  studies  were 
 published  in  the J   urnal of Physical Chemistry and Journal   of Chemical Physics).
Numerous  theoretical  and  experimental  papers  have  been  published  by
colleagues and  the  system  enjoys a central  role in femtodynamics. From  the beginning we 
understood  the moor features of the  dynamics from  the point of  view  of  classical  mechanics.  
The  “exact”  quantum  calculations  were  first made by Volker Engel and Horia Metiu and  these 
were important in identify- ing the sensitivity of the  observations  to details of the  motion and 
 the poten- tial. The  agreement with  the  experimental  results was remarkable. The same 
agreement  was found  for  later  theoretical  studies  involving  classical,  quan- tum, and 
semiclassical approaches.

The Saddle-Point Transition State
Our   next goal was to examine reactions governed by multidimensional (nuc- lear)  potentials, 
starting with  “barrier reactions” which define a saddle-point transition  state, the  classic case 
of chemistry textbooks. If the  reaction  dyna- mics  involve  more  than  one  nuclear  
coordinate,  an  interesting  question arises:  can one observe in  real time the reactive 
evolution  from the TS  at  the saddle point  to  final  products  on  the global  PES? The   
question  was  addressed  by  per- forming femtochemistry on ABA Systems. The  IHgI system was the  
so-called “gift experiment” I suggested  to a new postdoctoral fellow in our  group, who joined  us 
in 1988 from  Ken  Eisenthal's  group.  Stunning  observations  were made — the    product HgI was  
coherently formed from  the  transition  state [Fig. 16]. Also, the transition state, which absorbs 
a probe fs pulse in the red, as op- posed to the Hgl product which absorbs in the UV, was found to 
live for only
-200 fs and  this state  produces  different  coherent product  states  (different periods   of   
vibrational   oscillation).   It   was   also   in   this   system   that   we studied  coherence  
of  rotational  motion  (real-time  alignment)  and  learned about the geometry of the  (initially 
prepared)  transition-state, activated com- plex IHgI*  .
With simple theoretical PES's and  molecular dynamics simulations we exa- mined  details of  the  
motion,  but  the  major features were evident in  the  ex- perimental  observations.  Originally,  
we studied  the TS and  the  evolution  to HgI products by using laser-induced  fluorescence. 
Later, we used mass spec- trometry  to also detect  the I atoms and  the  translational  energy;  
this effort triggered a great deal of theoretical work [Fig. 16] in our group addressing, in depth, 
the actual meaning of classical TS structure  (see Section IV). Features of  this reaction  were 
similarly found  in other classes of  reactions,  including those in condensed  phases and  
biological systems.
The studies of this ABA system were published with an emphasis on the fol- lowing  points:  First, 
coherent  nuclear  motion  can  be  observed  on  tnufti-dt- mensional  surfaces involving  
multiple-bond  breakage  (or  formation).  Second,

314









0.8



0.6


0.4


0.2
Chemistry 1999






Rotadonal  Motion (ps)



















—   Rotational aIignme‹s


—500      0      500   1000   1500   2000   2500   3000   3500
Time (femtoseconds)





Figure  16. Femtochemistry of  the IHgI reaction,  the saddle-point  transition  state  (barrier  
reac- tions).  The experimental  results show  both  the coherent vibrational  and rotational  
motions  of the reaction  (A, above). The transition  state IHgI*   and final fragment Hgl were 
probed. We al- so probed the I fragment and the change of translational energy with  time. The 
classical  trajec- tory calculations are shown  in (B, next page), together with experimental 
results for I detection; both  theory and experiment illustrate  the family of reaction  
trajectories on the global PES, in  ti- me and in kinetic energy distribution.  Q_uantum  
calculations were also done  (not shown). This ABA system is a prototype  for saddle-point 
transition  states.  [Ref. Bl,  B4, B6, BI0, 57]


coherence  survives  the  entire  reaction  journey,  even  in  multi-dimensional systems,  and  
yields  selective  coherence-in-products.  Third, for  the  first  time,  a saddle-point  TS can  
be seen evolving in  real time. Fourth, the  TS can be aligned (oriented) at  zero time and  seen 
evolving into rotations of the diatom  (AB)  and the translation of the A and  AB fragments — the   
 vibrational  (scalar)  and  rota- tional  (vectorial)  motions were easily separated  using 
polarized fs pulses.

The Uncertainty  Principle Paradox
At the time when  I was giving lectures on  the above examples of elementary reactions,  some were 
raising  a question about the  “energy resolution” of the fs experiments:  flow can a broad-energf  
pulse probe a sharp resonance ?  In the con-

315





















I-Detection


!“‘     t —— 1  ps
10





r——O


5            10           15
r  [A]


-1    0     1    2     3    4     5     6
Reaction Time (ps)


ventional  teaching  on spectroscopy of  “eigenstates”, one thinks of stationary states   and   
their   populations   (diagonal   elements   of   the   density   matrix [Equation 4]), but now we 
must think of coherent states. All information  per- tinent to eigenstates is in the wave packet 
structure. This point was elucidated by our  experiments  on  a  bound  nonreactive  system — the  
iodine  system  [Fig. 17].  Serendipity  was  at work.  We  were  initiating  studies  of  the  FTS 
 of  CdI (from the family of HgI₂) and instead observed the wave packet motion of I₂, made  from  
the  samples  of  CdI   without  our  knowledge!  It  turned  out  that when  we  heated  Cdlq,  we 
 made  If,  which  gave  us  striking  oscillatory  tran- sients.  The  oscillations  directly  
gave  the  periods  of  the  nuclear  (vibration) motion,  and  the  data  could  be  related  to  
the  change  with  time  of  the  I-I separation  and  the  rotation  of  1₂; the  time  scales 
were  separated  (fs  es.  ps) and  the  vibrational  (scalar)  and  rotational  (vectorial)  
motion  were  clearly seen.
We  used  classical  mechanical  inversion  methods  and  the RKR and  quan-
tum  inversion  methods  to characterize  the potential. This was followed  by a

316                                            Chemistry 1999


















2                                             5
r(I—I),  d










6Xmt0N4G






TIeo Ddny (Ci)
Figure  17.  Femtosecond,  real  time  observation  of  the  vibrational  (and  rotational)  motion 
 of iodine. The experiments show the anharmonic nature of the bound motion. Q_uantum  theory in- 
dicates  the  limit  for  creating  a  localized  wave  packet  on   the  fs  time  scale.  The  
localized wave packet describes  the classical spring motion. [Ref. Bl,  B6, Bl7, B18, B25, 58]


study of  the ICI system. It became evident that:  (1)  t/ie uncertainty  iti energyfor short 
pulses works in  otir/acer, and the shorter the pulses, the better the localiz- ation  of  the wave 
 packet;  and  (2)  we could now observe  the vibrations  and ro- tation of molecules  itt real 
time, not from energy spectra. This work was first pub- lished  in  Nature  (London)  and  detailed 
 later  in  the J   urnal  of  Chemical
Physics. Because  the initial experiments were made on a diatomic molecule,
the significance  of  this piece of work was originally  missed,  until  later when many  complex  
systems  showed  surprisingly  similar  behavior.  The  real  mes- sage of  this 1₂ experiment was 
in its conceptual elucidation  of the role of the uncertainty  principle  and  the  robustness  of  
time,  space,  and energy resolu- tions because of cotence: Because dx Ap   fi and At AE   fi, we 
can achieve  lo- calization with a very small de Broglie wavelength.

Ahmed  H.   Zeuiail                                               317

Bimolecular  Bond Making N  Breaking.- Bernstein's Passion
Bimolecular  reactions  were  ready  for  a femtosecond  treatment,  to  observe the “simultaneous” 
processes of bonds being broken  and formed. With Dick Bernstein  (1987), we had studied the IH/CO  
 system. The problem was that, for bimolecular  reactions,  the transient time for reactants to 
undergo a colli- sion is generally nanoseconds  to microseconds.  By using van der Waals com- 
plexes,  an  idea  introduced  for  the  studies  of  product-state  distributions  by Benoit Soep 
and Curt Wittig, we could expand HI and CO   in a single mole- cular  beam.  But now, with  the  
two reagents within  angstroms  of  each  other, we could examine  the dynamics of  the single 
collision. We used  the first pul- se to liberate the H atom with  a given translational  energy 
and a second pul- se to probe the nascent OH product — the zero of time became well-defined and the 
collision was that of a limited impact parameter. The results were exciting and,  in  our joint 
paper,  Dick  termed  this  the  “birth  of  OH  from  H + COC”. Wittig's group improved  the time  
resolution  and studied  the energy depen- dence of the rates. Fig. 18 gives a summary for this 
system.
The H + CO   ground-state reaction  proved  to be important for a number of reasons.  First,  it 
showed  how Reactive  Scattering Resonances  can  be  probed  in real  time  during  the  collision 
 and  for  a  system  of  a  complex  number  of degrees of freedom.  Second,  the experiments  
established  that the  intermediate HOCO   lives for i     1 ps and that for this reaction  the OH 
bond-making  and the CO bond-breaking  are made in a nonconcerted  pathway. The nuclear mo- tions 
of HOCO thus determine  the reaction mechanism. If z was found to be 10 -100 fs, the picture would  
have  been  entirely different;  bond-making  and breaking would occur as a result of the electron 
redistribution with the nuclei essentially  “frozen”  in  configuration.  Obtaining  i  directly  
is  critical  for  the nature  of  the  transition  state/intermediate.  This  is  particularly  
true  when  i  is much  longer  than  the vibrational  and rotational  periods,  and all other  me- 
thods will fail in deducing z. Third, it provided a direct test of theory at the ab iti- itio  
level.  High  quality  ab  initio  calculations  of  the  PES  and  dynamics  have been  made  
available  by David  Clary,  George  Schatz, John  Zhang  and  many others. Theory compares 
favorably with experiments showing that resonances must  be  considered — the  vibrations  of  HOCO 
 bottleneck  the  trajectories. The  reaction  OH + CO      COC + H is one of the key reactions  in 
 both  com- bustion  and atmospheric  chemistry,  and represents the most studied  4-atom reaction, 
both theoretically and experimentally [see Ref. 27].
We constructed  FEMTOLAND  II, and I thought it would be interesting  to examine  “halogen  
bimolecular  reactions”.  Precursors,  of which  the H-Br/I-I system  is a prototype,  were  chosen 
 to study  bimolecular  halogen  atom  + ha- logen molecule reactions.  Upon breaking  the HBr 
bond,  the hydrogen  goes many angstrñms  away from  the  field of  the  reaction  (in  
femtoseconds)  and
we are left with  the Br + 12  collision.  This halogen  reaction  had a history  in crossed  
molecular  beam  experiments  and comparison  with  real-time  experi-
mental results would be interesting.  The Br + I   reaction  was examined  and found to occur 
through  a sticky (    50 picoseconds)  collision  complex. It is a stable  intermediate  of  BrII, 
 and  there  is no  other way we  know of  to deter-

318                                             CHmistry 1999





12












Reaction Coordinate



Experimental






wave  pacl‹et

1  ps

Time deiay (ps)



Figure 18. Femtochemistry of the bimolecular H+CO   reaction. The precursor in this molecular beam 
experiment is HI/COC in a van der Waals complex. The initial experiments utilized ps pul- ses, but 
later sub-ps pulses were used  (see text). Theoretical  at  initio calculations of the PES and the 
dynamics (classical, semiclassical  and quantum wave packet)  have all been reported; the PES and 
wave  packet calculations are from  the work of D. Clary,  G. Schatz and J.  Zhang.  [27] The 
transit species HOCO   lives for -lps. Similar studies were made of reactive Br+I   and of the ine- 
lastic collision  between I and CH  I. [Ref. Bl,  B5, Bl0, Bl6, B19, 59]

mine its lifetime and dynamics.  We examined classical  trajectories of motion and compared  them 
with  the experimental  results. In more recent work, the McDonald  group  obtained  similar  times 
and discussed  the possibility  of  the involvement of ground and excited halogen surfaces. In this 
study of an atom
+ diatom  collision, we learned the effect of impact parameters,  the influence of  translational  
energy,  and  the  interplay  between  bonding  and  dynamics. The analogy between  full-collision 
(Br + 12) and half-collision (hv + Iq) dyna-
mics was based on the change in bonding, and we used frontier orbitals to de-
scribe such an  analogy.  Studies  of  bimolecular  collisions  in  complex  systems have  
continued  in  our  and  other  laboratories;  the  most  recent  came  from NIST (}ohn  Stephenson 
 and colleagues)  on the studies of CH₄ + O      CH₃ +
OH, using CH-4     O3 as a precursor.

Ahmed  H.  Zeuiail                                             319

Ultrafast Electron Diffraction (UED)
FEMTOLAND   III  was   the   home   of   our   next  effort,   Ultrafast   Electron Diffraction  
(UED) . Our  goal was  to complement  the  detection  schemes  of spectroscopy  and  mass 
spectrometry  and  to  use diffraction  to follow  struc- tural changes,  especially for  large 
systems.  I proposed  the  idea in 1991 in  a Faraday  Discussion  paper  [B17],  and  we  had  our 
  first  success  in  1992.  We were able to record structures with an  electron  pulse duration of 
a few pico- seconds,  but with no time scan. This was followed  by other studies,  both  on the  
theoretical  and  experimental  fronts.  In  our  group,  rumor  had  it  that UED was a “NO  to 
the  power 10 experiment!” We now have the third gene- ration of UED machines, with a group of 
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows participating. In a Nature paper in 1997, we reported 
our state-of-the- art  experimental development of the  methodology. We also developed a “dif- 
ference-method” which allows us to record the structure of radicals, carbenes and  intermediates, 
and with  higher sensitivity,  as discussed  below in Section IH6.
Clusters, Dense Fluids  N  Liquids, and No   Femtolands
With  the  above-mentioned spectroscopy,  mass spectrometry and  diffraction techniques, it was 
becoming possible to study many new systems. In  addition to FEMTOLANDS  I to III, PICOLANDS I and  
II were still operational in or- der  to cover the different time scales of reaction dynamics. We 
are now up  to FEMTOLAND Vl. Two additional  beam machines, equipped with mass spec- trometry  and  
 spectroscopic   detectors,  were  added.  These   new  FEMTO- LANDS  were  built  to accommodate  
the  expanding  scope  of  research,  from gas phase to clusters,  to liquids and  dense fluids, to 
the world of complex or- ganic and  inorganic chemistry, and  to the very complex biological 
systems. I find complex  reactions fascinating and  we have devoted significant effort to this  
area,  studying  both  uni-  and  bimolecular  reactions.  We  also  maintain strong theoretical 
efforts on  mohcufor structures and  molecular dynamics to com- pare theory with experiment on the 
relevant time scale.
Theoretical Femtochemistry
Our   involvement  had  roots in  the  study of  coherence  and  dephasing.  This line of research 
was initiated  by using pulsed lasers to form a coherent state, [Equation 4]. The  evolution  was 
followed in  time to obtain  the pure dephas- ing time  (T2’), which  reflects  the  extent of 
phase interruptions, and the po-
pulation or energy decay time  (TI). We invoked  theoretical  techniques such
as density matrix formalism, Kubo relaxation  theory and the Bloch equations to describe  the  
optical  analogue  of  NMR experiments.  The  1956 Feynman, Vernon and  Hellwarth  paper [29] was 
an important contribution,  as it point- ed out  the linkage between “spin” and  “optical” 
coherence experiments: even in the absence of a magnetic field, used in the former, one can use a 
rotating frame  picture  to describe  such optical experiments. All of  this was known  at the 
time. Our  interest in theory was to relate T₁ and Tq  to molecular  proces- ses and  to learn  
about  their formal  limits of applicability. We wrote  a book

320                                               Chemistry 1999

chapter [B9] on the subject and published a number of papers relating these relaxation  times  to  
the  anharmonicity  of  molecular  vibrations,  the  phonon structure of solids, and  collision 
dynamics in gases.
For  collisionless,  large  molecules,  the  issue  of  intramolecular  electronic- states coupling 
was, by the  1970’s, well developed  theoretically and heavily im- bedded  in  theories  of  
radiationless  transitions  formulated  to  explain  the origin  of  non-radiative  decays.  Wilse  
Robinson, Joshua Jortner,  Stuart  Rice and  many others were involved  in  the  early stages of  
this development. The Bixon-Jortner   model  gave   the  description   for  such  
inter-electronic-states coupling  and  the  important  role  of  preparing  a doorway  state which  
“dep- hases”  and   “relaxes”  depending  on  electronic  coupling   matrix  element, Franck-Condon 
 factors and  the density of states [30].
For IVR [Section III  2], we developed  a theoretical description  for the co- herent preparation 
of a set of vibrational eigenstates on a single potential sur- face, defining  the preparation  of 
a non-stationary vibrational packet, with the role of rotations and vibrational couplings 
explicitly expressed. The  probabi- lity of being in the initial state y0 is:
P(t) =€   Jo I W(t)Tl² = Zm(i,j)   expr—(i(D;; +   )t]         (  )

where  the  sum  is  over  a  product  of  coefficients  n,  and  displays  the  inter- ference of 
states i and  j,  together with  their damping rate F. This  treatment was  useful  because:  (1)  
it  gives  a  direct  view  of  IVR,  from  the  initial  non- stationary state and as a function 
of time; (2) it indicates the critical role of se- lective probing — if all states were monitored, 
coherence would be obscured. On  the other hand,  selectivity provides rich  information  on  the 
nature  and extent of IVR, the level structure and the phase changes; and  (3) it shows that P(t)  
is a measure  of vibrational  chaos, defining what we called  restricted  or nonchaotic IVR — 
coherence among vibrational states of a single electronic po- tential. Similarly, we considered  
the theory for rotational coherence using po- larization-analyzed probes. This was treated in a 
series of papers with focus on the  phenomenon  of  pure  rotational  coherence  and  its utility 
for  molecular structural determination, and the rotational dephasing time.
At  the  time  of  the  first femtochemistry experiment,  I was thinking  of  the coherent state — 
wave packet — as an extension of the above picture. However, the span of states is now sufficient 
to create a localized, in R-space, atomic-sca- le wave  packet [Equation 7]; see also Section III6. 
We needed  a classical  pic- ture  to connect with  Newtonian  mechanics,  a simplified  picture  
of  the  mo- tion.  The   first  of  such   models  was   published   after   we   considered   the 
theoretical  treatment  of  absorption  of  fragments  during  reactions.  We  ob- tained  the 
following expression:
A(t;R) = C(a² + w²(t,t'))*'                     (9a)
where C is a constant and W = V(t) -  V(t+)  is the potential  (or more general-

Ahmed  H.  Zeuiail

ly, the difference  of the two potentials probed) ; d is a half-width of the pulse (and damping).  
For  exponential  repulsion,  V = E sech*  (vt/2L)  with  L de- fining   the   length   scale   and 
 v  being   the   speed   at   the   total   energy   E. Accordingly,  the  time for bond breakage  
can  be related  to FTS observables [Section III4]:
zgB  = (L/v) I»(4E/ñ)                                (9b)
This expression  defines  bond  breakage  time when  the  potential  drops  to a value of  h. The  
model  is basic and  describes  the reaction  trajectory  R(t)  or r (R). It provides a simple 
connection  between  observations and the dissoci- ation  time,  transition-state  lifetime,  and  
the  forces  of  the  potential   [see Equabon 6 and Fig. 14]. While Dick  Bernstein  was at 
Caltech, we extended the model to obtain the potential using an inversion approach. We published 
two papers on the subject. Peter Sorokin and colleagues at IBM have addres- sed different limits of 
 the classical  regime  in connection  with  their original studies of fs transient absorption  of 
dissociation  [B50].
Next, we considered  the treatment of the effect of alignment and orienta- tion on femtochemical 
reaction dynamics. I considered  the time evolution of alignment  and  coherence  for  a  single  
rotational  angular  momentum  and then averaged  the different  trajectories to define  the 
coherence  time;  r   (in ps)  becomes simple and equal  to 2.2[B < ñp >] l'*, where  B is the 
rotational constant and < ñp> is the average thermal rotational energy (cm ’) produced in the 
reaction fragment(s). We applied this to reactions and I wrote a paper on the subject, published  
in 1989 [B18]. This was followed, in collaboration with Spencer Baskin, by a paper describing the 
details of the approach and its applications.
In quantum treatments, we have benefited greatly from the advances made in  theoretical  formalism  
and computation.  A major  step forward  was made when Rick Heller [31] reformulated  the 
time-dependent picture for applica- tions  in  spectroscopy,  and Jim  Kinsey  and  Dan  Imre  [31] 
 described  their novel dynamical Raman experiments in terms of wave packet theory. Progress
was significantly  helped  by advances  made in  the  theoretical  execution  and speed  of  
computation  by  Ronnie  Kosloff  [31]  and,  subsequently,  by  many others.  In Section  III6, we 
 discuss  the  contributions  made  in  the 1980’s  in connection  with quantum control.
As mentioned  above,  the  groups  of  Imre  and  Metiu  did  the first  “exact” quantum 
calculations of femtochemical dynamics (ICN and NaI). The litera- ture is now rich with numerous 
theoretical studies. There is a parallelism  be- tween the experimental diversity of applications 
in different areas and the im- pressive  theoretical  applications  to  many  experiments  and  
systems.  This  is summarized in the (1996 Nobel Symposium)  book edited by Villy Sundstrom on 
Femtochemistry and Femtobiology [28]. Jiirn Manz, who has played a sig- nificant   role   in   this 
  field,   gave   an   overview   of   developments   since Schrodinger's 1926 paper, with 1500 
references. Jorn classifies the field into periods  of  origins,  sleeping  beau],  renaissance,  
and  rnofuitoa.  In  this  Nobel Symposium  book  (and  another  one [30]) Jortner  provides  a 
unifying  over-

322                                                      Chemists  1999

view   of  molecular   dynamics   in   femtochemistry  and   femtobiology,   and Mukamel gives an 
exposition  of a general approach using the density matrix formalism. In the same volume, Clary 
presents the state-of-the-art in quantum theory of chemical  reaction  dynamics while Marcus and 
Casey Hynes review transition  state  theories for rates and dynamics.
Theory and experiment are now hand-in-hand,  and many laboratories are doing both. For elementary 
chemical reactions,  the above classical/quantum picture captured  the essence of  the observation  
and in many cases the com- parison  between  theory  and  experiment  was  tested  critically.  For 
 complex systems,  our  theoretical  effort  has  taken  on  a different  approach.  With  the help 
of molecular dynamics  (MD)  simulations,  we  compare  theory with  ex- periments. Then we use the 
MD simulations as a tool and vary parameters un- til we reduce the problem to identify the 
important key forces of dynamics. At this point, we can provide a microscopic dynamical picture 
with focus on the relative   vibrational   coordinates,   time   scales   or  system   parameters.  
 Two examples  illustrate  the  point.  The  first  was  our  study  of the  dynamics  of a guest 
molecule  in dense  fluids with focus on the density dependence  of mi- croscopic friction, Tl  and 
Tq, and of bond breaking/remaking dynamics. The
second is the study of numerous organic reaction mechanisms.  For the latter,
we  also  use  advanced  computational  methods,  such  as  Density  Functional Theory  (DFT) ,  ab 
 inttio  and  CASSCF  computations.  For  ground-state  reac- tions, the theory can be compared in 
a critical way with experiment, while for excited states the situation  is more challenging  [32].

Experimental Femtochemistry
The generation, amplification, and characterization of ultrashort pulses are a major part of 
femtochemistry experiments. Another is the reaction chamber: molecular-beam machine, gas cell, 
ultrahigh-vacuum  (UHV)  surface appara- tus or the high-pressure/liquid cell. Here, we mention  
only the different sys- tems designed for the studies presented in this anthology; further details 
can be found  in  the  book  chapter  I wrote  for  the volumes  edited  by Manz  and Woste [B6] 
and in the two volumes of our collected works [16].
At Caltech, over the years, we have constructed different types of lasers de- pending  on  the  
particular  development  and  the resolution  needed,  picose- cond  to femtosecond  [see Fig.  19] 
; one  apparatus  is shown  in Fig.  S.  Since 1976, and in evolutionary order,  these are:
(1)   Passive  mode-locked,  and  cavity-dumped, dye laser  (pumped  by a CW argon  ion  laser) ; 
Ippen  and Shank cavity design. Pulse  characteristics: 615—625 nm, 2.4 ps (and 0.7 ps), 2 nJ, 100 
kHz repetition  rate.
(2)   Synchronously  pumped,  mode-locked  dye laser system  (pumped by an actively  mode-locked  
argon  ion  laser) .  Pulse  characteristics:  550—600 nm, 3.1 ps, 1.8 nJ.  82 MHz repetition  
rate.
(3)   Mode-locked argon ion laser. Pulse characteristics: 514.5 nm, 150 ps, 12
nJ, 82 MHz repetition  rate.
(4)   Synchronously  pumped,  cavity-dumped  dye laser  (pumped by a mode-

Ahmed  H.  Zeuiail                                               323































Figure 19. Examples of  (A, above)  the laser systems utilized in different laboratories  (for more 
details see text and Ref. B6)  (B, next page)  the two-dimensional (time & wavelength)  correlated 
pattern of a fs pulse  (M. Chachisvilis, unpublished  work from this laboratory).


locked argon ion laser). Pulse characteristics: 550—750 nm, 15 ps, 20 nJ, 4 MHz repetition rate.
(5)   Mode-locked  (CW)  Nd:YAG laser which synchronously  pumps two dye lasers, with two 
amplifiers pumped by a 20 Hz Q-switched  Nd:YAG laser. Pulse characteristics: 550—750 nm,  3—5 ps,  
  1 mJ, 20 Hz repetition rate.
(6)   Dye  lasers  as  described  in  (5)  with  an  extra-cavity  pulse  compressor (using a 
fiber-grating optics arrangement)  to obtain -  0.4 ps pulses.
(7)   Colliding-pulse mode-locked  (CPM)  ring dye laser  (pumped  by a CW argon ion laser), and 
amplified in a four-stage dye amplifier pumped by a YAG laser. A compression at the output of the  
amplifier was also used. Pulse characteristics: 615-625 nm,  70 fs,    0.5 mJ, 20 Hz repetition  
rate.
(8)   Synchronously  pumped, cavity-dumped  dye lasers  (two),  pumped  by a

324                                                 Chemistry 1999






10




m  O





10





z00

Time Delay, fs
200

@switched,  mode-locked  Nd:YAG  laser.  Pulse  characteristics: 550—750 rim, 50 ps,  10 yJ,  < 
1000 Hz repetition  rate.
(9)   Passively mode-locked,  dispersion-compensated tunable dye laser (syn- chronously    pumped   
 by   a   frequency-doubled,   CW,    mode-locked Nd:YAG  laser),  amplified  in  a four-stage  dye 
 amplifier.  The  compres- sion  is after  the  amplifier.  Pulse  characteristics: 500—700  rim,  
150  fs,  l mJ, 20 Hz repetition  rate.
(10)   CPM  laser-amplifier system  similar  to  (7) ,  used for ultrashort  electron pulse 
generation.  Pulse  characteristics: 615—625  nm, 60 fs, 1 mJ,  30 Hz repetition  rate.
(11)   Ti:sapphire  laser  system,  Sibbett-type,  argon-ion  pumped;  Ti:sapphire amplifier  
pumped  by Nd:YAG laser. Pulse  characteristics: 750—850  nm, 50 fs, 0.7 mJ,  lkHz repetition  
rate; one OPA system.
(12)   Ti:sapphire   laser   system;   oscillator,   diode   pumped   and   amplifier (Ti:sapphire) 
 Nd:YLF  (2)  pumped — all solid state (no gas lasers). Pulse characteristics: 750 nm  to 850 nm,  
50 to  100 fs,  2 mJ,  l  kHz repetition rate. With  two Optical Parametric Amplifiers  (OPA), the 
tunability 1.1 to 2.6 y, with nonlinear conversions,  200 rim to 2.6 y.

Ahmed  H.  Zeuiail                                             325

(13)   Ti:sapphire  laser system, same as (12), but pulse width  120 fs and ener- gy 3 mJ, I  kHz 
repetition  rate.
For recording and clocking in any study, the resolution must be determined accurately, as must the 
zero-of-time  (t=0). The pulses were characterized  using auto-correlation  and  cross-correlation  
techniques,  typically  by  scanning  the time delay between  the two pulses  (of the same or 
different  colors)  in an in- terferometer arrangement and observing the sum- or 
difference-frequency ge- neration in a non-linear crystal. In this way, we can obtain  the duration 
of the pulse. The central frequency of  the pulse  can  be determined  by passing  the pulse 
through  a calibrated spectrometer,  while  the shape of the pulse can be obtained   from   
frequency-resolved-optical-gating   (FROG)    measurements, where the time and frequency components 
of the pulse are correlated and dis- played as a ?-D image [Fig. 19]. In clocking experiments,  the 
zero-of-time was precisely  determined  by  an  in-situ  measurement,  typically  using  ionization 
techniques  in  beam  experiments,  lensing  techniques  in  diffraction  experi- ments, or the 
solvent response in condensed phase experiments.
The detection  probes are numerous.  Initially, we used laser-induced  fluor- escence for 
selectivity and sensitivity, and there we had a Jrquency-time  correla- fioti. Later, we invoked 
mass spectrometry  (multiphoton  ionization)  for mass- tis    2D correlations.  This was followed  
by  speed-time  and  angle-time  correlations. All   these   correlations    proved   important   
in    the   studies   of   complex systems; a prime example was the application  of the latter two 
correlations to the  study  of  electron   transfer   in  isolated  bimolecular   reactions   and  
in clusters.  For absorption-type measurements,  we introduced  non-linear  tech- niques such  as 
degenerate-four-wave mixing.  In  a recent  collaboration  with the groups of Wolfgang Kiefer and 
Arnulf Materny, we also used CARS, with frequency-time correlations  to study the dynamics of 
ground-state systems, in this case polymers.  Other detection  methods are: energy-resolved and 
ZEKE photoelectron  spectroscopy,  Coulomb  explosion,  ion-electron  coincidence ionization  
techniques,  absorption  and photodetachment spectroscopy.  The range  of wavelength  is from  the  
IR to  the far UV. Absorption,  emission,  re- flection, ionization, and diffraction  have all been 
involved [Fig. 6].

(5) Femtocopia — Examples from Caltech
The range of applications to different systems  and phases in many laborato- ries around the world 
is extensive  and beyond the purpose  of this report. In this section we limit ourselves to the 
examples studied by the Caltech group. The details are given in the original publications and are 
summarized  in the reviews and books mentioned here. Fig. 20 gives a summary of  the different 
areas studied at Caltech with chronological  flow from the south to the north!

Elementary Reactions and  Transition States
The focus here was on the studies of elementary reactions.  Some of these ha-
ve already been discussed above. The  dynamics are generally of three classes:
(i)      Dynamics of Bond Breakage

326                                                 Chemistry  1999
































Figure  20. Femtochemistry branches,  from  the early days of  studying  elementary reactions and 
transition states (“southern part”)  to current activities (“northern part”). The flow has produced 
the different branches studied at Caltech.


(ii)     Dynamics of the (saddle)  Transition  State
(iii)    Dynamics of  (bimolecular)  Bond Breakage — Bond Formation

Organtc Chemists
With the integration of mass spectrometry into femtochemistry experiments, the  field  of  organic  
reaction  mechanisms  became  open  to  investigations of multiple transition  states and reaction 
intermediates [Fig. 21). The technique of femtosecond — resolved kinetic-energy-time-of-flight 
(KETOF)  provided a new dimension  to the experiment — correlations  of time,  speed, and 
orientation

Ahmed  H.   Zeuiail

Fs-Resolved Mass Spectrometry













58 amu






Time of flight (ps)
327

Figure 21. Femtosecond mass spectrometry,  a 2D correlation  important in tne stucfies of reactive 
intermediates. The  example  given  here  is  for  the  reaction  of acetone  (Norrish-type  I)  
and its non-concerted behavior.  [Ref. B10, 60]

which  give  scalar  and uectoriaf  dynamics.  The  examples  of reactions  include [Figs. 21—26]:
(i)      Isomerization Reactions
(ii)     Pericyclic Addition and Cleavage Reactions
(iii)    Die1+Alder/Sigmatropic Reactions
(iv)    Norrish-type  I and II Reactions
(v)     Nucleophilic  Substitution  (Sq) Reactions
(vi)    Extrusion  Reactions

328

Bond Breakage
Chemistry 1999

Bond Breakage/Bond Format













































Figure 22. Molecular structures of different reactions studied,  typical of  the systems discussed  
in text  for  organic  arid  organometallic  femtochemistry: Acetone,  Ref.  60;  Azomethane,  Ref. 
 61; Diiodoethane,   Ref.  62;  lodobenzene,   Ref.  63;  Mud(CO) ,p,  Ref.  64;  Cyclic  ethers,  
Ref.  65; Aliphatic  ketones  for Norrish-II  reactions,  Ref.  66; Methyl  salicylate,  Ref.  67;  
One  of the  struc- tures studied for addition and elimination  reactions, Ref. 68; Pyridine for 
valence isomerization, Ref. 69.


(vii)   b-Cleavage Reactions
(viii)  Elimination  Reactions
(ix)    Valence Structure Isomerization
(x)     Reactive Intermediates

Ahmed  H.  Zewail                                               329




















Figure 23. Femtochemistry of bimolecular  electron-transfer reactions,  the classic  case of donors 
(e.g.  benzene  or diethylsulfide)  and  acceptors  (e.g.  iodine  or iodomonochloride) .  (A,  
above) The  experimental  results  clearly  show  the  distinct velocity and  time  correlations,  
anrl  thus  the two-.speed  distributions  anrl time  scales of  the reaction  on  the global  PES. 
 (B, below)  Snapshots of the atomic motions according  to experimental  findings. [Ref. 70]

Electron  N  Proton Transfer
Here, we  examined  both  bimolecular  and  intramolecular  electron  transfer reactions, and  
these studies were the first to be made under solvent-free con- ditions. We also studied the  
transfer in clusters and  in solutions [Figs. 11, 22, 23]. For proton transfer, three classes of 
reactions were of interest, those of bi-

330                                                 Chemistry 1999
































Figure  24.  Reactive  intermediates  on  the  femtosecond  time  scale.  Here,  tetramethylene,  
tri- methylene,  bridged tetramethylene and  benzyne  are examples  of species isolated on  this 
time scale  (see Fig. 22 for others).  [Ref. 71]


molecular  and intramolecular reactions,  and those  involving  double  proton
transfer  (base pair models) :
(i)      Bimolecular Electron Transfer Reactions
(ii)     Intramolecular Electron Transfer  and  Folding Reactions
(iii)    Acid-Base Bimolecular  Reactions
(iv)     Intramolecular Hydrogen-Atom  Transfer
(v)      Tautomerization Reactions: DNA Mimics

Inorganic  N  Atmospheric Chemists
We extended the applications  of femtochemistry to complex inorganic  reac- tions of  
organometallics [Fig. 22L  Organometallic compounds  have  unique functions and properties which 
are determined by the dynamics of metal-me-

Ahmed  H.    Znuail
351




















4.0






1.5       2.0

2.5        3.0


4.0
2.0



Figure  25. Reaction dynamics of azomethane,  based on the experimental, femtosecond  studies (Fig. 
22, References). The aâ inifio PES was obtained from state-of-the-art calculations  tRef. 72) which 
show the  two reaction  coordinates  (C-N)  relevant  to  the dynamics.  A third coordinate, which 
involves a twisting motion, was also studied. Note the concerted and non-concerted path-

tal  (M-M)  and metal-ligand  (M-L)  bonding. The  time  scales for cleavage  of such bonds 
determine  the product yield and the selectivity in product chan- nels. They also establish  the 
nature of  the reactive  surface: ground-state  ver- sus  excited-state  chemistry.  Similarly,  we 
 studied  the  dynamics  of  chlorine atom production from OClO, a reaction of relevance to ozone 
depletion.

The Ivlesoscopic Phase:  Clusters  H  Nanostructures
We have studied different types of reactions but under microscopic solvation conditions in 
clusters. These include  [Fig. 2'fl:

332                                                  Clietnistp   1999




















Figure  26. Generalized  schematic  showing  reactive  and non-reactive  pathways  (bifurcation)  
of wave packets. Both  the photophysical  and  photochemical  processes are shown with  the conical 
intersection  (CI)  playing a crucial role. Examples are given in Ref. 73.



(i)       Reactions of van der Waals complexes
(ii)     Unimolecular Reactions
(iii)    Bimolecular Reactions
(iv)    Recombination, Caging Reactions
(v)      Electron  and Proton Transfer Reactions
(vi)    Isomerization  Reactions

The Condensed  Phase: Dense Fluids,  Liquids  X   Polymers
In this area of research, we have focused our efforts on the study of reactions in dense  fluids 
and comparison  with dynamics in  liquids. By varying  the sol- vent density,  we  could study the  
femtosecond  dynamics from  gas-phase  con- ditions  to the condensed phase of liquid-state  
density. Accordingly,  we  could observe  the  influence  of  solute-solvent  collisions  on  
reaction  dynamics  in real  time.  We  also  did  studies  in  liquid  solutions  for  some  of  
the  systems examined  in  the  gas  phase:  bond  breakage  and  caging;  valence  structure 
isomerization; and double proton  transfer. Similarly, we studied systems of  na- nocavities and 
polymers.  Some highlights include [Fig. 28]:
(i)      Dynamics of  the Ga+to-Liquid  Transition  Region  (T   and T  )
(ii)     Dynamics of Bimolecular  (one-atom)  Caging
(iii)    Dynamics of Microscopic  Friction
(iv)    Dynamics in  the Liquid State

Ah    d  H.        atf                                             333
























Figure 27. Femtosecond  dynamics in the mesoscopic phase, reactions in solvent clusters. Several 
examples are given: (A, above) The coherent nuclear dynamics of bond breakage and recombi- nation 
of iodine in argon  (the cage effect), and  the dynamics of the same solute but in polyato- mic 
solvents (benzene) . It was for the former that the first coherent bond breakage in the cage was 
observed  and separated from  the effect of vibrational  relaxation.  For  the  latter,  the  two 
atoms experience different force fields and the time scales are determined  by the degree of 
solvation.
{We also studied van der  Waals complexes.)  (B, next page) Shown is the study of acid-base reac- 
tions of naphthol with ammonia, changing  the  number of solvent molecules from 0 to 10. The 
isomerization  of stilbene was similarly studied; the number of solvent hexane was varied from 0 to 
6. [Ref. 74]


(v)      Dynamics of Energy Flow in  Polymers
(vi)    Dynamics of Small & Large Molecules in Cyclodextrins

(6) Opportunities  for the future Three areas of study are discussed.
Transient  Structures from Ultrafast Electron Diffraction
Electron  diffraction  of molecules  in  their ground  state  has been  a powerful tool  over  the  
past  50  years,  and  both  electron  and  x-ray  methods  are  now being  advanced  in  several 
laboratories  for the studies  of structural  changes. We have reported in Nature (London)  the 
latest advance in UED [Fig. 29], by which  major challenges were surmounted:  the very low number 
densities of gas samples;  the absence  of the  long-range  order  that is present  in  crystals, 
which enhances coherent interference; and the daunting task of determining

534                                               Chemistry 1999






1


0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2
1-NpOH•(NH3»
n=Oto 10






10



120    140    180    180     200    Z20     240    280    280    300    MO
Mass (AMU)

1.2
Stilbene•hexane

0.8






0.0

100     200     300     400     500     600    700     800
Mass (AMU)

in  situ  the  zero-of-time  when  diffraction  changes  are  on  the  ps  and  sub-ps time scale.
With UED, we have been able to study molecular structures and branching ratios of final products on 
 the ps time scale. The change  in diffraction  from before  to after a chemical reaction was 
observed.  However,  the direct obser- vation  of  transient  structural  changes  in  the  course  
of  a  reaction  was  pub- lished only recently [in PNAS] . Specifically, we observed the transient 
inter- mediate  in  the elimination  reaction  of 1,2-diiodotetrafluoroethane (C₂F₄I₂) to produce 
the corresponding ethylene derivative by the breakage of two car- bon-iodine bonds [see Fig 29B and 
C]. The evolution  of the ground-state  in- termediate  (CgF₄I radical) was directly revealed in  
the population  change of a single chemical bond, namely the second G-I bond. The elimination of 
two iodine atoms is nonconcerted, with the reaction  time of the second G-I bond breakage  being  
-17   ps.  The  UED  results  for  the  short-lived  C  F₄I  radical favor the classical structure  
over the bridged structure.  Ab initio calculations were made°'°‘to compare theory with 
experiments.


0enseFluids
Ahmed  H.  Zewail                                               355














































£iyre  2h.  Femtosecond  dynamics  iii  the  condensed  I°*ase'  (A,  above)  dense  fI uids;  (B,  
next. page)  the coherent vibrational and rotational  motions observed  in dense tlui ds as a 
function  of density and doom  to the one-atom  collision with  iodine,  (C, page  1 73)  
nanocavities  of cyclodcx- trins  and  polymers  of  polydiacetylenes;  liquids   (n‹ t  sh own,  
but  references  are  given   [75] ) . Studies in these media include the one-atom  coherent 
caging, J-coherence triction  model, colic- ren t IVR in polymer chains, anorrialous  T$ laehavior  
in dense  fluids.  [  •!  881

336                                          Chemistry 1999




I'       p =  0.025 nm“
(P = 1 bar)




















p =19.7 nm-* (P = 2500 bar)

Solvent Density
gepenaence




One-Atom Solvent Caging











r(t)




-1      0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9
Time delay (ps)

This leap in our ability to record structural  changes on the ps and shorter time  scales  bodes  
well  for  many  future  applications  to  complex  molecular systems,  including  biological  
systems.  We  have  completed  a  new  apparatus equipped  with  diffraction  detection  and  also  
with  mass  spectrometry.  This universal system  is capable of studying  complex systems in the 
gas and other phases. It holds great opportunities for the future.

Reaction  Control
Our interest  in  this area goes  back  to  the late  1970’s when  a number  of  re- search  groups 
were  reporting  on  the possibility  of  (vibrational)  mode-selec- tive  chemistry  with  lasers. 
 At  the  time,  the  thinking  was directed  along  two avenues. One of these suggested  that, by 
tuning a CW laser to a given state, it might be possible to induce selective chemistry. This 
approach was populariz- ed  enthusiastically,  but  it  turned  out  that  its  generalization  
could  not  be made without  knowing  and controlling  the time  scales of  IVR in molecules. 
Moreover, state-selective chemistry is quite different from bond-selective che- mistry. The second 
avenue was that of IR multiphoton  chemistry. In this case, it was shown  that selectivity was lost 
in the quasi-continuum vibrational  mani-

Ahmed  H.   Zeuiail                                                     337



















































600
’#’›200
'“’C  d OO






fold of molecules, but that the initial IR coherent pumping could be used for selective isotope 
separation. Such an approach has proven successful, even on the practical scale, and Letokhov has 
called the process “incoherent control” [33].
The  discovery  [Section  IIIA]  of coherent  and selective  vibrational  oscilla- tions  (in-phase 
 and  out-of-phase)   in  a  large  molecule  such  as  anthracene made  me  think  of  the  
possibility  of  temporally  controlling  the  state  of  the system.  The  key idea was  coherence 
 among  the vibrational  degrees  of free- dom  and its observation  (published  in  1981)  which  
triggered  significant  in- terest in  the issue of  chaotic  as. coherent “motion” of packets in 
isolated mo-

338                                             Chemistry 1999



















Figure 29. Ultrafast Electron Diffraction  (UED).  (A, above) The experimental  arrangement;  (B, 
below)  A 2-D image  (CCD)  and the obtained molecular scattering sM(s)  and radial distribution 
f(r) functions;  (C, next page)  The temporal change observed on a bond population, elucidates the 
structure of the reaction intermediate shown as two possibilities  (see text).  [Ref. B17, 76]


lecules.  Some  of us believed  that,  despite  the  complexity  of the vibrational mode structure, 
 coherence would be robust, provided  it could be disentang- led  through  proper  preparation  and 
 probing.  In  fact,  in  a discussion  Cth Richard Feynman  (at Caltech)  about the anthracene  
results, he informed me of a related problem  noticed by Fermi, when  both were at Los Alamos: A 
li-

Ah     d  H.    fail

Reaction Intermediates





Ultrafast Electron Diffraction
Radial Di9tribution Function



t -  0 ps


t = 10 ps














0     1                                   6   r \A

F-I         C-I       F—I
339


near  chain  of springs  (vibrations)  showed recurrences when  the energy was initially localized  
(on the computer)  in one spring. They expected dissipation and not recurrences.  Nico Bloembergen  
and I wrote a feature article  (1984) emphasizing  this  point  of  coherent  motion  and  its  
significance  to  mode- selective  chemistry  [B21]. Stuart Rice believed strongly in  the concept 
of co- herence and, as I mentioned  before, we even drafted a paper that was not fi- nalized for 
publication.
Earlier in 1980, I wrote a Physics Today  article in a special issue on laser che- mistry 
suggesting the use of ultrashort pulses (not CW or long-time  lasers)  to control  the outcome of a 
chemical reaction [B24]. The title of the paper was:

340                                               Chemistry 1999

Laser  Selective  Chemistry — Is it Possible?  The  subtitle  stated  the  message, ”With 
sufficiently  brief and intense radiation, properly  tuned to specific resonances,  we may  be able 
to fulfill a chemist’s  dream,  to 6reak particular  selected  bonds in  large mo- dems. ”In this 
article, I was concerned with the problem of IVR and so-called chaotic behavior. Stimulated by our 
work on IVR and coherence [Section HI], I thought  that ultrashort  pulses should be used  to 
control  the system  in  the desired configuration  by proper choice of the time duration and delay 
and by the  preparation  of  the  packet  which  is  controlled  by  the  coherence  width. 
Experimentally,  we  had  already  developed  methods  for  the  control  of the phase of the field 
of optical pulses with the idea of using the phase (pulse sha- ping  to  control  molecular  
processes  —  collisions,  inhomogeneous   broad- enings and even photon locking which could 
inhibit relaxation [Section III]; the time scale was ns and for the control of IVR, fs pulses were 
needed. Prior to this work, the optical pulse field,
E(t)  ——  £     A(I)  cos[wz -t- @  I)],                                         (10)
was simply defined by the envelope A(t)  and the frequency ci; the phase Q i) was unknown.  By 
controlling  Qt) we were able  to make  sequences  of phase- coherent multiple  pulses and to 
tailor a composite  “single” pulse with a pre- scribed Q I). We published a series of papers 
demonstrating  the power of the approach,  as  mentioned  in  Section  III;  see  Fig.  30.  In  
fact  with  composite shaped-pulses, a sequence  of phase segments and tilt angles  (in  the 
rotating frame) of, e.g., 60,—300 —60„ we showed experimentally that the emission  of a molecule  
can  be made  twice  that as when  a normal  single  pulse was  used [Fig. 30]. Similarly,  by 
choosing  pulse  sequences  such  as x-y-x(S)  we  experi- mentally locked  the system  and thus 
lengthened  its relaxation  time conside- rably. In  theoretical  papers, we examined  the use of 
the approach  for selec- tivity and control of molecular relaxations; in recent reviews [34), 
Warren has discussed pulse shaping and its relevance  to quantum control.
On the fs time scale, the theoretical work of Heller [Section IO] stimulated the use of  the 
time-dependent wave packet picture for absorption  and emis- sion. In  1985,  David Tannor and 
Stuart Rice,  using  the wave packet picture, provided  a  two-photon  scheme  for  the  control  
of selectivity  with  pulse-se- quence coherence being an important part of the evolution. This 
scheme was extended and, in their review article of 1988 [35), they described  phase sen- sitive 
experiments such as the ones we reported earlier. An important realiza- tion was the desire  to 
optomize  the yield of  a given  channel. With  fs resolu- tion, we began testing the idea of 
timing of pulses on small molecular systems [Fig. 30J.  We  first  began  with  a single experiment 
 on  the control  of  the po- pulation in bound states (iodine). Then we reported results on the 
control of the yield in  the reaction  Xe + I         Xel + 7 as a function  of the delay  time  
be- tween  pump and control. Although  the mechanism  is not fully resolved,  the important point 
is that the yield of product Xe/fol1owed the temporal motion of the iodine wave packet. In a third 
experiment, we used pump-control-pro- be fs pulses to control the branching of the Nat reaction; 
these, together with the experiment  by Gustav  Gerber's group on  Na  (Na   + e vs. Na + Na’  +  
e),

Ahmed  H.   Zeu›ail
341











UnimolecularReamon


a=tdT




AI = 2 T



Bimdeozlar Collision











Figure  50. Control  by the phase  and/or the delay,  or the duration  of optical  pulses.  (A, 
above) (Left) The effect of a designed composite pulse on the fluorescence of a molecule  (iodine), 
sho- wing  the large  experimental  enhancement  for  the labeled  phase-controlled  sequence.  
(Right) Control  of the population  (Iy) , of unimolecular  reactions  (NaI) , and of a bimolecular 
 collision (Xe+I  ) , see text.  (B, next page)  Localized wave packet control of the preparation  
at high ener- gy on  the  femtosecond  time  scale,  which  is  shorter  than  that of  IVR.  The  
series  has  the  same reaction  coordinate  (C-C  bond)  but  the  molecular  size  has  increased 
 in  complexity.  The  be- havior is far from being statistical.  [Ref. B20, B24, 77]


are prototypes for the Tannor-Rice-Kosloff scheme. Phase-locked  pulses were extended  to  the  fs  
resolution  by Norbert  Scherer  and  Graham  Fleming  in elegant studies of iodine.
Recently,  we  turned  our attention  to complex  molecular  systems,  but this time using fs 
pulses to implement the 1980 idea. In a series of molecules of in- creasing complexity,  but 
retaining  the same reaction coordinate, we illustrat- ed selectivity by beating IVR (and entering 
near the transition state); the rate of reaction was two to three orders of magnitude larger than 
the expected sta- tistical limit. This work was published in Science [Fig. 30] arid promises to be 
significant  for achieving  non-statistical chemistry at high energies. The con- cept suggests  
that control at high  energies  (chemical  energies)  is more  rea-

342                                                 Chemistry 1999


‹ = 100 z 20 Is






‹ = 125 a 10 Is




z = 180 + 10 fs




‹ = 180 4 20 fs



Time delay (fs)
listic, in contrast with the conventional wisdom which asserts the need for low energies — time  is 
of  the  essence! Another  example  of  non-statistical femto- chemistry  comes  from  the  work  
on  surfaces  [36].  Recently,   the  group  in Berlin  (Ertl and Wolf [36]) demonstrated,  in  an 
elegant experiment,  the cri- tical role of fs resolution  in inducing  oxidation  (as. desorption) 
 of CO on Ru surfaces — the fs non-equilibrated electron  distribution  of the surface gives a 
selective  chemistry  different  from  that of equilibrated  phonon  distribution, or thermal 
heating.
In the future,  there will be extensions and new directions in fs light-matter control  based  on  
the  temporal  coherence  of light  and its  interference  with matter waves. One area that holds 
promise is the use of fs pulses to induce se- lectivity by utilizing  the three parameters of the 
pulse,  the central frequency, the width  and the chirp, in an iterative algorithm;  the chirp is, 
in a way, simi-

Ahmed  H.   Zeniail                                                   343

lar to a composite  pulse of the type described above. The technique of liquid- crystal-display 
developed by Andy Weiner for fs pulse shaping, combined with the evolutionary  feedback idea of 
Herschel Rabitz, makes possible  the gene- ration  of the desired complex E(t)  field to achieve  
(combinatorial)  control. This optimal control has been demonstrated nicely for a targeted second 
har- monic  generation  or  a yield  of chemical  reaction  as  reported  by  Gerber's group in 
Wiirzburg [37]. Kent Wilson [37] showed the importance of chirped pulses in focusing and reflecting 
 wave packets and, in a more recent contri- bution, he, with Warren Warren, used the evolutionary 
feedback approach  to optimize  the fluorescence of a molecule in solution,  reminiscent of the 
com- posite pulse experiment we described above. In pulse shaping,  the field is op- timized  and  
forms  a complex  pattern  which  is  used  through  many genera- tions to reach the fitted, 
desired population.
It should be noted that all of the above schemes change the coherent com- position of the initial 
packet and hence the evolution  in different channels — but we have  not changed  the evolution  
dictated  by the natural forces of the atoms!  Intense  fields may do so. Paul Corkum,  Thomas 
Baumert,  and other colleagues have provided  novel observations with intense fields [38]. Clearly 
these areas of control by ultrafast pulse timing  (t), phase  (   ) (shape), spatial localization  
(R) and intensity to alter the potential  (V) offer new opportuni- ties  for  the  future.  Many  
theoretical  efforts  have  already  been  advanced ahead of current experiment and Manz’ group is 
providing new possibilities, including  deracemization by controlled  pulses — timed  and shaped  
[see  his review of 1500 references in Ref. 28, to all work] . We did not discuss here the CW 
control scheme  advanced by Paul Brunner  and Moshe  Shapiro,  nor can we give references to all 
work done in this area.

Biological Dynamics
There have been important contributions  to femtobiology and these include [Refs. 28 & 39, and 
references therein]: studies of the elementary steps of vi- sion; photosynthesis; protein dynamics; 
and electron and proton transport in DNA.  In  proteins  such  as  those  of photosynthetic  
reaction  centers  and  an- tennas,  hemoglobins,   cytochromes  and  rhodopsin,   a  femtosecond   
event, bond  breaking,  twisting  or electron  transfer  occurs.  There  exist global  and coherent 
 nuclear motions,  observed  in  these complex systems, and it is pos- sible that the complexity is 
not as complicated  as we think; for the chemistry and  the  efficiency  to  be unique,  the  
system  utilizes  the organized  structure around  the  “active  center” with  the  necessary  
restraint  on  transition  states and energy  flow.  Thus,  in  my view,  the  early  fs events  
are  critical  to  under- standing the function of complex systems, as they reflect the important 
local- ity in biological dynamics.
Our efforts in this direction have so far focused on DNA twisting dynamics, electron  transfer in 
DNA assemblies, DNA base-pair models, and on protein- ligand dynamics. The work on the torsional 
rigidity of DNA was published in 1980-1982,  while  that relating to proton  transfer  in  model 
base  pairs was re- ported  in  the  last few years.  With  donors  (D)  and  acceptors  (A)  
covalently

844                   Chemistry 1999































Figure 3L Femtosecond dynamics of biological systems, DNA assemblies and  protein corn plexes. (A, 
above)  The  systems studied are the  DNA with  donors and acceptors at fixed distances  (top) and  
protein  HSA with  the  molecule  HPMO  shown  in  the interior.  The  focus  of  research  is on 
clec tron  transfer and  molecular dynarriics in  the former and on probing salvation and  
ligancl-re- cognition effects in the latter. (B, next page) Some illustrative femtosecond 
transients of  DNA as- semblies. Amin o{murine was used for  the initial excitation, and  the 
efféct ref' diIIN rent bases G, C•, A, ’1“ was studied at a fixed distance. The  time scale of  
torsion  dynamics was known  troin  studies we and others made  before.  [Ref. 78, 79]


bonded  to DNA, studies of  ET on  more  well  defined  assemblies were  made possible, and  the  
effect o1 distance could be addressed. With fs resolution, we obtained  the actual time scale of ET 
and  related the rates to the distance bet- ween D and  A. In collaboration with Jackie Barton's 
group, we published  this work in PNAS. The  time scale of orientational coherence and solvation 
was al- so examined,  allowing  us  to elucidate  the  role of  molecular  motions,  inclu- ding 
the effect of DNA rIgidity. The  results reveal  the nature of  ultrafast ET

345





ApAG



0     200





Apll ApCI ApAI ApTI ApGI





ApAAAG ApAAG ApAG
ApG





0           100         200         300         400         500         600
Time (ps)



and  its mechanism: in DNA, ET cannot be described  as in  proteins simply by a  phenomenological 
parameter, b. Instead, the local involvement  of  the  base pairs controls the  time scale and  the 
 degree of coherent transport. Molecular dynamics are  critical to the  description  of  the  
transport. The measured  rates [Fig. 31] and  the  distance range of  the  transfer suggest that 
DNA is not  an  ef- ficient molecular wire.
For  proteins, our  current interest is in  the  studies of  the  hydrophobic  for-
ces  and  ET  [Fig.  31],  and  oxygen  reduction  in  models  of  metallo-enzymes

346                                             Chemistry 1999

[Fig.  32].  For  the  former,  we  have  studied,  with  fs  resolution,  the  protein Human  
Serum Albumin  (HSA), probed with the small (ligand)  molecule hy- droxyphenyl  methyloxazole   
(HPMO) ;  this  work  is  in   collaboration   with Abderrazzak Douhal. We also studied ET in 
hyperthermophilic proteins. For

































Figure  32.  Femtosecond  dynamics  of  model  biological  systems,  hemoglobin  and  myoglobin, 
DNA  base  pairs,  and  photosynthetic  assemblies.  Shown  here  are  the  structure  of  
Dioxygen- picket fence Cobalt Porphyrins and the fs transients which show the âme scales involved 
and the release of O  in 1.9 ps at room temperature. These studies on  this and the other model 
systems (not shown) are part of the continued effort in this area. [Ref. 80]

Ah    d  H.  fail                                            347

model  enzymes,  we examined novel  picket-fence  structures which  bind oxy- gen to the central  
metal with -  859c  efficiency at room  temperature.  In this system [Fig. 32], we observed  the 
release of O₂ in 1.9 ps and the recombina- tion was found to occur on a much slower time scale. 
These are fruitful areas for future  research, especially in  that they provide  prototype systems 
for O reduction with complex metallo-porphyrins in the transition state, similar  to the smaller 
systems of benzenes/halogens (discussed  in Fig. 23)  but at room temperature.  We published  our 
first report recently in Angewandte Chemie in collaboration with Fred Anson's group at Caltech.
In  the future, new extensions  are anticipated. The  nature and control  of enzymatic  reactions,  
the  catalytic  function  of  the  transition  state,  and  the design of artificial biological 
functions seem to be areas of great promise for dynamical studies. Also, it is envisaged that the 
recording of a large biological structure  changing  with  time  and  with  atomic  resolution  may 
 be  realized. Already some success in studies of small chemical  systems utilizing  ultrafast 
electron  diffraction  have  been  reported.  X-ray diffraction  is another  direc- tion. The 
ultimate goal is the recording of all coordinates in space and time. The impact on problems such as 
protein folding and molecular  recognition is clear.

IV. IMPACT AND CONCEPTS — A RETROSPECTIVE
In retrospect,  the key to the explosion  of research  cited in Ref. B60 can per- haps be traced to 
three pillars of femtochemistry:

Time Resolution — Reaching the Transition-State Limit
Three points are relevant:  (i) The improvement of nearly ten orders of mag- nitude  in  time  
resolution,  from  the  (milli) microsecond  time  scale  (Eigen, Norrish  & Porter)  to  present  
femtosecond  resolution,  opened  the door  to studies of new phenomena  and  to  new discoveries;  
(ii)  the  transition  state, the  cornerstone  of reactivity,  could  be  clocked  as a  molecular 
 species  TS  , providing  a  real  foundation   to  the  hypothesis  of  Arrhenius,   Eyring  and 
Polanyi  for ephemeral  species  [TS]*, and leading  the way to numerous  new studies. Extensions 
will be made to study transition state dynamics in complex systems,  but the previous  virtual  
status of the  transition  state  has now given way to experimental  reality [B60];  (iii)  
inferences deduced from  “rotational periods” as clocks in uni- & bimolecular reactions can now be 
replaced by the actual  clocking  of the  nuclear  (vibrational)  motion.  This is particularly  
im- portant when  a chemical phenomenon  such  as concertedness  is involved  or the time scale of 
complexes or intermediates is many vibrational periods.
In the 1960’s,  there was some thought [40] that the relevant time scale for chemistry was the 
microsecond  regime.  Moreover,  the uncertainty principle was  thought  to represent  a severe  
limit of  the  utility of  shorter  time  resolu- tion;  coherence  was  not part of the  thinking  
in  deciphering  fs nuclear  mo- tion,  as  discussed  in  Section  IH   (Development  of 
Femtochemistry)  and  in

348                                               Cl  miistty 1999

what follows. The new vision  is summarized  in  the following statement  [40]: ‘The study  of 
chemical eoents that occur in  the femtosecond  time scale is the ultimate achievement in  half a 
century of dnielopment and, although many future euents njll be run over the same course, chemists 
are near the end of the race against timr. ”Manfred Eigen,  who  gave  the  1967  Nobel  Lecture  
with  the  title  “Immeasurably  Fast Reactions"  —  “Die  ‘Unmessbar’  Schnellen  Reaktionen”  —  
told  me,  when  I teased him about the title, that nobody in the 1950s anticipated  the laser and 
the short pulses they can provide.

Atomic-Scale Resolution
Two  points are  relevant:  (i)  The  transition  from  kinetics to  dynamics. On   the femtosecond 
 time scale, one  can see the coherent nuclear motion of atoms — oscillatory  or  quantized   steps 
 instead  of  exponential  decays  or   rises.  This  was proved to be the case for bound, 
quasi-bound or unbound systems and  in sim- ple (diatomics)  and in complex systems (proteins) . 
Because of coherence, we can speak of the  motion classically and  visualize it as the  change 
actually oc- curs; (ii)  the  issue of the uncertainty      nettle. Many thought  that the pulse 
was too short in time, thus broad in energy by the uncertainty principle At AE-fi, but  as 
discussed before, localization is consistent with  the  two uncertainty re- lationships  [Fig.  4]  
and  coherence  is  the  key.  The   energy  uncertainty  AE should be compared with bond energies: 
AE is 0.7 kcal/mol for a 60 fs pulse [see details in Ref. Bl7]. In  the condensed  phase, 
localization  may become shorter lived, but the basic picture is still valid [41).
It  took  time  for  this  concept  of  coherence  to  be  appreciated,  not  only
among some chemists, but also among notable physicists. In 1972, at a Welch Conference,  picosecond 
 time resolution  was of concern  because of  the  per- ceived fundamental limitation  imposed on  
time and  energy by Heisenberg's uncertainty  principle.  After  his lecture  on  lasers  in  
chemistry,  the  physicist Edward  Teller  had   a  lively  exchange  with  another   physicist  
and   friend, Eugene  Wigner.  Even  for  picosecond  resolution  the  question  was  asked,  is 
there  a  natural,  real  fruit  to the time... .° In    the    Welch  Prize  Address  (1997) ,  I
highlighted  these exchanges [42] Jacob Bigeleisen [24), although concerned about  the  uncertainty 
 principle,  asked  why  not  venture  into  the  "millijiffy" (femtosecond)  range?

Generality of the Approach
Three points are relevant:  (i)  In retrospect,  the fcmtosecond  time scale was just right for 
observing  the “earliest" dynamics at the actual time scale of the chemical  bond,  defining  the  
earliest  time  possible;  (ii)  the  methodology  is versatile  and general, as evidenced by the 
scope of applications  in  different phases and of different systems. Moreover, it has stimulated 
new directions of research  in  both  experiment  and  theory  in  areas such  as quantum  control 
and ultrafast diffraction;  (iii) the time resolution  offers unique opportunities when  compared 
with other methods.

Ahmed  H.    Zewail                                                     349

First, processes  often  appear  complex  because we look at them  on  an ex- tended time scale, 
during which many steps in the process are integrated. On the fs time scale, these steps are 
resolved, and the process breaks down into a series of simpler events. Second, only this time 
resolution  can give  the dyna- mics of transition states/intermediates in real time since for 
reactions neither the spectra of reactants nor those of products are directly relevant. This point 
was amply demonstrated  in complex reactions, such as those of transient, re- active intermediates  
of organics. Even for simple,  reactive  systems  this is still true.  For example,  the spectral  
bandwidth  of the  reactant,  dissociative  ICN has no information  about the actual dynamics of 
the nuclear separation  be- tween I and CN fragments or about the transient configurations, as it 
only re- flects  the steepness  of the potential  at the initial  nuclear  configuration. For 
unreactive  molecules,  there is a different complexity;  the spectra are usually inhomogenously 
broadened, especially in complex systems. Finally, with time resolution,  we  can  observe  the  
motion  without resorting  to a mathematical construct from eigenstates or other indirect methods.
It is worth noting that both excited and ground state reactions can be studied. It has been known 
for some time that the use of multiple pulses can popula- te  the ground state  of  the  system  
and,  therefore,  the  population  and  cohe- rence of the system can be monitored [23]. The use of 
CARS, DFWM, SRS, u- pulses or the use of direct IR excitation are some of the approaches possible. 
Two recent examples demonstrate  this point: one invokes the use of IR fs pul- ses  to  study  
reactions  involving  hydrogen  (bond)  motions  in  liquid  water, work done in France and Germany 
[43]; and the other utilizes CARS for the study of  polymers in  their ground state which we 
published in collaboration with the groups of Kiefer and Materny [Fig. 28]. Ground-state dynamics 
have also been studied by novel fs photodetachment of negative ions, and the sub- field of fs 
dynamics of ions is now active in a number of laboratories [44).

Some Concepts
New  concepts  and phenomena  have  emerged  and  include:  Localization  of wave  packets;  
reaction  path  coherence,  single-molecule  trajectory;  reaction landscapes  as.  path;  
bifurcation;  chemical  rs.  spectroscopic  dynamics  (time scales) ; concertedness; dynamical  
active  space;  non-statistical  (non-ergodic) behavior;  dynamical  caging  (by  energy  loss  as  
opposed  to  barrier  confine- ment) ; microscopic friction  (energy rs. mechanical) ; and 
inhomogeneous dy- namics of  “soft matter" (e.g. biological)  systems,  with  a whole  range of  
time scales. These concepts have been discussed  in the original  publications,  and below, only a 
few will be highlighted:

(1)  Resonance  (Non-equilibrium  Dynamics):  The  concept  of  resonance  in  the structure of the 
chemical bond goes back to the era of Linus Pauling and the idea  of  interconversion  between  
different  electronic  structures.  The  inter- conversion was a hypothesis,  not an observable  
fact. Quantum  mechanically, chemists usually speak of eigenstates of  the system, which  are 
stationary with

350                                               Chemistry 1999

no time evolution. Resonance in dynamics  is a concept which  is not a statio- nary-state  picture. 
 With  coherent  preparation  of molecules  it is possible  to prepare  a non-stationary 
(non-equilibrium)  state  of  a given  nuclear  structure and for the system  to evolve  in  time. 
In our studies this was shown  for vibra- tional redistribution, for rotational orientation, and 
for wave packet nuclear motions. Such non-stationary evolution does not violate the uncertainty 
prin- ciple and is fundamental  to chemical dynamics.

(2)  Coherence  (Single-molecule-type Dynamics): Perhaps one of the most powerful concepts in 
femtochemistry is coherence of the  molecule,  of the ensemble,  and of the trajectory. First, the 
coherence created by a femtosecond pulse is reflect- ed in  the motion  of  the wave packet; for a 
force-free motion  the group velo- city is that of a free particle  (p/m), a classical motion [45]. 
Second is the abi- lity   to   “transform”   the   ensemble's   incoherent   behavior   to   a   
coherent molecular trajectory. This is achieved because on the fs time scale the system can be 
promoted and localized in space with a localization  length  (AR)  only limited  by the uncertainty 
of the initial system,  typically     0.05 A; all molecu- les which do not interact span this 
range. The chemical length scale (R) of in- terest is several ângstrfims and this is why the system 
 behaves as a single-mo- lecule  trajectory [Fig. 33]. Because  the initial state is promoted  
nearly intact or  the fs time scales the only dispersion  is that which causes the different  tra- 
jectories to spread under the influence of the new forces of the energy land- scape or by external 
perturbations, such as solvation. If longer time pulses are used  for  the  preparation,  then  AR 
is on  the  scale  of R,  and  kinetics  of the states  are  recovered.   Put  in   time-domain   
language,   the  inhomogeneous dephasing  time of the ensemble  is relatively  long for fs 
preparation  and the homogeneous  dynamics  and  the  actual  coherence  of  the  packet  become 
dominant, as amply demonstrated  here and elsewhere. Third, the concept of coherence  is  crucial  
for  achieving  a  coherent  trajectory  of reactions.  Such control projects out the 
non-statistical behavior  through  the preparation  of a localized  configuration  [Fig.  33],  as  
opposed  to  an  incoherently-prepared configuration  (by, for example, chemical activation)  or a 
spatially-diffuse con- figuration  (by long-time experiments).  The concept is powerful and basic 
to many phenomena: atomic-scale motion; reaction path coherence (from TS to products);  reaction  
landscape  trajectories  as  opposed  to  a  single  reaction path;  energetic  as.  entropic  
structures  near  transition  states and conical  in- tersections; coherent caging by a solvent; 
bifurcation  and others.

(3) Transition Structures  (Landscape @ynatnics): This concept became clear to us after studies of 
the elementary dynamics  in  simple  reactions of three  atoms and in  complex  reactions of 
organic systems.  Traditionally,  one uses a reac- tion  path  and makes a distinction  between  a 
TS and a reactive  intermediate by the absence or presence of a potential well — if there is no 
well, bonds are not formed  and  thus we  do  not speak  of a  “real” structure.  On  the fs  time 
scale, we can isolate a continuous trajectory of transition  structures; none are in a potential 
well. Such structures are defined by the change in bond order

Ahmed  H.   Zeuiail

Concept of Coherence

Single-Molecule-Type Dynamics



















OSi"O                                                               
zn "      z
351

Figure 33. Concept of coherence, both in the dynamics at the atomic scale and in the control of 
non-statistical behavior. Shown is the phase space picture, describing the robustness of coheren- 
ce (left) ; note the phase-space area of the initial state relative  to that of the reaction.  
(Right)  We present, for simplicity, a schematic of a configuration space made of the reactive 
coordinate and all nonreactive coordinates perpendicular  to it (an equivalent phase-space picture 
can be made). Shown are three cases of interest: (top)  the ergodic dynamics, (middle)  the 
incoherent prepara- tion and  (bottom)  the coherent wave packet preparation, showing the initial 
localization, spatial- ly and temporally, and the bifurcation into direct and indirect reaction  
trajectories. Recent  theo- re ical work  (K Miller, this laboratory)  of the corresponding  
temporal  behavior has elucidated the different regimes for the influence of the initial 
preparation, from a wave packet to a micro- canonical limit.


and  lead  to a family of  trajectories  of  reaction  products. Thus,  the  two clas- sical  
pathways  of  either  a  “concerted”  or  “sequential”  process  represent  a very crude 
approximation for the actual landscape dynamics, even in a three- atom system. There is a whole 
distribution of reaction times and  kinetic ener- gy releases. The  problem becomes even more 
severe if the landscape is com- plex  and  has  near-flat  energy  regions  or  entropic  changes,  
as  discussed  in Section II for the case of complex organic reactions and  protein folding. The 
concept  of  transition  structures  and  landscape  dynamics is significant  to is- sues 
addressing stereochemistry, product branching and selectivity, and  to the real distinction between 
TS and  intermediates in many reactions. Finally, the presence of such a family of  trajectories on 
 the  energy landscape  makes  the restricted definition of TS — as only the saddle point — less 
clear. Concerted re- actions, in the strict synchronous sense, essentially do  not  exist [see 
Sections II & III].

(4) Reduced  Space (Directed  Dynamics): Another important concept in dynamics is  the  reduction  
of  nuclear  space  to  the  sub-space  critical  to  reactivity  and

352                                               Chemistry 1999

nonradiative  behavior in complex systems.  Here,  the fs time scale allows one to project the  
primary sen/s out of all processes possible. In complex systems with many degrees of freedom, the 
reduced space becomes the focus and  the remaining space becomes a “continuum”, thus moving the 
description from a multidimensional  (3N  - 6)  PES  to  a few  coordinates  plus  a weakly  
coupled continuum. This idea was central to our  description of the  dynamical isotope effect  in  
elementary  reactions,  bifurcation  to  chemical  and  photophysical channels  by conical  
intersections, concertedness  and  stereochemistry in  or- ganic reactions, non-statistical 
behavior, and  reaction control in large systems at   high   energies.   The   consequences   to   
photochemistry  are   significant: Reactions  from  high-energy  states  (tt  n*,  Rydberg,  etc.)  
 usually  result  in ground-state  chemistry, and  bifurcation  into conical intersections  is the 
key; for transitions involving cr* orbitals,  the  time scale of rupture becomes com- parable  to  
that  of  the  funneling  through  conical  intersections,  resulting  in competitive  chemical  
channels.  It  is  possible  that  this  same  concept  of  re- duced space is essential to 
biological dynamics. By reducing the space for dy- namics, events occur efficiently and  without 
“wasting” energy to all degrees of freedom  possible.  In addition, such  designed  local activity 
makes  the system robust and immune  to transferring  “damage” over long distances. The  ultra- 
fast time scale is important  because on  it the system separates the important from  the  
unimportant events — DNA bases quench  their energy  (nonradiati- vely) very rapidly, ET in DNA is 
locally ultrafast, and  the first event of vision is very efficient and  occurs in 200 fs.

V. EPILOGUE
As the ability to explore shorter and shorter time scales has progressed  from the millisecond  to 
the present stage of widely exploited  femtosecond  capabi- lities,  each  step  along  the way has 
 provided  surprising  discoveries,  new  un- derstanding,  and new mysteries. In  their editorial 
on  the 10th anniversary of Femtochemistry, Will  Castleman  and Villy  Sundstrom  put  this 
advance  in  a historical  perspective  [46].  The  report  in  Ref.  5 addresses  with  details  
the field and its position  in  over a century of developments.  Developments  will continue  and  
new directions  of research  will  be  pursued.  Surely,  studies  of transition  states and their 
structures in chemistry and biology will remain ac- tive for exploration  in new directions,  from 
simple systems  to complex enzy- mes and proteins [47], and from probing to controlling of matter.
Since the current femtosecond lasers (4.5 fs) are now providing the limit of time  resolution  for 
phenomena  involving  nuclear  motion,  one  may  ask:  Is there  another  domain  in  which  the  
race  against  time  can  continue  to  be pushed?  Sub-fs or attosecond  (10 1'  s)  resolution  
may one day allow for the direct  observation   of  the  electron's  motion.  I  made  this  point  
in  a  1991 Faraday Discussion  review [B17] and, since then, not much has been reported except  
for  some  progress  in  the  generation  of  sub-fs  pulses  [46,  Corkum, Harris] . In  the  
coming  decades,  this may change  and we may view electron rearrangement,  say,  in  the  benzene  
molecule,  in  real  time.  Additionally,

Ahmed  H.  Z    ail                                               353
there  will  be  studies  involving  the  combination  of  the  “three  scales”  men- tioned in  
the prologue,  namely time,  length  and number. We should see ex- tensions to studies of the 
femtosecond  dynamics  of  singfe molecttles and of  trio- lecules  on  surfaces  (e.g.  using  
STM) .  Combined  time/length  resolution  will provide unique opportunities  for making  the 
important  transition  from  mo- lecular  structures,  to dynamics  and  to functions  (Section  
III6). We  may also see that all of femtochemistry can be done at micro-to-nano  Kelvin  tempera- 
tures, utilizing lasers and other cooling  techniques.
It seems that on the femtosecond  to attosecond  time scale we are reaching the  “inverse” of  the  
big  bang  time  [Fig. 34], with  the  human  heartbeat  “en- joying” the  geometric  average  of  
the  two  limits.  The  language  of  molecular dynamics  is even  similar  to  that of cosmos  
dynamics.  Cosmologists  are  spea- king of energy landscapes  and transition  states for the big 
bang and universe inflation  [48]. Perhaps we are approaching  a universal limit of time!
Personally,  I did not originally  expect  the  rich  blossoming  in all of  the di- rections 
outlined in  this anthology;  many more  could,  unfortunately, not be mentioned  because of the 
limited space. What is clear to me is that my group and I  have  enjoyed  the  odyssey  of  
discovery,  seeing  what was  not previously possible,  acquiring  new  knowledge  and  developing  
new  concepts.  Perhaps the best words to describe  this feeling are those of the English 
archaeologist, Howard  Carter,  on November  25"   1922 when  he got his first glimpse  of  the 
priceless contents of Tutankhamen's  Tomb — At first, I  coutd see nothing        then
.shapes  gradually  began  to emerge. ..  .  Lord Carnarvon,  who  financed  the  excava-




















Figure 34. Time Scales of cosmological, geological, human and molecular events. Here, the time 
scale spans more than thirty orders of magnitude, from the big bang to the femto age. [Ref. B25]

354                                                 Chemistry 1999























Figure 35. The Almond Blossom  (st. Rémy, 1890) of Vincent van Gogh  (1853—1890). With a good 
beginning, even if branching is unpredictable, the blossoms are rich and the big picture is beauti- 
ful. [L. A. County Museum of Art]

tion of this discovery, asked, when looking with Carter,  What do you see? Carter replied,  
“Beautiful  Things”,  “Beautiful Things”. This is the thrill of discovery in science,  too.  It 
seeks  to  unveil  the  hidden  simplicity  and beauty  of  Nature’s truth.  On a recent visit to 
the Los Angeles Art Museum with  my wife, I stood in  front  of  van   Gogh’s  masterpiece  —  
Almond   Blossom   [Fig.  35]  —  and wondered about  the beauty of  the big picture  and thc 
unpredictability of its details. That, also, is in the nature of scientific discoveries.
The  future  of  femtoscience  will  surely witness  many  imaginative  and  un- predictable  
contributions.  I  hope  that  I  will  be  able  to  enjoy  the  future  as much as I have the 
past. Benjamin  Franklin  once wrote:  “The progress of human knowledge  will  be rapid  and  
discoveries  made of  which  we at present  have no concep- tion.  I  begin to be almost  sort    I 
 was  born so soon since I  cannot  hate the happiness  of knowing what  at// be known in  years  
hence. ”

APPENDIX
A Primer for Femtoscopy, Coherence and Atoms in Motion
Pvmp-Probe Femtoscop
In   high-speed  photography,  a  continuous  motion  is  broken  up  into  frames (“freezing”)  
using  a  brief  exposure  time.  For  example,  in  Muybridge's  ex- periment  (Section I),  the  
shutter speed  (exposure  time)  was    2 milliseconds

Ahmed  H.  Zemail                                             355

and the speed of the motion was -10   mrs, resulting in a well-defined  resolu- tion  (speed x  
exposure  time)  of 2 cm; the number of frames per second was about twenty since the cameras were 
0.5 m apart. The huge contrast with mo- lecular experiments is due to vast differences in speed (-1 
 km/s), resolution (-10   cm)  and the number  (millions)  of molecules  involved.  Given  the mo- 
lecular  speed  and  resolution,  the  ultrashort  strobes  must  provide  exposure time on the 
order of 100 femtoseconds,  and in one second 10”  frames could be recorded! Ultrafast pulsed laser 
techniques have made direct exploration of this temporal  realm  a reality (Secbons H & III). 
Spectroscopy,  mass spec- trometry and diffraction play the role of ultra-high-speed photography in 
the investigation  of molecular processes.
A femtosecond laser pulse provides the shutter speed for freezing  nuclear motion with the 
necessary spatial resolution. The pulse probes the motion by stroboscopy,  i. e.  by pulsed  
illumination  of the  molecule  in  motion  and  re- cording or photographing  the particular 
snapshot. A full sequence of the mo- tion is achieved by using an accurately-timed series of these 
probe pulses, de- fining  the number of frames per second. This method  of probing, although 
different from Muybridge's,  is in principle equivalent  to his use of the came- ras  (with  
shutters)  as probes.  For molecules  there  exist  three  additional  re- quirements  in order to 
study the motion. First, we need to clock  the motion by defining  its zero  of time,  also  
accurate  to tens of femtoseconds.  Second, the  motion  must  be  synchronized  since  millions  
of molecules  are  typically used in the recording of molecular motion. Third, molecular coherence  
(see below)  must be induced to localize the nuclei. These  requirements are satis- fied by using a 
femtosecond  pump  (initiating)  laser pulse, in what is referred to as a pump-probe configuration.
With  this methodology,  the  process  to be  studied  is clocked  from  the  in- stant that the 
substance under investigation  absorbs radiation from the pump pulse.  Passage  of a probe  pulse  
through  the  sample  at some  later  point  in time provides a snapshot of the status of the 
system  at that time. For femtose- cond  studies,  where  femtosecond  control  of relative  timing 
 is  needed,  the laser pump and probe pulses are produced in s    chrony,  then  the probe pul- se 
is diverted  through  an  adjustable  optical  path  length  (Fig.  5). The  finite speed of light 
translates the difference  in path length into a difference  in ar- rival  time of  the two pulses 
at the sample;  ly  corresponds  to 3.3 fs. The indi- vidual  snapshots  combine  to produce  a 
complete  record  of the  continuous time evolution — a motion  picture, or a movie — in what may 
be termed fern- toscopy.

Coherence and Atomic Motion
In  a classical  description,  the  motions  of  nuclei  would  be  particle-like, i.e., they would 
behave as “marbles on  a potential”. At the  scale of atomic masses and energies, however, the  
quantum mechanical wave/particle duality of mat- ter comes into play, and  the notions of position 
and velocity common  to clas- sical  systems  must  be applied  cautiously  and  in  accord  with  
the  uncertainty principle,  which  places  limits  on  the  precision  of  simultaneous  measure-

S56                                               Chemistry 1999

ments.  In  fact,  the  state  of any  material  system  is defined  in  quantum  me- chanics  by a 
spatially varying  "wave  function” with  many similarities  to light waves.  Since  the wave  
nature of light is a much  more  familiar  concept than that of matter,  we will use light to 
introduce  the idea of wave  superposition and interference, which plays an important role in 
atomic motion.
When  light from two or more sources overlaps in space,  the instantaneous field amplitudes  (not 
intensities)  from each  source  must be added  together to produce the resultant light field. A 
well-known  example is Young's two-slit experiment,  in which  light from  a single  source  passes 
through  two parallel slits in a screen to produce, in the space beyond, two phase-coherent fields 
of equal wavelength and amplitude. At points for which the distances to the two slits differ by n 
+$ wavelengths  (for integer a)  the two waves add to zero at all time, and no light is detected. 
Elsewhere,  the amplitudes do not cancel. Thus, a stationary  pattern  of light and dark 
interference  (Fig. A, next page, inset)
fringes is rroduced  (“light + light —  darkness + more light!”). Knowledge  of the wavelength  of 
light and the spacing of fringes projected on a screen  pro- vide  a  measurement  of the  
separation  of the  slits.  In  x-ray diffraction  such
interferences make it possible  to obtain molecular structures with atomic re- solution — the 
positions of the atoms replace the slits.
In studies of motion, we have  exploited  the concept of coherence  among molecular wave functions 
to achieve atomic-scale resolution  of dynamics — the change of molecular  structures with  time. 
Molecular wave functions are spa- tially diffuse  and exhibit no motion.  Superposition  of a 
number of separate wave functions of appropriately chosen phases can produce a spatially localiz- 
ed  and  moving  coherent  superposition  state,  referred  to  as  a wave  packet (Fig. A,  next 
page);  constructive  and destructive  interference  (as in  the  in- terference  of light waves)  
is the origin of such spatial localization.  The pack- et has a well-defined  (group) velocity and 
position which now makes it analo- gous to a moving classical marble, but at atomic resolution. The 
femtosecond light induces the coherence  and makes it possible  to reach atomic-scale  spa- tial 
and temporal resolution, without violation  of the uncertainty principle.
In  the figure,  a snapshot is shown  of the position  probability  (in red)  of a wave packet, 
formed from wave functions  n = 16 to 20 with weighting accord- ing to the distribution  curve at 
the left of the figure. This was calculated for the harmonic wave functions representing the 
vibrational states of a diatomic molecule,  in  this case iodine  (n  is the quantum  number) . As 
time advances, the wave packet moves back and forth across the potential well. As long as the wave 
packet  (width  -0.04 A)  is sufficiently localized on the scale of all acces- sible space  (-0.6 A 
between  the walls of the potential) , as in  the figure, a de- scription  in  terms of the 
classical  concepts  of particle  position  and momen- tum is entirely appropriate.  In  this way, 
localization  in  time and in space are simultaneously achievable for reactive and nonreactive 
systems (Section III4). Note that the width of the packet prepared by a 20 femtosecond  pulse is 
very close to the uncertainty in bond distance for the initial a = 0 ground state. To prepare the 
packet at the inner turning point with the given  phase composi- tion, it must be launched 
vertically at the internuclear separation of -2.4 A; if

357










5000
wave  packet



n=20


4000





1000






n=5
n=18 n=17 n=16









2.6    2.8    3.0
Bond  Distance (A)


Figure A. The wave packet and wave function limits for molecular systems, in this case a diatomic 
molecule. The analogy with light interference is depicted — Thomas Young's experiment of 1801
{B25J .


launched from the shown  n —- 0 distance, the packet will have a different pha- se composition  and 
will be  localized initially in  the  center of the  well.
The  observation  of motion in a real system requires not only the formation of localized wave 
packets in each molecule, but also a small spread in position among wave  packets formed  in the  
typically  millions  of  molecules  on  which the  measurement is performed. The  key to  achieving 
 this condition  is gene- rally provided  by (a)  the well-defined initial, equilibrium 
configuration  of the studied  molecules  before  excitation  and   (b)  by  the   “instantaneous" 
femto- second  launching of  the  packet. The  spatial  confinement  (in this case    0.04

358                                               Chemistry 1999

A)  of  the  initial ground  state of  the  system  ensures  that all molecules,  each with  its 
own  coherence  among  the states which form its wave  packet,  begin their motion on the excited 
potential in a bond-distance-range much smaller than  that executed  by the motion. The femtosecond 
 launching ensures that this narrow range of bond distance is maintained during the entire process 
of preparation  (see Fig. 33). Unless the  molecular and ensemble coherences are destroyed  by 
intra- and/or inter-molecular perturbations, the motion  is that of a classical  single-molecule 
trajectory.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The  story  told  here  involves  many dedicated  students,  post-doctoral  fellows and  research  
associates.  Their  contributions  are  recognized  in  the  publica- tions cited. I hope that by 
mentioning  their work, they recognize  the crucial role they have played in the journey of 
femtochemistry at Caltech. To me the exciñng  time  with  my research  group  represents  the  
highlight  of  the  story. For 20 years I have always looked forward to coming to work with them 
every- day and  to enjoying the science in the  truly international family [Fig. 36]. All members 
of the current research group have helped with the figures present- ed  here. I particularly wish  
to  thank  Dongping  Zhong for  the special effort and care throughout the preparation  and Ramesh 
Srinivasan for his devoted help with some of the  figures. The  artistic quality of many of  the 
figures re- flects the dedicated efforts of Wayne Waller and  his staff.
There have been a number of friends and colleagues who have supported


4 997                 1996              1995                        1994              1993









1969





1986




1979                            1980

1982

1986




Figure  36. The International  Roster  of the Caltech group,  from  1976—1999.  The red circles are 
usually composite of many dots, reflecting  the more than one hundred graduate  students,  post- 
doctoral fellows and visiting associates, who made up the research  team over the years.

Ahmed  H.   fail                                               359

the  field  and  made  the  experience  enjoyable  and  humanly worthwhile — to them  I wish  the 
very best. All are with  us today,  except one: Dick Bernstein. Caltech  proved  to be the ideal 
scientific institution  for me, not only because of  the strong  science  it radiates,  but also  
because  of  its culture,  the  “science village”. I will never forget the impact of the “round 
table” at the Athenaeum. Vince McKoy, friend, colleague and neighbor at Caltech,  has been  the 
source of enjoyment  and  stimulation  for over  20  years;  Vince  has  taken  an  almost daily 
interest in our progress!  Over the years I have enjoyed discussions with Spencer Baskin whose 
critical and wise judgment served as a sounding board for penetrating  physics concepts.
Major  support  of  this  research  came  from  the  National  Science  Founda-
tion,  the  US  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research,  the  Office  of  Naval Research,  
and  it is a pleasure  to  acknowledge  all  of  these  organizations  for making  it possible.  I  
take  the  opportunity  to  thank  Carl  and  Shirley  Larson for their support and friendship.  
Last,  but not least, I wish  to thank  the staff of the Division  and the Institute for their care 
and sincere efforts which  have made our ship sail along with minimal resistance.


REFERENCES
1.    J.  H. Breasted,  A History  ofEgfpt, Scribner's  Sons, New York (1909) ; Renewal  (1937) ; 
A. Gardiner,  Egyptian  Gratntnor,  Third  Edition,  Griffith  Institute  Ashmolean  Museum, Oxford 
 (1957) ,  first  published  1927  and  last  1994;  H.  E. Winlock,  The  Origin  of  the Ancient 
Egyptian Calendar, Proc. Am. Phys.  Soc. 83, 447 (1940) ; O. Neugebauer,  The Exact Sciences in 
Antiquity, Brown Univ. Press, Providence, RI (1957) ; R. K  Marshall,  Sundials, McMillan,  New 
York  (1963) ;  P. Tompkins,  The Magic of  Obelisks,  Harper  & Row,  New York  (1981) ;  G.J.  
Whitrow,  Tiice  in History,  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  Oxford  (1989) ;  H. Selin  (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of the History  of Science,  Technology,  and Medicine in  Non-Western Cultures, 
Kluwer Academic Pub., The Netherlands  (1997) ; A WalL Through  time, NIST publication    (1998)   
http://physics.nist.gov/GenInt/Time/time.html;   Mostafa   M. Soliman,  History  of Science and  
Technology  in Ancient  and Middle Ages (in Arabic), Alhiaa Almasria Lelkitab,  Cairo  (1995) ; 
Duncan  Steel, Marking time — The Epic Quest  to  fluent the Perfect  Calendar, Wiley, New York  
(2000).
2.    Scientific  American  , Volume XXXIX, Oct. 19 Issue, p. 241  (1878) ; T. K  Derry and T. I. 
Williams,  A  Short  History   of  Technology,   Dover,  New  York  (1993) ;  E. Jussim  and  G. 
Kayafas,  Stopping Timr, H. N. Abrams, Pub., New York (1987).
3.    C. A. Ronan,  Science — Its History  and D‹:velopment  Among the World's  Cultures,  Facts on 
File,  New York  (1982) ; J.   R. Partington,  A  Short  History  of Chemistry,  Dover,  New York 
(1989) ;J. W. Servos, Physical Chemistry  from Ostwald to Pauling, Princeton  (1990) ; C. van 
Doren,  A  History  of  Knowledge,  Ballantine,  New York  (1991) ; W.  H. Brock,  Chemistry, 
Norton, New York (1992) ; C. H. Langford and R. A. Beebe, The Development  of Chemical Principles, 
Dover (1995) ; R. Breslow,  Chemistry  Today and Tomorroni, American  Chemical Society, Washington  
(1997) ;J.  Read, From Alclumiy to Chemistry, Dove, New York (1995) ; Scientists -  Random House 
Webster's Dictionary,  New York (1997) ;
4.    A. H.  Zewail,  Cambridge  Reu.  118,  No.  2330,  65  (1997) ; J.   Baggott,  Chemistry  in  
a Ninu Light, Cambridge University Press (2000) , to be published.
5.     B.   Nordén,   www.nobel.se/announcement-99/chemistry99.html;   www.nobel.se/an- 
nouncement-99/chemistry99.html#further reading; A. Donoso and C. C. Martens, J. Phys.  Chem. A 102, 
 4291  (1998) — see introduction  of this reference;  D. E. Folmer,  W.
S. Wisniewski,  S.  M.  Hurley  and A.  W.  Castleman,  Jr.,  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.,  USA  96, 
12980  ( 1999) , and references  therein.
6.     H. C. von Baeyer, Taming Ihe Atom, Random House, New York (1992) ; P. Ball, Designing the 
Molecular World,  Princeton  University Press, Princeton  (1994) ; P. W. Atkins,  Atoms, Electrons, 
 and Change, W. H. Freeman  and Co., New York (1991).

560                                              Chemistry 1999

7.    S.  Arrhenius,  Z.  Phys.  Chem.  (Leipzig)  4,  226  (1889) ; J.   H.  van’t  Hoff,  in  
Etudes  de Dfnamiques  Chimiques,  E. Muller and Co., Amsterdam,  p. 114 (1884)  (translation  by 
T. Ewan,  London,  1896) ;  M.  Bodenstein,  Z.  Phys.  Chem.  (Munich)  13,  56  (1894) ;  22,  1 
(1897) ;  29,  295  (1899) ;  F. A.  Lindemann,  Tress.  Faraday  Soc.  17,  598  (1922) ;  C.  N. 
Hinshelwood,  The  Kinetics  of  Chemical  Change  in  Gaseous  Systems,  Calendron,  Oxford (1926) 
 (second  printing,  1929;  third printing,  1933) ; f'roc.  R   Soc.  London A113,  230 (1926) ;  
R. C. Tolman, /.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  47,  2652  (1925) ; ibitl.  42,  2506  ( 1920) ;  Bio- 
graphical memoirs, National Academy of Sciences (USA), byJ. G. Kirkwood, O. R. Wulf, and P. S. 
Epstein, Volume XXVII, p 139.
8.     See, e.g., K.J. Laidler,  Chemical Kinetics,  3rd ed., Harper Collins, New York (1987) ;J.  
I. Steinfeld,J. S. Francisco, and W. L. Hase,  C      icof fiuetics and @yriotnics, Prentice-Hall, 
New Jersey  (1989) ;  T.  Baer  and  W.  L.  Hase,  Unimolecular  Section  @yrtomics,  Oxford 
University  Press,  New  York  (1996) ;  S.  Shark,  H.  Schlegel  and  S.  Wolfe,  Theoretical 
Aspects  of Phys.  Org.  Chem.,  Wiley,  New  York  (1992) ;  A.  Pross,  Theoretical   N   
Physical Principles  of Organic  fi'eociioi), Wiley, New York  (1995).
9.    R. D. Levine  and R. B. Bernstein,  Molecular  Reaction @yaozriics  and  Chemical Reactiuitf,
Oxford University Press, Oxford  (1987) and references  therein.
10.     W.  Heitler  and  F. London,  Z.  Phys.  44,  455  (1927) ; F. London,  Problems  der 
Modernen Physik, Sommerfeld Festschrift, p. 104 (1928) ; H. Eyring and M. Polanyi,  Z. Phys.  Chem. 
B 12, 279 (1931) ; M. Polanyi,  Atomic Reactions, Williams and Norgate, London  ( 1932).
11.    M. Polanyi  and E. Wigner,  Z. Phys.  Chem.,  Abt.  A 139,  439  (1928) ; H. Eyring, /.  
Chem. Phys. 3, 107  (1935) ; see also /.  Chem.  Phys.  3, 492  (1935) ; M. G. Evans and M. 
Polanyi, Bretts. Faraday  Soc.  31, 875  ( 1935) ; 33, 448 (1937) ; H. A. Kramers,  Physica  
(Utrecht)  1, 284 (1940) ; R. F. Grote and J.  T. Hynes, /.  Chem. Phys. 73, 2715  (1980)  and the 
review in Ref. 28; R. A. Marcus,/.  Chem. Phys. 24, 966 (1956) ; ibid.  p 974.
12.    J.  C. Polanyi and A. H. Zewail,  Acc.  Chem. &s.  28,  119 (1995)  and references therein.
13.     I.  H.  Williams,  CA.     Soc.  M.     22,  277  (1993) ;  A.  Williams,   firm  Soc.  
Reu.,  23,  93
(1994) ;  W.  v.  E.  Doering  and  W.  Wang, /.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  121,  10112  (1999)   J   E. 
Baldwin, J.   Come.  Ghem.  19,  222  (1998) ;  P.  G.  Schultz  and R. A. Lerner,  Science  269, 
1835 (1995) ; A. R. Fersht,  Current  Opinion iii Structural Biology 5, 79 (1994).
14.    J.  C.  Polanyi,  Science  236,  680  (1987)  and  references  therein; J.  C.  Polanyi,  
Faraday Discuss.  Ghem.  Soc. 6Y, 129 (1979).
15.    B. R. johnson  and J.  L. Kinsey in: Femtosecond  Chemistry, J.  Manz and L. Wfiste  (Eds.), 
VCH Verlagsgesellschaft, Weinheim  (1994).
16.    A. H. Zewail, Femtochemistry -   Ultrafast  Dynamics  of the Chemical Bond, World 
Scientific, Singapore  (1994) , Vols. I and II. Most of the Caltech publications in this field, to 
be re- ferenced here (197€›-1994), are collected in these two volumes. References will be gi- ven 
for the specific topics and will be updated in text and bibliography.
17.    M. Eigen,  Discuss. Faraday  Soc.  11,  194  (1954) ,  in:  Techniques  of  Organic  
Chemistry,  In- terscience,  London  ( 1963) , Vol. VIII, Part II; M. Eigen, Immeasurable  Fast 
Reactions, in: Nobel Lectures  {Chemistry),  Elsevier, Amsterdam,  p.  170  (1972) , and references 
 the- rein; R. G. W. Norrish and G. Porter, Nature 164, 658 (1949) ; G. Porter in: The Chemical 
Bond:  Structure  and  Dynamics,  A.  H.  Zewail  (Ed.),  Academic  Press,  Boston,  p.  113 (1992) 
; and references therein.
18.     H. Abraham and T. Lemoine,  Compt. Rend. (Paris)  129, 206 (1899). For reviews see: N. 
Bloembergen,          Mod.  Phys.  71,  S  283  (1999)  and references  therein;  E. N. Glezer, in: 
Spectrosccpf  and @yiiomim of Collective Excitations in  Solids, Plenum Press, New York, p. 375  
(1997) ;  S.  L.  Shapiro  (Ed.),  Lffros/iort  Light  Pulses,  Springer,  Berlin  (1977) ;  W. 
Kaiser (Ed.), Wtrashort Laser Pulses U   Applications,  Springer-Verlag, Berlin  (1988) ; P. F. 
Barbara, W. H. Knox, G. A. Mourou,  and A. H. Zewail  (Eds.),  Wtrafast  Phenomena  If Springer,  
New York  (1994) ; T. Elsaesser, J.  G. Fujimoto,  D. A. Wiersma and W.  Zinth (Eds.), Wtrafast 
Plumomena  XI, Springer, New York (1998) ; and references  therein; see also Ref. 2.
19.    C. V. Shank and E. P. Ippen,  App. Phys.  Lett.  24,  373 (1974) ; R. L. Fork, B. I. Greene, 
and C. V. Shank,  App. Phys.  Lett.  38, 671  (1981) ; J.   A. Valdmanis,  R. L. Fork, and J.  P. 
Gordon,       t. Qtr. 10, 131  (1985) ; R. L. Fork, C. H. Brito Cruz, P. C. Becker, and C. V. 
Shank,       t.  Lett.  12,  483  (1987) ;  see also  the  reviews  in  Ref.  18;  D. E.  Spence,  
P. N. Kean, and W. Sibbett,       t. Lett.  16, 42 (1991) ; J.  P. Zhou,  G. Taft, C. P. Huang,  M. 
M.
Murnane,  and  H.  C.  Kaptyn,       f.  Lett.  19,  1149  (1994) ; A.  Baltuska,  Z.  Wei,  M.  S. 
Pshenichnikov,  and  D.  Wiersma,       t.  brits.  22,  102  (1997) ;  R.  R.  Alfano  and  S.  L. 
Shapiro, Phys. Reu.  Wn. 24, 584 (1970).

361

20.     P. M. Rentzepis,  Chem.  Phys.  W/t. 2, 117  (1968) ; T. L. Netzel,  P. M. Rentzepis  and J 
  S. Leigh,  Science 182,  238  (1973) ; K.J. Kaufmann  and P. M. Rentzepis,  Acc.  Chem.  Res. 8, 
407 (1975).
21.    T.J. Chuang, G. W. Hoffmann, and K. B. Eisenthal,  Com. Phys. Lett. 25, 201  (1974) ; K.
B. Eisenthal and K. H. Drexhage,/.  Chem.  Phys. 51, 5720 (1969) ; K   B. Eisenthal,  Acc. Co.      
 is.     8,  118 (1975).
22.    R.  M.  Hochstrasser,  H.  Lutz,  and  G.  W.  Scott,  G      .  Phys.  Mii.  24,  162  
(1974) ;  R. Anderson,  R.  M.  Hochstrasser,   H.  Lutz  and  G.  W.  Scott,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  
28,  153 (1974) ; R. M. Hochstrasser in: Advances in loser Chemisny,  Springer Series in Chemical 
Physics, No. 3, p. 98 (1978).
D.  von  der  Linde,  A.  Laubereau,  and  W.  Kaiser,  Phys.  Reu.  Lett.  26,  954  ( 1971) ;  A. 
Laubereau,  D.  von  der  Linde,  and  W.  Kaiser,  Phys.  Reu.  EU.  28,  1162  (1972) ;  A. 
Laubereau and W. Kaiser,         Mod. Phys. 50, 607 (1978).
24.    j.  Bigeleisen,  Chemistry  in cm/  ,  Chem.  H  Eng. Nems 55, 26 ( 1977). In a written  
corre+ pondence  to me, Jacob emphasized  that he, in contrast with the 1960s view (Ref. 40) , 
understood what could be learned from  time scales below a nanosecond,  but that he failed to fully 
appreciate  how the two uncertainties would serve to localize  the length scale.
25.    D. R. Herschbach,  Angus.  Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 26, 1221  (1987) and references therein;
Y.  T.  Lee,   Science  236,  793  (1987)  and  references  therein;  R.  N.  Zare  and  R.  B. 
Bernstein,  Phys. Today  33,  11 (1980).
26.    A.  H.  Zewail  and  R.  B.  Bernstein,  Chem.   N   Eng.  Neuis  (feature  article),  Nov.  
7,  pp.
24-43  (1988) ; also  in  The  Ghenical Bond:  Structure  and Dynamics,  A.  H.  Zewail  (Ed.) , 
Academic Press, Boston, p. 223 (1992) , (with an update section).
27.     D.  C.  Clary,  Spence  279,  1879  (1998) ;  and  D.  C.  Clary  in  Ref.  28,  and  
references
therein.
28.    V.  Sundstrfim   (Ed.)  Nobel  Symposium  Book:  Femtochemistry  and  Femtobiology:   
Ultrafast Reaction Dynamics  at  Atomic-Scale  Resolution,  World  Scientific,  Imperial  College  
Press, London  (1997).
29.    R. P. Feynman,  F. L. Vernon and R. W. Hellwarth, J.  Appl. Phys. 28, 49 (1957).
30.    For recent reviews, see:j. Jortner and M. Bixon in Ref. 28;J. Jortner, Phil. Trans. R   Soc. 
Loud.  A 356, 477  (1998) ; and references therein for earlier work.
31.    E. J.  Heller,  Acc.  Chem.  Res.  14,  368  (1981) ;  D.  Imre, J.  L.  Kinsey,  A.  Sinha  
and J. Krenos, J.  Phys.  CA     88, 3956  (1984) ; B. R. johnson,  C. Kittrell,  P. B. Kelly and 
J.  L. Kinsey, /. Phys.  Chem.  100, 7743  (1996) ; R. Kosloff, /. Phys.  Chem.  92, 2087  (1988)  
and references therein.
32.     B. Roos,  Acc.  Chem.  As. 32,  137  (1999) , and references therein.
33.    V. Letokhov in Ref. 28;  his lecture  in Femtochemistry IV, Leuven, Belgium  (1999) ; and 
his articles in [B30 and B31].
34.     W. S. Warren,  Scien‹:e 242,  878  (1988) ; W. S. Warren, Encyclopedia  Magnetic Resonance,
Wiley, New York  (1996).
35.     D.J. Tannor and S. A. Rice,/. Chem. Phys. 83, 5013 (1985) ; D.J. Tannor, R. Kosloff and
S. A. Rice, /.  Chem.  Phys.  85, 5805  (1986) ; D. J   Tannor  and S. A. Rice,  Ads.  in  Chem.
Phys. LXX, 441 (1988).
36.    H.-L. Dat and W. Ho, Laser Spectroscof  and Pholochemistry on Metal Surfaces,  Part I  X   
II, World Scientific, Singapore  (1995) ; see the articles by W. Ho and others; M. Bonn, S. Funk, 
Ch. Hess, D. N. Denzler,  C. Stampfl,  M. Scheffler,  M. Wolf, and G. Ertl,  Science 285,  1042  
(1999) ; R.J. Finlay,  T.-H.  Her, C. Wu, and E. Mazur,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  274, 499 (1997).
37.     B. Kohler, j.  L. Krause, F. Raksi, K. R. Wilson, V. V. Yakovlev,  R. M. Whitnell, and Y.J. 
Yan,  Acc.  Chem.  Res.  28,  133  (1995) ; A. Assion,  T. Baumert,  M.  Bergt,  T.  Brixner,  B. 
Kiefer, V. Seyfried,  M. Strehle, and G. Gerber,  Science 282, 919 (1998).
38.     P. B. Corkum,  M. Y Ivanov and J.  S. Wright,  Prin.       . Phys.  Glumi.  48,  387  
(1997) ; T. Frohnmeyer,  M.  Hofmann,  M.  Strehle,  and  T.  Baumert,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  312,  
447 (1999) ;  A.  D.  Bandrauk  (Ed.),  Molecules  iii  her    Fields,  Marcel  Dekker,  New  York 
(1994), and references therein.
39.    R. M. Hochstrasser,/. Cfieiti. Ed. 75, No. 5, 559  (1998) ; V. Sundstrfim, T. Pullerits, and
R. van  Grondelle, J.  Phys.  Chem.  B  103,  2327  (1999) ;  S.  Hahn  and  G.  Stock, J.  Phys. 
Chem. B  104, 1146 (2000):J-L  Martin and M. H. Vos, Annu. Reu. Biophys. Biomol.  Struct. 21,  199 
(1992) ; L. Zhu, J.  T. Sage and P. M. Champion,  Science 266, 629  (1994) ; G. R.
Fleming and R. van  Grondelle,  Phys.  Today, February Issue,  48 (1994) ; R. A. Mathies,

562                                            CUmisty  1999

S.  W.  Lin, ].  B. Annes,  and  W. T.  Pollard,  Annu.  Reu.  Biaphys.  Biophys.  Chem.  20,  491 
(1991) ;  R.J.D.  Miller,  Annu.  Reu.  Phys.  Chem.  42,  581  (1991) ;  M.  H.  Vos  and J.-L. 
Martin,  Biochim.  et Biophys.  Acta 1411,  l  (1999) ; U. Liebl,  G. Lipowski, M. Négrerie, J.-
C.  Lambry,  L.-L.  Martin,  and  M.  H. Vos,  Nature  401,  181  (1999): J   Jortner  and  M. 
Bixon  (Eds.), Electron Transfer — From Isolated  Molecules  to Biomolecules,  Wiley, New York 
(1999) ; see also references  28, 79 and 80.
40.    S.  Claesson  (Ed.) ,  Nobel  Symposium  5,  Fast  Reactions  and  Primary  Processes  in   
Chemical Kinetics,  Almqvist  &  Wiksell,   Stockholm,   p.  474  ( 1967) ;  G.  Porter  in:  
Femtosecond Chemistry,  J.   Manz  and  L.  Wfiste  (Eds.),  VCH,  Weinheim   (Germany)  Vol.  1,  
p.  3 (1995).
41.    Z. Li, J-Y Fang and C. C. Martens,/.  Chem. Phys. 104,  6919 (1996).
42.    A.  H.  Zewail,  The  1997  Welch  Prize  Address,  Femtochemistry,  in:  Proceedings  of  
the Robert  A.   Welch Foundation,  41st  Conference  on  Chemical  Research,  Houston,  Texas 
(1997), p. 323.
43.    G. M. Gale, G. Gallot,  F. Hache,  N. Lascoux,  S. Bratos, and J.  C. Leicknam,  Phys. Reu. 
Lett. 82,  1068 (1999) ; C. Chudoba, E.T.J. Nibbering, and T. Elsaesser,J. Phys. Chem. A 103, 5625  
(1999) ; For references of the development  of methods,  see: J.  N. Moore, P.
A. Hansen,  and R. M. Hochstrasser,  Chem.  Phys. Lett.  138,  110 (1987) ; P. O. Stoutland,
R. B. Dyer, and W. H. Woodruff,  Science 257,  1913 (1992) ; W. Kaiser and A. Laubereau in Ref. 28; 
and references therein  for earlier work.
44.    A. W. Castleman, Jr. and K  H. Bowen, Jr., J.  Phys.  Chem.  {Centennial Issue)  100,  12911 
( 1996) ;  S. Wolf,  G.  Sommerer,  S.  Rutz,  E.  Schreiber,  T.  Leisner,  L. Wñste,  and R.  S. 
Berry,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 'f4, 4177  (1995) ; P. Farmanara, W. Radloff, V. Stert, H. H. Ritze, and 
I. V. Hertel, J.  Chem.  Phys.  111, 633  (1999) ; W. C. Lineberger, article in  the book,
Ref. 28; M. T. Zanni, B. J   Greenblatt, A. V. Davis, and D. M. Neumark, J.  Chem.  Phys. 111, 2991 
 (1999) ; and references therein.
45.    C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, and F. Laloé,  Qyantum Mechanics,  Vol.  I  II,     Wiley, New 
York  (1977) ; J.   L. Eisberg, Fundamentals  o/Modern Physics,  Wiley,  New York  (1964) ; D.
D.  Fitts,        tiñ§frs  of  Quantum  Mechanics,   Cambridge   University   Press   ( 1999) ;  L. 
Miihlbacher,  A. Lucke and R. Egger, J.  C/ietn.  Phys.  110, 5851  (1999) ; J.   Manz,  in  Ref. 
28 p 80; Michael A. Morrison,  Quorifinn Physics, Prentice  Hall, New Jersey (1990).
46.    A.  W.  Castleman,  Jr.  and  V.  Sundstrñm  in: ].  Phys.  Chem.   Special  Issue,  “Ten  
Years  of Femtochemistr   ”,  A  102, June  4,  4021  (1998) ;  P.  Corkum,  Nature  (London)  403, 
 845 (2000) ; S. E. Harris and A. V. Sokolov, Phys. Reu. Lett. 81, 2894 (1998).
47.    A.  R.  Fersht,  Structure  and  Mechanism  in  Protein  Science,  W.  H.  Freeman,  New  
York ( 1999) ; W. A. Eaton, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA 96, 5897  (1999) ; C. L. Brooks III, M. 
Gruebele, J.  N. Onuchic  and P.  G. Wolynes,  ibid,  95,  11037  (1998) ; D. T. Leeson,  F. Gai, 
H. M. Rodriguez,  L. M. Gregoret, and R. B. Dyer, ibid, 9'7, 2527  (2000).
48.    J.  Glanz,  Science 284,  1448  (1999) — which way to the Big Bang?; Stuart Clark,  Tou'ords
the Edge of the Universe,  2nd Edition,  Springer,  New York  (1999).
49.    S. Pedersen, J.  L. Herek, and A. H. Zewail,  Science 266,  1359 (1994).
50.    A.  H.  Zewail,  T. E.  Orlowski,  K  E. Jones,  and  D.  E.  Godar,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  
48,  256 (1977) ; W. S. Warren  and A. H.  Zewail, J.  Chem.  Phys.  75,  5956  (1981) ; W. S. 
Warren and A. H. Zewail, /.  Chem.  Phys.  78,  2279  (1983) ; E. T. Sleva and A. H. Zewail,  Chem. 
Phys.  Lett.  110,  582  (1984) ; E. T.  Sleva,  I. M.  Xavier, jr.,  and A. H.  Zewail, /.       
f.  Soc. Amer. 3, 483 (1986).
51.    W. R. Lambert,  P. M. Felker,  and A. H. Zewail, /.  Chem.  Phys.  75,  5958  ( 1981) ; W. 
R. Lambert,  P. M. Felker,  and A. H. Zewail, /.  Chem.  Phys.  81, 2209 & 2217  (1984) ; P. M. 
Felker and A. H. Zewail, Phys.  Reu.  Lett.  53, 501  (1984) ; P. M. Felker and A. H. Zewail,
J.   Chem.  Phys.  82,  2961, ibid.  2975, ibid.  2994,  (1985) ; P. M. Felker  and A. H. Zewail, 
Ad-uances  in   Chemical  Physics  70,  265  (1988) ;  P.  M.  Felker  and  A.  H.  Zewail,  in:  
Jet Spectroscopy  and  Molecular  Dynamics,  M.  Hollas  and  D.  Phillips  (Eds.),  Chapman  and 
Hall, Blackie Academic, p. 222 (1995).
52.    A. H. Zewail, Faraday Discuss.  Chem.  Soc. 75, 315 (1983) ; J.  A. Syage, W. R. Lambert,  
P.
M. Felker, A. H. Zewail,  and R. M. Hochstrasser,  Chem. Phys.  Lett. 88, 266 (1982) ; J.  A. 
Syage, P. M. Felker, and A. H. Zewail,/.  Chem. Phys. 81, 4706 (1984) ; P. M. Felker, J.  A. Syage, 
W. R. Lambert, and A. H. Zewail,  Clumi. Phys. Lett. 92, I  (1982) ;J.  A. Syage, P. M. Felker, and 
A. H. Zewail, J.  Chem. Phfs. 81, 2233 (1984) ; P. M. Felker and A. H. Zewail, Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  
94,  454 (1983) ; P. M. Felker and A. H. Zewail,/.  Chem.  Phys. 78, 5266 ( 1983) .
53.   J.  S. Baskin, P. M. Felker, and A. H. Zewail, J.  Chem. Phys. 84, 4708 (1986) ; P. M. 
Felker,

Ahmed  H.  Waif                                               363

J.  S.  Baskin,  and A. H.  Zewail, /. Phys.  CA.    90, 724  (1986) ;  P. M.  Felker  and A. H. 
Zewail, /.  Clumi.  Phys.  86, 2460  (1987); J.  S. Baskin,  P. M. Felker,  and A. H. Zewail, /. 
them.  Phys.  86,  2483  (1987) ;  N.  F.  Scherer,  L.  R.  Khundkar,  T.  S.  Rose,  and  A.  H. 
Zewail, J.  Phys.  Chem. 91, 6478  (1987) ; J.   S. Baskin  and A. H. Zewail, J.  Phys.  Chem. 93, 
5701  (1989).
54.    L. R. Khundkar and A. H. Zewail,  Ann. Reu. Phys.  Chem. 41, 15 (1990) ; N. F. Scherer, F.
E. Doany, A. H. Zewail,  and J.  W. Perry, J.  Chem.  Phys.  84,  1932  (1986) ; N. F. Scherer and 
A. H. Zewail, /.  Chem.  Phys. 87, 97  (1987) ; L. R. Khundkar, J.  L. Knee, and A. H. Zewail, /.  
Chem.  Phys.  87, 77  (1987) ; S.J. Klippenstein,  L. R. Khundkar,  A. H. Zewail, and R. A. Marcus, 
J.  CA.    Phys. 89, 4761  (1988).
55.    N. F. Scherer,J. L. Knee, D. D. Smith, and A. H. Zewail,J  Phys.  Chem. 89, 5141  (1985) ;
M. Dantus, M.J. Rosker, and A. H. Zewail,J.  C      . Phys. 87, 2395 (1987) ; M.J. Rosker,
M. Dantus, and A. H. Zewail,  Scien‹:e 241, 1200 (1988) ; M.J. Rosker, M. Dantus, and A.
H. Zewail,/.  CA.    Phys. 89, 6113 (1988) ; M. Dantus, M.J. Rosker, and A. H. Zewail, J. Clumi.  
Phys.  89,  6128  (1988) ;  D.  Zhong  and A. H. Zewail, J.  Phys.  Chem.  A  102,  4031 (1998) ; 
R.  Bersohn  and A.  H.  Zewail,  Ben.  Bunsenges.  Phys.  Chem.  92,  373  (1988) ;  G. Roberts 
and A. H. Zewail, J.  Phys.  CA.    9S, 7973 (1991) ; G. Roberts and A. H. Zewail,
J.  Phys.  Chem. 99, 2520 (1995) ; the quantum  calculations  in  the last reference  follows the 
original results by D. Imre (see text).
56.    T. S. Rose, M.J. Rosker, and A. H. Zewail,J.  Chem. Phys. 88, 6672 (1988) ; T. S. Rose, M.
J.  Rosker, and A. H. Zewail, J.  CA.     Phys. 91, 7415  (1989) ; P. Cong, A. Mokhtari, and
A. H. Zewail,  Chem. Phys.  Wf.  172, 109 (1990) ; A. Mokhtari,  P. Cong, J.  L. Herek, and
A. H.  Zewail,  Nature 548,  225  (1990) ; P. Cong,  G. Roberts, J.  L. Herek, A. Mokhtari, and A. 
H. Zewail,/. Phys.  Chem.  100,  7832 (1996).
57     R.  M.  Bowman,  M.  Dantus,  and A   H.  Zewail,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  156,  131  (1989) ;  
M. Dantus, R. M. Bowman, M. Gruebele, and A. H. Zewail,/.  them. Phys. 91, 7437 (1989) ;
M.  Gruebele,  G. Roberts,  and A.  H.  Zewail,  Philos.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  London  A 332,  35 
(1990) ; D. Zhong and A. H. Zewail,J. Phys. Chem.  A 102, 4031  (1998) ; K. B. Muller and
A. H. Zewail,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 295, 1  (1998).
58.     M. Dantus, R. M. Bowman,  and A. H. Zewail, Nature 343, 737 (1990) ; M. Gruebele,  G. 
Roberts,  M.  Dantus,  R.  M.  Bowman,  and  A.  H.  Zewail,   Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  166,  459 
(1990) ; R. B. Bernstein  and A. H. Zewail,  Clumi.  Phys.  Lett.  170,  321  (1990) ; M. H. M. 
Janssen,  R.  M.  Bowman,   and  A.  H.  Zewail,   Clumi.   Phys.   Lett.   122,  99  (1990) ;  M. 
Gruebele and A. H. Zewail,/.  Chem.  Phys. 98, 883 (1993).
59.     N. F. Scherer, L. R. Khundkar, R. B. Bernstein, and A. H. Zewail,J.  CA.    Phys. 87, 1451 
(1987) ;  N. F.  Scherer,  C.  Sipes,  R. B. Bernstein,  and A. H.  Zewail, J.   C             5*   
92, 5239 (1990) ; M. Gruebele,  I. R. Sims, E. D. Potter, and A. H. Zewail,J.  Clumi. Phys. 95,
7763 (1991) ; I. R. Sims, M. Gruebele, E. D. Potter, and A. H. Zewail, J.  Chem. Phys. 91, 4127 
(1992) ; D. Zhong, P. Y. Cheng, and A. H. Zewail,J.  C/rem. Phys. 105, 7864 (1996) ; An  up-to-date 
 experimental  and  theoretical  work  is reviewed  in  Ref.  B5  (some  are adapted here) and the 
review by D. Clary (see Ref. 27).
60.   J.  L.  Knee,  L.  R.  Khundkar,  and  A.  H.  Zewail, /.  CA.      Phys.  82,  4715  (1985) 
;  M. Dantus,  M.  H.  M. Janssen,  and  A.  H.  Zewail,  CA.     Phys.  Lrtt.  181,  281  (1991) ; 
 T. Baumert,  S. Pedersen, and A. H. Zewail, J.  Phys.  CA.    97, 12447  (1993) ; S. Pedersen,
J.  L. Herek, and A. H. Zewail,  Serene:e 266, 1359 (1994) ; S. K. Kim, S. Pedersen, and A.
H. Zewail, J.  Chem. Phys.  103, 477 (1995); S. K. Kim and A. H. Zewail,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 250, 
279  (1996) ; S. K. Kim, J.  Guo, J.  S. Baskin,  and A. H. Zewail, J.  Phys.  Chem.  100, 9202  
(1996).
61.    E. W.-G. Diau, O. Abou-Zied, A. A. Scala, and A. H. Zewail,/. Am.  Chem.  Soc. 120, 3245 
(1998).
62.     L. R. Khundkar and A. H. Zewail, /.  C      . Phys. 92, 231  (1990) ; D. Zhong, S. Ahmad,
and A.  H. Zewail, J.   Am.  Chem.  Soc.  119,  5978  (1997) ; D. Zhong  and A. H.  Zewail, J.
Phys.  Chem.  A 102, 4031  (1998).
63.     P. Y. Cheng, D. Zhong, and A. H. Zewail,  CA.     Phys. LeU. 23'f, 399 (1995).
64.     S. K. Kim, S. Pedersen, and A. H. Zewail,  CA.     Phys. Lett. 233, 500 (1995).
65.    A. A. Scala, E. W.-G. Diau, Z. H. Kim, and A. H. Zewail,J.  Chem. Phys. 108, 7933 (1998).
66.    S.  De  Feyter,  E. W.-G.  Diau,  and  A.  H.  Zewail,  Angew   them.  Int.  Ed.  Engl.  
112,  266 (2000).
67.     P.  M.  Felker,  W.  R. Lambert,  and A.  H.  Zewail, J.   C      .  Phys.  11,  1603  
(1982) ; J.   L.
Herek, S. Pedersen, L. Bañares, and A. H. Zewail,J.  C      . Phys. 91, 9046 (1992).
68.    B. A. Horn, J.  L. Herek, and A. H. Zewail,/. Am.  them.  Soc. 118, 8755 (1996) ; E. W.-G.

364                                               Chemistry 1999

Diau, S. De Feyter, and A. H. Zewail,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 304, 134 (1999) ; S. De Feyter, E. W.-G. 
Diau, and A. H. Zewail, Phys.  Chem.  Chem. Phys. 2, 877  (2000).
69.    D.  Zhong,  E.  W.-G.  Diau,  T.  M.  Bernhardt,  S.  De  Feyter,  J.   D.  Roberts,  and  
A.  H. Zewail,  Cfietn.  Phys.  Lett.  298,  129  (1998) ;  M.  Chachisvilis  and A.  H.  Zewail, 
J.  Phys. Chem.  A 103, 7408 (1999).
70.    P. Y Cheng, D. Zhong, and A. H. Zewail,J.  Chem. Phys.  105, 6216 (1996) ; D. Zhong and
A. H. Zewail, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 96, 2602 (1999) ; D. Zhong, T. M. Bernhardt, and A. H. Zewail, 
J.  Phys.  Chem.  A 103,  10093 (2000).
7l.     S. Pedersen, J.  L. Herek, and A. H. Zewail,  Science 266, 1359 (1994) ; S. De Feyter, E. 
W.-
G. Diau, A. A. Scala, and A. H. Zewail,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  303, 249 (1999) ; S. De Feyter,
E. W.-G. Diau,  and A. H.  Zewail,  Angem.  Chem.  Ref. Ed. Engl.,  39, 260  (2000); E. W.-G. Diau, 
j.  Casanova, j.  D. Roberts, and A. H. Zewail,  f'roc. Natl.  AcaB.  Sci.,  USA 97, 1376 (2000).
72.    E. W.-G. Diau and A. H. Zewail,  to be published.
73.    D.  Zhong,  E.  W.-G.  Diau,  T.  M.  Bernhardt,  S.  De  Feyter, J.   D.  Roberts,  and  A. 
 H. Zewail,  CA.     Phys.  Lrtt.  298,  129  (1998) ;  M.  Chachisvilis  and A.  H.  Zewail, /.  
Phys. Chem.  A 103, 7408 (1999) ; E. W.-G. Diau, S. De Feyier, and A. H. Zewail,/.  Chem.  Phys. 
110, 9785 (1999).
74.    @. Liu, J  -K. Wang, and A. H. Zewail, Nature 364, 427 (1993) ;J.-K. Wang, Q_. Liu, and A.
H. Zewail,/. Phys. CM.   99, 11309 (1995) ; Q. Liu, J.-K. Wang, and A. H. Zewai1,J. Phys.
Chem. 99, 11321  (1995): J  J. Breen, D. M. Willberg,  M. Gutmann, and A. H. Zewail, J. Chem.  
Phys. 93, 9180  (1990) ; M. Gutmann,  D. M. Willberg, and A. H. Zewail, J.  Chem. Phys.  97, 8037  
(1992); J.  T. Su and A. H. Zewail, /.  Phys.  them.  102,  4082  (1998) ; J.J.
Breen, L. W. Peng, D. M. Willberg, A. Heikal, P. Cong, and A. H. Zewail,J.  Gore   . Phys. 92,  805 
 (1990) ;  S.  K.  Kim, J.-K.  Wang,  and A.  H.  Zewail,  Cfietn.  Phys.  Lett.  228,  369 (1994) 
; S. K.          J  J. Breen, D. M. Willberg, L. W. Peng, A. Heikal, J.  A. Syage, and A.
H. Zewail, J.  Phys.  them. 99, 7421  (1995) ; A. A. Heikal, S. H. Chong, J.  S. Baskin, and
A. H. Zewail,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 242,  380 (1995).
75.    A. H.  Zewail,  M. Dantus,  R. M.  Bowman,  and A. Mokhtari,  J.  Photochem.  Photobiol.  A: 
Clumi. 62/3, 301 (1992) ; C. Lienau, j.  C. Williamson, and A. H. Zewail,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 213,  
289  (1993) ;  C.  Lienau  and A.  H.  Zewail,  C/rein.  Tfiis.  Off.  222,  224  (1994) ;  C. 
Lienau and A. H. Zewail,/. Phys.  C/retn.  100, 18629 (1996) ; A. Materny, C. Lienau, and
A.  H.  Zewail, /. Phys.  Chem.  100,  18650  (1996) ;  Q_.  Liu,  C. Wan,  and A.  H.  Zewail, J. 
Phys.  C/rein.  100,  18666  (1996) ; C. Wan, M. Gupta, J.  S. Baskin,  Z. H. Kim, and A. H. 
Zewail, J.  C      . Phys.  106, 4353 (1997) ; J.  S. Baskin, M. Gupta, M. Chachisvilis,  and A.
H.  Zewail,  CA.     Phys.  Lett.  2'f5,  437  (1997) ; J.   S. Baskin,  M. Chachisvilis,  M.  
Gupta, and  A.  H.  Zewail,  J.   Phys.   Cfum.   A  102,   4158   (1998);  A.  Douhal,   T.  
Fiebig,   M. Chachisvilis,  and A. H.  Zewail, J.  Phys.  Chem.  A  102,  1657  (1998) ;  M.  
Chachisvilis,  I. Garcia  Ochoa,  A.  Douhal,  and  A.  H.  Zewail,  C      .  Phys.  Lett.  293,  
153  (1998) ;  A. Vierheilig,  T. Chen,  P. Waltner,  W. Kiefer,  A. Materny,  and A. H.  Zewail,  
Cir. Phys. Wn.  312, 349  (1999) ; C. Wan,  M. Gupta,  and A. H. Zewail,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  256, 
279 (1996) ; M. Chachisvilis and A. H. Zewail, J.  Phys.  Chem.  A 103, 7408 (1999) ; T. Fiebig,
M. Chachisvilis,  M. M. Manger, I. Garcia Ochoa, A. de La Hoz Ayuso, A. Douhal,  and
A. H. Zewail,     Phys.  Gbimi  A 108, 7419 (1999).
76.   J.  C. Williamson  and A.  H.  Zewail,  f'roc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.,  USA 88,  5021  (1991) ; 
J.   C. Williamson, M. Dantus,  S. B. Kim, and A. H. Zewail,  Chrm. Phys. Lett. 196,  529 (1992) ;
J.  C. Williamson  and A. H.  Zewail,  Cir. Phys.  Rti. 209,  10  (1993) ; J.  C. Williamson and  
A.  H.  Zewail,  /.  Phys.   them.   98,  2766   (1994) ;  M.  Dantus,   S.  B.  Kim,  J.   C. 
Williamson, and A. H. Zewail, J.  Ph5*  Ghem.  98, 2782  (1994) ; J.  C. Williamson, J.  Cao,
H. Ihee, H. Frey, and A. H. Zewail,  Nature 386, 159  (1997) ; H. Ihee, j.  Cao, and A. H.
Zewail,  C/rem.  Phys. Lett. 281, 10 (1997)  J   Cao, H. Ihee, and A. H. Zewail,  Chem.  Phys. 
Lett. Z90,  1  (1998) ;J.  Cao, H. Ihee, and A. H. Zewail, Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci., USA 96, 338 
(1999).
77.    W. S. Warren  and A. H. Zewail,J.  Chem. Phys. 78, 2279  (1983) ; ibid 78, 2298 (1983) ;j.
J.  Gerdy, M. Dantus, R. M. Bowman,  and A. H. Zewail,  them. Phys. Lett.  1'f1,  1  (1990) ;
J.  L. Herek, A. Materny, and A. H. Zewail,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 228,  15 (1994) ; E. D. Potter,
J.  L.  Herek,  S.  Pedersen,  @.  Liu,  and A.  H.  Zewail,  Nature 355,  66  (1992) ;  E.  W.-G. 
Diau, J.  L. Herek,  Z. H. Kim, and A. H. Zewail,  Science 2'f9, 847  (1998).
78.    D. P. Millar, R.J. Robbins, and A. H. Zewail, f'roc. Natl. Acad.  Sci., USA 14, 5593 (1980) 
;
D. P. Millar, R.J. Robbins, and A. H. Zewail,/.  C      . Phys. 14, 4200 (1981) ; D. P. Millar,
R.J. Robbins, and A. H. Zewail, J.  CA.     Phys. 76, 2080 (1982).

Ahmed  H.  Zewail                                             S65

79.    T. Fiebig, C. Wan, S. O. Kelley J   K. Barton, and A. H. Zewail, Doc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci., 
USA 96, 1187 (1999) ; C. Wan, T. Fiebig, S. O. Kelley, C. R. Treadway J   iC Barton, and A. H. 
Zewail, Proc. Natl. Acad.  So., USA 96, 6014 ( 1999) ; The protein work involves D. Zhong
of this laboratory. The work on the aminopurine system involves T. Fiebig and C. Wan of  this 
laboratory in collaboration  with Olav Schiemann  and Jackie Barton.
80.    B. Steiger, J.  S. Baskin,  F. C. Anson,  and A. H. Zewail,  Angew.  Chem.  Int. Ed. Engl.  
39, 257 (2000) ; A. Douhal, S. K  Kim, and A. H. Zewail, Nature 378,  260 (1995) ; T. Fiebig,
M. Chachisvilis,  M. M. Manger, I. Garcia Ochoa, A. de La Hoz Ayuso, A. Douhal, and
A. H. Zewail, J.  Phys.  them.  A 103, 7419 (1999) ; B. A. Leland, A. D. joran, P. M. Felker,
J.J. Hopfield,  A.  H.  Zewail,  and  P.  B. Dervan, /.  Phys.  CM.    89,  5571  (1985) ; A.  D. 
Joran, B. A. Leland, P. M. Felker, A. H. Zewail, J.J. Hopfield, and P. B. Dervan, Nature 327,  508 
(1987).



BIBLIOGRAPHY:  THE CALTECH RESEARCH
Over  the  past 20 years at  Caltech  my group and  I  have  published  some 300 scientific papers. 
The following list includes some rectums, feature articles, and   a few book.
Books
(B1)    A.  H.  Zewail,  Femtochemistry  -   Ultrafast  Dynamics  of  the  Chemical  Bond,  Vols.  
I  and  II,
World Scientific,  New Jersey, Singapore  (1994).
(B2)    A.  H.  Zewail   (Ed.) ,  The  Chemical  Bond:  Structure  and  Dynamics,  Academic   
Press, Boston  (1992).
Book Chapters
(B3)     J. A. Syage and A. H. Zewail, Molecular  Clusters: Got-Time @yaainics  and    eoctioify,  
in: fofecufor Clusters, J.  M. Bowman  and Z. Bacic (Eds.) , JAI Press (1998).
(B4)     A.  H.  Zewail,  Femtochemistry: lfnamics  with  Atomic  Resolution,  in:  Femtochemistry  
U Femtobiology,  V. Sundstrom  (Ed.), World Scientific,  Singapore  (1997).
(B5)     C. Wittig  and A. H.  Zewail,  Dyeoinics  o/ Ground  State Bimolecular  Reactions,  
Chemical Reactions   in  Clusters,  E,  R.  Bernstein   (Ed.),  Oxford  University,  New  York,  p. 
 64 (1996).
(B6)     A.  H.  Zewail,  Femtochemistry:  CoztcQts  and  Applications,  in: Femtosecond  
Chemistry,  ].
Manz and L. Wñste  (Eds.), VCH Publishers, Inc., New York, p. 15 (1995).
(B7)     P. M. Felker and A. H. Zewail,    fofrcufor Structures from Ultrafast 
CoherenceSpectroscof, in: Femtosecond  Chemistry, J.  Manz  and L. Wfiste  (Eds.), VCH  Publishers, 
 Inc.,  New York, p. 193 (1995).
(B8)     A.  H.  Zewail,  Ultrafast  Dynamics  of  the  Chemical  Bond  -  Femtochemistry,  in:  
Ultrafast Processes  in  Chemistry  and Photobiologf,  Chemistry  for the 21st  Century, M. A. 
El-Sayed, I. Tanaka, and Y. N. Molin  (Eds.) IUPAC, Blackwell  Scientific Publishers,  Oxford, p.1 
(1995).
(B9)     K  E. Jones and A.  H.  Zewail,  Molecular  Mechanisms  for Dephasing:  Toward  a  Unified 
treatment  of Cases,  Solids, and liquids, in: Advances in Laser Chemistry, Vol. 3, Springer Series 
in  Chemical  Physics,  A.  H.  Zewail  (Ed.),  Springer-Verlag,  New York,  p.  258 (1978).
Reviews
(B10)   A.  H.  Zewail,  Femtochemistry:  Recent  Progress  iii  Studies  of  Dynamics   and   
Confro/  of Reactions   and  Their  Transition  States,  J.   Phys.   Chem.,   (Centennial  Issue)  
 100,  12701 (1996).
(BII)   A.  Douhal,  F.  Lahmani  and  A.  H.  Zewail,  Proton-transferSection  Dynamics,   Chem.
Phys.  (Special Issue) 207, 477  (1996).
(B 12)   J.  C. Polanyi  and A. H.  Zewail,  Direct  Observation  of  The  Transition  State,  
Accounts  of Chemical Research (Holy-Grail Special Issue) 28, 119 (1995).
(B13)   A. H. Zewail,  Coherence  — A Pouierful  Concept  in  the Studies  of  Structures  and 
Dynamics, Laser Physics 5, 417  (1995).

566                                            Chemists  1999

(B14)   A. H. Zewail, Femtoclumiistry, (Feature Article) J.  Phys.  Chem. 97, 12427 (1993).  (B15)  
 A.  H.  Zewail,  M.  Dantus,  R.  M.  Bowman,  and A.  Mokhtari,  Femtochemistry:  Recent
Advances  and  Extension  to High-Pressures, J.  Photochern.  Photobiol.  A:  Chem.  62/3,  301 
(1992).
(Bl6)   A. H. Zewail and R. B. Bernstein, Real-Time Laser Femtochemistry: Vieniing the Transition 
States  from Reagents  to Products,  Chem.  H   Eng.  Neuis, Vol.  66 November  7, pp.  24-43 
(1988)  —  Feature  Article/Special  Report;   in:  The   Clumiical   Bond:   Structure   and 
@ynoinics, A. H. Zewail  (Ed.), Academic  Press, Boston, p. 223 (1992) , with an upda- te section.
(B17)   A.  H.  Zewail,  Femtosecond   Transition-State  Dynamics,   in:   Structure  and  lfnamics 
 of Reactive Transition  States, Faraday Discuss.  Chem.  Soc. 91, 207 (1991).
(B18)   A.  H.  Zewail,  Femtochemistry:  The  Role  of  Alignment   and  Orientation,   J.   Chem. 
  Soc., Faraday  Trans.  2 85,  1221  (1989).
(B19)   A. H. Zewail, Laser Femtochemistry,  Science 242,  1645 (1988).
(B20)   A. H. Zewail,      -   Its Coherent  and Incoherent Ifnamics, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys.  Chem. 
89, 264 (1985).
(B21)   N. Bloembergen  and A. H. Zewail,  Energf  Redistribution iii  Isolated  Molecules  and  
the Question  of Mode-Selective Laser  Chiefly  Revisited  (Featttre Article),  J.   Phys.  Chem.  
88, 5459 (1984).
(B22)   W. S. Warren  and A. H. Zewail, Phase  Coherence  in  Multiple Pulse Optical  Spectroscof, 
in: Photochemistry and Photobiologf: Proceedings of the International Confereni:e,  Vols. I and II, 
Alexandria,  Egypt, January M10,  1983, A. H. Zewail,  (Ed.)  Harwood Academic Publishers,  Chur, 
Switzerland,  (1983) ; Laser Chem.  2 (1,6), 37 ( 1983).
(B23)   A. H.  Zewail,       ftcof Molecular Dephasing:  Principles  of and Probings  6f  Coherent  
Laser Spectroscof,  Acc.  Clumi. Res.  13, 360 (1980) ;
(B24)   A. H. Zewail, Laser Selective Chemistry  -  Is it Possible?,  Phys.  Today  33, 2 (1980).
(B25)   J.  S. Baskin and A. H. Zewail, Freezing Time — In   a Femtosecond,  Science Spectra,  
Issue 14, p. 62 (1998).
(B26)   A.  H.  Zewail,  but     is  Chemistry .*  100  Years  After J.  }.   Thomson's  Discovery, 
 Cambridge lieu' 118, No. 2330, 65 (1997).
(B27)   A. H. Zewail, Discoveries at Atomic Resolution (Small is Beautiful), Nature (London)  361, 
215 (1993).
(B28)   A. H. Zewail,  Tire Birth of Molecules,  Scientific  American 268,  76 (1990). Also 
available in other languages: Italian, Japanese,  French, Spanish,  German, Russian,  Chinese, 
Arabic, Hungarian and Indian.


BIBLIOGRAPHY:  SOME GENERAL REFERENCES

(B29)   [Nobel   Symposium]   Femtochemistry   H    Femtobiology,   V.   Sundstrfim   (Ed.),   
World Scientific,  Singapore  (1997).
(B30)   [Solvay Conference]  Chemical Reactions and TNr  Control on the Femtosecond Time Scale,
P. Gaspard & I. Burghardt  (Eds.),  Ads. Chem.  Phys.  101, Wiley, New York  (1997). (B31)   
[Lausanne    Conference]    Femtochemistry,    M.   Chergui    (Ed.),   World    Scientific,
Singapore  (1996).
(B32)   [Berlin  Conference]  Femtosecond  Chemistry, Volumes  1 and  2, J   Maflz and L. Wfiste 
(Eds.), VCH, Weinheim  (1995).
(B33)   [Amsterdam  Conferencel Femtosecond Reaction Dynamics, D. A. Wiersma, (Ed.), Royal 
Netherlands Academy of Am and Sciences,  North  Holland, Amsterdam,  (1994).
(B34)   Ultrafast  Processes  in   Chemistry  and  Biology  -   Chemistry  for  the  21st  Century, 
 M. A.  El- Sayed,  I.  Tanaka,  and  Y  N.  Molin  (Eds.),  IUPAC,  Blackwell  Scientific  ,  
Oxford, (1994).
(B35)   Density Matrix Method  and Femtosecond Processes,  S. H. Lin, R. Alden, R. Islampour,  H. 
Ma and A. A. Villaeys, World Scientific,  Singapore  (1991).
(B36)   f'riaci§fes of Nonlinear  client  Spectrosccff,  S. Mukamel,  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  Oxford 
(1995).
(B37)   Ultrafast D  fnamics  of Chemical  Systems, J.  D. Simon  (Ed.), Kluwer, Boston  (1994). 
(B38)   Femtosecond Real-Time Spectroscof  o/Small Molecules  fs° Clusters, E. Schreiber,  
Springer,
New York (1998).

Ahmed  H.  fail                                              367

Special Issues
(B39)   Femtochemistry -   Ten Years  of,   A. W. Castleman, Jr. and V. Sundstrfim  (Eds.), J.  
Phys.
Clumiistry, June Issue  (1998).
(B40)   Femtochemistr   , J.  Manz  & A. W.  Castleman, Jr.  (Eds.), J.  Phys.  Chemistry,  
December Issue  97 (1993).
(B41)    Ultrafast  Lasers  wi  Chemistry,  Is.  J.   Clumi,  M.  Shapiro  and  S.  Rosenwaks,  34, 
 No.  1 (1994).
Reviews
(B42)    Chemistry  in  Microtime, C•. Porter, in: The Chemical Bond: Structures and Dynamics, A. 
H. Zewail  (Ed.), Academic Press, Inc., Boston, p. 113 (1992).
(B43)   Molecular Photoph  sics, G. Beddard, in: Reports on Progress  in AlJsics 56, 63 (1993). 
(B44)   Time-Resolved  Vibrational  Spectroscopy  in  the Impulsive Limit, L. Dhar, J.  A. Rogers,  
and
K. A. Nelson,  Chem.       . 94, 157  (1994).
(B45)   The  Dynamics  of  Wave  Packets  of  Highly-Excited  States  of  Atoms  and  Molecules,  
I.  Sh.
Averbukh  and N. F. Perel'man,  Son. Phys.  Usp. 34, 572 (1991).
(B46)   Hot Electron Femtochemistry at  Surfaces,].  W. Gadzuk, in  fB32J , Vol. II, p. 603.
(B47)   Dynamics ofNonthermal  Reactions:  Surface Femtosecond  Chemistry,  R. R. Cavanagh,  D. S. 
King, J.  C. Stephenson,  and T. F. Heinz, J.  Phys.  CA     9'f, 786 (1993).
(B48)   Femtochemistry, J.  G. Thorne and G. S. Beddard,  Clumiistry  X   Industry, June 20 Issue, 
p. 456 (1994).
(B49)    Wave PacLet @yaomics: New Physics and Chemistry  in Fee  to-time,  B. M.  Garraway and K- 
A Suominen,        . Prog. Phys. 58, 365 (1995).
(B50)   Femtosecond     Broadband     Absorption     Spectrosc           of    Fragments     Formed 
    in     the Photodissociation of Gas-phase Molecules, ].  H. Glownia,  R. E. Walkup,  D. R. 
Gnass, M. Kaschke, J.  A. Misewich,  and P. P. Sorokin, in  [B32] , Vol. I, p. 131.
(BSI)    theory of Ultrafast  Nonadiabatic  Excited-State  Processes and their Spectroscopic 
Detection  in Real Time”, W. Domcke  and G. Stock,  Advances  in  Chem.  Phys.  100,  1 (1997)
(B52)   “Femtosecond  Surface  Science",  j.  A.  Misewich,  T.  F.  Heinz,  P.  Weigand  and  A. 
Kalamarides,  in:  Advanced  Series  in Physical  Clumiistry,  vol.  5,  H.-L.  Dai  and W.  Ho, 
World  Scientific,  Singapore  (1995).
(B53)   Femtosecond Time-Resolved  Photochemistry of Molecules  and Metal Clusters, T. Baumert, R. 
Thalweiser, V. Weiss, and G. Gerber, in  [B32] , Vol. II, p. 397.
Overviews
(B54)   R. Hoffmann,  “Pulse, Pump and Probe",  American Scientist 87, 308 (1999)
(B55)   Y. Tanimura,  K. Yamashita  and P. A. Anfinrud,  “Femtochemistry", hoc. Natl.  Acad. Sci.,  
USA 96, 8823 (1999) ; P. Anfinrud,  R. de Vivie-Riedle,  and V. Engel, ibid., 8328 (1999).
(B56)   Designing the Molecular World, P. Ball, Princeton  University Press, Princeton  (1994). 
(B57)   Taming the Atos, H. C. von Baeyer, Random  House, New York  (1992).
(B58)   Atoms, Electrons,  and Change, P. W. Atkins, W. H. Freeman and Co., New York (1991). (B59)  
 V. K  Jain, ‘the World's Fastest Camera”,  The World and I,  The lYnsfiiiigton  his      Pub.
to., October Issue, p. 156 (1995).
(B60)   B. Nordén, www.nobel.se/announcement-99/chemistry99.html
(B61)   M. Nauenberg,  C. Stroud and J.  Yeazell,  “The Classical  Limit of an Atom",  Scientific 
American, June Issue, p. 44 (1994).
(B62)   Douglas L. Smith, “Coherent Thinking", Engineering and Science,  ñXf1, Number 4, p.
6 (1999).
