380


SEMICONDUCTING AND METALLIC POLYMERS:
THE FOURTH GENERATION OF POLYMERIC
MATERIALS

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2000

by

ALAN   J. HEEGER
Department of Physics, Materials Department, Institute for Polymers and
Organic Solids, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA
93106, USA.




I. INTRODUCTION

In 1976, Alan MacDiarmid, Hideki Shirakawa and I, together with a talented
group of graduate students and post-doctoral researchers discovered con-
ducting polymers and the ability to dope these polymers over the full range
from insulator to metal [1,2). This was particularly exciting because it created
a new field of research on the boundary between chemistry and condensed
matter physics, and because it created a number of opportunities:
Conducting polymers opened the way to progress in understanding the fun-
  damental chemistry and physics of n:-bonded macromolecules;
Conducting polymers provided an opportunity to address questions which
  had been of fundamental interest to quantum chemistry for decades:
  Is there bond alternation in long chain polyenes?
  What is the relative importance of the electron-elecron and the electron-
     lattice interactions in n:-bonded macromolecules?
Conducting polymers provided an opportunity to address fundamental issues
  of importance to condensed matter physics as well, including, for example,
  the metal-insulator transition as envisioned by Neville Mott and Philip
  Anderson and the instability of one-dimensional metals discovered by Ru-
  dolph Peierls ( the "Peierls Instability").
Finally - and perhaps most important - conducting polymers offered the
  promise of achieving a new generation of polymers: Materials which exhibit
  the electrical and optical properties of metals or semiconductors and which
  retain the attractive mechanical properties and processing advantages of
  polymers.

Thus, when asked to explain the importance of the discovery of conducting
polymers, I offer two basic answers:
(i) They did not (could not?) exist.
(ii) They offer a unique combination of properties not available from any
     other known materials.


                                  Alan J Reeger                             381

The first expresses an intellectual challenge; the second expresses a promise
for utiltity in a wide variety of applications.
   Conducting polymers are the most recent generation of polymers[3].
Polymeric materials in the form of wood, bone, skin and fibers have been
used by man since prehistoric time. Although organic chemistry as a science
dates back to the eighteenth century, polymer science on a molecular basis is
a development of the twentieth century. Hermann Staudinger developed the
concept of macromolecules during the 1920's. Staudinger's proposal was
openly opposed by leading scientists, but the data eventually confirmed the
existence of macromolecules. Staudinger was awarded the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry in 1953 "for his discoveries in the field of macromolecular che-
mistry". While carrying out basic research on polymerization reactions at the
DuPont company, Wallace Carothers invented nylon in 1935. Carothers' re-
search showed the great industrial potential of synthetic polymers; a potential
which became reality in a remarkably short time. Today, synthetic polymers
are used in larger quantities than any other class of materials (larger by vo-
lume and larger by weight, even though such polymers have densities close to
unity). Polymer synthesis in the l 950's was dominated by Karl Ziegler and
Giulio Natta whose discoveries of polymerizarion catalysts were of great im-
portance for the development of the modem "plastics" industry. Ziegler and
Natta were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1963 "for their discove-
ries in the field of the chemistry and technology of high polymers". Paul Flory
was the next "giant" of polymer chemistry; he created modem polymer
science through his experimental and theoretical studies of macromolecules.
His insights and deep understanding of macromolecular phenomena are
summarized in his book, Principles of Polymer Chemistry, published in 1953, and
still useful (and used) today. Flory was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
in 1974 "for his fundamental achievements, both theoretical and experimen-
tal, in the physical chemistry of macromolecules".
   Because the saturated polymers studied by Staudinger, Flory, Ziegler and
Natta are insulators, they were viewed as uninteresting from the point of view
of electronic materials. Although this is true for saturated polymers (in which
all of the four valence electrons of carbon are used up in covalent bonds), in
conjugated polymers the electronic configuration is fundamentally different.
In conjugated polymers, the chemical bonding leads to one unpaired electron
(the rc-elecron) per carbon atom. Moreover, re-bonding, in which the carbon
orbitals are in the sp 2p, configuration and in which the orbitals of successive
carbon atoms along the backbone overlap, leads to electron delocalization
along the backbone of the polymer. This electronic delocalization provides the
"highway" for charge mobility along the backbone of the polymer chain.
   As a result, therefore, the electronic structure in conducting polymers is
determined by the chain symmetry (i.e. the number and kind of atoms
within the repeat unit), with the result that such polymers can exhibit semi-
conducting or even metallic properties. In his lecture at the Nobel Sympo-
sium (NS-81) in 1991, Professor Bengt Ranby designated electrically con-
ducting polymers as the "fourth generation of polymeric materials"[3].


382                             Chemistry 2000

   The classic example is polyacetylene, (-CH) 0 , in which each carbon is
a-bonded to only two neighboring carbons and one hydrogen atom with one
1t-electron on each carbon. If the carbon-carbon bond lengths were equal, the
chemical formula, (-CH) 0 with one unpaired electron per formula unit would
imply a metallic state. Alternatively, if the electron-electron interactions were
too strong, (-CH) 0 would be an antiferromagnetic Mott insulator. The easy
conversion to the metallic state on doping[ 1,2] together with a variety of stu-
dies of the neutral polymer have eliminated the antiferromagnetic Mott in-
sulator as a possibility.
   In real polyacetylene, the structure is dimerized as a result of the Peierls
Instability with two carbon atoms in the repeat unit, (-CH=CH) 0 • Thus, the
1t-band is divided into 1t- and n*-bands. Since each band can hold two elec-
trons per atom (spin up and spin down), the 1t-band is filled and the 1t*-band
is empty. The energy difference between the highest occupied state in the
1t-band and the lowest unoccupied state in the 1t*-band is the 1t-1t* energy gap,
Eg. The bond-alternated structure of polyacetylene is characteristic of conju-
gated polymers (see Fig. I). Consequently, since there are no partially filled
bands conjugated polymers are typically semiconductors. Because Eg depends
upon the molecular structure of the repeat unit, synthetic chemists are pro-
vided with the opportunity and the challenge to control the energy gap by de-
sign at the molecular level.
   Although initially built upon the foundations of quantum chemistry and
condensed matter physics, it soon became clear that entirely new concepts
were involved in the science of conducting polymers. The discovery of non-
linear excitations in this class of polymers, solitons in systems in which the
ground state is degenerate and confined soliton pairs (polarons and bi-
polarons) in systems in which the ground state degeneracy has been lifted by
the molecular structure, opened entirely new directions for the study of the
interconnection of chemical and electronic structure. The spin-charge sepa-
ration characteristic of solitons and the reversal of the spin-charge relation-
ship (relative to that expected for electrons as fermions) in polyacetylene
challenged the foundations of quantum physics. The study of solitons in poly-
acetylene [4], stimulated by the Su-Schrieffer-Reeger (SSH) papers [5,6]
dominated the first half of the l 980's.
   The opportunity to synthesize new conducting polymers with improv-
ed/ desired properties began to attract the attention of synthetic chemists in
the l 980's. Although it would be an overstatement to claim that chemists can
now control the energy gap of semiconducting polymers through molecular
design, we certainly have come a long way toward that goal.
   Reversible "doping" of conducting polymers, with associated control of the
electrical conductivity over the full range from insulator to metal, can be ac-
complished either by chemical doping or by electrochemical doping. Concur-
rent with the doping, the electrochemical potential (the Fermi level) is
moved either by a redox reaction or an acid-base reaction into a region of
energy where there is a high density of electronic states; charge neutrality is
maintained by the introduction of counter-ions. Metallic polymers are, there-


                                                                 Alan J Heeger                                                     383


                Polyacetylene                                           Polyparaphenylene
                    (PA)                                                     vinylene
                                                                              (PPV)


                Polythiophene          I n
                                      ~s                                                                               OR
                    (PT)
                                                                        Poly (2,5 dialkoxy)
                                                                           paraphenylene
                                                                              vinylene
                Poly(3-alkyl)
                 thiophene
                  (P3AT)
                                       1\, R"
                                      ~S                                 (e.g. MEH-PPV)
                                                                                              ~
                                                                                              R0
                                                                                                 I.
                                                                                                     2
            (R·methyl, butyl, etc.)


                 Polypyrrole
                    (PPy)
                                           ,
                                      ~"'7i;;-
                                                   nNI      'n          Polyparaphenylene
                                                                              (PPP)
                                                                                                         R2



                     Poly
              isothianaphthene
                                                                            Ladder·type
                   (PITN)
                                                                         polyparaphenylene
                                                                              (LPPP)


                                               !\                                             R2
                                               0        0
                Polyethylene
               dioxythiophene
                  (PEDOT)
                                      A                                  Polyparaphenylene
                                                                              sulphide
                                                                                                   +0--/;S*
                                                                                                         \\
                                                                               (PPS)



                Alkoxy·substituted
           poly para·phenylene vinylene
                                                        Y                   Polyheptadiyne
                                                                                (PHT)




                                                                                                         J
                   (MEH-PPV)                        0




                                      -o
                                                                          Poly (3-hexyl) thiophene
                                                                                  (P3HT)                      '/       \
                                                                                                         1         s           "

                                                                  H                                                        H
                  Polyaniline, PAN!    +0-~-0-N=0=Nv~+
Figure 1. Molecular structures of a few conjugated polymers; note the bond-alternated structures.




fore, salts. The electrical conductivity results from the existence of charge car-
riers ( through doping) and from the ability of those charge carriers to move
along the n-bonded "highway". Consequently, doped conjugated polymers
are good conductors for two reasons:
(i) Doping introduces carriers into the electronic structure. Since every
     repeat unit is a potential redox site, conjugated polymers can be doped
     n-type (reduced) or p-type (oxidized) to a relatively high density of
     charge carriers [ 7].
(ii) The attraction of an electron in one repeat unit to the nuclei in the
     neighboring units leads to carrier delocalization along the polymer chain
     and to charge carrier mobility, which is extended into three dimensions
     through interchain electron transfer.

Disorder, however, limits the carrier mobility and, in the metallic state, limits
the electrical conductivity. Indeed, research directed toward conjugated poly-


384                                        Chemistry 2000

mers with improved structural order and hence higher mobility is a focus of
current activity in the field.
   Fig. 2 shows the early results on the conductivity ofpolyacetylene as a func-
tion of the doping level; even in these early studies the conductivity increased
by more than a factor of 10 7 to a level approaching that of a metal [2].


                           IOOO

                                               i •         •
                            IOOf-
                                  I
                                           •    trans [CH (AsF, >y]x
                                       •


                              +   I
                                  r
                                  !
                                  iI
                     7      10··1-               H             H                H        H
                      E           I               I                I             I       I
                      u                        _,...c~c,.,c"""c/c"""-,,....c~
                            10· 2 ~-                  I      I    I        I
                      c:                             H      H     H       H
                                  I
                      b           I                                        TRANS
                                  I
                            10· 3 ..
                                                  H                    H    H            H
                                                      \            /         \       I
                                                          C=C               ;=c
                                                                                               <
                                                                ,,c-~
                                                                                                     j
                                                  I             \                    \
                            10-4~
                                i
                                                                                     p=
                                                               H                H    H          H

                                  I                                         CIS
                            ,o-~-
                                  II
                            10·61
                               000 005         0 10            0 15          0 20            0 25
                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                    0 3(
                                                                y
Figure 2. Electrical conductivty of trans-(CH), as a function of (A~F,;) dopant concentration. The
trans and ris polymer structures are shown in the inset.




   The electrochemical doping of conducting polymers was discovered by the
MacDiarmid-Heeger collaboration in 1980 and opened yet another scientific
direction [8]. The electrochemistry of conducting polymers has developed in-
to a field of its own with applicaions that range from polymer batteries and
electrochromic windows to light-emitting electrochemical cells[9].
  Although I have emphasized the processing advantages of polymers, even
as late as 1990, there were no known examples of stable metallic polymers
which could be processed in the metallic form (a requirement for broad use in
industrial products). This major outstanding problem was first solved with
polyaniline, PANI. PANI has been investigated extensively for over 100 years
and attracted interest as a conducting material for several important reasons;
the monomer is inexpensive, the polymerization reaction is straightforward


                                   Alan J Heeger                              385

 and proceeds with high yield, and PANI has excellent stability. As shown by
Alan MacDiarmid and his collaborators in the mid-SO's, polyaniline can be
 rendered conducting through two independent routes; oxidation (either
 chemically or electrochemically) of the leuco-emeraldine base or protonation
 of the emeraldine base through acid-base chemistry[lO]. Because the inser-
 tion of counter-ions is involved in both routes; conducting polyaniline is a salt
 (a polycation with one anion per repeat unit).
    Processing high molecular weight polyaniline into useful objects and de-
vices proved to be a difficult problem. Yong Cao, Paul Smith and I made im-
portant progress in 1991 by using functionalized protonic acids to both con-
vert PANI to the metallic form and, simultaneously, render the the resulting
PANI-complex soluble in common organic solvents[ll]. The functionalized
counter-ion acts like a "surfactant" in that the charged head-group is ionical-
ly bound to the oppositely charged protonated PANI chain, and the "tail" is
chosen to be compatible with non-polar or weakly polar organic liquids (in
the case of solutions) or the host polymer (in the case of blends). The pro-
cessibility of PANI induced by the "surfactant" counter-ions has enabled the
fabrication of conducting polymer blends with a variety of host polymers [ 12].
Since the blends are melt-processible as well, the counter-ion induced pro-
cessibility of of polyaniline provides a route to conducting polymer blends for
use in industrial products. The "surfactant" counterions offer an unexpected
advantage; they lead to the formation of a self-assembled network morpholo-
gy in the PANI polyblends[13]. Because of these interpenetrating networks,
the threshold for the onset of electrical conductivity in blends with tradition-
al insulating host polymers is reduced to volume fractions well below 1 % [14].
The PANI network is sufficiently robust that it remains connected and con-
ducting even after the removal of the host polymer, thus opening another
new direction; the fabrication of novel electrodes for use in electronic de-
vices. The use of "surfactant" counter-ions was introduced with the goal of
making PANI processible in the conducting form. The self-assembly of phase-
separated networks was an unexpected - but very welcome - bonus.
    Conducting polymers were initially attractive because of the fundamental
interest in the doping and the doping-induced metal-insulator transition.
However, the chemistry and physics of these polymers in their non-doped
semiconducting state are of great interest because they provide a route to
"plastic electronic" devices. Although polymer diodes were fabricated and
characterized in the 1980's[15], the discovery oflight emitting diodes (LEDs)
by Richard Friend and colleagues at Cambridge in 1990 [16] provided the
stimulus for a major push in this direction. The polymer light-emitting diode
is, however, only one of a larger class of devices in the emerging class of "plas-
tic" optoelectronic devices, including lasers, high sensitivity plastic photodi-
odes (and photodiode arrays) and photovoltaic cells, ultrafast image proces-
sors (optical computers), thin-film transistors and all-polymer integrated
circuits; in each case these sophisticated electronic components are fabric-
ated from semiconducting and metallic polymers. All of these have a com-
mon structure: They are thin film devices in which the active layers are fabric-


386                                  Chemistry 2000

ated by casting the semiconducting and/ or metallic polymers from solution
(e.g. spin-casting).


II. DOPING
Charge injection onto conjugated, semiconducting macromolecular chains,
"doping", leads to the wide variety of interesting and important phenomena
which define the field. As summarized in Fig. 3, reversible charge injection by
"doping" can be accomplished in a number of ways.

A. Chemical Doping by Charge Transfer
The initial discovery of the ability to dope conjugated polymers involved
charge transfer redox chemistry; oxidation (p-type doping) or reduction (n-
type doping) [l,2,7], as illustrated with the following examples:

a. p-type
                                                                                          (1)

b. n-type
                       (1t-polymer)n + [Na+(Napthtalide)·]Y                               (2)
                         [(Na+\(1t-polymerfY)n + (Naphth) 0
When the doping level is sufficiently high, the electronic structure evolves to
that of a metal.




Electrical conductivity
                                                  Control ofelectrochemical potential
  Conductivity approaching that of copper
                                                    Electrochemical batteries
  Chemical doping induces solubility
                                                    Electrochromism and "Smart Windows"
  Transparent electrodes, antistatics
                                                    Light-emitting electrochemical cells
  EMI shielding, conducting fibers


                                                          Electrochemical




                 Photochemical                          Interfacial

High-performance optical materials
                                                        Charge iniection without counterions
  1-d Nonlinear optical phenomena
                                                          Organic FET circuits
  Photoinduced electron transfer
                                                          Tunneling injection in LEDs
  Photovoltaic devices
  Tunable NLO properties
Figure 3. Doping mechanisms and related applications.


                                     Alan J Reeger                                  387

B. Electrochemical Doping
Although chemical (charge transfer) doping is an efficient and straightfor-
ward process, it is typically difficult to control. Complete doping to the high-
est concentrations yields reasonably high quality materials. However, attempts
to obtain intermediate doping levels often result in inhomogeneous doping.
Electrochemical doping was invented to solve this problem [8]. In electro-
chemical doping, the electrode supplies the redox charge to the conducting
polymer, while ions diffuse into (or out of) the polymer structure from the
nearby electrolyte to compensate the electronic charge. The doping level is
determined by the voltage between the conducting polymer and the counter-
electrode; at electrochemical equilibrium the doping level is precisely de-
fined by that voltage. Thus, doping at any level can be achieved by setting the
electrochemical cell at a fixed applied voltage and simply waiting as long as
necessary for the system to come to electrochemical equilibrium (as indicated
by the current through the cell going to zero). Electrochemical doping is il-
lustrated by the following examples:

a. p-type
     (1t-polymer)n + [Li+(BF 4-)]sol'n      [(1t-polymer)+Y(BF 4-\Jn + Li(electrode) (3)
b. n-type
     (1t-polymer)n + Li(electrode)       [(Li+)/1t-polymerfY]n + [Li+(BF4-)]sol'n (4)


C. Doping of Polyaniline by Acid-Base Chemistry
Polyaniline provides the prototypical example of a chemically distinct doping
mechanism[lO]. Protonation by acid-base chemistry leads to an internal
redox reaction and the conversion from semiconductor ( the emeraldine
base) to metal (the emeraldine salt). The doping mechanism is shown sche-
matically in Fig. 4. The chemical structure of the semiconducting emeraldine
base form of polyaniline is that of an alternating copolymer. Upon protona-
tion of the emeraldine base to the emeraldine salt, the proton induced spin
unpairing mechanism leads to a structural change with one unpaired spin
per repeat unit, but with no change in the number of electrons[I 7,18]. The result is
a half-filled band and, potentially, a metallic state where there is a positive
charge in each repeat unit (from protonation) and an associated counterion
(e.g. c1-, HS0 4-, DBSA-etc). This remarkable conversion from semiconductor
to metal has been well-described, but it is not well understood from the view
of basic theory. There are no calculations which show that the metallic
(emeraldine salt) final state is lower in energy than the semiconductor and
no detailed understanding of the rearrangement reactions sketched in Fig. 4.

D. Photodoping
The semiconducting polymer is locally oxidized and (nearby) reduced by
photo-absorption and charge separation (electron-hole pair creation and
separation in to "free" carriers):

             (1t-polymer)n + hv          [{1t-polymer)+Y + {1t-polymerJ-Y]n         (5)


388                                      Chemistry 2000

where y is the number of electron-hole pairs (dependent upon the pump rate
in competition with the recombination rate). The branching ratio between
free carriers and bound excitons (and the closely related issue of the magni-
tude of the exciton binding energy) is a subject of continuing discussion [ 19]
    Following photoexcitation from the ground state (lAg in the notation of
molecular spectroscopy) to the lowest energy state with proper symmetry
( l B), recombination to the ground state can be either radiative (lumines-
cence) or nonradiative. Some families of conjugated polymers exhibit high
luminescence quantum efficiencies (for example, PPV and PPP and their
soluble derivatives); others do not (for example, polyacetylene and the poly-
thiophenes). A number of mechanisms have been identified that lead to low
quantum efficiencies for photoluminescence. Rapid bond relaxation in the
excited state and the formation of solitons with states at mid-gap prevent ra-
diative recombination in polyacetylene [ 4]. The existence of an Ag state or a
triplet excited state below the lBu state will favor nonradiative recombination
(in both cases, direct radiative transitions to the ground state are forbidden).
Interchain interactions in the excited state ("excimers") also lead to nonra-
diative channels for decay [20-22].




                                            I:      Reaction+with protonic acid
                                                    adds 2H




                                                    Geometrical (bond length)
                                                    Relaxation (Quinoid to
                                                    Benzenoid)

         ,
          { )----~ -~\_)-N
        t-v_/;
                        H     /----'='         +-0
                                             HI •      + -)- •   Hi
                                                \ /;--N-<_/; N-,n-
                                                                                HI   -




                         \"- ~IV                I   Redistribution of charge
                                                    and spin; halving of unit cell




Figure 4. Protonation induced spin unpairing in polyaniline; conversion from insulator to metal
with no change in the number of electrons.


                                  Alan J Heeger                               389

E. Charge Injection at a metal-semiconducting polymer (MS) interface
Electrons and holes can be injected from metallic contacts into the re*- and
re-bands, respectively:

a. Hole injection into an otherwise filled re-band
                     (re-polymer) 0 -y(e-)   (re-polymer)+J                   (5)
b. Electron injection into an empty re*-band
                     (re-polymer\,+ y(e-)    (re-polymerf~                    (6)


In the case of charge injection at an MS interface, the polymer is oxidized or
reduced (electrons are added to the re* band or removed from the re-band).
However, the polymer is not doped in the sense of chemical or electroche-
mical doping, for there are no counter-ions. This distinction becomes par-
ticularly clear when comparing charge injection in the polymer light-emitting
diode[l6,23] (where there are no ions) with that in the polymer light-emit-
ting electrochemical cell where electrochemical doping with associated re-
distribution of ions provides the mechanism for charge injection [9].
   As indicated in Fig. 3, each of the methods of charge-injection doping leads
to unique and important phenomena. In the case of chemical and/ or elec-
trochemical doping, the induced electrical conductivity is permanent, until
the carriers are chemically compensated or until the carriers are purposely re-
moved by "undoping". In the case of photo-excitation, the photoconductivity
is transient and lasts only until the excitations are either trapped or decay
back to the ground state. In the case of charge injection at a metal-semicon-
ductor (MS) interface, electrons reside in the re*-band and/ or holes reside in
the re-band only as long as the biasing voltage is applied.
   Because of the self-localization associated with the formation of solitons,
polarons and bipolarons, charge injection leads to the formation of localized
structural distortions and electronic states in the energy gap [4]. In the case of
"photo-doping", the redistribution of oscillator strength associated with the
sub-gap infrared absorption and the corresponding bleaching of the inter-
band (re-re*) transition provide a route to nonlinear optical (NLO) response.
Real occupation of low energy excited states[ 4,24] and virtual occupation of
higher energy excited states (in the context of perturbation theory) [25] lead
to, respectively, resonant and nonresonant NLO response.
   By charge-injection doping at an MS interface, the polymer semiconductor
can be used as the active element in thin film diodes[l5] and field effect tran-
sistors (FETs) [26-28]. Tomozawa et al. [15] demonstrated the first example of
an electronic device component fabricated by casting the active polymer di-
rectly from solution; even these early diodes exhibited excellent current-
voltage characteristics. Dual carrier injection in metal/polymer/metal struc-
tures provides the basis for polymer light-emitting diodes (LEDs)[23]. In
polymer LEDs, electrons and holes are injected from the cathode and anode,
respectively, into the undoped semiconducting polymer; light is emitted
when the injected electrons and holes meet in the bulk of the polymer and
recombine with the emission ofradiation[16].


390                              Chemistry 2000

  Thus, as summarized in Fig. 3, doping is a common feature of conducting
polymers; doping leads to a remarkably wide range of electronic phenomena.


III. NOVEL PROPERTIES GENERATE NEW TECHNOLOGY

As emphasized in the Introduction, conducting polymers exhibit novel pro-
perties; properties not typically available in other materials. I focus on a few of
these as illustrative examples:
(a) Semiconducting and metallic polymers which are soluble in and proces-
     sible from common solvents;
(b) Transparent conductors;
(c) Semiconductors in which the Fermi energy can be controlled and shifted
     over a relatively wide range.

In each case, the property is related to a fundamental feature of the chemistry
and/ or physics of the class of conducting polymers. These novel properties
enable a number of applications including polymer LEDs, conducting poly-
mers as electrochromic materials, polymer photodetectors, and polymer pho-
tovoltaic cells.

A. Semiconducting and metallic polymers which are soluble in and
processible from common solvents
Because the interchain electron transfer interactions of conjugated polymers
are relatively strong compared with the Van der Waals and hydrogen bonding
interchain interactions typical of saturated polymers, conducting polymers
tend to be insoluble and infusible. Thus, there was serious doubt in the early
years following the discovery that re-conjugated polymers could be doped to
the metallic state as to whether or not processing methods could be devel-
oped. Significant progress has been made using four basic approaches:
I. Side-chain functionalization; principally used for processing semiconduc-
   ting polymers from solution in organic solvents or from water;
2. Precursor route chemistry, principally used for processing polyacetylene
   and PPV into thin films;
3. Counter-ion induced processing, principally used for processing polyani-
   line in the metallic form from organic solvents;
4. Aqueous colloidal dispersions created by template synthesis, principally
   used for processing polyaniline and poly( ethylenedioxythiophene),
   PEDOT.
The addition of moderately long side chains onto the monomer units result-
ed in derivatives of polythiophene, the poly( 3-alkylthiophenes), or P3ATs; see
Fig. 1. Since the side chains decrease the interchain coupling and increase
the entropy, these derivatives can be processed either from solution or from
the melt. Similarly, side chain functionalization of poly(phenylene vinylene),
PPV, (see Fig. I) has progressed to the point where a variety of semiconduct-
ing polymers and copolymers are available with energy gaps that span the vis-
ible spectrum [29]). Water solubility was achieved by incorporating polar


                                          Alan J Reeger                           391

 groups such as (CH 2 )nS0 3-M+ into the side chains (so-called 'self-doped' poly-
 mers) [30,31].
    The ability to fabricate optical quality thin films by spin-casting from solu-
 tion has proven to be an enabling step in the development of plastic elec-
 tronic devices such as diodes, photodiodes, LEDs, LECs, optocouplers, and
 thin film transistors[32].
   The counter-ion induced processibility of "metallic" polyaniline utilizes bi-
 functional counter-ions such a dodecylbenzenesulfonate to render the poly-
 mer soluble[ll]. The charge on the S0 3- head group forms an ionic bond
with the positive charge (proton) on the PANI chain; the hydrocarbon tail
"likes" organic solvents. Processing PANI in the conducting form resulted in
materials with improved homogeneity and crystallinity, and with correspond-
ingly improved electrical conductivities [33]; The solubility of "metallic" PANI
 in organic solvents has also enabled the fabrication of conducting blends of
PANI with a variety of insulating host polymers[l 1,12]. These polymer blends
exhibit a remarkably low percolation threshold as a result of the spontaneous
formation of an interpenetrating network morphology[ 13].
   Template-guided synthesis of conducting polymers was first reported by
S.C. Yang and colleagues[34]. The molecular template, in most cases, poly-
acids such as polystyrene sulfonic acid, binds the monomer, for example ani-
line, to form molecular complexes which are dispersed in water as colloidal
particles. Upon polymerization, the aniline monomers form polyaniline and
remain attached to the template to form the template-polyaniline complex.
By judicious choice of the template molecule and the polymerization condi-
tions, stable sub-micron size colloidal particles of polyaniline-template aggre-
gate can be formed during polymerization. The stabilization against coagula-
tion arises from the Coulomb repulsion between particles, which is a result of
the surface charge provided by the extra sulfonic acid groups in polystyrene
sulfonic acid. Very stable dispersions of polyaniline-polystyrene sulfonic acid
complexes can be made with particle sizes less than 1 µm[34]. Transparent
films with a specific resistivity of 1-10 0-cm can be cast from such dispersions.
   Poly(ethylenedioxythiophene)-polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT-PSS) can be
prepared as a stable dispersion in water[34,35]. Films of PEDOT-PSS are se-
mi-transparent and can be spin-cast with a surface resistance of approximate-
ly 500 0/square and with 75% transmission.



B. Transparent metallic polymers
Metals reflect light at frequencies below the plasma frequency,    ffip'   defined as

                                ffi
                                      p
                                          2=   4nNe 2/m*                          (7)
where N is the number of electrons per unit volume, e is the electron charge,
and m * is the effective mass ( the "optical mass") of the electrons in the solid.
At frequencies above the plasma frequency, metals are transparent[36]. For
conventional metals (Na, Cu, Ag etc.), N is of order 10 23 per unit volume. As
a result, the plasma frequency is in the ultraviolet; therefore, conventional


392                                    Chemistry 2000

metals appear shiny and "metallic-looking" in the spectral range over which
the human eye is sensitive.
   Metallic polymers have a lower density of electrons; both the length of the
repeat unit along the chain and the interchain spacing are relatively large
compared to the interatomic distances in conventional metals. Typically,
therefore, for metallic polymers N is of order 2-5 x 10 21 cm- 3 . Thus, for metal-
lic polymers, the plasma frequency is at approximately 1 eV[37,38]. The re-
flectance of high quality, metallic polypyrrole ( doped with PF 6 ) is shown in
Fig. 5. Metallic polymers exhibit high reflectance (and thus look "shiny") in
the infrared, but they are semitransparent in the visible part of the spectrum.
The residual absorption above the plasma frequency arises from interband
(re-re*) transitions between the partially filled re-band and the lowest energy
re*-band.
   Optical quality thin films of metallic polymers are useful, therefore, as
transparent electrodes [39]. For example, polyaniline [40], polypyrrole [ 41]
and PEDOT[ 42] have been used as transparent hole-injecting electrodes in
polymer LEDs (the initial demonstration of mechanically flexible polymer
LEDs utilized PANI as the anode [40]). Transparent conducting films can be
used for a variety of purposes; for example, as antistatic coatings, as elec-
trodes in liquid crystal display cells or in polymer LEDs, or for fabricating
electrochromic windows.



            1.0...-----r----.-------.----
                       T::300K                1.0--.------.----
                                              0.a
            0.8

                                             0.2
            0.6
                                              o.o~__,,...,___,..,,_....,.~-,...__...
                                                0.0    0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4   0.5
                                                             Eoergy(eV)




                                        -     Metallic Regime
                                        ·-····· Insulating Regime


            0 ·00_ _ _ _1..____ __.2_ _ _-_..;_-·_·-·_··-_···-····-··-.....

                                            Energy(eV)
Figure 5. Reflectance spectra of PPy-PF6 near the metal-insulator transition; inset shows the low
energy spectra with expanded scale.


                                  Alan J Heeger                              393

C. Semiconductors in which the Fermi energy can be shifted across the
energy gap
In comparison with traditional inorganic semiconductors, semiconducting
polymers cannot be considered materials with ultra-high purity. As a result, al-
though many device concepts have been demonstrated using semiconducting
polymers as the active materials[32], there was early skepticism that these
novel semiconductors could be used in commercial applications.
   In some ways, however, semiconducting polymers are more robust than
their inorganic counterparts. In particular, whereas pinning of the Fermi
energy by surface states is a major problem in conventional semiconductors,
the Fermi energy can be controlled and shifted all the way across the energy
gap in conjugated polymers. The absence of Fermi level pinning and the
ability to shift the chemical potential all the way across the energy gap are
fundamentally important; these novel features of semiconducting polymers
underlie the operation of polymer LEDs, polymer LECs, and polymer photo-
diodes.
   One might have expected chemical reactions between the metal electrode
and the polymer to lead to interface states which pin the Fermi level, as in in-
organic semiconductors. Experiments have shown, however, that these inter-
facial interactions do not lead to pinning of the Fermi level. For example,
electroabsorption measurements were used to determine the built-in electric
field in metal-semiconductor-metal (MSM) structures of the kind used for
polymer LEDs[ 43]. The results indicated that the maximum internal field is
nearly equal to the single particle energy gap; the built-in field directly
tracked the difference in work functions of the two meal electrodes, as origi-
nally proposed by Parker[23]. Thus, the Fermi level is not pinned by surface
states. The absence of Fermi level pinning in semiconducting polymers is a
major advantage: Conceptually, it greatly simplifies the device physics, and
technologically, it greatly simplifies the device fabrication.


IV. SEMICONDUCTING POLYMERS: ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE AND
BOND RELAXATION IN EXCITED STATES

A. Band Structure, Electron-Lattice Interaction, Electron-Electron
Interaction and Disorder
Although the linear and nonlinear optical properties of conducting polymers
have been investigated for over a decade, there is still controversy over the de-
scription of the elementary excitations. Are the lowest energy elementary ex-
citations mobile charge carriers (charged polarons) either injected at the
contacts or created directly via inter-band photoexcitation, or are the lowest
energy excitations bound neutral excitons [ 19]? The answer is of obvious im-
portance from the perspective of our basic understanding of the physics of
conducting polymers. The answer is also important for applications based on
these materials.
   The central issue relates to the strength of the electron-electron interac-
tions relative to the bandwidth, relative to the electron-phonon interaction


394                             Chemistry 2000

and relative to the strength of the mean disorder potential. Strong electron-
electron interactions ( electron-hole attraction) lead to the creation oflocal-
ized and strongly correlated negative and positive polaron pair; neutral po-
laron excitons. Well screened electrons and holes with associated lattice
distortions (charged polarons) on the other hand, are more appropriately de-
scribed using a band picture supplemented by the electron-phonon interac-
tion. Molecular solids such as anthracene [44] are examples of the former,
where the absorption is dominated by excitonic features; whereas inorganic
semiconductors such as Si and GaAs are examples of the latter (where rigid
band theory is a good approximation).
   The electronic structure of conjugated polymers was described by
SSH[5,6] in terms of a quasi-one-dimensional tight binding model in which
the n-electrons are coupled to distortions in the polymer backbone by the
electron-phonon interaction. In the SSH model, photoexcitation across the
n-n* band gap creates the self-localized, nonlinear excitations of conducting
polymers; solitons (in degenerate ground state systems), polarons, and bipo-
larons [ 4]. Direct photogeneration of solitons and polarons is enabled by the
Franck-Condon overlap between the uniform chain in the ground state and
the distorted chain in the excited state [ 45,46]. When the ground state is non-
degenerate, as in the PPVs, charged polaron pairs can either separate as mo-
bile charged polarons or form bound polaron-excitons; i.e. neutral bipo-
larons bound by a combination their Coulomb attraction and their shared
distortion. Photoluminescence can be described in terms of the radiative de-
cay of polaron-excitons.
   Conjugated polymers are n-bonded macromolecules, molecules in which the
fundamental monomer unit is repeated many, many times. Thus, N, the
Staudinger index as in (CH)N, is large. Since the end-points are not impor-
tant when N is large, then-electron transfer integral (denoted as "W' in mole-
cular orbital theory[ 47], and "t" in tight-binding theory) tends to delocalize
the electronic wavefunctions over the entire macromolecular chain. This ten-
dency toward delocalization is limited by disorder (which tends to localize the
wavefunctions) and by the Coulomb interaction, which binds electrons when
transferred to a nearby repeat unit to the positive charge left behind; i.e. to
the "hole".
   In principle, disorder can be controlled. Chain extended and chain
aligned samples can be prepared. Indeed, by utilizing the method of gel-pro-
cessing of blends of conjugated polymers in polyethylene [ 48], a high degree
of structural order has been attained[45,46]. Thus, as a starting point, it is
useful to consider idealized samples in which the macromolecular chains are
chain extended and chain aligned.
   The relative importance of the Coulomb interaction versus the band struc-
ture is a classic problem of the field. In tight-binding theory, the n-electron
band structure extends over a band width, W = 2zt where z is the number of
nearest neighbors. Thus, for linear polymers with z = 2 and t ::e 2.5 eV, W ::e 10
eV [4]. Since the size of the monomer, typically 5-10 Aalong the chain axis, is
the smallest length in the problem, the monomer length is the effective


                                  Alan J Reeger                              395

"Bohr radius". Thus, on general grounds, one expects the electron-hole bind-
ing energy to be reduced from 13.5 eV (the electron-proton Coulomb bind-
ing energy in the H-atom where the Bohr radius is 0.53A) by a factor of 10-20
simply because of the change in length scale. Dielectric screening provides an
additional reduction factor of E, where E 3 ( typical of conjugated polymers)
is the dielectric constant for an electric field along the chain. Thus, the bind-
ing energy is expected to be no more than a few tenths of an eV. Since the
typical band widths and band gaps are all in the eV range, one can start with
a one-electron band approach and treat the Coulomb energy as a perturba-
tion. In this description, the electron-hole bound states are Wannier excitons
which are de localized over a number of repeat units. There are obvious cases
where this argument breaks down. For example, one finds that in structures
containing benzene rings, specific sub-bands have bandwidth near zero
(nodes in the wavefunction reduce the effective transfer integral to zero).
When electrons and holes occupy such narrow bands, the corresponding ex-
citons are easily localized by the Coulomb interaction onto a single monomer.
Thus, in general, one can expect both "Wannier -like" excitons and "Frenkel-
like" excitons for electrons and holes originating from different bands in the
same polymer.

B. Electronic Structure of Polyacetylene
Trans-polyacetylene, trans-(CH)x, was the first highly conducting organic
polymer[l ,2]. The simple chemical structure, -CH- units repeated (see Fig.
6a), implies that each carbon contributes a single p, electron to the 1t-band.
As a result, the n-band would be half-filled. Thus, based upon this structure,
an individual chain of neutral polyacetylene would be a metal; since the elec-
trons in this idealized metal could move only along the chain, polyacetylene
would be a one-dimensional (Id) metal. However, experimental studies show
clearly that neutral polyacetylene is a semiconductor with an energy gap of
approximately 1.5 eV. Rudolf Peierls showed many years ago[49] that Id me-
tals are unstable with respect to a structural distortion which opens an energy
gap at the Fermi level, thus rendering them semiconductors. In the Peierls in-
stability, the periodicity (A= n/kF) of the distortion is determined by the mag-
nitude of the Fermi wave-vector (kF). Since kF = 1t/2a for the half-filled band
of trans-(CH)x, the Peierls distortion doubles the unit cell, converting trans-
polyacetylene into trans-(-HC = CH-)x, see Fig. 6b where, schematically, the
dimerization is drawn as alternating single bonds and double bonds. The
1t-band of (CH)x is split into two sub-bands, a fully occupied n-band (the
valence band in semiconductor terminology) and an empty n*-band (the
conduction band), each with a wide bandwidth (-5 eV) and significant dis-
persion. The resulting band structure and associated density of states, shown
in Fig. 7, results from the opening of the bandgap that originates from the
doubling of the unit cell as a result of the bond alternation caused by the
Peierls instability of the Id metal.
   Shortly after the initial discovery of doping and the metal-insulator transi-
tion in polyacetylene, the SSH description of the electronic structure was pro-


396                                     Chemistry 2000


      a)


      b)


      c)



      d)


      e)


      f)                                             •
Figure 6. Polyacetylene a) undimerized structure, b) dimerized structure due to the Peierls in-
stability, c) cis-polyacetylene, d) degenerate A and B phases in trans-polyacetylene, e) soliton in
trans-polyacetylene.




posed [5,6]. The construction of the remarkably successful SSH Hamiltonian
was based on two assumptions: (a) The re-electronic structure can be treated
in the tight-binding approximation with a transfer integral t::::, 2.5 eV, and (b)
The chain of carbon atoms is coupled to the local electron density through
the length of the chemical bonds.

                                                                                               (8)

where tn,n+I is the bond-length dependent hopping integral from site n to
n+l, and un is the displacement from equilibrium of the nth carbon atom.
The first assumption defines the lowest order hopping integral, t0 , in the
tight-binding term that forms the basis of the Hamiltonian. The second as-
sumption provides the first-order correction to the hopping integral. This
term couples the electronic states to the molecular geometry, giving the elec-
tron-phonon (el-ph) interaction where a is the el-ph coupling constant. The
bond-length dependent hopping integral is physically correct, as indicated by
bond alternation observed in polyacetylene[50,51]. The precise form ofEqn.
8, in which the dependence of the hopping integral on the C-C distance is li-
nearized for small deviations about t0 , is the first term in a Taylor expansion.


                                      Alan J Reeger                                    397




_;\I) _f----------1------ k
 ......,J       /2a
                                                    v                      c
-2to   /                                  -2to                                            E

Figure 7. Electronic structure of semiconducting polyacetylene. Left: Band structure. Right:
Density of states. The energy opens at k = rr/2a as a result of the Peierls distortion.




The resulting SSH Hamiltonian is then written as the sum of three terms
[5,6]:




where Pn are the nuclear momenta, u,, are the displacements from equili-
brium, mis the carbon mass, and K is an effective spring constant. The c\,u
and c,,,u are the fermion creation and annihilation operators for site n and
spin u. The last two terms are, respectively, a harmonic "spring constant" term
which represents the increase in potential energy that results from displace-
ment from the uniform bond lengths in (CH)x and a kinetic energy term for
the nuclear motion.
   The spontaneous symmetry breaking due to the Peierls instability implies
that for the ground state of a pristine chain, the total energy is minimized for
lun I> 0. Thus, to describe the bond alternation in the ground state,
                                                                                      (10)

With this mean-field approximation, the value u 0 which minimizes the energy
of the system can be calculated as a function of the other parameters in the
Hamiltonian[4-6]. Qualitatively, however, one sees that u0 and-u 0 both mini-
mize the energy for trans-polyacetylene since the bonds all make the same
angle with respect to the chain axis. Hence, the energy as a function of u has
a double minimum at ±u0 , as shown in Fig. 8. The corresponding structures of
the two degenerate ground states are shown in Fig. 6d. The double minimum
of Fig. 8 implies that nonlinear excitations, solitons, will be important. In
polymers with a nondegenerate ground state, the degeneracy indicated in
Fig. 8 is lifted; for a nondegenerate ground state polymer, the absolute mini-
mum energy occurs at a single value of u.


398                                Chemistry 2000




                                                                               u



Figure 8. Total energy of the dimerized polyacetylene chain; note the double minimum asso-
ciated with the spontaneous symmetry breaking and the two-fold degenerate ground state.



C. The electronic structure of poly(phenylene vinylene)
Poly(phenylene vinylene), PPV, and its soluble derivatives have emerged as
the prototypical luminescent semiconducting polymers. Since PPV has a non-
degenerate ground state, structural relaxation in the excited state leads to the
formation of polarons, bipolarons, and neutral excitons. Prior to treating the
structural relaxation in the excited state, however, one needs to develop a
satisfactory description of the electronic excited states.
   In PPV, with eight carbons in the main-chain repeat unit, the re-band is split
into eight sub-bands. Since each band can hold precisely 2 electrons per re-
peat unit, the four re-sub-bands with the lowest energy are filled and the four
re*-sub-bands are empty. Thus, I begin with a description at the one-electron
level; i.e. from the point of view of band theory.
   Brazovskii and Kirova and Bishop[52,53] treated the band structure of PPV
with a tight-binding Hamiltonian, using standard values for the hopping in-
tegrals. The el-ph coupling, Eqn. 8, can be included after defining the basic
band structure of the semiconductor. From this simple ansatz, basis states
which reflect the intrinsic symmetry of the phenyl ring and the dimer were
calculated and used to expand the wavefunction. The basis states hybridize as
a result of ring-to-dimer hopping, thus yielding the 6 + 2 = 8 subbands in the
re-system of PPV.
   The resulting band structure, Fig. 9, has a number of important features.
Six of the subbands ( three occupied and three unoccupied), labeled D and
D* in Fig. 9, are broad, and the corresponding wavefunctions are delocalized
along the chain. The other two bands labeled L and L * (one occupied and
one unoccupied), are narrow and the corresponding wavefunctions have am-
plitudes which are localized on the ring. The L and L * sub bands derive from
the two ring states whose wavefunctions have nodes at the para linkage sites;
as a result, these states do not participate in hopping and the subbands do
not acquire the resulting dispersion. On the contrary, the delocalized D and


                                                     Alan J Reeger                                            399

                        ,------.-----,----,----,----.,-------,,--·-·-,-·-··········-
                   6
                                                                                        D3*
                                                               .,.-.....------
                   4               -------                           ~-                    D2*
                              -----
                              ,...._~ .., __ ,..                   . --- ........ ,.----,...-~
                                                                  L"'
                                        ....... ---- ........ _.. -                   ---
         ·-->
         .._.,
         .
                   2                                  ......
                                                                      /~
                                                           ""-------- D I *
                                                                             ./'

          ;;,-,
             b(j   ()
             (l)
             t::
         ;.Ll
                   -2
                              ~-·····-                         -··-· .. ··-·-··. ---·   -----~
                   -4         -----                                         L               -
                                       ------------------ D2
                                                          03
                              -~------·----~~-~~.......::...::~
                   -6

                    -4                                               0                  2               4
                                             Quasimomentum~ q
Figure 9. Electronic band structure of PPV.



D* sub bands have relatively high dispersion (-1. 7 eV), indicating good delo-
calization over both ring and dimer states.
   Starting from this simple yet physically robust model of the band structure,
the discussion of the electronic structure can be extended to include the ef-
fect of the Coulomb interaction. The delocalized nature of Dl and Dl * im-
plies that, for electron correlation effects involving these subbands, it is ap-
propriate to compute an effective mass from the dispersion curves and then
compute the corresponding one-dimensional (ld) hydrogenic levels. From
the k 2-dependence of the dispersion near the zone center, the effective mas-
ses in Dl and Dl * are m* = 0.067 me.
   Using the well-known result for the binding energy of a hydrogenic-like
state in ld, the exciton associated with the lowest energy electronic transition
(Dl - Dl *) has a binding energy and effective radii given by:

                                                                                                   1
                              Eb = Eb *ln\atla.J                             ab= ab *[ln(atla.JI    ,       (Ila)
where
                                            * 4                                     ti2e
                               E   * = !!!.___!:__
                                   h
                                                                             ah*=--,                        (l lb)
                                         821i2                                  m*e 2

£ is the dielectric susceptibility, h is Planck's constant, m* is the electron ef-
fective mass at the zone center in k-space (for PPV, m* 0.067 m), e is the
electron charge and a.1.      2 A (the "width" of the chain). From Eqn. 11,
Eb~ 0.1-0.2 eV (depending on the value assumed for a.1.) and a radius of ap-
proximately 30 A.
   In addition to this weakly-bound Wannier-Mott exciton, there are two


400                             Chemistry 2000

other excitons in this model. The degenerate Dl-Ll * and Ll-Dl * transitions
are treated by assuming an immobile (massive) carrier in the L or L * sub-
band and a mobile carrier in the D or D* subband. The resulting bound state
has a binding energy of -0.8 eV, and is a more tightly bound (but still some-
what delocalized) exciton. Finally, the L-L* transition forms a very tightly
bound Frenkel exciton, localized on the phenyl ring.
  With the electronic excitations established, they can be compared to the
data obtained from optical absorption measurements. An unambiguous test
of the agreement between the proposed electronic structure (Fig. 9) and ex-
periment requires data from chain extended and chain oriented samples of
macromolecular PPVs. With macromolecular samples, chain end boundary
conditions are not important; with oriented polymers, the polarization of the
various absorptions with respect to the chain axis can be determined. Recent
polarized absorption studies ofhighy oriented PPVand PPP indicate that the
one-electron model is a good starting point[54,55].

D. Solitons, Polarons and Polaron Excitons: The Elementary Excitations of
Conducting Polymers
Although bond relaxation in the excited state is implicitly allowed through
the bond-length dependent hopping integral in the SSH model, the effect of
bond relaxation, and the formation of solitons, polarons and bipolarons, has
not been explicit in the previous section. These important concepts are sum-
marized in the following paragraphs. In the related experimental studies,
trans-polyacetylene and polythiophene were used as the model systems for
the degenerate ground state polymer and the nondegenerate ground state
polymer, respectively[ 4].

a. Solitons
Charge storage on the polymer chain leads to structural relaxation, which in
turn localizes the charge. The simplest example of the dramatic effect of this
structural relaxation is the soliton in trans-polyacetylene. The soliton is a do-
main boundary between the two possible degenerate ground state configura-
tions oftrans-(-CH = CH-)N' the "A" Phase and the "B" Phase. For simplicity,
we often draw the chemical structure of the soliton as an abrupt change from
A Phase to B Phase, as shown in Fig. 6e. In agreement with the predictions of
the SSH model [4], however, the experimental evidence indicates that the
structural relaxation in the vicinity of the domain boundary extends over ap-
proximately fourteen carbon atoms, as illustrated in Fig. 6f. The correspond-
ing spin and charge distributions are similarly delocalized.
   The value of a picture like Fig. 6e quickly becomes evident when one tries
to understand the quantum numbers of the soliton and the reversed charge-
spin relationship that characterizes the solitons of polyacetylene (see Fig.
lOc). Since the non-bonding, or mid-gap, state formed by the chain relaxa-
tion can then be mapped to a specific atomic site, the resulting distribution of
charge and spin can be easily addressed; if the state is unoccupied ( doubly oc-
cupied), the carbon atom at the boundary is left with a positive (negative)


                                  Alan J Heeger                               401

charge, but there are no unpaired spins; the charged soliton is positively
(negatively) charged and spinless. Single occupation of the soliton state neu-
tralizes the electronic charge of the carbon nucleus, while introducing an un-
paired spin onto the chain. The localized electronic state associated with the
soliton is a non bonding state at an energy which lies at the middle of the re-re*
gap, between the bonding and antibonding levels of the perfect chain. On
the other hand, the defect is both topological and mobile due to the transla-
tional symmetry of the chain. Such a topological and mobile defect is histori-
cally referred to as a soliton[4-6]. The term "soliton" (S) refers simulta-
neously to all three types of solitons; the quantum numbers for spin and
charge enter only when referring to a specific type (for example, neutral
solitons found as defects from the synthesis of undoped material or charged
solitons created by photoexcitation), and even then, the spin is only implicit.
Another feature of the soliton terminology is the natural definition of an "an-
ti-soliton" (AS) as a reverse boundary from B Phase back to A Phase in Figs.
6e and 6f. The anti-soliton allows for conservation of soliton number upon
doping or upon photoexcitation.

b. Polarons and Bipolarons
In cases such as poly( thiophene), PPV, PPP and cis-polyacetylene where the
two possible bond alternation patterns are not energetically degenerate, con-
fined soliton-antisoliton pairs, polarons and bipolarons, are the stable non-
linear excitation and the stable charge storage states[56,57]. A polaron can
be thought of as a bound state of a charged soliton and a neutral soliton
whose mid-gap energy states hybridize to form bonding and anti-bonding
levels. The neutral soliton contributes no charge and a single spin, as noted
above, and the charged soliton carries charge of ±e and no spin; the resulting
polaron then has the usual charge-spin relationship of fermions; q = ± e and
s = 1/2. The polaron is illustrated schematically for PPP in Fig. lOa and lOb.
The positive (negative) polaron is a radical cation (anion), a quasiparticle
consisting of a single electronic charge dressed with a local geometrical re-
laxation of the bond lengths. Similarly, a bipolaron is a bound state of two
charged solitons of like charge ( or two polarons whose neutral solitons anni-
hilate each other) with two corresponding midgap levels, as illustrated in
Fig. I la and 11 b. Since each charged soliton carries a single electronic charge
and no spin, the bipolaron has charge ± 2e and zero spin. The positive
(negative) bipolaron is a spinless dication (dianion); a doubly charged bound
state of two polarons bound together by the overlap of a common lattice dis-
tortion (enhanced geometrical relaxation of the bond lengths).

c. Solitons and Polarons in Conjugated Polymers: Experimental Results
The models outlined above for solitons, polarons and bipolarons make con-
crete predictions of experimentally observable phenomena, and indeed the-
oretical progress would not have been possible without concurrent experi-
mental investigation. Optical probes of the mid-gap electronic states (see Fig.
lOc) and magnetic measurements of spin concentrations and spin distribu-


402                                    Chemistry 2000

tions conu·ibuted greatly to the refin ement and verification of th eoretical pre-
dictions. For a detailed review of the experimental results, the reader is re-
ferred to the Review of Modern Physics article on this subject[4].



            (a)




            ( b)


                                          P olaron
                                          fF   112,   er= -IeJ

                                      f
           ( c)


                       N e gati ve S oliton                      P osi ti ve S oliton
                       fFD, q= -I el                             FD, q= lei
Figure 10. a. Schematic picture ofa polaron in PPP; b. Band diagrnm ofan eleCLron polaron; fo,·
a hole polaron, the lower gap state is si ngle occupied and t11e upper gap state is empty: c. Band
diagrams for positive an d nega tive solitons with associated electronic U'llnsitions.



                   (a)




                   (b)


                                           Bi pol aron
                                           s=O, q= -2JeI
Figure 11 . Bipolarons in polymer "'ith non-degenerate ground suue. a. Schematic picture ora nc-
gativt: bipolaron in PPP: b. Band diagrnm for a nega1.ive bipolaron. For a positive hipolaron, both
gap states are unoccupied.


                                      Alan J Reeger                                  403

V. PHOTOINDUCED ELECTRON TRANSFER

The discovery of photoinduced electron transfer in composites of conducting
polymers (as donors, D) and buckminsterfullerene, C 60 , and its derivatives (as
acceptors, A) opened a number of new opportunities for semiconducting
polymers [58,59]. A schematic description of the photoinduced electron
transfer process is displayed in Fig. 12.
  A broad range of studies has been carried out to fully characterize this pho-
toinduced charge transfer, culminating with a study of the dynamics of pho-
toinduced electron transfer from semiconducting polymers to C 60 using fs
time resolved measurements [60,61]. These studies have demonstrated that
the charge transfer occurs within 50 femtoseconds after photo-excitation.
Since the charge transfer rate is more than 1000 times faster than any com-
peting process ( the luminescence lifetime is greater than 300 picoseconds),
the quantum efficiency for charge separation approaches UNI1Y! Moreover,
the lifetime of the charge transferred state is metastable[62,63].


                                                                       I
                                                                   I
                                                               I




        RO

                  I
              I
          I




Figure 12. Illustration of photoinduced electron transfer from a conjugated semiconducting
polymer to C 60 .


   Semiconducting polymers are electron donors upon photoexcitation (elec-
trons promoted to the antibonding n* band). The idea of using this proper-
ty in conjunction with a molecular electron acceptor to achieve long-lived
charge separation is based on the stability of the photoinduced nonlinear ex-
citations (such as polarons) on the conjugated polymer backbone. Buck-
minsterfullerene, C 60 , is an excellent electron acceptor capable of taking on


404                                Chemistry 2000

as many as six electrons[64]; C 60 , therefore, forms charge transfer salts with a
variety of strong donors. It is reasonable, therefore to consider electron trans-
fer from photo-excited semiconducting polymer to C 60 . Fig. 13 shows a sche-
matic energy level diagram of the photoinduced electron (or hole) transfer
process, which can be described in terms of the following steps:

Step   1:   O + A-+ 1•30* + A, (excitation on O);
Step   2:   l,30* +A--+ 1•3 (0 -A) *, (excitation delocalized on 0-A complex);
Step   3:   l,3 (0 -A) * --+ 1•3 (0 8+ -A&-)*, (charge transfer initiated);
Step   4:   1,3(01>+ -A 0-)*--+ 1•3 (o+• -A•), (ion radical pair formed);
            1•3 (o+• -A•)--+ o+• + A•, (charge separation);
Step   5:

where the donor (0) and acceptor (A) units are either covalently bound (in-
tramolecular), or spatially close but not covalently bonded (intermolecular);
I and 3 denote singlet or triplet excited states, respectively.



                 Photoinduced Electron Transfer


                CB                       + . ..........._< 1 picosecond
              :::: 2 eV                               --4---     LUMO

                VB
                                                      #         HOMO
                          c•    . . ~1.  ,
                          ,.:.em1conuiJcting
                              Polymer


                   Photoinduced Hole Transfer

                                                                  CB

             LUMO _..


            "Hi:~~ IH                                             VB

                                                Semi c oncb;cting
                                                     Polymer
Figure 13: Energy band diagram for photoinduced electron transfer and photoinduced hole
transfer between semiconducting polymers and C6().


                                  Alan J Heeger                               405

    Since the partial charge transfer at Step 3 is strongly dependent on the sur-
 rounding medium there is a continuous range for the transfer rate, 0 <D < 1.
 At Step 4, 8 = 1, i.e. a whole electron is transferred. At each step, the D-A sys-
 tem can relax back to the ground state either by releasing energy to the "lat-
 tice" (in the form of heat) or through light emission (provided the radiative
 transition is allowed). The electron transfer step (step 4) describes the for-
 mation of an ion radical pair; this does not occur unless I 0 * - AA - Uc < 0,
where I 0 • is the ionization potential of the excited state (D*) of the donor, AA
is the electron affinity of the acceptor, and Uc is the Coulomb energy of the
separated radicals (including polarization effects). Stabilization of the charge
separation (step 5) can be enabled by carrier delocalization on the o+
 (and/ or A) species and by structural relaxation. The symmetrical process of
hole transfer from the photoexcited acceptor to the donor is described in an
analogous way, and can be driven by photoabsorption in spectral regions
where the acceptor can be photoexcited but not the donor.
    Even though the photoinduced electron transfer reaction is energetically
favorable, energy must be conserved in the process. In semiconducting poly-
mers, the excess energy is readily taken up by promoting the hole to a higher
energy state in the n*-band. Ultimately, therefore, the ultrafast nature of the
photoinduced electron-transfer process results from the delocalized nature of
 the n-electrons. Once the photoexcited electron is transferred to an acceptor
unit, the resulting cation radical (positive polaron) species on the conjugated
plymer backbone is relatively stable. Thus, photoinduced electron transfer
from the conjugated polymer donor onto an acceptor moiety can be viewed
as 'photodoping" (se Fig. 3). The forward-to-reverse asymmetry of the photoin-
duced charge separation in the conducting polymer/C 60 system is neverthe-
less remarkable; the asymmetry is orders of magnitude greater than that ob-
served in the photosynthesis of green plants.
    Definitive evidence of charge transfer and charge separation was obtained
from light-induced ESR (LESR) experiments[58,63,65]. Upon illuminating
the conjugated polymer/C 60 composites with light with hv > ETC-TC* where ETC-TC*
is the energy gap of the conjugated polymer (donor), two photoinduced ESR
signals can be resolved; one at g = 2.00 and the other at g = 1.99 [58,63]. The
higher g-value line is assigned to the conjugated polymer cation (polaron)
and the lower g-value line to C 60- anion. The assignment of the lower g-value
line to C 60- is unambiguous, for this low g-value was measured earlier[64]; the
higher g-value is typical of conjugated polymers. The LESR signal vanishes
above 200K; this rules out permanent photochemical changes as the origin of
the ESR signal and demonstrates the reversibility of the photoinduced elec-
tron transfer. The integrated LESR intensity shows two peaks with equivalent
intensities. The temperature dependence of the LESR signal intensity shows
Arrhenius behavior with activation energy of approx. 15 meV. This result sug-
gests a phonon assisted back relaxation mechanism of the photoinduced
charge separated state [ 63].
    In MEH-PPV /C 60 composites, the strong photoluminescence of MEH-PPV
is quenched by a factor in excess of 10 3 , and the luminescence decay time is


406                              Chemistry 2000

reduced from , 0 = 550 ps to 'rad<< 60 ps (the instrumental resolution) indi-
cating that charge transfer has cut-off the radiative decay[58,62,63]. An esti-
mate of the transfer rate, 1/,ct' can be obtained from the quenching of the
photoluminescence;

                                                                               (12)
where l/, 0 and 1/,rad are the radiative decay rates, 10 and Icomp are the inte-
grated photoluminescence intensities of MEH-PPV and the MEH-PPV/C 60
composite, respectively. The data imply, therefore, that 1/'tct > 10 12 ; i.e. elec-
tron transfer occurs on the sub-picosecond time scale. The ultrafast charge
transfer process was subsequently time resolved [60,61]; the data directly con-
firm that charge transfer occurs in less than one hundred femtoseconds.
   The photoinduced electron transfer process serves to sensitize the photo-
conductivity of the semiconducting polymer[66]. Time-resolved transient
photocurrent measurements indicate that the addition of as little as 1 % of
C 60 into the semiconducting polymer results in an increase of initial pho-
tocurrent by an order of magnitude. This increase of the photocarrier gener-
ation efficiency is accompanied by an increase in lifetime of the photocarriers
upon adding C 60 . Thus, the ultrafast photoinduced electron transfer from the
semiconducting polymer onto C 60 not only enhances the charge carrier ge-
neration in the host polymer but also serves to prevent recombination by se-
parating the charges and stabilizing the charge separation.
   Conjugated polymers with higher electron affinities (e.g. cyano-substituted
PPV) function as the acceptor component with MEH-PPV as the donor
[67,68]. Through control of the morphology of the phase separation into an
interpenetrating bicontinuous network of D and A phases, high interfacial
area was achieved within a bulk material: a "bulk D/ A heterojunction" that
yields efficient photoinduced charge separation[67-70]. These all-polymer
phase separated blends were successfully used in fabricating solar cells with
efficiencies that approach those fabricated from amorphous silicon [69].


VI. METALLIC POLYMERS AND THE METAL-INSULATOR TRANSITION
A. Metallic Polymers with High Performance Electrical and Mechanical
Properties
An early (and continuing) goal of the field of conducting polymers was the
creation of materials with high electrical conductivity and with the excellent
mechanical properties of polymers. This goal has been achieved; more im-
portantly the conditions for realizing this combination of properties are un-
derstood and can be applied to new materials.
  Electrical conductivity results from the existence of charge carriers and the
ability of those carriers to move. In principle, broad 1t-electron bandwidths
(often several eV) can lead to relatively high carrier mobilities[ 4]. As a result
of the same intra-chain 1t-bonding and the relatively strong inter-chain elec-
tron transfer interaction, the mechanical properties (Young's modulus and
tensile strength) of conjugated polymers are potentially superior to those of


                                  Alan J Heeger                               407

saturated polymers. Thus, metallic polymers offer the promise of truly high
performance; high conductivity plus superior mechanical properties.
   This combination of high electrical conductivity and outstanding mechan-
ical properties has been demonstrated for doped polyacetylene[70-75].
Unfortunately, since doped polyacetylene is not a stable material, the
achievement of stable high performance conducting polymers remains an im-
portant goal.

B. Metal-Insulator Transition in Doped Conducting Polymers
a. The Role of Disorder
loffe and Regel[76] argued that as the extent of disorder increased in a
metallic system, there was a limit to metallic behavior; when the mean free
path becomes equal to the inter-atomic spacing, coherent metallic transport
would not be possible. Thus, the Ioffe-Regel criterion is defined as
                                     kl, ,,, l;                              (13)

where kFis the Fermi wave number and Lis the mean free path. The metallic
regime corresponds to kl,>> 1. Based on the loffe-Regel criterion, Mott pro-
posed[77,78] that a metal-insulator (M-I) transition must occur when the dis-
order is sufficiently large that kl,< 1. In recognition of Anderson's early work
on disorder induced localization, Mott called this M-I transition the
"Anderson transition" [79]. In the limit where kl,<< 1 (i.e. where the strength
of the random disorder potential is large compared to the bandwidth), all
states become localized and the system is called a "Fermi glass" [80]. A Fermi
glass is an insulator with a continuous density of localized states occupied ac-
cording to Fermi statistics. Although there is no energy gap, the behavior is
that of an insulator because the states at the Fermi energy are spatially local-
ized.
   The scaling theory of localization demonstrated that the disorder-induced
M-I transition was a true phase transition with a well defined critical point[81].
MacMillan[82] and Larkin and Khmelnitskii[83], showed that near the criti-
cal regime of Anderson localization a power law temperature dependence is
to be expected for the conductivity.
   The M-I transition in conducting polymers is particularly interesting; criti-
cal behavior has been observed over a relatively wide temperature range in a
number of systems, including polyacetylene, polypyrrole, poly(p-phenylene-
vinylene), and polyaniline [33]. In each case, the metallic, critical and insu-
lating regimes near the M-I transition have been identified. The critical
regime is tunable in conducting polymers by varying the extent of disorder
(i.e. by studying samples with different Pr= p( l.4K) / p (300K)), or by apply-
ing external pressure and/ or magnetic fields. The transitions from metallic
to critical behavior and from critical to insulating behavior have been in-
duced with a magnetic field, and from insulating to critical and then to metal-
lic behavior with increasing external pressure [33].
   In the metallic regime, the zero temperature conductivity remains finite
with magnitude that depends on the extent of the disorder. Metallic behavior


408                                Chemistry 2000

has been demonstrated for conducting polymers with CT(T) remammg con-
stant as T approaches zero[33]. Well into the metallic regime where the mean
free path extends over many repeat units, the residual resistivity will become
small, as in a typical metal. However, this truly metallic regime, with k/ >> l
has not yet been achieved.

b. Infrared Reflectance Studies of the Metallic State and the Metal-Insulator Transition
Infrared (IR) reflectance measurements have played an important role in
clarifying the metal physics of conducting polymers. High precision reflectan-
ce measurements were carried out over a wide spectral range on a series of
PPy-PF 6 samples in the insulating, critical, and metallic regimes near the M-I
transition [84]. Since the reflectance in the infrared (IR) is sensitive to the
charge dynamics of carriers near the Fermi energy (EF), such a systematic re-
flectance study can provide information on the electronic states near EF and
how those states evolve as the system passes through the M-I transition. The
data demonstrate that metallic PPy-PF 6 is a 'disordered metal' and that the
M-1 transition is driven by disorder; similar results were obtained for polyam-
line[37,85].
   Fig. 14 shows CT( ro) for a series of PPy-PF 6 samples (A-F) as obtained from
Kramers-Kronig transformation of R(ro) at room temperature. For the most
metallic samples, R(ro) exhibits metal-like features; a free carrier plasma re-
sonance as indicated by a minimum in R(ro) near 1 eV and high R(ro) in the
far IR. As PPy-PF 6 goes from the metallic to the insulating regime via the crit-
ical regime (Samples A through F), CT ( ro) is gradually suppressed in the IR. In
the insulating regime (F), CT ( ro) remains well below that of the metallic sam-
ple (A) throughout the IR. The CT(ro) spectra are in excellent correspondence
with the transport results ( this is especially clear at low frequencies in Fig. 14);
the better the quality of the sample, as defined by the higher CT<lc (300K), the
higher R(ro) in the IR[84].
   In the far-IR (below 100 cm-I), the Hagen-Rubens (H-R) approximation
provides an excellent fit to R(ro) [36],

                                                                                  (14)

where CTH-R is the ro-independent conductivity. The CTH-R values obtained from
the Hagen-Rubens fits are in remarkably good agreement with the measured
values ofCTrlc(300K). The excellent fits and the agreement between CTH-R and
CT<lc(300K) imply a weak ro-dependence in the corresponding optical conduc-
tivity, CT(ro), for ro < 100 cm-I.
   The CT(ro) data are fully consistent with the "localization-modified Drude
model" (LMD) [86]
                                                                                  ( 15)

where kF is the Fermi wave-number and l is the mean free path. In this mod-
el, the zero frequency limit determines the constant C (precisely at the M-1
Transition, C=l) while a fit to CT(ro) determines ki The suppressed CT(ro) as ro
approaches zero arises from weak localization induced by disorder[84]. The


                                          Alan J Reeger                                        409



                                                                    soo---.--.--...--
                         - - Experiment
                         -Fit
                                                           'e... JOO
             600                                           C:       200
                                                           b        100



    -
   .E
       u
             400
   -c
   I
                                                 E
       t:i
                                                         F

             200                                C1Jp[rnr• J     t   [I0·15s]    kFI
                                            A      15990             0.70       1.38
                                            D      15220             0.6i      1.18
                                            E      13700             0.64      1.01
                                            F      12200             0.64      0.94
              o--~~------~~. . . . .                            ........~~~--~~---
               o    2000   4000                            6000                8000    10000
                                                                          1
                                        Frequency(cm"                      )
Figure 14. Frequency dependent conductivity, cr(ro), for Ppy-PF 6 . The inset shows the far-IR data
in greater detail.




cr(w) data from the various regimes were fit with the functional dependence
predicted by the LMD model; Fig. 14 illustrates the excellent agreement of
the fits to the data with the parameters summarized in the inset (except for
the phonon features around 400-2000 cm- 1 which are not included in the
LMD model). There are small deviations for w < 100 cm- 1 (more important in
the less metallic samples), below which phonon-assisted hopping makes a
measurable contribution to cr(w) and to the de conductivity.
   The parameters obtained from the fits are reasonable. The screened plas-
ma frequency, QP = m/ (i\,J 11 2 = 1.5 x 104 cm- 1, is in good agreement with the
frequency of the minimum in R( w), and 1 is typical of disordered metals
(1 -10- 14-10- 15 s). The quantity kflis of particular interest for it characterizes
the extent of disorder and is often considered as an order parameter in lo-
calization theory[87,88]. For all four samples represented in Fig. 14, k1.l :::e 1,
implying that all are close to the M-I transition. As the disorder increases and
the system moves from the metallic regime (sample A with krl = 1.38) to the
critical regime (sample E with kfl = 1.01), k/ approaches the Ioffe-Regel lim-
it[76], precisely as would be expected. In the insulating regime (sample F)
k/ = 0.94 < 1, consistent with localization of the electronic states at J,,~,
   Thus, the IR reflectance data obtained for metallic polymers indicate that


410                                       Chemistry 2000




      'i
      .e       30000                                       •
      -....
      ""ts                                       •
                                                      •
      ..
      >
       u                                         •                       0
                                                                             00


      i
                                           •••
       0                                                       O O Cf>
      u                                                        0
                                                      c9
               10000
                                     •     cP
                                                 a'
                                     o9
                             0   •
                    0
                                                          10                               20

                                                  Draw ratio
Figure 15. Electrical conductivity of iodine-doped polyacetylene (parallel to the draw axis) vs.
draw ratio; solid points, thin films of thickness 3-5 µm; open circles, films of thickness 25-30 µm.




they are disordered metals near the disorder-induced M-1 transition. There is
remarkable consistency between the conclusion obtained from transport
studies and from IR reflectance measurements.

C. Striving Toward More Perfect Materials - Chain Extension, Chain
Alignment and Inter-chain Order
Experimental studies have established that for conducting polymers, the elec-
trical properties and the mechanical properties improve together, in a corre-
lated manner, as the degree of chain extension and chain alignment are im-
proved. Polyacetylene remains the prototype example.
   Fig.15 shows the correlation between the electrical conductivity (er) and
the draw ratio (A) for iodine doped polyacetylene films; the conductivity in-
creases approximately linearly with the draw ratio[73]. The slope of er versus
A is approximately a factor of two larger for the thinner films (evidently the
details of polymerization and/ or doping result in more homogeneous,
higher quality material for the thinner films).
   X-ray diffraction studies of these drawn films exhibited a high degree of
structural order that improves with the draw ratio; the structural coherence
length perpendicular to the draw direction increases by about a factor of two
as the films are drawn, from 10 nm at A= 4 to 20 nm at A= 15[73]. Consistent
with the chain orientation and the improved structural order, the anisotropy
(er 1/ er _1) in the electrical conductivity increased with the draw ratio, ap-
proaching 250 as A~ 15 (although er 11 increased dramatically as a function of
A, er_1 remains essentially constant). These data set a lower limit on the intrin-
sic anisotropy and demonstrate that heavily doped polyacetylene is a highly
anisotropic metal with relatively weak interchain coupling.


                                    Alan J Reeger                               411

   Does the weak interchain coupling imply poor mechanical properties? The
answer is "No"; for films with'),.,= 15, Young's modulus reaches 50 GPa and the
tensile strength approaches I GPa, mechanical properties that are charac-
teristic of high performance materials. More importantly, the data demon-
strate a direct correlation between the electrical conductivity and the me-
chanical properties. The linear relationship implies that the increase in both
the conductivity and the modulus (or tensile strength) with draw ratio result
from increased uniaxial orientation, improved lateral packing and enhanced
interchain interaction. The correlations between the electrical conductivity
and the mechanical properties observed for polyacetylene are general. This
correlation has been demonstrated in every case studied [31], and can be un-
derstood as a general feature of conducting polymers.
   Although the electrical conductivity is enhanced by the relatively high mo-
bility associated with intra-chain transport, one must have the possibility of in-
ter-chain charge transfer to avoid the localization inherent to systems with a
Id electronic structure [77]. The electrical conductivity becomes three-di-
mensional (and thereby truly metallic) only if there is high probability that an
electron will have diffused to a neighboring chain prior to traveling between
defects on a single chain. For well-ordered crystalline material in which the
chains have precise phase order, the interchain diffusion is a coherent
process. In this limit, the condition for extended anisotropic transport is the
following[89]:

                                                                               (16)
where L is the coherence length, a is the length of the chain repeat unit, t 0 is
the intra-chain 1t-electron transfer integral, and t 3 d is the inter-chain 1t-elec-
tron transfer integral.
   A precisely analogous argument can be constructed for achieving the in-
trinsic strength of a polymer material; i.e. the strength of the main-chain co-
valent bonds. If E 0 is the energy required to break the covalent main-chain
bond and E3 d is the weaker inter-chain bonding energy (from Van der Waals
forces and hydrogen bonding), then the requirement is coherence over a
length L such that[90]

                                                                               (17)
In this limit, the large number, L/a, of weak interchain bonds add coherent-
ly such that the polymer fails by breaking of the covalent bond. The direct
analogy between Eqns. 15 and 16 is evident. When the interchain structural
order is "nematic" (i.e. without precise phase order), the conditions become
L/a » (t0 /t3d) 2 and L/a » (E 0 /E 3d) 2 , respectively[89]. Thus, the achieve-
ment of high performance materials with nematic order requires even
greater longer range intra-chain coherence.
   In fact, for conjugated polymers, E 0 results from a combination of cr and 1t
bonds (the latter being equal to t0 ) and E3 d is dominated by the interchain
transfer integral, t 3d. Thus, the inequalities imply that, quite generally, the
conductivity and the mechanical properties will improve in a correlated man-


412                             Chemistry 2000

ner as the degree of chain alignment is increased. This prediction is in excel-
lent agreement with data obtained from studies of the poly(3-alkylthiophe-
nes), the poly(phenylene vinylenes), poly(thienylene vinylene) and polyace-
tylene [31].
   Assuming that the linear correlation persists to even higher draw ratios, the
extrapolated modulus of 300 GPa for polyacetylene would imply that the elec-
trical conductivity of perfectly oriented polyacetylene would be approximate-
ly 2 x 105S/ cm [91]. However, this extrapolated value might still be limited by
structural defects (e.g. sp 3defects, etc.) rather than by intrinsic phonon scat-
tering.
   A theoretical estimate of the intrinsic conductivity, limited by phonon scat-
tering, yields the following expression [89]:

                                                                            (18)

where CTn is the conductivity parallel to the chain, his Plancks's constant, a is
the strength of the electron-phonon interaction, Mis the mass of the repeat
unit of length a, and t0 is the transfer integral (2-3 eV). Using parameters ob-
tained from experiment, Eqn. 17 predicts cr11 = 2 x 10 6 S/ cm at room tempe-
rature [89], more than an order of magnitude greater than that achieved to
date. The exponential dependence upon T arises from the fact that backscat-
tering must involve a high energy phonon with wave number near the zone
boundary. The high conductivity values and the exponential increase in con-
ductivity on lowering the temperature predicted by Eqn. 17 indicates that the
achievement of metallic polymers in which the macromolecules are chain ex-
tended and chain aligned is a major opportunity.



D. The Possibility of Superconductivity in Metallic Polymers
Superconductivity has not yet been observed in doped conjugated polymers.
Might one expect superconductivity? If so what are the materials require-
ments?
   There is every reason to be optimistic that superconductivity will be discov-
ered in doped conjugated polymers:
(i) They are metals;
(ii) The coupling of the electronic structure to the molecular structure is
     well known. Upon doping, the bond lengths change such that charge is
     stored in solitons, polarons and bipolarons. Thus, the electron-phonon
     interaction which is responsible for superconductivity in conventional
     metals, leads to important effects in metallic polymers. In this context,
     doubly charged bipolarons can be thought of as analogous to real-space
     Cooper pairs.

As shown above, however, currently available metallic polymers are barely
metallic; their electronic properties are dominated by disorder with mean
free paths close to the loffe-Regel criterion for disorder induced localization.
   It is interesting to compare the transport properties of available metallic


                                  Alan J Reeger                              413

polymers with those of the underdoped High Tc superconductors at doping
levels where ki -1. For example, when YBa 2Cu 30 7_,; is underdoped to values
of 8 such that the resistivity increases as the temperature is lowered with Pr=
p(l.4K)/p(300K) "" 2 (i.e. with temperature dependence similar to that
found in the best metallic polymers), the disorder associated with the random
occupation of the oxygen sites quenches the superconductivity.
   The phase diagrams of MBa2 Cu 30 7--0 (where M = Y, Dy, etc.) have been
thoroughly studied[92]. For large 8, MBa 2Cu 3 0 7_,; are antiferromagnetic in-
sulators; increasing the oxygen concentration introduces carriers into the
Cu0 2 planes and results in a transition from the antiferromagnetic insulating
phase to the metallic and superconducting phase. The changes in resistivity
which occur during this evolution from insulator to metal (and supercon-
ductor) have been followed in detail in a continuous set of resistivity mea-
surements carried out on ultrathin films[93,94]. Thus, the prototypical High-
Tc "superconductors" show behavior characteristic of the disorder-induced
metal-insulator transition. Near the metal-insulator transition, the p vs T
curves look remarkably similar to those obtained from "metallic" polyaniline,
polypyrrole, and PPV. At doping levels near the metal-insulator transition
there is no sign whatever of the fact that these copper-oxide systems exhibit
superconductivity with the highest known transition temperatures.
   The point is quite clear. One cannot expect to make any progress toward
superconductivity in metallic polymers until there is a major improvement in
materials quality to the point where the mean free path is much longer than
the characteristic monomer repeat units. When this has been achieved, k1,1>>
1 and the resistivity will be truly metal-like, decreasing as the temperature de-
creases. The unresolved question is how to realize the required improve-
ments in structural order? This remains as a major challenge to the field.
   Although the required structural order is lacking in materials that are cur-
rently available, there is evidence that in metallic polyaniline, the electronic
states near the Fermi energy interact strongly and selectively with a specific
optical phonon mode [95]. The 1598 cm· 1 Raman-active vibrational mode
(Ag symmetry) exhibits a distinct resonance enhancement associated with
the mid-IR absorption in metallic polyaniline. Since the mid-IR oscillator
strength results from the intraband free-carrier Drude absorption, the reso-
nant enhancement suggests that the symmetry of the electronic wavefunc-
tions near EF matches the vibrational pattern of the 1598 cm· 1 normal mode.
Quantum chemical calculations of the electronic wavefunctions and analysis
of the normal modes verified that this is in fact true[95]. Since the coupling
of the electronic states near Er to lattice vibrations is known to lead to super-
conductivity in metals, the demonstration of resonant coupling to a specific
vibrational mode provides some optimism; at least this is the kind of feature
that one would like to see.
   The story of superconductivity in metallic polymers has not yet begun. If
and when superconductivity is discovered in this class of materials, that dis-
covery will create a new research opportunity that will be both exciting and
potentially important.


414                             Chemistry 2000

VIL APPLICATIONS

Solid state photonic devices are a class of devices in which the quantum of
light, the photon, plays a role. They function by utilizing the electro-optical
and/ or opto-electronic effects in solid state materials. Because the interband
optical transition (absorption and/ or emission) is involved in photonic phe-
nomena and because photon energies from near infrared (IR) to near ultra-
violet (UV) are of interest, the relevant materials are semiconductors with
band gaps in the range from 1 to 3 eV. Typical inorganic semiconductors used
for photonic devices are Si, Ge, GaAs, GaP, GaN and SiC. Photonic devices
are often classified into three categories: light sources (light emitting diodes,
diode lasers etc.), photodetectors (photoconductors, photodiodes etc.) and
energy conversion devices (photovoltaic cells). All three are important.
Because photonic devices are utilized in a wide range of applications, they
continue to provide a focus for research laboratories all over the world.
   Most of the photonic phenomena known in conventional inorganic semi-
conductors have been observed in these semiconducting polymers[32]. The
dream of using such materials in high performance "plastic" photonic devices
is rapidly becoming reality: High performance photonic devices fabricated
from conjugated polymers have been demonstrated, including light emitting
diodes, light emitting electrochemical cells, photovoltaic cells, photodetec-
tors, and optocouplers; i.e. all the categories which characterize the field of
photonic devices. These polymer-based devices have reached performance
levels comparable to or even better than their inorganic counterparts.
   This Nobel Lecture is, perhaps, not the proper place to discuss in detail the
many current and anticipated applications of semiconducting and metallic
polymers; there is simply neither time in the presentation nor space in the
written document to do justice to the subject. Suffice it to say here that I am
convinced that we are on the verge of a revolution in "Plastic Electronics". I
refer those interested to recent reviews that focus on these important devel-
opments [97].



VIII. CONCLUDING COMMENTS

I am greatly honored to receive the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for "the discov-
ery and development of conducting polymers". The science of semiconduct-
ing and metallic polymers is inherently interdisciplinary; it falls at the inter-
section of Chemistry and Physics. In creating and expanding this "fourth
generation"of polymers, we attempted to understand nature with sufficient
depth that we could achieve materials with novel and unique properties;
properties that are not otherwise available. This was (and is) an elegant and
somewhat dangerous exercise; elegant because it required the synthesis of
knowledge from the two disciplines, and dangerous because one is always
pushing beyond the knowledge and experience of his background. I started
out as a physicist; however, I am what I have become. I have evolved, with the
help of many colleagues in the international scientific community, into an in-


                                          Alan J Reeger                                       415

terdisciplinary scientist. That my work and that of my colleagues Alan
MacDiarmid and Hideki Shirakawa has had sufficient impact on Chemistry to
be recognized by the Nobel Prize gives me, therefore, particular satisfaction.


REFERENCES
 1.    H. Shirakawa, EJ. Louis, A.G. MacDiarmid, C.K. Chiang and AJ. Heeger, Chem.
       Commun. 578, (1977).
 2.    C.K. Chiang, C.R. Fincher, Jr., Y.W. Park, AJ. Heeger, H. Shirakawa and EJ. Louis,
       Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 1098 (1977).
 3.    B. Ran by in Chapter 3 of Conjugated Polymers and Related Materials: Th.e Interconnection of
       Chemical and El£ctronic Structures, Edited by W.R. Salaneck, I. Lundstrom and B. Ran by,
       Oxford University Press, Oxford, (1993).
 4.    AJ. Heeger, S. Kivelson,J.R. Schrieffer and W.P. Su, Rev. Mod. Phys.60, 781 (1988).
 5.    W.P. Su,J.R. Schrieffer and AJ. Heeger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 1698(1979).
 6.    W.P. Su,J.R. Schrieffer and AJ. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B22, 2099 (1980).
 7.    C.K. Chiang, S.C. Gau, C.R. Fincher,Jr., Y.W. Park, A.G. MacDiarmid, Appl. Phys. Lett.
       33,18 (1978).
 8.    PJ.Nigrey, A.G. MacDiarmid and AJ. Heeger, Chem. Commun. 96, 594 (1979).
 9.    Q. Pei, G. Yu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang and AJ. Heeger, Science, 269, 1086 (1995).
10.   W.R. Salaneck, I. Lundstrom, W.S. Haung and A.G. MacDiarmid, Synth. Met.13, 291
       (1986).
11.   Y. Cao, P. Smith andAJ.Heeger, Synth. Met. 48, 91 (1992).
12.   Y. Cao, P. Smith and AJ. Heeger, U.S. Patent 5,232,631.
13.    C.Y. Yang, Y. Cao, P. Smith and AJ. Heeger, Synth. Met. 53, 293 (1992).
14.    M. Reghu, Y. Cao, D. Moses, and AJ. Heeger, Phys. Rev. 8497,1758 (1993).
15.    H. Tomozawa, D. Braun, S. Philips, AJ. Heeger and H. Kroemer, Synth. Met.22, 63
       (1987); H. Tomozawa, D. Braun, S.D. Philips, R. Worland, and AJ. Heeger, Synth.
       Met. 28, C687 (1989).
16.   J.H. Burroughes, D.D.C. Bradley, A.R. Brown, R.N. Marks, R.H. Friend, P.L. Bums and
      A.B. Holmes, Nature, 347, 539 (1990).
17.   A.G. MacDiarmid and AJ.Epstein in "Conjugated Polymeric Materials: Opportunities
       in Electronics, Optical Electronics and Molecular Electronics", Ed. by J.L. Bredas and
       R.R. Chance (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1990), p.53.
18.   F. Wudl, R.O. Angus, F.L.Lu, P.M. Allemand, DJ. Vachon, M. Nowak, Z.X. Liu,and AJ.
       Heeger,J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 109, 3677 (1987).
19.    N.S. Sariciftci, "Primary Photoexcitations in Conjugated Polymers" (World Scientific
      Publishing Co., Singapore, 1998).
20.   S.A.Jenekhe, andJ.A. Osaheni, Science, 265, 765 (1994).
21.   J. Comil, D.A. do Santos, X. Crispin, R. Sil bey and J.L. Bredas, J. Amer. Chem. Soc.
       120, 1289 (1998).
22.   LJ. Rothberg, M. Yan, F. Papadimitrakopoulos, M.E. Galvin, E.W. Kwock and T.M.
      Miller, Synth. Met. 80, 41 (1996).
23.   I.D. Parker,]. Appl.Phys. 75, 1656 (1994).
24.   E.S. Maniloff, D. Vacar, D.W. McBranch, H. Wang, B.R. Mattes,]. Gao and AJ. Heeger,
      Opt. Commun., 141, 243 (1997).
25.   L.Y. Chiang, A.F. Garito and DJ. Sandman, Proceedings of the Materials Research
      Society, Vol. 247 (Materials Research Society, Pittsburgh, 1992).
26.   F. Gamier, R. Hajlaoui, A. Vasser and P. Svrivastava, Science, 265, 1684(1994).
27.   J.H. Burroughes, C.A.Jones and R.H. Friend, Nature, 335, 137 (1988).
28.   CJ. Drury, C.MJ. Mutsaers, C.M. Hart, M. Matters, and D.M. de Leeuw, Appl. Phys.
      Lett. 73, 108 (1998).
29.   F. Hide, M. Diaz-Garcia. B. Schwartz, M. Andersson, Q.Pei and AJ. Heeger, Science,
       73, 1833 (1996).


416                                  Chemistry 2000

30.    M. Kobayashi, N. Colaneri, M. Boysel, F. Wudl, and AJ Heeger,]. Chem. Phys., 83,
       5717 (1985).
31.   AJ. Heeger and P. Smith in "Conjugated Polymers", Ed. by J.L. Bredas and R. Silbey
       (Kluwer Acad. Publishers, Dordrecht, 1991), p. 141.
32.   G. Yu and AJ. Heeger in "The Physics of Semiconductors", Ed. by M. Schieffer and R.
      Zimmerman (World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 1996), Vol. 1.
33.   R. Menon, C.O. Yoon, D. Moses and AJ. Heeger in "Handbook of Conducting
      Polymers" 2nd Edition, Ed. by T.A. Skotheim, R.L. Elsenbaumer and J.R. Reynolds
       (Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 1998), p. 85.
34.   L. Sun and S.C. Yang, Polymer Preprints,33, 379 ( 1992) .G. Heywang and F. Jonas, Adv.
      Mater. 4, 116 (1992).
35.   ]. Friedrich and K. Werner, U.S. Patent 5,300,575.
36.   C. Kittel, "Introduction to Solid State Physics", (John Wiley and Sons, Inc. New York,
       1986).
37.   K.Lee, AJ. Heeger and Y. Cao, Phys. Rev. B48, 14884 (1993).
38.   K. Lee, R. Menon, C.O. Yoon and AJ. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B52, 4 779 ( 1995).
39.   Y. Cao, G.M. Treacy, P. Smith and AJ. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 2711 ( 1992).
40.   G. Gustafsson, Y. Cao, G.M. Treacy, F. Klavetter, N. Colaneri, and AJ. Heeger, Nature,
      357, 477 (1992).
41.   ]. Gao, AJ. Heeger,J.Y. Lee and C.Y. Kim, Synth. Met. 82, 221 (1996).
42.   Y. Cao, G. Yu, C. Zhang, R. Menon and AJ. Heeger, Synth. Met. 87, 171 (1997).
43.   I.H. Campbell, T.W. Hagler, D.L. Smith and J.P. Ferraris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 76, 1900
       (1996).
44.   M. Pope and C.E. Swenberg, "Electronic Prosesses in Organic Crystals" (Clarendon
      Press, Oxford, 1982).
45.   T.W. Hagler and AJ. Heeger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 189, 333 (1992).
46.   T.W. Hagler,K. Pakbaz,, K. Voss, and AJ. Heeger, Pjys. Rev. B44, 8652 ( 1991).
47.   A. Streitweiser, "Molecular Orbital Theory for Organic Chemists" (John Wiley and
      Sons, New York, 1961).
48.   P. Smith, PJ. Lemstra,J.P.L. Pijpers and A.M. Kile, Colloid and Polym. Sci. , 259, 1070
       (1981).
49.   R.E. Peierls, "Quantum Theory of Solids" (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1955).
50.   C.R. Fincher,C.E. Chen, AJ. Heeger, A.G. MacDiarmid, and]. B. Hastings, Phys. Rev.
      Lett.48, 100 ( 1982).
51.   C.S. Yannoni and T.C. Clarke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 1191 (1983).
52.   S. Brazovskii, N. Kirova and A.R. Bishop, Opt. Mater. 9, 465 ( 1998).
53.   N. Kirova, S. Brazovskii, and A.R. Bishop, Synth. Met. 100, 29 (1999).
54.   E. K. Miller, D. Yoshida, C.Y. Yang and AJ. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B59, 4661 (1999).
55.   E.K. Miller, C.Y. Yang and AJ. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B62, 6889 (2000).
56.   K. Fesser, A.R. Bishop and D. Campbell, Phys. Rev. B27, 4804 (1983).
57.   S.A. Brazovski and N. Kirova,JETP, 33, 4 (1981).
58.   N.S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, AJ. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 258, 1474 (1992).
59.   S. Morita, A.A. Zakhidov and Y. Yoshino, Sol. State Commun., 82, 249 (1992).
60.   B. Kraabel, D. McBranch, N.S. Sariciftci, D. Moses, and AJ. Heeger, Mo!. Cryst. and
      Liq. Cryst., 256, 733 (1994); B. Kraabel, J.C. Hummelen, D. Vacar, D. Moses, N.S.
      Sariciftci and AJ. Heeger,J. Chem. Phys. 104, 4267 (1996).
61.   G. Lanzani, C. Zenz, G. Cerullo, W. Graupner, G. Leising, U. Scherf, S. De Silvestri,
      Synth. Met. 111-112, 493 (2000).
62.   L. Smilowitz, N.S. Sariciftci, R. Wu, C. Gettinger, AJ. Heeger and F. Wudl, Phys. Rev.
      B47, 13835 (1993).
63.   N.S. Sariciftci and AJ. Heeger, Int.]. of Mod. Phys. BS, 237 (1994).
64.   P.M. Allemand, G. Srdanov, A. Koch and F. Wudl, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 113, 1050
       (1991).
65.   K. Lee, R.Jansson, N.S. Sariciftci and AJ. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B49, 5781 (1994).


                                        Alan J Heeger                                    417

66.   C.H. Lee, G. Yu, D. Moses, K Pakbaz, C. Zhang, N.S. Sariciftci, AJ. Heeger and F.
      Wudl, Phys. Rev. 848, 15425 (1993).
67.    G. Yu and AJ. Heeger,J. Appl. Phys., 78, 4510 (1995).
68.   JJ.M. Halls, C.M. Walsh, N.C. Greenham, E.A. Marseglia, R.H. Friend, S.C. Moratti
       andA.B. Holmes, Nature,376, 498 (1995).
69.    G. Yu,]. Gao,J.C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and AJ. Heeger, Science, 270, 1789 (1995).
70.   C.Y. Yang and AJ. Heeger, Syn th. Met. 83, 85 ( 1996).
71.   K Akagi, M. Suezaki, H. Shirakawa, H. Kyotani, M. Shimamura, and Y. Tanabe, Syn th.
       Met. 28, Dl (1989).
72.   ]. Tsukomoto,Jpn.J. of Appl. Phys. 29, 1 (1990).
73.   Y. Cao, P. Smith and AJ. Heeger, Polymer, 32, 1210 ( 1991).
74.   T. Schimmel, W. Reiss, J.Gmeiner, M. Schworer, H. Naarmann, and N. Theophilou,
      Sol. State. Commun. 65, 1311 (1998).
75.   S. Tokito, P. Smith andAJ. Heeger, Polymer, 32, 464 (1991).
76.   A.F. loffe and A.R. Regel, Prog. Semicond. 4, 237 ( 1960).
77.    N.F. Mott and E.A. Davis, "Electronic Processes in Noncrystalline Matrials (Oxford
       Univ. Press, Oxford, 1979).
78.    N.F. Mott, "Metal-Insulator Transition" (Taylor & Francis, London, 1990).
79.   P.W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 8109, 1492 (1958).
80.   P.W. Anderson, Comm. on Sol. State Phys., 2, 193 (1970).
81.   E. Abrahams, P.W. Anderson, D.C. Licciardello and T.V. Ramakrishnan, Phys. Rev.
      Lett., 42, 695(1979).
82.   W.L. McMillan, Phys. Rev. B24, 2739 (1981).
83.   A.I. Larkin and D.E. khmelnitskii, Sov. Phys.JETP, 56, 647 (1982).
84.   K Lee, E.K Miller, A.N. Aleshin,R. Menon, AJ. Heeger, J.H. Kim, C.0. Yoon and H.
      Lee, Adv. Mater. 10, 456 (1998).
85.   K Lee, AJ. Heeger and Y. Cao, Synth. Met. 69, 261 (1995).
86.    N.F. Mott and M. Kaveh, Adv. Phys. 34, 329 (1985).
87.   T.G. Castner, in "Hopping Transport in Solids", Ed. byM. Pollak and B.I. Shlovskii
       (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 1991).
88.   P.A. Lee and T.V. Ramakrishnan, Rev. Mod. Phys., 57, 287 (1985).
89.   S. Kivelson and AJ. Heeger, Synth. Met. 22,371, (1987).
90.   AJ. Heeger, Faraday Discuss., Chem. Soc. 88, 1 (1989).
91.   S. Tokito, P. Smith and AJ. Heeger, Polymer, 32, 464 (1991).
92.   J.M. Tranquada in "Earlier and Recent Aspects of Superconductivity", Ed. by J.G.
      Bednorz and KA. Muller (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990).
93.   T. Wang, KM. Beauchamp, D.D. Berkley, B.R.Johnson,J.X. Liu,]. Zhang, and A.M.
      Goldman, Phys. Rev. 843, 8623 (1991).
94.   G. Yu, C.H. Lee, AJ. Heeger, N. Herron, E.M. McCarron, L. Cong, G.C. Spalding, C.A.
      Nordman, and A.M. Goldman, Phys. Rev. 845, 4964 (1992).
95.   N.S. Sariciftci, AJ. Heeger, V. Krasevec, P. Venturini, D. Mihailovic, Y. Cao,]. Libert
      and]. L. Bredas, Synth. Met. 62, 107 (1994).
96.   M.D. McGehee, E.K Miller, D. Moses and AJ. Heeger, in "Advances in Synthetic
      Metals: Twenty Years of Progress in Science and Technology", Ed. by P. Bernier, S.
      Lefrant and G. Bidan (Elsevier Science S.A., Lausanne, 1999).
97.   M.D. McGehee and AJ. Heeger, Adv. Mater, 22, 1655 (2000).


 Erratum


  Page 405, line 19 should read as:

  energy state of the 1t*-bandref_ Ultimately, therefore, the ultrafast nature of the

 where re£ refers to M.J. Rice and Yu. N. Gartstein, Phys. Rev. B53, 10764 (1996).
