                           A LFRED W E R N E R

        On the constitution and configuration of
               higher-order compounds
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1913


Allow me first of all to express my deeply felt gratitude to the Swedish
Academy of Sciences for the distinction granted to me and for the honour
of being invited to present to you an account of the progress of our know-
ledge concerning the structure of the molecules.
  I started my scientific work by putting forward a hypothesis on the arrange-
ment of atoms in nitrogen-containing molecules. In the years that followed,
the hypothesis has borne much fruit; but I must refrain from discussing it
in detail here, because the experimental confirmation of the conclusions to
be drawn from it is the merit of my teacher, A. Hantzsch. In the same way
I wish to make passing reference only to the ideas put forward in my trea-
tise "Beiträge zur Theorie der Affinität und Valenz" (Contributions to the
theory of affinity and valence) because the conclusions to be drawn from
them are only now beginning to exert their expected influence. I shall limit
myself to a discussion in detail of those of my researches which are concerned
with the constitution and configuration of compounds to which little atten-
tion was given twenty years ago, by contrast with earlier times, i.e. the con-
stitution and configuration of the so-called molecular compounds. During
the great era of development of organic chemistry, during which the theory
of structure was perfected, the molecular compounds had become stepchil-
 dren, and attention only continued to be given to a few of them because they
were of practical interest. This neglect can be ascribed to the fact that it was
impossible to develop the constitution of these compounds on the same
valence principle as the constitution of organic compounds. It must there-
 fore be stressed all the more that one of the most important groups of molec-
ular compounds, i.e. metal ammonias, were carefully tended at that time
in Sweden, by C. W. Blomstrand and P. T. Cleve. These two scientists had
recognized the theoretical importance of these compounds whose charac-
teristics had prompted Berzelius to number them with the "paired com-
 pounds". The former contributed to the knowledge of these compounds in
the theoretical, the latter in the experimental respect.


    CONSTITUTION AND CONFIGURATION OF COMPOUNDS                        257

   Blomstrand directly followed Berzelius by putting forward certain con-
cepts about the manner in which the components of the paired compounds
are linked with one another in the molecules of these compounds. He fol-
lowed the model provided by the constitution formulae of paired organic
compounds, i.e. he arranged the components in the form of chains. To
the compound CoCl2· 6NH 3 for example he gave the following constitu-
tional formula:




It was however known even in Blomstrand’s day that in certain of these ad-
dition compounds of ammonia and metal salts, the individual acid residues
can possess different functions, in that some have a firmer, others a looser
bond. Blomstrand adapted his formulae to this fact by postulating that the
firmer were linked with the metal atom, whereas the looser were the ter-
minal members of the ammonia chains. For the xantho salts, for example, he
derived the following formula:




in which a double cobalt atom was assumed to be present in accordance
with the view then prevailing.
    For further progress in the knowledge of the constitution of metal am-
monias we are again indebted to a Nordic scientist, i.e. the Danish chemist
 S. M. Jorgensen, who extended and deepened the field of metal ammonias
by researches which have become classic. Jorgensen showed that the for-
mulae containing double metal atoms are untenable, and that not only one,
but two acid residues can be directly linked with the metal atom. He was
further able to show that on the departure of one molecule ammonia from
the compounds richest in ammonia - which always contain six ammonia
molecules for one metal atom, and in which all the acid residues are in loose
linkage - one acid residue, and, on departure of two ammonia molecules,
two acid residues enter into direct bond with the metal atom. From this he
concluded that these two acid residues in the hexammine salts of the tri-


258                            1913 A.WERNER

valent metals are only separated from the metal atom by interposition of one
ammonia molecule each, from which he derived the following formula for
the hexammine salts:




This was the stage of development of the theory of the constitution of
metal ammonias when I began to deal with these compounds. From an exam-
ination of the behaviour of the compounds I recognized that in the event
of the departure of a further ammonia molecule, the third acid residue also
enters into direct bond with the metal atom. This, however, is only possible
if in the hexammine salts this acid residue, too, is only separated from the
metal atom by an ammonia molecule. Further I discovered that the other
ammonia molecules also can be replaced by acid radicals which enter into
direct bond with the metal atom. From this I concluded that the ammonia
molecules cannot be connected chainwise at all, but must all be directly
linked with the metal atom. The following formula therefore had to be
derived for the hexammine metal salts:




and the following formulae were derived for the compounds formed from
the above by ammonia loss:




That other metal ammonias, e.g. the platinum ammonias, chromic am-
monias, etc. must have analogous formulae, was shown by their chemical
behaviour.
  The diverse function of the acid residues in the compounds under dis-
cussion could, in accordance with the electrolytic theory of dissociation put
forward by your famous member, Professor Arrhenius, also be interpreted
by postulating that the acid residues in direct bond with the metal atom do
not dissociate in solution, whereas those not directly linked with the metal
atom occur as independent ions. It should be possible, therefore, to provide
experimental physico-chemical evidence for the conclusions drawn, by de-


    CONSTITUTION AND CONFIGURATION OF COMPOUNDS                           259

termining the electrolytic conductivity. The result of the investigation I
carried out jointly with my friend A. Miolati, fully confirmed our conclu-
sions, since we discovered that the compounds of which it was assumed that
they contained all acid residues in direct bond with the metal atom, are so
little dissociated electrolytically, that they behave practically as non-conduc-
tors. This important result was later confirmed again by an investigation
carried out jointly with Ch. Herty. In this way we had secured an experi-
mental foundation on which the new theory of the constitution of inorganic
compounds could be based. The new theoretical principle which formed
the guiding theme in the evaluation of constitution, can be summarized as
follows:
   Even when they are saturated in the sense of the older theory of valence,
the elementary atoms still possess sufficient chemical affinity to bind other
seemingly also saturated atoms and groups of atoms, under generation of
clearly defined atomic bonds. This doctrine has now been so amply confirm-
ed experimentally by investigations of a very large number of molecular
compounds which are now called complex compounds, that we can make it
the starting-point of further developments.
   The first question to which we have to find an answer is that as to the
number of atoms which can be directly linked with an atom forming the
centre of a complex molecule. It has been found that this number which has
been called the maximum coordination number is dictated by the nature
of the mutually interconnected elementary atoms. Hitherto, the maximum
coordination numbers, four, six, and eight have been observed, which cor-
responds to the theoretically possible symmetrical groupings of a corres-
ponding number of points about a centre, if the neighbouring points are
equidistant. It must however be noted that the composition of the complex
chemical compounds must not invariably correspond to the maximum
coordination number of the centre atom, because there are coordinatively
unsaturated atoms, just as there are valence-chemically unsaturated atoms.
   In inorganic chemistry, the coordination number six plays a predominant
part, which finds expression in the predominance of complex compounds
with complex radicals (MeA6). On examining any binary compound whose
centre atom has the coordination number six, we would therefore expect
that it is capable of adding new components, until the coordination number,
six, of the centre atom is satisfied. This conclusion has been confirmed ex-
perimentally. Let us select platinum tetrachloride as a simple example. It
forms e.g. the following addition compounds:


260                            1913 A.WERNER




whose constitutional formulae were established by detailed investigations.
The formulae show that the compounds previously classified as double
salts, and also the metal ammonias and the hydrates are wholly in agreement
constitutionally, and that there are intermediate types which belong both to
the one and to the other group. I have been able to confirm these constitu-
tional relationships by demonstrating mutual transformation of the com-
pounds in many cases.
   All compounds which, like the derivatives of platinum chloride mentioned
above, are formed by simple addition, are now classified as addition com-
pounds. They represent one of the principal groups of higher-order com-
pounds. Within the scope of this lecture it would be impossible even to at-
tempt to show to you how extensive are the experimental facts which it has
been possible to classify consistently theoretically on the basis of the views
put forward. For the sake of general orientation, I only wish to add that the
behaviour of platinum chloride recurs in an identical manner in a wide range
of first-order compounds.
   The addition compounds are joined by a second group of higher-order
 compounds, i.e. the intercalation compounds. These form when, as a result
 of the incorporation of a new component, the acid residues of a compound
 are displaced from the direct bond with the metal atom. The following is an
example:




This completely changes the function of the acid residue, because after ad-
dition of ammonia it functions as an ionogenic group, whereas previously its
bond was non-ionogenic. This prompts the assumption that after the addi-
tion process the acid residue is situated in a second linkage sphere in which it
is enabled to form ions. With the assistance of electrical conductivity we
were able to trace by measurements the process of intercalation in a large
number of cases and, consequently, to establish experimental foundations
for the evaluation of the formation of such intercalation compounds. The
addition process with change of function of acid residues can be repeated
until all acid residues are in ionogenic bond. We thus come to the end types


of intercalation compounds, which, with the metal ammonias, include the
hexammine salts, with the examination of which we started. We must
therefore visualize such a hexammine salt as a metal atom in the first sphere
of which six ammonia molecules or amine molecules are linked by means of
nitrogen, whereas the acid groups are situated in a second sphere. In the
formula, we express this as follows:




In the metal ammonias, the ammonia molecules may in part be substituted
by water molecules, and the water plays the same part in these compounds as
ammonia. This doctrine is of fundamental importance, and I have therefore
devoted a large number of papers to proving it. We may now consider it as
proved, because we now know almost unbroken transition series from the
metal ammonias to the compounds of metal salts with water, which latter are
merely the hydrates of the metal salts. One of these transition series, in which
only one link is missing, is known e.g. for the salts of tri-valent chromium:




Since the water in the hydrates therefore plays the same part as the am-
monia in the metal ammonias, it would be expected that on the withdrawal
of water from the hydrates, individual acid residues belonging to the com-
pound will also suffer a change in function. This conclusion, too, was ex-
perimentally confirmed, and, on that occasion, we discovered the cause of
the difference between blue and green chromic chloride hexahydrate. We
were able to show that blue chromic chloride is normal hexaquochromic
chloride, whereas the green chromic chloride corresponds to the following
constitutional formula:




The isomerism is therefore based on a different mode of linkage of the
water of hydration, and this kind of isomerism has therefore been called
"hydrate isomerism".


262                            1913 A.WERNER

   Knowledge of the nature of the hydrates of metal salts has acquired great
importance. The demonstration that the water molecules in the hydrates can
be replaced by substituted water molecules, belonging to which metal hy-
droxides Me(· OH) 2 and metal oxygen salts can also be interpreted, rendered
possible the opening up of the field of so-called multi-nuclear compounds.
A large group of these compounds, in which metal atoms are mutually
linked in a non-ionogenic manner by the oxygen of radicals such as OH,
OAc, etc. has considerable importance in inorganic chemistry and in the
chemistry of minerals. The constitution of basic salts such as atacamite,
langite, alunite, etc. and that of the group including Schweinfurt Green, the
apatites, etc. was clarified; they are in excellent concord with the constitu-
tional formulae of the simpler compounds, as the formulae below show:




The study of the aquo-ammonia metal salts has also led to important results.
The property of these compounds to have an acid reaction, and their ability
to be converted into so-called hydroxo compounds, such as




has thrown new light on the process of hydrolysis, also on the nature of
bases, and the process of salt formation. For it was found that, depending on
the nature of the centre atoms and of the groups linked with them, these
hydroxo compounds may exhibit very diverse characteristics. They may
go through the whole scale from wholly neutral to strongly basic character,
and this is due to the fact that the hydroxyl groups linked with the metal
atom have a smaller or greater tendency to bind the hydrogen ions present
in the water in small amounts. The greater this tendency, the more strongly
basic are the hydroxo compounds. We thus obtain a new definition of bases,
i.e. that the bases are compounds which have the ability to bind the hydro-
gen ions of the water, and in this way to disturb the equilibrium between the
water and its ions by absorbing hydrogen ions, which results in an increase


     CONSTITUTION AND CONFIGURATION OF COMPOUNDS                          263

of hydroxyl-ion concentration. Hydrolysis is based on partial cleavage of the
aquo-salts into hydroxo compounds and acids, and salt formation on the
formation of aquo-salts by addition of acids to hydroxo compounds. The
knowledge of the behaviour of aquo-salts also provides the theoretical foun-
dation for the evaluation of the constitution of oxonium salts.
   Having sketched some of the principal areas in which the coordination
theory has yielded a civilizing hand and has imposed order on the almost
unconceivable multiplicity of the higher-order compounds that have accu-
mulated in the course of time, I wish to discuss briefly the nature of the
affinity forces bringing about the formation of these compounds. I have
called these affinity forces secondary valences, to distinguish them from those
called primary valences which bring about the formation of first-order com-
pounds. In spite of the vast amount of experimental data we are not yet able
to characterize precisely the difference that exists between the two types of
valence. Most recent investigations have however shown that there is no
fundamental difference between primary and secondary valences and that
both types of valence have entirely the same significance for the cohesion of
the atoms in the molecule. This leaves only the possibility of a gradual differ-
ence. I consider this gradual difference to be that the changing quantity of
affinity which corresponds to a primary valence is sufficiently great to link
an electron, whereas the affinity amount of a secondary valence is too small
for this. As a consequence of this, the processes brought about by primary
valences between atoms may be accompanied by electrical phenomena,
whereas this is not the case with those caused by secondary valences.
   In examining the coordination compounds we have so far taken account
only of the affinity relationships between the atoms belonging to the atomic
cluster, but have neglected the mutual positions of these atoms in the mole-
cules. We are now concerned with the question as to the manner in which
the six groups which in the complex radicals MeA6 are linked with the centre
atom, are arranged about this atom in space. This question can be answered
by experimental examination of the consequences arising from the various
possibilities of arrangement with regard to the occurrence of isomerism
phenomena. That the arrangement of the six groups about the centre atom
must be symmetrical, is rendered experimentally probable by the fact that
in spite of many experiments we have never been able to observe isomerism
phenomena in compounds with complex radicals :                   Of symmetrical
arrangements, the following may be involved : (I) plane, (2) prismatic, (3)
octahedron (Fig.I).


264                              1913 A.WERNER




                                    Fig. I.

Plane and prismatic arrangements require, for compounds with complex
radicals         the occurrence of three isomeric forms, whereas the octahe-
dron arrangement only envisages the existence of two isomeric compounds
of this nature (Fig. 2). The latter isomers are characterized in that one form
contains the two B groups in two adjacent positions of the octahedron ar-
rangement, whereas the other form contains it in more remote (diagonal)
positions.
  The experimental investigations have shown that compounds with com-
plex radicals            do in fact occur in two isomeric forms; in no case were




                                    Fig.2.


      CONSTITUTION AND CONFIGURATION OF COMPOUNDS 2 6 5

three isomeric forms found to exist (see Fig. 2). The elucidation of these iso-
merism phenomena which were discovered first in the platinum series and
then in the cobalt series, occupied my mind for many years, and a large
number of compounds had to be prepared to provide the material by means
of which we were able to test the theoretical conclusions. Without this ex-
tensive material of compounds it would have been quite impossible to ob-
tain information about the arrangement of the atoms in these molecules. We
now know, in the case of cobalt, more than 20 different series of compounds
which show this isomerism, and P. Pfeiffer has shown that identical isomer-
ism phenomena occur in chromium. The differences in the properties of the
isomers are so great that it is frequently possible to distinguish between them
by external appearance. The difference e.g. between dichloro compounds:
[C1 2MeA4]X is particularly characteristic, both in the cobalt series and in the
chromium series; they differ in that some isomers are green, and the others
are violet. For some considerable time however such isomers were as a rule
demonstrated only in compounds which contain amines, e.g. ethylene di-
amine, and it was therefore claimed with some semblance ofjustification that
carbon was important for the occurrence of the isomerism phenomenon. I
was however able to show that even the simplest compounds, the dichloro-
tetrammine cobalt salts [CI2CO(NH 3)4]X exhibit this isomerism, which pre-
cluded any possible explanation other than that provided by the spatially
different arrangement of the groups.
   Configuration allocation, i.e. the determination in which isomers the two
B groups are in the cis-position and in which isomers they are in the trans -
 position, was also carried out. We started with the consideration which also
serves for the configuration determination of cis- and trans -isomers in orga-
nic chemistry, that groups in the cis -position are suitable for ring closure,
 whereas this is not the case with trans-groups. It was found that from com-
 pounds which, in the place of the two B groups, contain one group occu-
 pying two coordination points, e.g. the carbonate-sulphite group, etc.:




there were always obtained, on replacement of these groups by chlorine,
bromine, etc., compounds of the violet series, although as a rule these are
relatively unstable under the reaction conditions and will therefore be con-
verted into the more stable, green trans-compounds on being subjected to
these reaction conditions for some time.


266                              1913 A.WERNER

   During the preparation of metal ammonias which occur in cis- and trans-
forms, from other stereo-isomeric metal ammonias by substitution reac-
tions, i.e. by reactions in which certain groups are replaced by others, we
found that rearrangements frequently occurred, in that trans-forms are
formed from cis-compounds, and cis-compounds from trans-isomers. We can
summarize this by saying that a change in position frequently occurs in
substitution processes, so that the substituent group does not come to occupy
that position in the molecule previously occupied by that displaced by substi-
tution. These observations resulted in a new view of the progress of substi-
tution processes. The entry of a substituent occurs as a result of the attractive
affinity effect of the centre atoms, and the position the entering substituent
seeks to occupy in the new atomic constellation is entirely independent of
the bond position of the atomic group displaced by the substitution process.
This concept which is indispensible for the explanation of the change of
position during the conversion of stereo-isomeric inorganic compounds, has
led to an explanation of the strange processes which occur in so-called Wal-
den inversions, i.e. in the mutual inversion of mirror-image isomeric carbon
compounds. In applying the concepts obtained for substitution processes in
inorganic compounds to the conditions obtaining in carbon compounds, it
is possible, without any secondary hypothesis and in a simple manner, to
explain why, in substitution processes, either the spatially identically con-
structed molecules, or their mirror-image forms can occur.
   The octahedral distribution of the six groups about the centre atom means
that compounds with complex radicals




also must occur in two stereo-isomeric forms, according to the arrangement
of the three B groups in a plane or in a sectional plane of the octahedron
(Fig. 3).




                                     Fig.3.


       CONSTITUTION AND CONFIGURATION OF COMPOUNDS                          267

This conclusion also has recently been confirmed. The compound:




for example, exists in two isomeric forms, of which one is indigo blue and
the other violet. With respect to the phenomena of the so-called geometrical
stereo-isomerism, all the conclusions drawn from theory have been confirm-
ed in such a perfect manner that there can be no further doubt as to the
correctness of the theory.
   The octahedral system permits other isomerism phenomena to be predic-
ted apart from those we have discussed. Where the six groups linked with the
centre atom are not all identical, molecular configurations can be derived
which cannot be superimposed on their mirror images. It was therefore to be
expected that the compounds corresponding to these molecular configura-
tions would occur in optically active mirror-image isomers. In this lecture I
shall merely discuss briefly a few cases which have been confirmed by ex-
perimental investigation. If we imagine four of the positions in the octahe-
dral arrangement to be occupied by two coordinatively bivalent groups in a
manner such that the two unoccupied positions are adjacent, and if we place
two groups A and B in these positions, two spatial constructions become
possible whose relationship to one another is that of two mirror-image
forms which cannot be superimposed on each other (Fig. 4). Compounds
which satisfy these conditions include the following:




We therefore attempted to resolve such compounds into optically-active
mirror-image isomers. In many cases, this proved to be possible. The sta-
bility of the active forms is not, as I had at first feared, small, but the active




                                      Fig.4.


268                             1913 A.WERNER

 compounds are in part infinitely durable, and many are highly stable even in
 aqueous solution. In the case of the compounds under discussion, we can dis-
 cover, in their molecular structure, an asymmetric cobalt atom of similar
 structure to the asymmetric carbon atom. This is however not the case in
 compounds with complex radicals: [en 2CoA 2], with two A groups in ad-
jacent positions. Even in this case, image and mirror image cannot be super-
 imposed (Fig.5). It was therefore of great interest to examine whether op-




                                     Fig.5.


tical isomerism can also occur in compounds of this hind. Experiment con-
firmed it. Both in the case of cobalt and of chromium we were able to re-
solve into the mirror-image isomers the cis-dichloro-diethylenediamine
compounds having the following constitutional formulae:




Further, we were able to resolve the cis -dinitrodiethylenediamine cobalt
salts and the cis-diamine-diethylenediamine cobalt salts into the active forms,
and the active carbonate- and oxalo-diethylenediamine cobalt salts were also
obtained. In agreement with theory, it has however up to now proved im-
possible to resolve the corresponding trans-forms into active components in
a single case, despite all our efforts to do so. In these compounds, we thus
discovered conditions in molecular structure such as Pasteur in his day con-
sidered himselfjustified in assuming for the structure of all molecules, i.e. that
the molecules consist in one symmetrically constructed and in two asymmet-
rically constructed forms, the latter of which behave like image and mirror
image, and cannot be superimposed.
   If we imagine the six positions in the octahedral system to be occupied by
three coordinatively bivalent groups, e.g. ethylenediamine, we obtain a con-
struction which cannot be superimposed on its mirror image either, although
all six positions are occupied by chemically corresponding groups (Fig. 6).


     CONSTITUTION AND CONFIGURATION OF COMPOUNDS                               269




                                         Fig.6.


In this case, the asymmetrical structure of the molecules is thus wholly dic-
tated by the spatial arrangement of the groups, and is entirely independen-
of the nature of the groups linked together. It therefore appeared to be par-
ticularly important for our conceptions of the origin of the optical activity
of chemical molecules to establish whether such asymmetrical molecular
structure also results in optical activity. This is in fact the case. In four differ-
ent metals we succeeded in resolving compounds of this kind into optical
isomers, i.e. in the case of cobalt, chromium, rhodium, and iron. For the first
three metals we obtained in optically active form the triethylene-diamine
compounds:

                    [ C o e n 3 ] X3 [ C r e n 3 ] X3 [ R h e n 3 ] X3

for iron, the tri- α -dipyridyl compounds:


                                     [ F e D p y 3] X2

Recently, we have begun a search for other similarly constructed com-
pounds. We have been able to resolve into active forms, and in this way to
establish beyond doubt the constitution of the metal trioxalic acids, com-
pounds which correspond to the general formula:




  This opens up much-promising prospects for the treatment of new fields
of inorganic chemistry. May it be granted to me to justify the confidence
which the Swedish Academy of Sciences has placed in me by the award of
the Nobel Prize, by making further advances in the field of inorganic
constitution research. In concluding allow me to express to you my gratitude
for the kind attention you have given to my lecture.
