                          A R C H E R J . P . MA R T I N


    The development of partition chromatography
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1952



The subject of partition chromatography has now an extensive literature and
I feel on an occasion such as this it is better to describe the development of
the method rather than to summarize the present position or to attempt to
put forward any of the more recent advances, which have been described
elsewhere. Perhaps indeed, if enough histories, written while the ideas are
still fresh in the minds of the people concerned, are available for a variety of
discoveries or inventions, it may eventually be possible to lay down some of
the principles required to facilitate the obtaining of fruitful results in sci-
entific research in general. Clearly also the background of knowledge at the
time the advance was made will be best understood if the history is as recent
as possible.
   Partition chromatography resulted from the marrying of two techniques,
that of chromatography and that of countercurrent solvent extraction. All of
the ideas are simple and had peoples’ minds been directed that way the meth-
od would have flourished perhaps a century earlier. In fact the minds of
laboratory workers seem to have been closed to countercurrent procedures,
which were adopted in industry, e.g. in distillation and lixiviation, long be-
fore they were generally used in the laboratory. In industry the use of the
countercurrent principle led to great economies in heat and solvents, and its
value was obvious: in the laboratory such economies are of comparatively
little importance and the more subtle point that by its aid a vast improve-
ment in certain difficult separations could be effected was not appreciated.
Indeed it is only within the last twenty years that high efficiency distillation
apparatus has been available in the laboratory and twenty-five years elapsed
after Tsvett’s classical work on chromatography before the latter method
was put to general use. Synge and I were fortunate to work at a time when
the need for new methods was apparent to many people, so that our methods
have gained general acceptance in ten years.
    I was fascinated by fractional distillation as a method while still a school-
 boy, and built in the cellar of my home, which was my combined workshop
 and laboratory, distillation columns, packed with coke of graded size, some


360                          1952 A.J.P.MARTIN

five feet in height. They were made from coffee tins (obtained from the kitch-
en), with the bottoms removed, soldered together! Experience with them
served me in good stead and by the time I graduated I had a good under-
standing of the problems of fractional distillation.
    When later I began to do research at the Dunn Nutritional Laboratory on
the attempted isolation of vitamin E, I applied similar ideas to the problem
of extracting into ether the unsaponifiable matter from saponified wheat
germ oil. The apparatus consisted of a twenty litre aspirator bottle placed on
the flat roof of the building, connected at its bottom tubulure by means of a
half inch glass tube with a twenty litre bottle. The bottom vessel was filled
with ether, the top with the soap solution. This was set up in the afternoon
and by the next morning the liquids had interchanged their position. Exper-
iment showed that there was an extraction efficiency corresponding to about
ten theoretical plates.
    The next stage followed the reading a single sentence at the end of an
American paper on the purification of Vitamin E, that a countercurrent
fractional extraction machine was giving an improved product. Until then
 it had not occurred to me that an extraction column could be used to separate
 two substances of rather similar partition coefficient. I can still vividly re-
 member the satisfaction of working out how this could be done using a long
 column with the material to be analysed injected in the middle, the two
 halves of the column, as it were, opposing each other, the ratio of rates of
 flow of the two solvents being chosen to lie between the reciprocals of the
 partition coefficients of the substances to be separated, so that the two sub-
 stances left the column, one at one end and the other at the other end. I
 worked out the theory of the columns, unaware because of my deficient
 reading, that it had mostly been done before. I recognized that it could be
 done in a succession of separating funnels, but the labour involved was pro-
 hibitive for any large number.
    It was then I think I discovered what I might call Martin’s principle of
 scientific research, viz. "Nothing is too much trouble if somebody else does
 it". Now this is a very difficult principle to apply, particularly if one is a
 Ph.D. student. Since, however, it is immaterial whether the work is done by
 assistants or a machine, I decided to build a machine equivalent to an array of
 about 200 separating funnels and to use essentially the same arrangement as I
 had used in the extraction of Vitamin E from the soaps. This required in
 essence a tube some 60 metres long, and I devised a method of breaking up
 the tube into a number (45) of vertical sections each united to its neighbours


         DEVELOPMENT OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                          361
by two pairs of small-bore glass tubes, each containing a ball valve. Fig. 1
shows a diagram of a single unit.
   A diaphragm pump with adjustable valves pumped into the column the
two phases, one at either end and also provided an alternating flow which
circulated the liquid from the bottom of one main tube to the top of the
next through the small-bore tubes. Fig. 2 shows a picture of this machine
and the author at the time. Using methanol and 60°-80° boiling point petro-
leum ether this machine had an efficiency of about two hundred theoretical
plates. It was, however, like the American machine due to Cornish (details
of which were published before I had finished mine), before its time. I could
not obtain support to continue work on it and after using it for a Vitamin E
purification, in the course of which I obtained the first evidence of the mul-
tiple nature of Vitamin E, the machine was never used again. Since I failed
also to publish my Vitamin E results the whole of the effort put in this work
appeared to have been wasted.
   The next two years I spent looking after pigs on diets deficient in the B 2




                                    Fig. I.


362                          1952 A.J.P.MARTIN




                                   Fig. 2.


group of vitamins. This work was done under the close supervision of Sir
Charles Martin, whose guidance has been of inestimable value to me. It was
he who suggested that I should meet Synge and perhaps collaborate on the
problem of separating acetyl amino acids.
   Synge had already sh own that the acetyl amino acids had partition coef-
ficients between chloroform and water, which were different enough to
permit of good separations if a high efficiency countercurrent extraction ma-
chine were available. Unfortunately the machine I had built was not suitable
for chloroform and water, and methanol and petrol ether were not very
good for the acetyl amino acid separation.
   We decided, therefore, to build another apparatus for the purpose. I built
a rough three plate machine of entirely different type, with stirring and
settling compartments, as a model for a forty plate machine, which we de-
cided would suffice for our needs. Synge had the forty plate model con-
structed in the Biochemical Laboratory at Cambridge. Meanwhile I had
moved to the Wool Industries Research Laboratories at Leeds. The machine
when complete needed modification, so Synge moved to Leeds so that we


         DEVELOPMENT OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                           363
could work on it together. After a lot of work we were able to determine
the more fatty amino acids in wool, with much greater accuracy than had
been done before. The machine, however, was very troublesome to use and
required nursing day and night for several days at a time.
   A better machine was needed before the method could be of general ap-
plication, and I made dozens of new designs, which I put up in turn to Synge,
who became very tired of listening to me. But none of them seemed easy to
make, and no construction was undertaken.
   I then had an idea of a radically different kind. This was to pack a tube
with a mixture of wool and cotton, with the fibres parallel to the axis of the
tube. Now cotton is wetted preferentially by water and wool by chloro-
form. By putting chloroform above and water below I hoped that I should
obtain a large number of parallel streams of the two solvents with a large
area of contact. When I tried it out I was very disappointed to find that large
domains went over to one solvent or the other and the arrangement was
actually less efficient than an unpacked tube.
   Up to this time my thinking had been dominated by the idea of moving
the two phases in opposite directions simultaneously. But in considering the
failure of the cotton and wool experiment I realized that it should be com-
paratively simple to hold one phase stationary and move only one. The ar-
rangement would then be essentially a chromatogram. I put this idea to
Synge and he was full of enthusiasm, and we decided to work on it at
once.
   We decided to try first silica gel, of the type used to dry balance cases,
suitably ground up, to hold the water, and having packed a chromatogram
tube with this, to run chloroform down the column. We tried first the separa-
tion of acetyl alanine and acetyl leucine. We were then faced with the task
of determining what was happening and how to decide whether separation
had occurred or not. We quailed at the thought of evaporating down and
titrating a large number of cuts and the idea occurred to us of including in
the water in the silica gel an indicator with an appropriate range to show the
presence of the acetyl amino acid. We chose methyl orange and the first col-
umn we made up showed the separation we looked for, as bright red bands
on an orange column.
   We were greatly encouraged by this and resolved to do the experiment
with more care. We carefully purified our chloroform. Then the red bands
stuck at the top of the column, as a result we presumed of adsorption on the
silica gel; indeed addition of alcohol to the chloroform made the column


364                           1952 A.J.P.MARTIN

behave as before. Alcohol was, of course, present as a stabilizer in the com-
mercial chloroform we used in the first experiment.
   I would like to take this opportunity to record here my belief that one
should take a minimum of care and preparation over first experiments. If
they are unsuccessful one is not then discouraged since many possible reasons
for failure can be thought of, and improvements can be made. Much can
often be learned by the repetition under different conditions, even if the
desired result is not obtained. If every conceivable precaution is taken at first,
one is often too discouraged to proceed at all.
   We soon found that a batch of commercial precipitated silica gave better
columns, particularly after some fatty material had been extracted with al-
cohol. When, however, this batch came to an end we were unable to make
the new batch work at all. The colour of the methyl orange was too red to
show any change in the presence of the acids, and if the colour was made
more yellow by addition of a base, though well-defined bands were seen at
first, their intensity decreased as they moved down the column, and a large
part of the acetyl amino acid was found to remain on the column. We then
attempted to prepare our own precipitated silica by as many methods as we
could think of, and finally arrived at an empirical method for its preparation
from sodium silicate, which was reasonably satisfactory. It is of interest to
note that in this method we found it necessary to carry out the precipitation
in the presence of methyl orange. Dickey has since shown that an increased
affinity for methyl orange can result from this; which was perhaps of assist-
ance to us in preventing the methyl orange from being leached from the
column by certain solvents. We found it was necessary to "age" the silica by
 standing with dilute hydrochloric acid for a day or two, in order to obtain
a colour of column on which the acid zones were observable, but this ageing
process could not be continued too long without so increasing the adsorptive
power, that separation of the fast moving acids was unsatisfactory.
    This method however has not been found to be satisfactory with other
batches of sodium silicate, and an empirical approach has still to be made to
 the preparation of precipitated silica for any particular use.
    It is of interest to consider how the method would have developed had we
not thought of using an indicator on the column. The indicator enabled us to
work rapidly and do many experiments, which were needed in the early
 stages, but most of our difficulties were due to the need to obtain a silica
which gave a suitable colour with the indicator, and at the same time satis-
factory separation of the acetvl amino acids. Had we thought of the titration


         DEVELOPMENT OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                             365
techniques such as are used at present, where hundreds of titrations can be
carried out without undue labour, the problems to be solved would have
been simpler, and the more extensive information gained of the behaviour of
the column would have greatly improved the final method. I think it is
indeed possible that the acetylated amino-acid method might have had a
permanent place in analysis had we started with this technique. But at the
time it seemed an unnecessary waste of labour to titrate hundreds of cuts
from a single column when we thought we could collect each band sepa-
rately.
   About the same time at least two other investigators conceived essentially
the same idea as we had had for this "partition chromatography". I refer to
Sverre Stene in Norway and Van Dyck in Holland. They had, however, no
problems they were immediately able to solve with its aid and consequently
their work has passed comparatively unnoticed.
   Since we had approached the partition chromatogram from the direction
 of fractional extraction, it was natural to apply an analogous type of theory
to its operation. Once the concept of the height equivalent to a theoretical
plate (H.E.T.P.) had been clarified (somewhat similar to that introduced by
Peters for distillation in packed columns) it was easy to give the theory of
 the chromatogram for the case where the partition coefficient remained
 constant, and to guess qualitatively the result where the partition coefficient,
 because of ionisation, association or absorption on the silica, depended on
 the concentration.
                                     Table I.




  Synge and I were able to show that to a first approximation, the mono
amino mono carboxylic acids behaved, under proper conditions in accord-
ance with theory. They were not appreciably adsorbed by the silica, and the
water in the silica had approximately the solvent powers of ordinary water.
Table 1 shows the comparison of the partition coefficients deduced from the
behaviour on the column and those measured directly for acetyl proline and
acetyl phenyl alanine.


366                             1952 A.J.P.MARTIN

Gordon, Synge and I developed the method for the analysis of the seven
more fatty mono amino mono carboxylic acids using two types of column
(Table 2).
   Tristram continued with further work on this and his recoveries are shown
in Table 3.
   Gordon, Synge and I were then unable to extend the method to other ami-
no acids, and turned our attention to the separation of the amino acids them-

                                      Table 2.




Table 3. Percentage recovery of acetylamino acids from mixture of amino acids resem-
                        bling hydrolysate of insulin (Tristram).




selves, and not their acetyl derivatives. Here indicators could not be used on
the column and a method of running a sewing thread beneath the column,
(so that it was wetted by the effluent) and then winding it on to a slowly
rotating screwed rod was tried. On treating the thread on the screwed rod
with ninhydrin a record of the behaviour of the column was obtained. Using
butanol and water, as suggested by the work of Dakin, and England and
Cohn, we found that great absorption of the amino acid by the silica in-


         DEVELOPMENT OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                          367
terfered with the separations. The adsorption was of the Freundlich type
causing a long tail to the bands.
   Since, however, we could no longer use an indicator we were able to try
again those substances as supports for water, which we had previously aban-
doned because we were unable to obtain a suitable change of colour of the
indicator. We were thus led again to try cellulose as the water-holding
medium.
   I was already familiar with the use of filterpaper chromatograms as used
by the dyestuff chemists and adopted at first their technique. A ten centi-
metre circular paper was cut to a semicircle with a three centimetre tail
about one centimetre wide at the centre. On this tail near the centre was
placed a drop of a solution of valine and leucine. The tail was put in butanol
saturated with water contained in a Petri dish surrounded by water saturated
with butanol in a glass jar. The semicircle of paper rested on the edge of the
Petri dish. The top of the jar was covered with a glass plate. When the buta-
nol had reached the edge of the paper it was taken out and dried and dipped
in a solution of ninhydrin in ether. On heating two semicircles of colour
were observable, and it was evident the method was a success. It was found
quicker and more convenient to hang strips of paper from troughs containing
the solvents, and this method was adopted as a routine. There followed a
period in which we tried all the solvents we could lay our hands on, and
logged the positions of the various amino acids in each of these. Experiment
showed that the theory we had put forward for the silica columns applied
equally well to paper chromatograms. It was indeed surprising with what
closeness the solvent power of the water in the paper followed that of free
water.
   No one solvent, however, was able to resolve a mixture of all the com-
mon amino acids, and I tried to separate into acidic, neutral and basic frac-
tions by ionophoresis, prior to separation in a direction at right angles by
chromatography. The method adopted was rather clumsy. Each end of a
square paper was treated with paraffin wax so that a centimetre wide strip of
untreated paper was left, nearer one end than the other. This strip was moist-
ened with acetate buffer and a drop of amino-acid mixture put in the middle.
Copper wires were applied to either end of the strip and a potential of two
hundred volts applied. After a couple of hours the paper was dried, the par-
affin wax removed with petroleum ether and the paper developed as a chro-
matogram with water saturated butanol. A two dimensional separation of
the amino acids was revealed on spraying with ninhydrin and heating. The


368                           1952 A.J.P.MARTIN

separation however of the neutral group of amino acids was not satisfactory.
Attention was therefore concentrated on chromatography successively in
two directions at right angles.
   This two dimensional development of paper chromatograms, of the clas-
sical not the partition type, had already been done by Liesegang, but I was
unaware of this until just lately.
    At this stage Synge left us to go to the Lister Institute and I continued work
with Consden and Gordon. At first finding good systems for two dimen-
sional chromatograms was our main preoccupation. One problem caused us
much worry. With butanol, phenol or benzyl alcohol, but not with isobu-
tyric acid or collidine, the amino acids, particularly the faster moving ones,
disappeared as they moved down the paper. As well as a purple spot, a
continuous streak, starting from it but moving faster, of pale pink became
visible after ninhydrin treatment. Sometimes the purple spot disappeared
altogether. We thought this must be the result of oxidation or some other
decomposition. Excluding oxygen did not improve matters. Then we found
that phenol with ammonia was a particularly useful solvent, but here the
paper rapidly blackened. We found in the literature that this was due to
 catalytic oxidation in the presence of copper. It was readily possible by in-
 cluding in the solvent or the atmosphere substances which formed complexes
with copper, to eliminate this blackening completely. Simultaneously the
 "pink front" phenomenon disappeared. Thereafter we used a beaker of po-
 tassium cyanide in the bottom of the chromatogram box, or used a box
 which could be completely filled with coal gas.
    There is enough copper in most papers to be able to show the effect, but
 in our case a large amount of copper was present in the atmosphere of the
 laboratory as we were using a motor in the drying cabinet, whose commuta-
 tor sparked badly. (The copper complexes of the α-amino-acids do not give
 compact spots on paper and separation of the copper complexes is much
 more difficult than the separation of α-amino-acids. Dent, however, has
 shown that this complex formation on paper affords a ready method of
 distinguishing a from other amino acids.)
    The high sensitivity of the ninhydrin reaction made it possible to do a
 chromatographic analysis with a few micrograms of any amino acid. So lit-
 tle labour was involved that it was possible for hundreds of analyses to be
  done simultaneously. Even in the case of unknown substances, something
  could be inferred of their nature from their behaviour in different solvents.
    We were convinced that the method was by no means confined to amino


        DEVELOPMENT OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                             369
acids. Partridge spent a day or two in our laboratory and a few days after his
return to Cambridge, wrote to us and told us that he had been able to sep-
arate reducing sugars, and detect them with silver nitrate. He found that
practically the same solvent systems were satisfactory for sugars and amino
acids. Later he worked out the methods for carbohydrates as completely as
we had done for amino acids.
    We found also that the method worked well for the simpler peptides, and
decided to attempt to learn something of the structure of keratin, by the
examination of partial hydrolysates of wool. This involved developing tech-
niques for preliminary group separation of the peptides before the applica-
tion of chromatography, since the mixture to be separated was of such ex-
treme complexity. We developed the method of ionophoresis in silica jelly
for this, preferring it to a chromatographic method because the fractions ob-
tained would not then be chromatographically similar. We had also to work
out the technique of washing peptide spots from the chromatogram, hydro-
lysing and returning to another chromatogram. We were able to do this
without very serious losses using capillary tubes as vessels and a sheet of poly-
thene, on which a drop of liquid stays, compact for evaporation and solution.
We were able also to de-aminate the terminal NH2 group of a number of
simple peptides to permit determination of nature of the end amino acid.
    Synge at this time was working on the structure of gramicidin-S which he
showed to be a cyclic polypeptide with one each of five different amino
acids. This was an excellent test material for these methods; in collaboration
we were in fact able by them to determine the order of the acids. Confirma-
tion of this order was obtained using Sanger’s dinitrophenyl end group
method.
    Sanger, in his recent remarkable achievement of the complete determina-
tion of the order of linking the amino acids in insulin, has shown how these
methods may be developed for the much more difficult problem of the
structure of a protein.
    Elsden and Synge showed that potato starch could be used to pack a
 column and gave essentially the same separations of amino acids as did paper
 sheets. Moore and Stein showed that with careful control a complete quan-
 titative analysis of a protein could be performed on starch columns using a
 ninhydrin calorimetric method. They also introduced the use of automatic
 fraction collectors which are now so widely used. Later the starch columns
 were superceded by ion-exchange resins. Their methods now provide the
 best means of protein analysis.


370                           1952 A.J.P.MARTIN

   Many independent attempts have been made to put paper chromatography
on a quantitative footing. Various sources of error have been discovered but
so far the accuracy is inferior to the Moore and Stein method, though it may
suffice for many purposes.
   I will now return to the silica columns. For the acetylamino acids we used
water as the stationary phase. So also did Elsden, who adapted it for the
lower fatty acids. Isherwood used sulphuric acid instead for the separation
of hydroxy and dicarboxylic acids, since it was desirable to suppress their
ionization. Levi used a buffer for penicillin separations, in this case to obtain
a given proportion of the penicillin in the ionized form. These penicillin
columns were widely used and kieselguhr rather than precipitated silica was
found satisfactory in America. Its great advantage was that it was available
commercially and was less variable than precipitated silica, and less likely
to cause trouble due to adsorption. To get good columns, however, a new
technique of packing the columns was required. This technique is not, how-
ever, difficult and I consider that for most purposes precipitated silica is now
obsolete. Kieselguhr has an advantage in another respect. The pore size of
 precipitated silica is small enough to preclude its use for very large molecules,
whereas that of the kieselguhr is relatively almost infinite. In fact, Porter and
I have shown that it is possible to separate ribonuclease into two different
 fractions on a partition chromatogram using kieselguhr as support. Admit-
tedly this is a small and atypical protein but Porter has extended its use to
a few other proteins.
   The surface of silica is wetted preferentially by the more polar of a given
pair of liquid phases in equilibrium. So that in the usual column the mobile
phase has to be the less polar one, and only those substances whose partition
coefficient is in favour of the less polar phase, can be satisfactorily separated.
By treatment of the silica with a silicone or silane the surface becomes pref-
 erentially wetted by the less polar phase. A "reversed phase" column thus
becomes possible, suitable for the separation of substances which favour the
less polar phase.
    The first "reversed phase" chromatogram was a paper one loaded with
rubber latex, and was due to Boldingh. He also used columns packed with
powdered rubber, for the separation of the higher fatty acids. Paper alone or
silane treated, will hold a liquid hydrocarbon and give satisfactory chromato-
 grams, with say aqueous alcohols as the moving phase.
    Finally, I would like to mention gas-liquid chromatography. Synge and I
suggested the possibility of this ten years ago in our first paper on the parti-


         DEVELOPMENT OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                            371
tion chromatogram. No one seems to have taken it up until James and I did
so recently, to try and encourage ourselves after a very unsuccessful attempt
to put fractional crystallization on a column basis. These chromatograms
differ from the usual ones only in that the mobile phase is a gas instead of
the usual liquid. They are suitable of course only for volatile substances.
   Because gas is so mobile compared to liquid it is feasible to use much
longer and thinner columns, and since diffusion is so much more rapid, to
move the gas rapidly without increasing the H.E.T.P. It is thus possible to
use columns with a very high separating efficiency. So far our work has been
confined to substances which can be titrated, acids and amines. A more gen-
eral method of detecting vapours in the gas issuing from the chromatograms
should, however, make this type of column available for use with all types
 of substances that can be distilled at a pressure of a few millimetres of mer-
cury. Whereas, with distillation, apparatus has at most several hundred the-
 oretical plates, gas chromatographic columns with one to ten thousand plates
 are readily possible, and the quantity of material required for analysis is
 milligrammes instead of grammes.
    It is very easy with the chromatograpbic apparatus to measure the free
 energy of solution of a given volatile substance in the stationary phase. I
 hope it will be possible to learn with its aid a great deal about the molecular
 forces involved in solution.
