              Multiscale Modeling of Biological
              Functions: From Enzymes to
              Molecular Machines
              Nobel Lecture, 8 December 2013

              by Arieh Warshel
              University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.




              Abstract

              A detailed understanding of the action of biological molecules is a prerequisite
              for rational advances in health sciences and related fields. Here, the challenge is
              to move from available structural information to a clear understanding of the
              underlying function of the system. In light of the complexity of macromolecu-
              lar complexes, it is essential to use computer simulations to describe how the
              molecular forces are related to a given function. However, using a full and reli-
              able quantum mechanical representation of large molecular systems has been
              practically impossible. The solution to this (and related) problems has emerged
              from the realization that large systems can be spatially divided into a region
              where the quantum mechanical description is essential (e.g. a region where
              bonds are being broken), with the remainder of the system being represented
              on a simpler level by empirical force fields. This idea has been particularly ef-
              fective in the development of the combined quantum mechanics / molecular
              mechanics (QM/MM) models. Here, the coupling between the electrostatic ef-
              fects of the quantum and classical subsystems has been a key to the advances in
              describing the functions of enzymes and other biological molecules. The same
              idea of representing complex systems in different resolutions in both time and
              length scales has been found to be very useful in modeling the action of complex

                                                                                             159




ok.indb 159                                                                                         11/4/14 2:27 PM


      160                                                            The Nobel Prizes


      systems. In such cases, starting with coarse grained (CG) representations that
      were originally found to be very useful in simulating protein folding, and aug-
      menting them with a focus on electrostatic energies, has led to models that are
      particularly effective in probing the action of molecular machines. The same
      multiscale idea is likely to play a major role in modeling even more complex
      systems, including in describing cells and collections of cells.


      Introduction

      The ability to model complex molecular systems is crucial for advances in un-
      derstanding biological systems and in rational progress in molecular medicine,
      as well as in the rational design of new materials and devices. However, progress
      in this direction was hindered by the fact that rigorous modeling of complex
      systems requires enormous computational power. That is, a reliable quantum
      mechanical description [1] of more than a few atoms was practically impos-
      sible for a very long time. Even now, it is still too computationally expensive
      to use high-level quantum calculations to obtain convergent sampling on the
      many configurations needed to reliably describe the free energies of even me-
      dium sized systems. The solution to this challenge (and related problems) has
      emerged from the realization that a description of the properties of complex
      systems does not require the representation of all parts of the system at the same
      level of detail. For example, the interactions of a water molecule with a charge
      center that is 10 Å away can be treated classically instead of quantum mechani-
      cally. Similarly, a bond that does not participate in a chemical reaction can be
      represented as a classical spring. Thus, it is possible to decompose the system to
      parts where the quantum mechanical description is essential (e.g. parts where
      bonds are being broken), and other parts that can be represented on a simpler
      level with empirical force fields. This idea, which may seem obvious in retro-
      spect, led to the development of the combined quantum mechanics/molecular
      mechanics (QM/MM) model [2]. Here, the coupling between the electrostatic
      effects of the quantum and classical subsystems has eventually become a key to
      advances in describing the function of enzymes and other biological molecules.
          The emergence of the QM/MM approach allowed one to ask for the first
      time, in a well-defined and logical way, what the origin of the catalytic power
      of enzymes actually is. That is, although landmark works (see discussion in
      [3],[4],[5]) suggested various ways by which enzymes can accelerate reactions,
      none of these could directly relate the structure of the enzyme to its catalytic
      effect, nor could any approach reliably predict the rate constants of enzymatic
      reactions. Here, the QM/MM approach (and, in particular its empirical valence




ok.indb 160                                                                                11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:161


              bond (EVB) version) has provided what is probably the best solution to this
              long-standing fundamental puzzle. The idea of dealing with complex systems by
              treating different parts of the system on different scales is very general, and has
              found applications in many areas, and, in particular, in studies of complex bio-
              logical systems. An early example of this has been our simplified coarse-grained
              (CG) model for protein folding [6]. Subsequent focus on electrostatic models
              has led to CG models that are particularly effective in probing the action of
              molecular machines.
                  Overall, the philosophy that has emerged from our studies is that the de-
              scription of complex molecular systems requires computers to bridge between
              structural and functional information, and that computational scientists should
              carefully consider the resources available when choosing optimal models for
              describing the simulated systems. Here, using multiscale strategies is almost al-
              ways a powerful way to explore different systems with different time and length
              scales. In describing the emergence of multiscale modeling, I will start by some
              recollections of the early developments in the field, and then move to specific
              examples, starting with enzyme action all the way through to the action of mo-
              lecular machines.


              Early Journeys in Multiscale Computer Modeling

              Growing up in a Kibbutz in Israel, I did not have much scientific experience, but
              I liked to experiment with hot air balloons and building handguns, as well as
              in other subjects that have no relationship to chemistry. Nevertheless, after be-
              ing accepted to the Technion (Israel Institute of Technology), I rather randomly
              chose to study chemistry. Eventually in 1964–1965, during my third year, I be-
              came interested in understanding how enzymes can accelerate chemical reac-
              tions, sometimes by up to twenty orders of magnitude. I started an experimental
              project that resulted in perhaps the first NMR measurement of a very fast step in
              the catalytic reaction of chymotrypsin, but this experiment did not provide any
              reasonable clues about the origin of the catalytic effect. In fact, although I did
              suspect that electrostatic effects are making the reaction go faster, my experi-
              ments showed that changing the ionic strength does not influence catalysis in a
              major way [7]. This result (incorrectly) indicated that electrostatic effects do not
              contribute significantly to catalysis.
                   After the Technion, I joined Shneior Lifson, who was the scientific director
              of the Weizmann Institute, and was starting to move from statistical mechan-
              ics of helix coil transitions, to modeling molecules with digital computers. In
              the fall of 1966, I started my PhD trying to develop what became known as




ok.indb 161                                                                                          11/4/14 2:27 PM


      162                                                             The Nobel Prizes


      the consistent force field (CFF) [8, 9]. My general suggested direction was to
      represent molecules as balls and springs (which became known as molecular
      mechanics [MM] or a “force field” approach) and to reproduce energies, struc-
      tures, and perhaps vibrations. This was supposed to be done by a consistent
      refinement of the MM parameters that will force the calculated and observed
      properties to be as close as possibly to each other. However, we had no clue
      how to actually do so. As a start, I attempted to treat cyclic amides, on the way
      to parameterizing amino acids’ potential functions, by extending the internal
      coordinate approach of Mordechai Bixon [10], who was the previous student
      of Lifson. Unfortunately, this approach, which involved analytical derivatives of
      complex interdependent transformation matrices, became basically impossible
      to formulate and implement. The same internal coordinate treatment had been
      the key to practical conformational analysis programs of that time (e.g. [11,
      12]), which incidentally could not obtain convergent minimization, because this
      required the first and second derivatives. In desperation, I tried to abandon the
      common description of molecules in terms of bond lengths and angles, and to
      move to a Cartesian coordinate description, where suddenly all the problems
      with analytical derivatives seemed to disappear. For example, obtaining the ana-
      lytical first and second derivatives needed for minimizing the energy of a cyclic
      molecule in a converging way, which was close to impossible in internal coor-
      dinates (because each internal coordinate depends on all other coordinates),
      became trivial in Cartesian coordinates. Similarly, obtaining vibrational modes,
      which previously demanded spending half a year on reading Bright Wilson’s
      molecular vibrations book [13], and then almost (at least for cyclic molecules)
      hopeless programming, required only the use of one simple equation in terms
      of the Cartesian second derivatives.
           Fortunately, the Weizmann Institute had a specialized computer called
      the Golem (named after the “robot” from Jewish legend that helps the famous
      Prague rabbi), which had a remarkable double precision. Thus, I was able to
      obtain very accurate first and second numerical derivatives, and to prove that I
      was on the right track in obtaining exact minima and molecular vibrations in a
      general molecule. At that point I started to write a program with Cartesian ana-
      lytical derivatives and a least squares force field refinement (using the numerical
      derivatives in pinpointing errors), stopping for a while during the Six-Day War,
      and then moving back to the program. At the end of the war, I returned to the
      Weizmann Institute, and around this time Michael Levitt appeared. Guided by
      Schneior’s insight on obtaining consistent force field parameters, and his insis-
      tence that these parameters can describe reality regardless of whether they are
      derived from experiment or theory, we developed the general CFF Cartesian




ok.indb 162                                                                                 11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:163


              force field programs [8, 14]), that allowed one to use MM to find exact local
              minima and vibrations of any medium sized molecule. The program also al-
              lowed for a fully consistent refinement of the MM parameters, by fitting the
              calculated and observed properties of molecules and molecular crystals. At any
              rate, our CFF program eventually became the basis of all modern MM molecu-
              lar simulation programs [14]. The CFF parameter refinement turned out to be
              quite a demanding job (as it required automatic fitting to many independent
              properties), including inventing automatic frequency assignments and devel-
              oping a general way of refining parameters that would reproduce known unit
              cell dimension of molecular crystals [9]. During 1968, in what turned out to be
              eventually significant, I also started experimenting with combining my newly
              developed CFF method (with the spring-like description of bonds with local-
              ized electrons) and a valence bond (VB) quantum model [15]. This QM (VB) +
              MM model helped to describe the extremely large isotope effect in a chemical
              reaction between oxygen and a medium sized organic molecule, and indicated
              to me that such a combination can be useful.
                   While still keeping enzymes at the back of my mind, I started a postdoctoral
              position at Harvard with Martin Karplus at the beginning of 1970, hoping to
              make the QM + MM CFF more general. Karplus and his postdoc Barry Honig
              were at that time making important advances in the study of retinal (the chro-
              mophore of the visual pigment) [16], which involves a 12 π-electron system.
              This seemed to be a good rationale to start developing the CFF for π-electron
              systems. Indeed, I succeeded in connecting the molecular orbital (MO) descrip-
              tion of atoms with π-electrons with an MM description of σ-bonds with local-
              ized electrons [17], and in consistently refining the corresponding parameters
              for a unified CFF description. This QM (MO) + MM model included only the
              bonding between the QM and MM region, and thus ignored all key (e.g. elec-
              trostatic) coupling between the MM and QM regions. Nevertheless, the model
              provided a very powerful and general way to treat large conjugated molecules.
              During this project, I also figured out how to get the exact analytical forces from
              the QM treatment, by fixing the molecular orbitals and differentiating only the
              integrals. As usual, I made this fundamental advance by guessing it, then (as
              before) I confirmed my idea by using numerical derivatives and then finding the
              exact mathematical proof [18]. Here again it was shown that the combination of
              intuition and numerical validation is a powerful tool.
                   At any rate, the QM + MM treatment of delocalized electron systems still
              did not help me to move towards studying enzymes. Thus, upon returning to
              the Weizmann Institute in 1972, I started to develop a very effective hybrid or-
              bital quantum program (QCFF/ALL), that represented all atoms in a relatively




ok.indb 163                                                                                         11/4/14 2:27 PM


      164                                                             The Nobel Prizes


      small part of a molecular quantum mechanically, while representing the rest
      classically. I felt that this should allow me to finally make a progress towards my
      old dream of studying enzymes. At that time, Mike returned from his PhD at
      the Medical Research Council (MRC) to the Weizmann Institute, and I started
      to explore the possibility of combining my quantum mechanical model with
      his MM calculations on lysozyme (see below). While still struggling with the
      development of my QCFF/ALL approach, I found myself one day in the com-
      puter center discussing the protein-folding problem with Mike. This discussion
      turned to a strange idea of studying mechanical models of molecules on a gravi-
      tation-less spacecraft, and we suddenly came out with the idea of simplified pro-
      tein models where spheres would represent amino acid side chains, and started
      to work on this project. This folding project started to move in a remarkable
      way, and it appeared that the drastic simplifications we had suggested allowed
      us to fold the small protein BPTI without using an enormous number of mini-
      mization steps. This simplified CG model [6] appeared to resolve the so-called
      “Levinthal paradox” [6], where the observation that proteins actually fold ap-
      peared to contradict the fact that they have an astronomical number of possible
      conformations so that they could never find a path for folding in a reasonable
      timescale. In fact, our simulations showed that the number of relevant coordi-
      nates is relatively small, and that the protein folding process can be effectively
      simulated. The progress on the folding problem helped me to obtain an EMBO
      fellowship so that I could collaborate with Mike when he moved back to the
      MRC. My time at the MRC turned out to lead to the culmination of several key
      advances pushing the frontiers in the understanding of biological function.


      Enzymes, Electrostatics and QM/MM

      The three-dimensional structures of the enzyme lysozyme, which were solved
      by Phillips and coworkers in 1967 [19], provided the first glimpse of the struc-
      ture of the enzyme-substrate complex. These breakthroughs offered enormous
      hope that enzyme catalysis would now be finally understood. For example, Phil-
      lips suggested that enzymes work by applying steric strain that pushes the sub-
      strate to a structure that is closer to the structure of the so-called “transition
      state,” where the crucial bond between the carbon and oxygen atom in the sugar
      substrate is broken. This idea was due in part to the observation of what looks a
      distorted sugar ring and to the assumption that the protein can induce a signifi-
      cant strain. The strain was argued to reduce the barrier for bond breaking, and
      thus the activation barrier for the reaction. However, as Mike demonstrated, the
      strain idea was problematic since enzymes are flexible [20], and it seemed clear




ok.indb 164                                                                                 11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:165


              to me that any further progress would require actually modeling the chemical
              reaction in the enzyme. Therefore, upon my arrival to the MRC in the autumn
              of 1974, I started to focus on modeling enzymatic reactions, still attempting
              to somehow combine my QCFF/ALL program with Mike’s energy minimiza-
              tion of lysozyme [21]. The first attempt to combine the programs resulted in
              ridiculously high activation energies (so the reaction would never happen), and
              I realized that something must be completely wrong with my modeling direc-
              tion. Eventually, it became clear that the work of breaking the bond between the
              carbon and oxygen atoms in the sugar substrate was being described incorrectly.
              The problem was that the bond is broken to a positive carbon and a negative
              oxygen (C+ O–), and that these charges must be stabilized by the electrostatic
              environment of the protein + solvent system (see Fig. 1).
                  The introduction of the effect of external charges was not so simple, since
              practically all earlier work that tried to add the effect of the environment started
              from the complicated configuration-interaction (CI) picture, which gave the
              overall molecular dipole moment and then used unreliable continuum cavity
              models (where the cavity radius is basically a free parameter) to describe the




              Figure 1. Showing the energetics of breaking a C-O bond in an uncoupled QM + MM
              (upper diagram) and when the electrostatic and steric effects of the environment are
              included in a coupled QM/MM (lower diagram) The dipoles designate the effect of the
              surrounding residual charges. As seen from the figure it is very hard to break the bond
              without including the coupling between the QM and MM regions.




ok.indb 165                                                                                             11/4/14 2:27 PM


      166                                                                    The Nobel Prizes


      environment. Instead, I realized that one can start from the general expression
      of the quantum mechanical self-consistent Hamiltonian (see e.g. [22]) :

                     ii
                    Fµµ ≡U µµ +1/2Pµµγ µµ − ∑ Pνν γ µν − ∑Qiγ ii ′ − ∑Q jγ ij              (1)
                                                ν −µ             i ′ ≠i   j



      where U is the core Hamiltonian, P is the quantum mechanical bond order, Q
      is the net atomic charge, γ is the electronic repulsive integral, and μ and ν are
      atomic orbitals on atom i. Now, assigning atoms I to the part of the system that
      should be treated quantum mechanically indicated that the other atoms (de-
      noted by j) can be treated classically, assuming that their charge is constant. That
      is, replacing γ by e2/r gives:

                                                    e 2qB
                              ii
                             Fµµ   ( )
                                 ≡ Fµµ
                                    ii
                                       −∑
                                          0
                                                σ    rAB
                                                             ( )
                                                          = Fµµ
                                                             ii
                                                                0
                                                                  −U A                     (2)



      where μ ∈ A and ( )0 designates the contribution from the quantum atoms (typi-
      cally the “solute”), and UA designates the total electrostatic potential from the
      classical atoms (typically the “solvent” molecules) at the site of atom A. This
      equation can be generalized to cases where the charge distribution of the clas-
      sical atoms it not fixed and can be polarized by the field of the quantum atoms
      [23]. Thus, the leading term in the solute-solvent coupling Hamiltonian is ob-
      tained by adding the potential from the solvent atoms to the solute Hamiltonian.
      The total potential energy is then given by:

                                   Vtotal = E S ( F S ) + E Ss′ + E ss                     (3)


           In this equation, ES(FS) is the energy that is quantum mechanically obtained
      with the F matrix that includes the given electrostatic potential from the solvent
      (the vector of all the UA’s). E Ss′ is the non-electrostatic solute-solvent interac-
      tion term, and Ess is the solvent-solvent classical force field. At this level of ap-
      proximation, the non-electrostatic term is evaluated by the standard classical
      van der Waals potential function. In studies of very large solute molecules, we
      sometimes divide the solute region in quantum and classical parts. The “connec-
      tion” between the quantum and classical regions is treated by a classical force
      field (which is included in E Ss′ ), where the quantum atoms at the boundaries
      are connected to dummy hydrogen-like atoms in order to balance the electrons
      in the quantum system. The main problem we faced in 1975 was how to evalu-
      ate the magnitude and positions of the charges in the environment (e.g. water




ok.indb 166                                                                                      11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:167


              molecules). Eventually, after spending several months in the library and talking
              to eminent experts on electromagnetic theory, I realized that none of the text-
              books or the experts could tell us much about how to computationally model
              electrostatic effects in proteins or solution. Thus, I turned to what I learned from
              my experience with developing force fields: forget about what is in the books
              that were written before the emergence of computers, and just go to the basic
              molecular level, using simplified models if needed.
                  I concluded that we would be unable to progress consistently as long as we
              thought in terms of the standard electrostatic theory, where all the details of the
              protein or the surrounding solvent are included with an elusive dielectric con-
              stant. Obviously, the computer power of the time was insufficient for modeling
              a protein surrounded by atomistic models of water molecules, while obtaining
              meaningful energetics. Thus, after considering several options with Mike, we
              decided to represent the water molecules as a grid of polarizable Langevin type
              dipoles (the LD model), and self-consistently evaluated the interaction of these
              dipoles with the charges in the protein-substrate system and with each other.
              Of course, the key to the success of this approach was the calibration of the
              LD model to observed solvation free energies. A similar self-consistent treat-
              ment was then introduced for the induced dipoles on the protein atoms [2].
              This LD water model led to the first microscopic description of protein elec-
              trostatics, evading all the conceptual traps of the past and future continuum
              dielectric descriptions. Apparently, this model looked problematic to those who
              were trained with the idea that the special, highly symmetric structure of water
              molecules must be very relevant to their enormous solvation effects. However,
              the LD grid model eventually turned out to be an excellent approximation for
              studying solvation effects, long before any other microscopic model, and also
              before the development of macroscopic models that tried to consider the pro-
              tein shape.
                  The introduction of a realistic electrostatic model for the enzyme and its
              surrounding water molecules, together with the incorporation of this effect in a
              quantum Hamiltonian, finally for the first time yielded the energy of heterolytic
              bond breaking processes in enzymes and in solution. This QM/MM approach
              reflected the realization that we cannot treat large systems quantum mechani-
              cally, and we cannot describe the chemistry without a quantum treatment. Thus,
              we used Eqs. 2 and 3 and described only the reacting region quantum mechani-
              cally, while treating the rest of the protein and the solvent classically (Fig. 2).
              This approach, along with related models that we subsequently introduced, has
              become known as “multiscale modeling.” The QM/MM model suggested that
              enzymes work by using electrostatic fields to reduce the activation barriers for




ok.indb 167                                                                                          11/4/14 2:27 PM


      168                                                                The Nobel Prizes


      bond breaking (see below). At any rate, the use of our QM/MM approach in
      modeling the catalytic reaction of lysozyme paved the way for the current di-
      rection in modeling enzyme action [24], and has become a major direction in
      theoretical chemistry and biophysics.
          Our QM/MM studies also eventually led to what I believe is a true under-
      standing of the origin of enzyme catalysis, which turned out to be associated
      with the electrostatic preorganization effect [25]. More specifically, my subse-
      quent (mainly EVB) studies led to the non-trivial finding that enzyme catalysis
      is not due to the interaction between the enzyme and substrate (which is what
      was believed by most people), but rather to a large free-energy penalty for the
      reorganization of the solvent in the reference reaction without the enzyme (the
      work of rotating the water molecules towards the transition state charges). As
      described in Fig. 3, the reorganization energy increases the activation barrier in
      solution, whereas in the enzyme, the polar groups that stabilize the transition
      state do not have to rotate, since they are already folded with correctly polar-
      ized dipoles. In subsequent years, I was also able to prove that the change in
      the electrostatic reorganization energy accounts for almost the entire catalytic
      power of enzymes [26]. Although this elusive origin of catalysis was not envi-
      sioned during our studies at the MRC, I had benefited from the general feeling
      that it should be somehow associated with electrostatic effects (see Max Perutz’
      insightful review [27]). Interestingly, while Max intuitively recognized the im-
      portance of this effect, he originally felt that it was like the assumed stabilization




      Figure 2. A QM/MM model of the lysozyme active site. The enzyme is divided into a
      small reactive QM region and the rest of the system, which is described by a classical
      MM model.




ok.indb 168                                                                                    11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:169


              of ion pairs in a low dielectric environment, while I found that enzyme active
              sites are in fact very polar and pointed out to him that ion pairs would not be
              stable in oil surrounded by water. This explanation eventually led to a paper that
              he communicated for me to PNAS [25]. The electrostatic models conceived in
              1975 became the basis for consistent microscopic treatment of biological mod-
              els, the understanding of the true nature of protein dielectric constants [28, 29],
              and the simulation of key functional properties, including pKa values, redox
              potentials, binding free energies, ion and proton conductance [29], and protein
              stability [30].
                   In subsequent years, my coworkers and I drastically simplified the QM/MM
              approach, using a valence bond description of the different steps of the reac-
              tion, in what I called the “Empirical Valence Bond” (EVB) method [31]. This
              approach, which exploits the clear physics of the diabatic reactant and product
              states, has allowed us to take a considerable leap towards approaching my early
              vision, and to finally quantitatively model enzyme catalysis and explore enzyme
              design. This also helped me to explore (and frequently to eliminate) popular
              suggestions of factors that presumably lead to enzyme catalysis, such as entro-
              pic effects, ground state destabilization by desolvation, dynamical effects, orbital
              steering and more (see discussions in [32] and [26]). The key to the ability to
              figure out the secret of enzyme catalysis has been the ability to model the actual
              chemical reaction in the enzyme active site, and to dissect the different contribu-
              tions to the rate constant, which is close to impossible when one is just using ex-
              perimental approaches. Overall, the QM/MM studies provided a solution to the




              Figure 3. Schematic demonstration of the reorganization of the environment dipoles in
              an SN2 reaction, where the charges change from being on one atom in the reactant state
              (RS) to being delocalized in the transition state (TS) in (A) water and (B) an enzyme
              active site [26].




ok.indb 169                                                                                            11/4/14 2:27 PM


      170                                                             The Nobel Prizes


      long-standing puzzle of the origin of the catalytic power of enzymes and paved
      the way for quantitative studies of enzymatic reactions [26]. This strategy also
      allowed one to start to explore the issue of enzyme design in a rational way [33].
           QM/MM approaches with an ab initio QM Hamiltonian (QM(ai)/MM cal-
      culations) have advanced in recent years to a level where they can be used with
      proper sampling to obtain reliable free energy surfaces in the condensed phase
      [34]. Nevertheless, it seems to me that at the time of writing this paper, it is
      still preferable to calibrate the EVB on QM(ai)/MM calculations in solution and
      then move to studies in proteins with the EVB approach [35]. However, it is
      clear that in the future, one will be able to obtain convergent QM(ai)/MM sur-
      faces also for reactions occurring in enzyme active sites. Finally, when talking
      about multiscale modeling in the context of QM/MM and related approaches, it
      is important to emphasize that the general idea can be described as an embed-
      ding approach, where one is looking for the best way to incorporate the effect
      of the surrounding of the system that is the focus of the given study. Here, one
      of the most promising strategies is the use of the frozen DFT (FDFT) and con-
      strained DFT (CDFT) approaches (e.g. [36]). These approaches treat the entire
      system on the quantum mechanical DFT level, with a formalism that is in prin-
      ciple rigorous [37]. However, the density around the main region is not subject
      to self-consistent optimization, and the corresponding electron densities are
      determined by approximate considerations (including a freeze-and-thaw strat-
      egy). The CDFT approach can be described as a QM/QM approach, but, again,
      the main idea is to have a less rigorous and less demanding description of part
      of the system in order to save computational cost.


      The Primary Event in Vision and the Dawn of Molecular Dynamics
      Simulations in Biology

      In 1971, I realized that the optimal way to study photochemical reactions of
      any medium size or large molecules was to forget about the traditional de-
      scription of crossing between energy levels, and to adopt the surface-hopping
      semi-classical trajectory approach that was introduced for treating gas-phase
      reactions of very small molecules [38]. This advance, which turned out to be a
      conceptual breakthrough, was only published in 1975 [39], using the photoi-
      somerization of butene as an example. Fortunately, my conviction that this was
      the key to quantitative studies of photobiology gave me the courage to look at
      the most important problem of biological photochemistry, namely the primary
      photoisomerization of retinal in the visual process. More specifically, I became
      interested in retinal during my postdoc time (see e.g. [40]), but this interest was




ok.indb 170                                                                                 11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:171


              focused on spectroscopic and geometric properties, and not on the most excit-
              ing problem of what is happening during the first step of the vision process (a
              problem that seems to be completely inaccessible to theoretical studies with the
              standard strategies). At that time, it was known that when light strikes the eye,
              it is absorbed in the Schiff base of retinal, which is embedded in a protein called
              rhodopsin. After absorption of light, the retinal molecule isomerizes from its
              initial 11-cis structure to an all-trans structure, forcing structural changes of
              the protein, where the new form of the protein (metarhodopsin) activates the
              transfer of the visual signal to the brain. Later, it was found that the metarho-
              dopsin activates a G-protein called transducing, and that rhodopsin is in fact a
              G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) [41]. It was also known that the primary
              absorption of light leads to a photoisomerization of the retinal molecule in less
              than six picoseconds (which was the shortest time that could be measured in
              the early 1970s). Furthermore, the absence of structural information seemed
              to introduce an even bigger challenge. Although I considered binding retinal
              to chymotrypsin, I decided to model the protein’s effect by a steric cavity plus
              an assumed internal counter ion, and used the semiclassical surface hopping
              approach with a Schiff base of retinal, constrained to be in the starting 11-cis
              conformation [42]. My molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, depicted in Fig.
              4, predicted that the primary process takes about 100 femtoseconds, with an
              enormous probability of jumping from the excited state to the ground state due
              to very large non-adiabatic coupling (a phenomenon that was later identified as
              the effect of conical intersections). Remarkably, the results of these simulations
              that represented the first use of MD simulations in biology have since been con-
              firmed both experimentally [43] and theoretically [44].




              Figure 4. Snapshots from the simulated MD trajectory of the primary event in the vision
              process. The trajectory starts with 11-cis retinal in the ground state, and, upon absorp-
              tion of light, the system moves to the excited state where the 11–12 torsional angle rotates
              without a barrier to 90°, and the trajectory crosses to the ground state in the trans direc-
              tion. The motion involves only a small change in the overall structure, since the other tor-
              sional angles move in the opposite direction to the 11–12 torsional angle. The snapshots
              are taken from a movie that used the original trajectory presented in [42].




ok.indb 171                                                                                                  11/4/14 2:27 PM


      172                                                             The Nobel Prizes


          The molecular motion that emerged from these computer simulations re-
      solved the problem of fast movement in a restricted protein cavity without
      strongly clashing with it. That is, it was found that the isomerization occurs with
      a concerted rotation of several bonds, which I called the “bicycle pedal” motion.
      To see if the bicycle pedal model made sense, I borrowed model building parts
      from Max Perutz’s structural biology lab, and built a model that appeared to
      reproduce the concerted motion without any large structural changes. Interest-
      ingly, about 30 years after my original model, this motion has been confirmed
      by ab initio studies [44].
          Over the following years, my long-time collaborator Bill Parson and our co-
      workers [45] used the structure of a bacterial reaction center (RC) and the same
      semi-classical approach to model the primary electron transfer event in photo-
      synthesis, establishing that the observed 3 ps process involves a sequential hop-
      ping from the primary chlorophyll dimer (P*) to one monomer (B), and then
      to a second monomer (H). This was again done before the confirmation of our
      findings by decisive experimental studies (e.g.[46]), and at a time where most
      workers assumed that the primary event cannot be stepwise and assumed that it
      is a single step super-exchange process. Here, the ability to determine the cor-
      rect electrostatic energy of each intermediate has been a major advantage over
      related attempts that did not involve experience in the conversion of protein
      structures to model electrostatic energies and redox potentials. Instructively, in
      this case, the advantage of working with and developing tools for studies of bio-
      logical functions has been demonstrated in an effective way. That is, although
      we waited four years to get the RC coordinates, all the computer programs were
      ready and tested for a long time, and it took us only two weeks at the end of
      1987 to convert the structure of the RC to a detailed (and correct) functional
      mechanism.


      Free Energy Calculations and Thermodynamic C ycles

      One of the most remarkable advances that resulted from the emergence of
      computer modeling of biological molecules has been the ability to evaluate the
      relevant free energies, and, in particular, the energetics of charged groups in
      proteins. Arguably, this started with the very rough attempt in the original 1976
      paper (see Fig. 8 of Ref. [2]), and continued with more quantitative free energy
      considerations and the introduction of well-defined microscopic based thermo-
      dynamic cycles, using the PDLD model that paved the way to evaluation of pKas
      [28], redox energies [47], ion transfer energies [48] and drug binding free ener-
      gies [26, 29]. In 1977–78, after reading Valleau and Toerrie’s masterful review
      [49], I started free energy perturbation (FEP) calculations of the charging of




ok.indb 172                                                                                 11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:173


              an ion in my surface-constrained soft sphere dipole (SCSSD) water model [50].
              This was mainly in order to show the referees of the SCSSD paper that the entro-
              pic contribution to the solvation free energies of ions is small. The calculations
              gave a reasonable trend, but I was so busy trying to fight the referees on other
              trivial issues that I did not publish the preliminary entropy study. Eventually, the
              increase in computer power allowed us to move into free energy calculations of
              charges in all atom solution models in 1982 [51], as well as starting free energy
              calculations of proteins in 1983–4 [52]. The microscopic free energy perturba-
              tion calculations and the corresponding free energy cycles have become a major
              part of the field, in part due to the excitement from rather trivial changes of
              a few solute atoms in solution [53] and then in proteins [54]. In light of my
              conviction in the importance of electrostatic energies, I did not consider these
              so-called “alchemical changes” to be a real challenge and continued to focus on
              evaluating the large absolute solvation free energy, providing the first FEP stud-
              ies of the free energy of ionizing acids in proteins and of redox process (for a re-
              view see [29]), as well as the free energies of countless enzymatic reactions [26].
              My coworkers and I also tried to educate the community about the enormous
              risks of looking at the so-called potential of mean force (PMF) in studies of bio-
              logical charge transport and related problems. Here, we pointed out that looking
              at the PMF of, say, ion penetration in ion channels can be extremely misleading,
              since it does not tell you much about the error in getting the absolute solvation
              free energy and can lead to enormous problems. On the other hand, insisting
              on obtaining the absolute free energy is the best way to know if the model cap-
              tures the correct physics [26]. This issue is strongly related to the tendency to
              confuse formal rigor with actual reliability. Here, the realization that the proper
              boundary conditions are key to the reliability of the results and the speed of the
              convergence, took a rather long time to reach the community.


              Bridging Time and Length Scales: Coarse-grained (CG) Simplified Models
              of the Function of Complex Molecular machines

              While the MD studies of ultrafast photobiological processes of the type dis-
              cussed above have been very effective [55], the simulations of functional prop-
              erties that involve longer time steps and larger systems have presented a much
              more serious challenge. In fact even today, despite the exponential growth of
              MD simulations of proteins and related systems, and the enormous progress
              in computer power (e.g. [56, 57]), the ability to capture functional properties
              has been limited. Here, one faces enormous sampling problems that, (as dis-
              cussed in [58])), are not necessarily reduced by using sophisticated formulations
              such as that of [59]. Of course, running one very long trajectory to represent a




ok.indb 173                                                                                          11/4/14 2:27 PM


      174                                                            The Nobel Prizes


      functional property suffers from the problem of having a single observation,
      which might not correspond to the overall action. Furthermore, having a single
      long trajectory can still be considered as an experiment that needs careful inter-
      pretation and an analysis by a general reduced model. Thus, our point of view
      has been that in simulating complex systems, we clearly have the need to bridge
      the time and length scales by simple models.
          Here, we have reverted back to the CG idea of the protein folding days [6],
      and asked how it can be used to study protein functions. It was clear that this
      task requires an improved treatment of electrostatic energies (which appear to
      be the key for structure-function correlations), and thus we undertook a major
      project, generating an improved electrostatic model and calibrating it on abso-
      lute protein stabilities [30]. The resulting CG model appeared to provide what
      is arguably the best current tool for moving from the structure to the function
      of molecular machines (see below). Another challenge that we had to address
      has been the requirement that the long time-scale behavior of the simplified
      model would reproduce the corresponding trend in the full model. The solution
      came with our renormalization method [60], where we apply strong external
      forces in MD simulations of the full model (thus inducing large conformational
      changes in short time) and also apply the same forces in the reduced model,
      which is simulated by Langevin dynamics. We then change the effective friction
      in the Langevin dynamics simulations until both the full and the reduced model
      produced the same time-dependent response to the applied force. The resulting
      friction is then used as the optimal friction for long timescale simulations with
      the reduced model, in the absence of the external force. This renormalization
      approach appeared to reliably reproduce the long timescale microscopic simu-
      lation [61], and allowed us to explore the long timescale behavior of complex
      molecular machines [60, 62].
          Significantly, in developing the above CG and multiscale models, one faces
      the question of how to relate the simplified free energy surface to the corre-
      sponding results that would be obtained with the full explicit model. Here, we
      recruited the paradynamics (PD) philosophy, first evaluating the CG free en-
      ergy, and then performing a perturbation between the CG and full surfaces at
      different key regions on the landscape [60]. These developments allowed us to
      use our CG model in simulations of molecular machines and other complex
      biological systems, and I will consider some of the most instructive recent ex-
      amples below.
          F1F0-ATPsynthase is a ubiquitous cellular engine composed of two rotational
      motors, the cytoplasmic F1 coupled to the membrane embedded F0 units. The
      F0 rotor uses the energy of the proton transport across the cellular membrane
      to rotate the membrane embedded c-ring, while the F1 couples the rotation of




ok.indb 174                                                                                11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:175


              the c-ring with its central stalk (g subunit) to generate ATP from ADP and Pi.
              In spite of numerous simulation and phenomenological studies (e.g. [63, 64]),
              the origin of the coupling between chemical and mechanical events in the F1F0-
              ATPsynthase has not been elucidated or simulated in a consistent and unbiased
              way. More specifically, several single molecule experiments [65] have discovered
              the amazing presence of the 80°/40° stepwise rotation of the system and noticed
              that the chemical step occurs after the 80° step (the delay before the chemical
              step has been called the “catalytic dwell”). Unfortunately, it has been especially
              difficult to understand the origin and significance of the stepwise coupling from
              a structural perspective. This difficulty has been in part due to the large system
              size, and the very long timescale of the process, which extends beyond the mil-
              lisecond regime. Remarkably, the CG electrostatic free energy surface coupled
              to the ATP hydrolysis and product release free energies could successfully re-
              produce the observed behaviour of the system. This included generating elec-
              trostatic landscape that has a high energy region after the 80° γ-stalk rotation
              (see figure 5) and there upon addition of the chemical landscape, reproduce (see
              ref. 62) a functional landscape, where the 80° barrier is coupled to the chemical
              coordinate of the ATP hydrolysis and generate the catalytic dwell. This repro-
              duced the experimentally observed catalytic dwell at 80°/40°. The details of our
              CG modeling and the corresponding analysis are given in [62].




              Figure 5. Exploring the coupling between the rotation of the γ-stalk to ATP hydrolysis
              in F1-ATPase. The relevant system (namely F1-ATPase) is shown from the membrane
              side (A), and along the vertical direction parallel to the central γ-stalk (B). The α catalytic
              subunits are shown in deep blue, deep green and orange, while the β units are shown in
              cyan, light green and yellow. The γ-stalk is shown in magenta. The nucleotide occupan-
              cies of the β subunits are depicted as T (ATP bound), D (ADP bound) or E (empty)
              states. (C) The CG electrostatic free energy surface of the rotation of the γ-stalk coupled
              to the α/β conformational changes. This landscape reflects the stepwise 80°/40° features
              discussed in the main text. The combination of the diagram of (C) with the energetic of
              the chemical steps (which is given in [62]) provides a structure-based description of the
              action of F1-ATPase. This figure is taken from [62].




ok.indb 175                                                                                                     11/4/14 2:27 PM


      176                                                            The Nobel Prizes


           An additional encouraging CG study [66] has for the first time reproduced
      the directionality of the coupling between the protomotive force and the rota-
      tion of the c ring in F0-ATPase. Phenomenological models have been used in
      attempts to understand the action of the C-ring rotation coupled to the proton
      transfer from the low to high pH reservoirs across the membrane [67, 68]. How-
      ever, a quantitative structure-function relationship that elucidates the physical
      nature of the directional rotation has been completely missing. Our CG model
      has generated the electrostatic free energy surface of the c-ring rotation coupled
      to the proton transport from the P side (pH = 5) to the N side (pH = 8) of the
      membrane. The generated landscape has shown that the molecular origin of the
      directional c-ring rotation is mostly due to the asymmetry of the proton trans-
      port path on the N and P sides of the F0 unit, rather than being driven by the
      energetics of the centrally placed salt bridge between the c-ring and the stator
      subunit a [66].
           Another interesting biological system that was explored with our CG model
      is the translocon complex that controls the translocation of polypeptides across
      the membrane. We used the CG model to address several key questions about
      this system, starting with the mechanism of membrane insertion of charged res-
      idues [69]. We then made significant advances in exploring the energetics of the
      translocon-assisted protein insertion, where we challenged ourselves to obtain
      the complete free energy profile for the protein translocation through the trans-
      locon and the partition to the water and membrane phases. By applying several
      constraints on the system, we were able to obtain a free energy profile [70] that
      was used to investigate the effect of different mutations and the ribosome bind-
      ing. Comparison with experimental data led to the conclusion that the insertion
      process is most likely a non-equilibrium process, and that the insertion barrier
      into the translocon controls the peptide topology. The obtained free energy pro-
      file allowed us to approach extremely challenging and fundamental questions
      regarding the nature of the coupling between two large biological systems: the
      translocon and ribosomes. That is, we investigated the origin of the experimen-
      tally observed [71] biphasic pulling force from the translocon that releases the
      stalling of some elongated nascent peptide chain from the ribosome. By com-
      bining the estimates of the chemical barriers of peptide bond formation for the
      regular and stalled peptide sequences with the profile for the translocon-assisted
      protein membrane integration and performing Langevin dynamics simulations
      of the ribosome/translocon model, we were able to reproduce the experimental
      effect ([72] and Fig. 6). Our simulation of the action of voltage activation ion
      channels [73] provides another instructive case study. The above examples high-
      light the importance of obtaining the relevant free energy profiles for a thorough
      understanding of the mechanisms underlying different biological processes.




ok.indb 176                                                                                11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:177




              Figure 6. Simulations of the coupling between the ribosome and the translocon (TR).
              The simulation addresses the effect of the TR on stalled peptides, where for some lengths
              of the linker, L, the coupling to the TR helps to release the stalled peptide. The time de-
              pendence of xistall and x1 for a peptide chain with 40 and 36 units is shown here, which
              corresponds to L = 31 (blue) and 27 (red), respectively. The x coordinate designates the
              insertion coordinate and is defined in [72]. The barriers used for the LD simulations were
              obtained by scaling down the energy terms by 0.43. This allowed for the simulation of the
              insertion process in a relatively short timescale, and then estimating the relevant time for
              the actual barriers by using the corresponding Boltzmann probability. The snapshots on
              the top and bottom of the plot show the configuration of the nascent peptide chain for L
              = 31 and L = 27, respectively. The ribosome and TR are shown schematically, the starting
              configuration of the nascent chain is in cyan, the leading particle (x1) is in red, and all
              other particles added to the growing chain are shown in magenta. The interpolated times
              (which should be obtained without scaling) for L = 31 and L = 27 are 6 min and 36 min,
              respectively. This figure is taken from [72], which also gives a complete description of the
              problem and the simulations performed.




ok.indb 177                                                                                                  11/4/14 2:27 PM


      178                                                               The Nobel Prizes


      Future Directions

      The enormous increase in computer power makes it virtually certain that com-
      puter simulations will increasingly become the key tool in modeling complex
      systems. Although it is hard to predict the exact future direction of the field, it
      may be useful to consider some promising directions. One clear trajectory is the
      field of fighting drug resistance. That is, at the turn of the 20th century, we had a
      short life-span due in part to the effect of deadly diseases. The discovery of peni-
      cillin and other drugs helped to protect against major diseases. However, in re-
      cent years, the phenomenon of drug resistance has started to reverse the picture.
      It appears that there is no magic bullet: key drugs become ineffective due in part
      to excessive irresponsible use of antibiotics. In other cases, we have diseases like
      HIV that are hard to combat due to the inherent fast mutations of the pathogen,
      or diseases like malaria, where we also have drug resistance. Thus, it has become
      essential to pursue new drug design strategies. Here, the challenge is to predict
      the moves of the pathogen in response to different drugs. Of course, one can try
      to explore the actual experimental response of the pathogen to different drugs,
      but this is obviously not a predictive approach. Thus, it would be tremendously
      helpful to use computational strategies for studies of drug resistance, but such a
      strategy must drastically reduce the options for effective mutations.
           One such strategy is to exploit the fact that a virus fighting against a given
      drug must reduce the affinity to this drug, while still maintaining a reasonable
      catalytic efficiency towards the native substrates. Thus, it would be useful to find
      a way to out-maneuver the virus by designing inhibitors, whose binding to the
      target enzyme cannot be reduced by mutations without significantly reducing
      its kcat/KM value. In other words, the drug resistant mutants must increase Ki for
      the drug, while maintaining a reasonable kcat/KM value for their native substrate.
      Thus, an effective strategy can exploit the ability to calculate the vitality value,
      γ(γ = Ki kcat/KM), and to determine the chance that the virus will mutate in a
      given way. Combining the vitality value and other constraints (such as main-
      taining reasonable protein stability) will provide the survival value, which is the
      chance that the given mutant will survive in the presence of the specific drug.
      Our ability to evaluate the vitality value has already been demonstrated in pre-
      liminary studies [74, 75], and thus we are confident that it will be possible to
      develop a robust ability to predict the survival of the virus mutants, and thus to
      design drugs that would reduce the resistance problem. Other constraints such
      as mutation tendency and other factors can be introduced by bioinformatics
      approaches. It is quite likely that an aggressive use of computer simulations will
      provide a way to beat pathogens in their own game.




ok.indb 178                                                                                   11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:179


                   Another exciting direction can involve the design of drugs that interfere with
              protein-protein interactions. Here, the idea is to learn about key interactions be-
              tween partners in signal transduction networks (e.g. Ras/RAF [76]), and then
              designing molecules based on the regions with the strongest interaction (see the
              strategy in Fig. 49 of [77]). Yet another direction that will gradually mature is
              the field of truly rational enzyme design. Here, it seems obvious to me that the
              design approaches must involve actual modeling of the catalytic effect of differ-
              ent design options. It is unlikely that unverified ideas of how enzymes may work
              (e.g. the idea that enzyme catalysis is due to dynamical effects), or ideas that
              are based on gas-phase modeling, would lead to artificial enzymes with large
              catalytic effects. On the other hand, approaches that can reproduce the catalytic
              effects of known enzymes must eventually be very powerful in screening differ-
              ent design options. Multiscale modeling of the action of molecular complexes
              is likely to be used in describing signal transduction, and allowing one to have
              a clearer and clearer understanding of cellular action. Finally, it should also be
              mentioned that multiscale modeling provides a very powerful tool in modeling
              non-biological systems. Promising directions here include the design of cata-
              lysts for a wide range of applications, the design of advanced materials, and the
              optimization of nanotechnological devices. Overall, the use of computer model-
              ing is likely to increase enormously in any branch of molecule science, as well as
              in modeling very large systems that can be considered as macroscopic systems.


              Acknowledgment

              I would like to express my gratitude to my wife Tamar, who followed me along my
              scientific life, and helped me both to endure difficulties and to enjoy successes.


              References
               1. Pople, J.A., “Quantum chemical models (Nobel lecture),” Angewandte Chemie-Inter-
                  national Edition, 1999. 38(13–14): p. 1894–1902.
               2. Warshel, A. and M. Levitt, “Theoretical Studies of Enzymic Reactions—Dielectric,
                  Electrostatic and Steric Stabilization of Carbonium-Ion in Reaction of Lysozyme,”
                  Journal of Molecular Biology, 1976. 103(2): p. 227–249.
               3. Fersht, A., Structure and mechanism in protein science : a guide to enzyme catalysis
                  and protein folding. 1999, New York: W.H. Freeman. xxi, 631 p.
               4. Warshel, A., Computer Modeling of Chemical Reactions in Enzymes and Solutions.
                  1997, Wiley-Interscience Imprint John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken. 256 p. ill.
               5. Jencks, W.P., Catalysis in chemistry and enzymology. McGraw-Hill series in ad-
                  vanced chemistry. 1969, New York,: McGraw-Hill. xvi, 644 p.




ok.indb 179                                                                                              11/4/14 2:27 PM


      180                                                                    The Nobel Prizes


       6. Levitt, M. and A. Warshel, “Computer Simulation of Protein Folding,” Nature, 1975.
          253(5494): p. 694–698.
       7. Warshel. A. and Y. Shalitin, “Abstract of the 34th meeting: On the interaction of
          Chymotrypsin with ionized substrates,” Israel Journal of Chemistry, 1966. 4: p. 85.
       8. Lifson, S. and A. Warshel, “Consistent Force Field for Calculations of Conforma-
          tions Vibrational Spectra and Enthalpies of Cycloalkane and N-Alkane Molecules,”
          Journal of Chemical Physics, 1968. 49(11): p. 5116–&.
       9. Warshel, A. and S. Lifson, “Consistent Force Field Calculations .2. Crystal Struc-
          tures, Sublimation Energies, Molecular and Lattice Vibrations, Molecular Confor-
          mations, and Enthalpies of Alkanes,” Journal of Chemical Physics, 1970. 53(2): p.
          582–&.
      10. Bixon, M. and S. Lifson, “Potential Functions and Conformations in Cycloalkanes,”
          Tetrahedron, 1967. 23(2): p. 769–&.
      11. Hendrickson, J.B., “Molecular Geometry .4. Medium Rings,” Journal of the Ameri-
          can Chemical Society, 1964. 86(22): p. 4854–&.
      12. Allinger, N.L. and J.T. Sprague, “Conformational-Analysis .84. Study of Structures
          and Energies of Some Alkenes and Cycloalkenes by Force Field Method,” Journal of
          the American Chemical Society, 1972. 94(16): p. 5734–&.
      13. Wilson, E.B., Decius, J.C. and Cross, P.C., Molecular vibrations; the theory of infrared
          and Raman vibrational spectra. 1955, New York,: McGraw-Hill. 388 p.
      14. Levitt, M., “The birth of computational structural biology,” Nature Structural Biol-
          ogy, 2001. 8(5): p. 392–393.
      15. Warshel, A. and A. Bromberg, “Oxidation of 4a,4b-Dihydrophenanthrenes .3. A
          Theoretical Study of Large Kinetic Isotope Effect of Deuterium in Initiation Step
          of Thermal Reaction with Oxygen,” Journal of Chemical Physics, 1970. 52(3): p.
          1262–+.
      16. Honig, B. and M. Karplus, “Implications of Torsional Potential of Retinal Isomers
          for Visual Excitation,” Nature, 1971. 229(5286): p. 558–&.
      17. Warshel, A. and M. Karplus, “Calculation of Ground and Excited-State Potential
          Surfaces of Conjugated Molecules .1. Formulation and Parametrization,” Journal of
          the American Chemical Society, 1972. 94(16): p. 5612–&.
      18. Warshel, A., “Quantum-Mechanical Consistent Force-Field (Qcff/Pi) Method—
          Calculations of Energies, Conformations and Vibronic Interactions of Ground and
          Excited-States of Conjugated Molecules,” Israel Journal of Chemistry, 1973. 11(5):
          p. 709–717.
      19. Phillips, D.C., “Hen Egg-White Lysozyme Molecule,” Proceedings of the National
          Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 1967. 57(3): p. 484–&.
      20. Levitt, M., “On the Nature of the Binding of Hexa-N-Acetyl Glucosamine Substrate
          to Lysozyme,” Peptides, Polypeptides and Proteins, 1974: p. 99–113.
      21. Levitt, M., “Energy Refinement of Hen Egg-White Lysozyme,” Journal of Molecular
          Biology, 1974. 82(3): p. 393–420.
      22. Pople, J.A. and D.L. Beveridge, Approximate molecular orbital theory. McGraw-Hill
          series in advanced chemistry. 1970, New York,: McGraw-Hill. viii, 214 p.
      23. Luzhkov, V. and A. Warshel, “Microscopic Models for Quantum Mechanical Calcu-
          lations of Chemical Processes in Solutions: LD/AMPAC and SCAAS/AMPAC Cal-
          culations of Solvation Energies,” J. Comp. Chem., 1992. 13: p. 199–213.




ok.indb 180                                                                                          11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:181


              24. Kamerlin, S.C.L., M. Haranczyk, and A. Warshel, “Progress in Ab Initio QM/MM
                  Free-Energy Simulations of Electrostatic Energies in Proteins: Accelerated QM/
                  MM Studies of pK(a), Redox Reactions and Solvation Free Energies,” Journal of
                  Physical Chemistry B, 2009. 113(5): p. 1253–1272.
              25. Warshel, A., “Energetics of Enzyme Catalysis,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA., 1978. 75:
                  p. 5250–5254.
              26. Warshel, A., et al., “Electrostatic basis for enzyme catalysis,” Chem. Rev., 2006.
                  106(8): p. 3210–35.
              27. Perutz, M.F., “Electrostatic Effects in Proteins,” Science, 1978. 201(4362): p.
                  1187–1191.
              28. Warshel, A. and S.T. Russell, “Calculations of Electrostatic Interactions in Biological
                  Systems and in Solutions,” Q. Rev. Biophys., 1984. 17: p. 283–421.
              29. Warshel, A., et al., “Modeling electrostatic effects in proteins,” Biochimica Et Bio-
                  physica Acta-Proteins and Proteomics, 2006. 1764(11): p. 1647–1676.
              30. Vicatos, S., M. Roca, and A. Warshel, “Effective approach for calculations of abso-
                  lute stability of proteins using focused dielectric constants,” Proteins-Structure Func-
                  tion and Bioinformatics, 2009. 77(3): p. 670–684.
              31. Warshel, A. and R.M. Weiss, “An Empirical Valence Bond Approach for Compar-
                  ing Reactions in Solutions and in Enzymes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980. 102(20): p.
                  6218–6226.
              32. Warshel, A., “Computer simulations of enzyme catalysis: Methods, progress, and
                  insights,” Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct., 2003. 32: p. 425–443.
              33. Frushicheva, M.P., et al., “Exploring challenges in rational enzyme design by simu-
                  lating the catalysis in artificial kemp eliminase,” Proceedings of the National Acad-
                  emy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2010. 107(39): p. 16869–16874.
              34. Plotnikov, N.V. and A. Warshel, “Exploring, Refining, and Validating the Para-
                  dynamics QM/MM Sampling,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2012. 116(34): p.
                  10342–10356.
              35. Prasad, B.R., et al., “Quantitative exploration of the molecular origin of the activa-
                  tion of GTPase,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
                  of America, 2013. 110(51): p. 20509–20514.
              36. Wesolowski, T.A., “Quantum chemistry ‘without orbitals’—An old idea and recent
                  developments,” Chimia, 2004. 58(5): p. 311–315.
              37. Wesolowski, T.A. and A. Warshel, “Frozen Density-Functional Approach for Ab-
                  Initio Calculations of Solvated Molecules,” J. Phys. Chem., 1993. 97: p. 8050–8053.
              38. Tully, J.C. and R.M. Preston, “Semiclassical Trajectory Surface Hopping Approach
                  to Nonadiabatic Molecular Collisions: The reaction of H+ with D2,” J. Phys. Chem.,
                  1971. 56: p. 562–572.
              39. Warshel, A. and M. Karplus, “Semiclassical Trajectory Approach to Photoisomer-
                  ization,” Chemical Physics Letters, 1975. 32(1): p. 11–17.
              40. Warshel, A. and M. Karplus, “Calculation of Pi Pi] Excited-State Conformations
                  and Vibronic Structure of Retinal and Related Molecules,” Journal of the American
                  Chemical Society, 1974. 96(18): p. 5677–5689.
              41. Kobilka, B.K. and R.J. Lefkowitz, “Nobel Prizes 2012: Cells and Sensitivity-GPCR
                  Heroes Honored,” Angewandte Chemie-International Edition, 2012. 51(45): p. 11199.




ok.indb 181                                                                                                  11/4/14 2:27 PM


      182                                                                   The Nobel Prizes


      42. Warshel, A., “Bicycle-Pedal Model for 1st Step in Vision Process,” Nature, 1976.
          260(5553): p. 679–683.
      43. Mathies, R.A., et al., “Direct Observation of the Femtosecond Excited-State Cis-
          Trans Isomerization in Bacteriorhodopsin,” Science, 1988. 240(4853): p. 777–779.
      44. Frutos, L.M., et al., “Tracking the excited-state time evolution of the visual pigment
          with multiconfigurational quantum chemistry,” Proceedings of the National Acad-
          emy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2007. 104(19): p. 7764–7769.
      45. Creighton, S., et al., “Simulating the Dynamics of the Primary Charge Separation
          Process in Bacterial Photosynthesis,” Biochemistry, 1988. 27: p. 774–781.
      46. Holzwarth, A.R. and M.G. Muller, “Energetics and kinetics of radical pairs in reac-
          tion centers from Rhodobacter sphaeroides: A femtosecond transient absorption
          study,” Biochemistry, 1996. 35(36): p. 11820–11831.
      47. Churg, A.K. and A. Warshel, “Control of Redox Potential of Cytochrome c and Mi-
          croscopic Dielectric Effects in Proteins,” Biochemistry, 1986. 25: p. 1675.
      48. Aqvist, J. and A. Warshel, “Energetics of Ion Permeation through Membrane Chan-
          nels—Solvation of Na+ by Gramicidin-A,” Biophysical Journal, 1989. 56(1): p.
          171–182.
      49. Valleau, J.P. and G.M. Torrie, A Guide to Monte Carlo for Statistical Mechanics: 2.
          Byways, in Statistical Mechanics, B. Berne, Editor. 1977, Springer US. p. 169–194.
      50. Warshel, A., “Calculations of Chemical Processes in Solutions,” Journal of Physical
          Chemistry, 1979. 83(12): p. 1640–1652.
      51. Warshel, A., “Dynamics of reactions in polar solvents. Semiclassical trajectory stud-
          ies of electron-transfer and proton-transfer reactions,” J. Phys. Chem., 1982. 86: p.
          2218–2224.
      52. Warshel, A., Simulating the Energetics and Dynamics of Enzymatic Reactions,
          in Specificity in Biological Interactions, C. Chagas and B. Pullman, Editors. 1984,
          Springer Netherlands. p. 59–81.
      53. Jorgensen, W.L. and C. Ravimohan, “Monte Carlo Simulation of Differences in Free
          Energies of Hydration,” Journal of Chemical Physics, 1985. 83(6): p. 3050–3054.
      54. Rao, S.N., et al., “Free Energy Perturbation Calculations on Binding and Catalysis
          after Mutating Asn 155 in Subtilisin,” Nature, 1987. 328: p. 551–554.
      55. Warshel, A., “Molecular dynamics simulations of biological reactions,” Accounts of
          Chemical Research, 2002. 35(6): p. 385–395.
      56. Shaw, D.E., “Millisecond-long molecular dynamics simulations of proteins on a
          special-purpose machine,” Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society,
          2012. 243.
      57. Voelz, V.A., et al., “Molecular Simulation of ab Initio Protein Folding for a Millisec-
          ond Folder NTL9(1–39),” Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2010. 132(5):
          p. 1526–+.
      58. Dryga, A. and A. Warshel, “Renormalizing SMD: The Renormalization Approach
          and Its Use in Long Time Simulations and Accelerated PAU Calculations of Macro-
          molecules,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2010. 114(39): p. 12720–12728.
      59. Jarzynski, C., “Nonequilibrium equality for free energy differences,” Physical Review
          Letters, 1997. 78(14): p. 2690–2693.
      60. Kamerlin, S.C., et al., “Coarse-grained (multiscale) simulations in studies of bio-
          physical and chemical systems,” Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2011. 62: p. 41–64.




ok.indb 182                                                                                         11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Multiscale Modeling of Biological Functions:183


              61. Dryga, A. and A. Warshel, “Renormalizing SMD: The Renormalization Approach
                  and Its Use in Long Time Simulations and Accelerated PMF Calculations of Macro-
                  molecules,” J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010. 114(39): p. 12720–12728.
              62. Mukherjee, S. and A. Warshel, “Electrostatic origin of the mechanochemical rotary
                  mechanism and the catalytic dwell of F1-ATPase,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2011.
                  108(51): p. 20550–5.
              63. Wang, H.Y. and G. Oster, “Energy transduction in the F-1 motor of ATP synthase,”
                  Nature, 1998. 396(6708): p. 279–282.
              64. Pu, J.Z. and M. Karplus, “How subunit coupling produces the gamma-subunit ro-
                  tary motion in F-1-ATPase,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2008. 105(4): p. 1192–1197.
              65. Noji, H., et al., “Direct observation of the rotation of F-1-ATPase,” Nature, 1997.
                  386(6622): p. 299–302.
              66. Mukherjee, S. and A. Warshel, “Realistic simulations of the coupling between the
                  protomotive force and the mechanical rotation of the F0-ATPase,” Proc. Natl. Acad.
                  Sci. USA, 2012. 109(37): p. 14876–81.
              67. Dimroth, P., C. von Ballmoos, and T. Meier, “Catalytic and mechanical cycles in
                  F-ATP synthases—Fourth in the cycles review series,” Embo Reports, 2006. 7(3): p.
                  276–282.
              68. Junge, W., H. Sielaff, and S. Engelbrecht, “Torque generation and elastic power
                  transmission in the rotary F0F1-ATPase,” Nature, 2009. 459(7245): p. 364–370.
              69. Rychkova, A., S. Vicatos, and A. Warshel, “On the energetics of translocon-assisted
                  insertion of charged transmembrane helices into membranes,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
                  USA, 2010. 107(41): p. 17598–17603.
              70. Rychkova, A. and A. Warshel, “Exploring the nature of the translocon-assisted pro-
                  tein insertion,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2013. 110(2): p. 495–500.
              71. Ismail, N., et al., “A biphasic pulling force acts on transmembrane helices during
                  translocon-mediated membrane integration,” Nature Structural & Molecular Biol-
                  ogy, 2012. 19(10): p. 1018–U68.
              72. Rychkova, A., et al., “Simulating the pulling of stalled elongated peptide from the ri-
                  bosome by the translocon,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2013. 110(25): p. 10195–200.
              73. Dryga, A., et al., “Realistic simulation of the activation of voltage-gated ion chan-
                  nels,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2012. 109(9): p. 3335–3340.
              74. Ishikita, H. and A. Warshel, “Predicting drug-resistant mutations of HIV protease,”
                  Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008. 47(4): p. 697–700.
              75. Singh, N., M.P. Frushicheva, and A. Warshel, “Validating the vitality strategy for
                  fighting drug resistance,” Proteins-Structure Function and Bioinformatics, 2012.
                  80(4): p. 1110–1122.
              76. Muegge, I., T. Schweins, and A. Warshel, “Electrostatic contributions to protein-
                  protein binding affinities: Application to Rap/Raf interaction,” Proteins-Structure
                  Function and Genetics, 1998. 30(4): p. 407–423.
              77. Kamerlin, S.C.L., et al., “Why nature really chose phosphate,” Quarterly Reviews of
                  Biophysics, 2013. 46(1): p. 1–132.

              Portrait photo of Arieh Warshel by photographer Alexander Mahmoud.




ok.indb 183                                                                                                 11/4/14 2:27 PM
