                             A RTHUR H ARDEN


The function of phosphate in alcoholic fermentation
                        Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1929


 The discovery that phosphates play an essential part in alcoholic fermentation
 arose of an attempt by the late Dr. Allan Macfadyen to prepare an anti-zymase
 by injecting Buchner’s yeast-juice into animals. As a necessary preliminary
 to the study of the effect of the serum of these injected animals on fermentation
 by yeast-juice, the action of normal serum was examined. It was thus found
 that this exerted a two-fold effect: in its presence the action of the proteolytic
 enzymes of the yeast-juice was greatly diminished, and at the same time both
 the rate of fermentation and the total fermentation produced were consider-
 ably increased. In the course of experiments made to investigate this phenom-
 enon, which it was thought might have been due to the protection of the
 enzyme of alcoholic fermentation from proteolysis by means of an anti-
 protease present in the serum, the effect of boiled autolysed yeast-juice was
 tested, it being thought that the presence of the products of proteolysis might
 also exert an anti-proteolytic effect. As my colleague Mr. Young, who had by
 this time joined me, and myselfhad fortunately decided to abandon the gravi-
 metric method chiefly used by Buchner in favour of a volumetric method
 which permitted almost continuous observations, we were at once struck by
 the fact that a great but temporary acceleration of the rate of fermentation
 and an increase in the CO, evolved proportional to the volume of boiled
juice added were produced. This was ultimately traced to the presence of two
 independent factors in the boiled yeast-juice, a thermostable dialysable co-
 enzyme now often known at the suggestion of von Euler as co-zymase, and
 inorganic phosphate.
    With regard to the phosphate subsequent experiments showed that in all
 fermentations brought about by preparations obtained from yeast the pres-
 ence of phosphate is absolutely essential. Leaving aside the question of living
 yeast for consideration later on, three different types of fermentation can be
 established (See Curves 1, 2, and 3, in Fig. 1) with such preparations.
    1. A relatively rapid fermentation (Curve 1, Fig. 1) in which sugar is de-
 composed into CO2 and alcohol, and simultaneously inorganic phosphate is
 converted into an ester (or esters) of a sugar which accumulates. When the


132                            1929 A.HARDEN




supply of inorganic phosphate ceases, the rate of fermentation falls, the accu-
mulation of ester also naturally ceases, and the fermentation passes into Type 2.
  2. A relatively slow fermentation (Curve 2, Fig. 2) in which the rate at
which fermentation occurs is controlled by the rate at which inorganic phos-
phate is supplied by the hydrolysis of the phosphoric esters present in the
system by the phosphatase also present. This inorganic phosphate is alternately
reconverted into a sugar-phosphoric ester and again liberated by hydrolysis,
and thus fermentation proceeds at a steady rate in the presence of available
sugar without any permanent increase in the amount of inorganic phosphate
or of phosphoric ester present. This is the type of fermentation which goes
on when sugar is added to an active preparation from yeast and the process is
allowed to proceed until a steady rate is obtained. In some preparations, de-
pending on the amount of phosphatase present, the rate of fermentation is
increased to some extent if more of the sugar-phosphoric ester is added or
produced (See E. Boyland, Biochem. J., 23 (1929) 219), but this soon reaches
a limit. If inorganic phosphate be added, the fermentation passes into Type 1.
   If sugar fails, inorganic phosphate appears and ultimately (unter favourable
conditions) the whole of the sugar-phosphoric ester is hydrolysed, its sugar
moiety fermented and the whole of the phosphate liberated in the inorganic
form.
   3. If now into a fermentation mixture in which a Type 2 fermentation is


             PHOSPHATE IN ALCOHOLIC FERMENTATION                          133
proceeding an additional quantity be introduced of a phosphatase, capable of
hydrolysing the sugar-phosphoric ester and thus increasing the rate of supply
of inorganic phosphate (Harden and Macfarlane, unpublished results), the
rate of fermentation also rises. If a sufficiently active preparation of phos-
phatase could be added, so that the sugar-phosphoric ester was decomposed
as rapidly as it was formed, a rapid fermentation would ensue, unaccompanied
by accumulation of phosphoric ester. This has not yet been accomplished
directly, but an indirect method of attaining the same end is available, inas-
much as arsenates have been found to have the power of greatly stimulating
the effect of the phosphatase. This observation was in reality the undeserved
reward for thinking chemically about a biochemical problem. In many chem-
ical reactions the type of compound concerned is the main fact of importance,
arsenates react like phosphates, potassium may be replaced by sodium, iron
by nickel or cobalt. Biochemically the difference between potassium and so-
dium may be the difference between life and death, and when iron is not used
in a respiratory pigment it is not replaced in nature by nickel or cobalt, but
by copper or vanadium. So, also, arsenate does not play a similar part to phos-
phate in fermentation, but acts in an entirely different manner. On the addi-
tion of a suitable amount of arsenate, a rapid fermentation (Curve 3, Fig. 1)
occurs comparable in rate with that of Type 1, but differing from this in that
the rate is permanently raised and that no accumulation of the sugar-phos-
phoric ester occurs. Under optimal conditions the addition of inorganic phos-
phate does not produce any significant rise in the rate of fermentation, as the
rate of fermentation is controlled under these circumstances by the concen-
tration of the fermenting complex (enzymes + co-enzyme). Arsenate on the
other hand does not increase the maximum rate in fermentations of Type 1,
as the supply ofinorganic phosphate is already optimal.
   Without making any assumption as to the exact nature of the phosphoric
ester actually produced, the changes so far considered may be illustrated by
the two equations, originally proposed by Harden and Young for the case in
which only hexose diphosphate is formed, the first representing the evolution
of CO, and production ofalcohol, accompanied by the accumulation of ester,
and the second the hydrolysis of this ester with liberation of a hexose and
mineral phosphate.


I34                                1929 A.HARDEN

Eq. (1) represents the controlling reaction in a fermentation of Type 1, Eq. (2)
that in a fermentation of Type 2. In the presence of arsenate the hydrolysis
of hexose phosphate according to Eq. (2) proceeds sufficiently rapidly to
supply phosphate at such a rate that Eq. ( 1) proceeds at maximum velocity.



                           Fermentation by living yeast

A striking feature of fermentation by yeast preparations is that it proceeds
much less rapidly than fermentation by a corresponding amount of living
yeast. Thus Buchner’s yeast-juice ferments at only about                    of the rate
of the yeast from which it is derived.
   The fact that the rate of fermentation of such a juice can be raised under
favourable circumstances some 10-20 times simply by increasing the supply
of phosphate seems to me to indicate clearly that a large fraction, at least half,
of the fermenting complex of the yeast has escaped injury in the preparation
and has passed into the juice, but that the mechanism for the supply of inor-
ganic phosphate has been to a large extent destroyed. Neither arsenate nor
phosphate has an accelerating action on the rate of fermentation by living
yeast. This may be due to the fact that the supply of inorganic phosphate in
the interior of the yeast-cell is already optimal, but some doubt exists as to
whether or not these salts freely penetrate the cell. If however, as seems to me
probable, it is true that in the preparation of yeast-juice, etc. it is the phosphate-
supplying mechanism that is thrown out of gear, it becomes an object of
enquiry in what way this is brought about.
   Several possibilities present themselves. As suggested for the fermenting
complex itself by von Euler and his colleagues, the phosphatase may in large
part be combined with the cytoplasm and thrown out of action when the cell
is killed. Another possibility is that in the cell the action is localized and that
disorganization of the cell leads to less favourable conditions (e.g. concentra-
tion, presence of inhibitors, etc.) and to lessened rate of action. There is some
evidence for this since the amount of phosphatase present, as judged by the
normal rate of fermentation (Type 2), seems to diminish as the disorganiza-
tion of the cell becomes more complete. Thus dried yeast and yeast dehydrated
with acetone ferment sugar (Type 2) more rapidly than yeast-juice, although
when phosphate is freely supplied they all cause fermentation at about the
same rate. Again some labile substance which acts as an accelerator of the phos-
phatase may be inactivated by the various modes of treatment (grinding,


              PHOSPHATE IN ALCOHOLIC FERMENTATION                                135
drying, treatment with toluene or acetone. etc.) to which the cell is subjected.
   The process least likely to inactivate an accelerating substance is probably
that used by Buchner, but the possibility also exists that such a substance, if
present, might be adsorbed and thus removed from the juice by the large
quantity of kieselguhr employed.
   Experiments (not yet published) have recently been made in my laboratory
by Miss Macfarlane to find out at what stage in the process the change occurs
and whether a juice richer in phosphatase could be obtained by modifying
the process of grinding and pressing out. It appears, however, that simple
grinding with sand produces a change of the same order as that observed in
Buchner’s yeast-juice. The experiments were made by grinding a mixture
of sand and yeast for different times and testing the rate of fermentation and
response to phosphate at intervals of the whole mass without pressing out
(Fig.2).
   These curves show the rate of fermentation of 2 g of yeast + 2 g of sand
in 20 C.C. of 10% fructose at 30o : (a) without grinding, (b) after grinding for
20 minutes, and (c) after grinding for 60 minutes. At the point marked with
an arrow 0.6 C.C. of 2 M K2HPO 4 was added.
   The curves show that the longer the period of grinding, the lower the rate
of fermentation and the greater the response to phosphate. Here again the
total loss of fermenting power was only small.
   Minor differences were observed when different substances were substi-




Fig. 2. Fermentation of yeast sand mixture. (At ↓ an addition of phosphate was made.)


136                             1929 A.HARDEN

tuted for the kieselguhr used by Buchner, the most active juice for example
being obtained by the use of CaCO3 whereas BaCO3 yielded totally inactive
material.
   Further investigation may possibly throw more light on this aspect of the
question.
   I have spoken hitherto on the assumption that the processes in the living
cell are essentially of the same kind as those which occur in the various prepa-
rations made from the dead cell, but differ from these mainly in the relative
intensity of some of the reactions, and I know no valid argument against this
assumption.
   The cycle undergone by the phosphate in the series of changes which con-
stitutes ordinary fermentation clearly consists in the alternate formation of a
phosphoric ester and the hydrolysis of this to free phosphoric acid. A simple
calculation based on the phosphorus content of living yeast shows that the
whole of this phosphate must pass through the stage of phosphoric ester every
five or six minutes in order to maintain the normal rate of fermentation,
whereas in an average sample of yeast-juice the cycle, calculated in the same
way, would last nearly two hours.



            Nature and function of the phosphoric esters produced


If we next consider the exact nature of these phosphoric esters and the relation
of their formation and hydrolysis to the decomposition of the sugar molecule,
we are met with a singularly complex condition of affairs, which cannot yet
be interpreted satisfactorily.
   The main facts seem to be as follows.
   When fermentation of sugar by yeast preparations is carried out under
suitable conditions in presence of added inorganic phosphate, a rapid produc-
tion of CO2 and alcohol occurs and a phosphoric ester of a sugar accumulates,
the amount of phosphate found in this form being approximately propor-
tional in the ratio (CO2/PO 4 to the increased production of CO2 and alcohol
caused by the addition of the phosphate (Kluyver and Struyk, it is true, have
found lower ratios than this, but there is no doubt that high ratios 0.8-1 are
often observed).
   The phosphoric ester produced, however, may consist mainly of the hexose
diphosphate originally described by Young and myself or of the hexose mono-
phosphate described by Robison and myself and subsequently studied by


              PHOSPHATE IN ALCOHOLIC FERMENTATION                            137
 Robison or it may be a mixture of these in any proportions. In the case of
 fermentation by dried yeast (and possibly of other preparations) a further
 complication is afforded by the fact that a disaccharide-phosphoric ester (tre-
halose monophosphate) may also be present.
    This conclusion is founded in the first place on a large amount of experience-
which has been gained at the Lister Institute in preparing hexose mono- and
diphosphate. These preparations are as a rule carried out by making repeated
additions of phosphate and sugar to a fermenting mixture of yeast-juice or
dried yeast and fructose (or glucose). With dried yeast a large proportion of
the diphosphate is usually obtained, and the relatively small amount of mono-
phosphate produced contains a considerable proportion of trehalose mono-
phosphate. With yeast-juice the results are very variable and no trehalose
monophosphate has so far been detected among the products. More precise
experiments have been made by Lord Henley and myself in which the gas
evolved after a single addition of phosphate was carefully measured and the
proportions in which mono- and diphosphates were produced were deter-
mined as accurately as possible. Unfortunately, the available methods are not-
very good, as they rest on the solubilities of the different compounds in 10%
 alcohol, and these are to some extent mutually affected in the presence of both
compounds. Further, yeast, like Africa, is always yielding something new,
and the recently discovered fact that pyrophosphates exist in yeast and by
their formation from, or hydrolysis to, orthophosphates may cause disap-
pearance or appearance of "inorganic phosphate" adds another source of in-
accuracy to the many previously known.
    Allowance has, of course, to be made for the phosphorus compounds ex-
isting in the mixture at the moment of addition of inorganic phosphate and
for the normal evolution of CO2 which occurs throughout the experimental
period in addition to the enhanced evolution due to the esterification.
   In spite of these minor uncertainties the somewhat surprising fact emerges,
that whatever the nature of the phosphoric ester which accumulates, the CO2
is approximately equivalent in the ratio CO 2 : PO4 to the amount of phosphate
which undergoes esterification. The full results are given in two papers pub-
lished recently by Lord Henley and myself in The Biochemical Journal and need
not be quoted in detail here. The experiments indicate the wide variation
which may occur in the nature of the hexose phosphate produced whilst the
ratio of CO2:PO 4 esterified remains constant and approximately equal to
unity. Two extreme cases may be quoted, in one of which 13.5% of the PO4
esterified was present as hexose diphosphate and 86.5% as monophosphate


138                             1929 A.HARDEN

and in the other 97% as diphosphate and only 3% as monophosphate; the
CO2/PO4-esterified ratios were 0.98 and 0.86 respectively.
   I do not propose to discuss in any great detail the various theories which have
been proposed to explain these complicated relationships. It would be natural
to assume that the introduction of the phosphoric acid group into the sugar
molecule, forming a hexose monophosphate, might render this more acces-
sible to decomposition into the compound (or compounds) containing three
carbon atoms which are now accepted as an intermediate stage in the produc-
tion of CO2 and alcohol. The phosphate radical from one of these groups might
then serve to convert another molecule of the monophosphate into the stable
diphosphate (Meyerhof) 2C 6H 11 O5P 04H 2 → C 6H Io O4( P 04H 2) 2+ 2CO2 +
 + 2C2H 6O, or two of the th ree carbon groups containing each one phosphate
group might unite with each other, forming the stable diphosphate (Kluyver
and Struyk) 2C6H 11O 5( P O4H 2) → 2 C3H 6O 3 + 2C3H 5O 2 ( P O4H 2) → 2CO2
 + 2C 2H 6O + C6H 10 O 4 ( P O4H 2) 2. Any monophosphate escaping these reac-
tions would be found as a constituent of the mixed hexose phosphates result-
ing from the fermentation.
   To add further to the dificulty of unravelling this complex tangle it must
be remembered that, whether glucose or fructose be fermented, the hexose
diphosphate produced is probably a derivative of fructose, or at least yields
fructose on hydrolysis, whilst the monophosphate is with equal probability
a mixture of about 80% of a glucose monophosphate and 20% of a fructose
monophosphate. It is obvious from this that whatever changes occur are not
limited to the simple introduction or removal of a phosphoric acid group, fun-
damental changes occur in the constitution of the molecule of the sugar itself.
    Attractive as is the theory of the intermediate character of some one of the
hexose phosphates, it seems to me impossible at the moment to bring it into
 agreement with some of the facts which have just been related. The produc-
tion of 70-80% of the monophosphate, with an unaltered degree offormation
of alcohol and CO2, renders it impossible that this ester should be "obviously
nothing but a part of the intermediate product which has escaped the coupled
decomposition-esterification reaction" (O.Meyerhof and K. Lohmann,
Biochem. Z., 185 (1927) 155).
    It appears to me that the fundamental idea expressedin the original equation
 of Harden and Young is nearer the truth than any alternative that has as yet
 been suggested. A coupled reaction of some kind occurs, as the result of which
the introduction of two phosphate groups into certain sugar molecules - either
into the same molecule or one each into two different ones - induces the de-


             PHOSPHATE IN ALCOHOLIC FERMENTATION                           139
composition ofanother molecule. The introduction of these phosphate groups
in presence of muscle extract and presumably in both muscle itself and yeast,
is actually accompanied by a small evolution of heat (O. Meyerhof and J.
Suranyi, Biochem. Z., 191 (1927) 106), and it is possible that this may have
some significance for the occurrence of the coupled reaction. What are the
conditions for the preferential formation of the mono- or di-ester we do not
yet certainly know, although the work of Kluyver and Struyk suggests that
dilution of the enzyme may be one factor in this.
    The lack of exact chemical equivalence among the products (ester on the
one hand, CO2 and alcohol on the other) is probably more easily explicable
on this view than on any other.
    The mechanism of the fermentation of the monoester has not yet been
worked out in sufficient detail to afford valid evidence either for or against
the theory, but Dr. Robison and I have made experiments (about to be pub-
lished) which show that the monophosphate itself reacts with a further quan-
tity of phosphate and that this reaction is accompanied by an enhanced pro-
duction of carbon dioxide and alcohol.



            Sugar metabolism in vegetable ad animal organisms

After the establishment of the important part played by phosphates and phos-
phoric esters in alcoholic fermentation, it was soon found by various workers
that these compounds provided the clue to many other biological phenomena.
The co-zymase of alcoholic fermentation was found by Meyerhof to exert
an equally important part in the respiration of yeast, and the important ob-
servation was made also by Meyerhof that it occurred in muscle and was an
essential factor in the carbohydrate metabolism of muscle, in which the inter-
vention of a hexose phosphate had been proved by Embden. This phenome-
non was shown to take place on lines quite similar to those of the respiration
and fermentation of yeast, and in 1924, before the riddle of lactic acid forma-
tion had been completely solved, O. Meyerhof wrote (Chemical Dynamics
of Life Phenomena, 1924) : "It may indeed be considered a success of general
physiology and its mode of experimenting, that the chemical dynamics of a
highly differentiated organ like the muscle could be partly revealed by the
study of alcoholic fermentation of yeast." But a still greater success was to
follow. An astonishing degree ofsimilarity was shown to exist between almost
every detail of the production of lactic acid by the muscle enzymes and of


140                             1929 A.HARDEN

alcohol by the yeast enzyme, which extended to the identity of the phos-
phoric esters concerned, the accumulation of ester under similar conditions,
and even to the effect of arsenate on the process. After the publication of
Meyerhof’s preliminary papers in which these observations were recorded I
wrote the following passage in concluding a short review of the work (Na-
ture, 118 (1926) Dec. 18th) which I may perhaps be allowed to quote: "The
striking similarity established by Meyerhof between the changes of carbohy-
drates in muscle and in the yeast cell is seen to be much closer than has been
believed. The remarkable phenomena accompanying alcoholic fermentation
are now duplicated in the case of lactic acid production, and it may reasonably
be expected that most of the fermentative decompositions of the sugars will
be found to be initiated in a similar manner"
   Direct proof is still wanting in many cases, but some instances are known
among bacteria (Virtanen), moulds (von Euler and Kullberg) and higher
plants (Ivanoff, Bodnar). It is not too much to say that the fundamental bio-
logical mode of attack on carbohydrates is that revealed by the study of alco-
holic fermentation.



                                  Ossification

Another biochemical function of the hexose phosphates which is shared by
other hydrolysable phosphoric esters is that of being a potential source of
phosphate ions. I am happy to say that one of the most beautiful and important
developments of this idea has been worked out quite independently at the
Lister Institute by Dr. R. Robison as a direct consequence of his work on the
hexose monophosphate of yeast-juice.
   "During my investigation of the hexose monophosphoric acid isolated
from the products of fermentation", he says (Biochem. ]., 17 (1923) 286) "the
hydrolysis of the ester by enzymes was studied. In some experiments in which
the readily soluble calcium and barium salts were used as substrates, the pro-
gress of the hydrolysis was shown by the formation of a precipitate of sparing-
ly soluble calcium or barium phosphate



The formation of this precipitate suggested to me the query whether some
such reaction might conceivably be concerned in the deposition of calcium
phosphate during the formation of bone in the animal body. In the first place I


             PHOSPHATE IN ALCOHOLIC FERMENTATION                             141
sought for an enzyme capable of effecting hydrolysis in the bones of growing
animals."
   The search was successful, a "bone phosphatase" was found in the ossifying
cartilage of young animals and a series of interesting and important investiga-
tions has followed, as a result of which I have little doubt that their author is
on the highway to the chemical explanation of the process of ossification - a
good instance of the far-reaching and unexpected results flowing from obser-
vations made for quite a different purpose.
