               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by
               Photolyase and Excision Nuclease
               Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2015

               by Aziz Sancar
               Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North
               Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.




               Summary

               The ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths in sunlight damage DNA by converting two
               adjacent thymines into a thymine dimer (T<>T) which is potentially mutagenic,
               carcinogenic, or lethal to the organism (Fig. 1). This damage is repaired by pho-
               tolyase in E. coli and by the nucleotide excision repair system in E. coli and in
               humans. In this lecture I will present our work on photolyase and nucleotide
               excision repair, and I will conclude my talk by describing how our research on
               photolyase led to the discovery of an essential circadian clock protein, called
               cryptochrome, that links these two research subjects to one another and thus
               completes the circle.


               Photolyase

               Photolyase is a photon-powered nanomachine that uses blue light photons to
               repair thymine dimers that are induced in DNA by UV. Photolyase was dis-
               covered by my Ph.D. mentor Claud S. (Stan) Rupert (Fig. 1) in 1958, and this
               discovery marked the beginning of the field of DNA repair as a scientific disci-
               pline. Decades before the discovery of photolyase, it had been known that UV
               kills bacteria very efficiently (Fig. 1, right panel). In 1949 Albert Kelner, of Cold
               Spring Harbor, made the interesting observation that if bacteria killed by UV

                                                                                                141




ook.indb 141                                                                                           5/12/16 1:52 PM


           142                                                                     The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 1. Photoreactivation and photolyase. Top panel (Left): Claud S. Rupert and Aziz
           Sancar at a function at the University of Texas at Dallas in 2009. (Right): Photoreactivation
           in E. coli. An E. coli strain defective in nucleotide excision and recombination repair and
           carrying the cloned photolyase gene was irradiated with the indicated UV dose and either
           plated directly (closed circles) or plated after exposure to a camera flash of 1 millisecond
           (open circles). Bottom panel: General Model for Photolyase based on the pioneering
           work of Rupert: UV induces the formation of a cyclobutane thymine dimer (T<>T),
           photolyase binds to the dimer, absorbs a blue light photon, and converts the dimer to
           two canonical thymines.



           were exposed to visible light, the dead bacteria were miraculously brought back
           to life [1, 2]. However, he had no explanation for this phenomenon, which was
           termed photoreactivation. Rupert analyzed this phenomenon further. He dem-
           onstrated that UV killed bacteria by damaging their DNA, and that there is an
           enzyme (photoreactivating enzyme = photolyase) that uses the blue light energy
           in visible light to repair DNA damage. Blue light thus brings dead cells back to
           life, demonstrating that this resurrection from the dead was not a miraculous
           phenomenon that needed a metaphysical explanation [3, 4], but could instead be
           explained by the laws of physics. The reaction mechanism that Dr. Rupert devel-
           oped is as follows [5–7]: UV converts two adjacent pyrimidines, including thy-
           mines, to a CPD (cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer), and there is an enzyme called
           photolyase that uses blue light energy to break the two abnormal bonds joining




ook.indb 142                                                                                               5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease143


               the thymines and thus converts the thymine dimer to two normal thymines (Fig.
               1, bottom panel). Photolyase therefore repairs DNA and eliminates the harmful
               effects of UV. While this was a satisfactory explanation of the photoreactivation
               phenomenon, it raised a physical question: Photolyase is a protein, and proteins
               do not absorb blue light. Therefore, for the next two decades Rupert and many
               other researchers attempted to identify the blue light-absorbing component of
               photolyase. They were unsuccessful because Rupert had determined that an E.
               coli cell contains only 10–20 molecules of photolyase, and this made it virtually
               impossible to purify and characterize the enzyme.
                    In 1974 when I joined Dr. Rupert’s lab, gene cloning had just been developed
               at Stanford University. As a fresh graduate student, I thought I could do any-
               thing I wanted, and therefore I proposed to Dr. Rupert to clone the photolyase
               gene, overproduce the enzyme, and purify it. He said, “Go ahead.” After months
               of work, I successfully cloned the gene [8, 9]. An electron micrograph of the
               plasmid containing the photolyase gene is shown in Fig. 2 (left). In subsequent
               years at the University of North Carolina, my colleagues and I used the cloned
               gene to purify the enzyme in gram quantities (Fig. 2, middle) [10–12], and while
               purifying it we found that it has a bright blue color (Fig. 2, right) [12]. That find-
               ing, without any chemical analysis, answered the physical question: It has a blue
               color which means it absorbs light. We proceeded to identify the light-absorbing
               component of the enzyme using analytical chemistry, and to our surprise we
               found that it contained not one, but two blue light-absorbing cofactors, which




               Figure 2. Cloning and purification of photolyase. Left: Electron micrograph of the plas-
               mid carrying the photolyase gene (Phr). Middle: Purification of photolyase from an E. coli
               strain overproducing the protein. Right: Purified photolyase exhibits a blue color because
               of the flavin neutral radical cofactor of the enzyme. The color ranges from sky blue to dark
               blue depending on the concentration of the enzyme.




ook.indb 143                                                                                                  5/12/16 1:53 PM


           144                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 3. Photolyase chromophores. Photolyase from E. coli contains two chromophores,
           which are two-electron reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH–) and methenyltetra-
           hydrofolate (Folate). The folate is the solar panel (or photoantenna) and the flavin is the
           catalytic cofactor. During purification, the flavin undergoes changes in oxidation status
           and as a consequence the enzyme may exhibit colors ranging from purple to orange.
           The figure shows the 4 redox states of flavin, and the corresponding absorption spectra,
           superimposed on the crystal structure of the active site of the enzyme. Image courtesy of
           Dongping Zhong.



           are methenyltetrahydrofolate (folate) and two-electron reduced and deproton-
           ated flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH–) [13–28]. Moreover, we found that the
           enzyme exhibits colors ranging from purple to orange depending on the redox
           status of the flavin cofactor [29] (Fig. 3). We next determined the functions of
           the two cofactors by carrying out photochemical experiments. We found that
           the folate acts like a solar panel, absorbing light and transferring the excitation
           energy to FADH– [15–17, 24]. The flavin is the actual catalyst, and upon excita-
           tion by energy transfer from folate (and less efficiently by direct absorption of
           a photon) it carries out the repair reaction on the CPD by a radical mechanism
           through a cyclic redox reaction [24, 26].
               To provide structural basis for the proposed reaction mechanism, we col-
           laborated with Johann Deisenhofer to crystallize photolyase and obtain the 3-D
           structure of the enzyme [30], which is shown in Fig. 4 in ribbon diagram and
           surface charge representations. As predicted from the biochemical experiments,
           the folate is like a solar panel, where it sits on the roof of the enzyme, absorbs
           light, and then transfers the light energy to the flavin cofactor within the core
           the enzyme to carry out catalysis. With this general structural view, then, the
           mechanism of photolyase was developed [31] (Fig. 5): Photolyase binds DNA
           containing a CPD because the T<>T distorts the backbone of the DNA. Upon




ook.indb 144                                                                                             5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease145




               Figure 4. Crystal structure of E. coli photolyase. Left: Ribbon diagram representation.
               Right: surface potential representation. Positively and negatively charged residues are
               highlighted in blue and red, respectively. The phosphodiester backbone of the damaged
               strand binds to the positively charged diagonal groove on the enzyme surface. The dashed
               box marks the hole leading to the FADH– catalytic cofactor.




               Figure 5. Reaction mechanism of photolyase. The enzyme makes ionic bonds with the
               phosphate residues of the damaged DNA strand and flips out the thymine dimer dinu-
               cleotide into the active site cavity so that the T<>T is within Van der Waals contact with
               FADH–. The catalytic reaction is initiated by absorption of a photon (300–500 nm) by the
               folate (MTHF). The MTHF excited singlet state transfers the excitation energy to FADH–
               by Forster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET). The excited FADH–* splits the cyclobutane
               ring by cyclic redox reaction to convert T<>T to T-T, and the repaired DNA dissociates
               from the enzyme. The inset shows the distances between the indicated atoms of FADH–
               and the cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD). Image courtesy of Dongping Zhong.




ook.indb 145                                                                                                5/12/16 1:53 PM


           146                                                                 The Nobel Prizes


           binding to damaged DNA, ionic interactions between the positively charged
           groove on the photolyase surface and negatively charged DNA phosphodiester
           backbone the enzyme pulls the T<>T out from within the helix and into the core
           of the enzyme so that the T<>T is within Van der Walls contact with FADH–. It
           makes a very stable complex, and nothing happens until folate absorbs a photon
           and transfers the excitation energy to the flavin cofactor. The excited state flavin,
           FADH–*, repairs the T<>T by a cyclic redox reaction, and then the enzyme dis-
           sociates from the DNA to go on in search of other damage sites to carry out the
           repair reactions again.




           Figure 6. Microscopic rate constants for photolyase. The rate constants were determined
           by ultrafast time-resolved absorption and fluorescence up-conversion spectroscopy. The
           cleavage of the cylclobutane ring is by a concerted asynchronous mechanism which cou-
           ples the cleavage of the C5-C5 bond in less than 10 ps to cleavage of the C6-C6 bond in
           90 ps. The entire photochemical reaction is complete in 1.2 ns, with an overall quantum
           yield of ~0.9. The inner circle shows the relative locations of the photoantenna (MTHF),
           the catalyst (FADH–) and the thymine dimer substrate (CPD). Image courtesy of Dong-
           ping Zhong.




ook.indb 146                                                                                          5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease147


                   Over the past decade we have collaborated with Dongping Zhong of Ohio
               State University to determine the microscopic rate constants of DNA repair by
               photolyase. We have determined the rates of energy transfer, electron transfer,
               bond breakage, bond forming and electron return, in real time and at picosecond
               resolution [29–35] (Fig. 6). The entire catalytic cycle is complete in 1.2 ns, and
               the enzyme repairs T<>T with a quantum yield of 0.9 [29, 31, 34]. Photolyase is
               currently one of the best understood enzymes.



               Nucleotide Excision Repair

               Excision repair in E. coli
               The work on photolyase, in addition to its intrinsic value, contributed to the
               discovery of the other major DNA repair mechanism found in nearly all cel-
               lular organisms: Nucleotide excision repair (excision repair). In early work on
               photolyase, E. coli cells were irradiated with UV in a suspension in a buffer,
               and then one half was exposed to blue light while the other half was kept in the
               dark. It was found that the UV-induced T<>Ts disappeared from the genome
               of the blue light-exposed cells, but remained unchanged in the genome of the
               control cells kept in the dark. However, if the same experiment was carried out
               in a buffer containing glucose as an energy source, incubation of UV-irradiated
               E. coli, in either the dark or the light, resulted in the disappearance of T<>Ts
               from the genome [36, 37]. Nevertheless, there was still a fundamental differ-
               ence between the two sets of cells. In light-exposed cells, the T<>Ts completely
               disappeared as expected. In contrast, in cells kept in the dark, even though the
               T<>Ts disappeared from the genomic DNA, they accumulated quantitatively in
               the cytosol [36–38]. This finding in 1964 by Paul Howard-Flanders [36] at Yale
               University and Richard Setlow [37] at Oak Ridge National Laboratory led to
               the concept of nucleotide excision repair. After these initial findings, research
               done in numerous labs led to the conclusions summarized in Fig. 7: T<>Ts are
               removed (excised) from the genome in both E. coli and humans [39, 40] in the
               form of 4–6 nucleotide-long oligomers [36, 37, 40–42] but remain within the cell
               and are not exported. The excision reaction is genetically controlled by the uvr
               genes in E. coli [43] and XP genes in humans [44, 45]. Following excision, the
               repair gap is filled in and ligated [39, 46]. The consensus model for nucleotide
               excision repair over the period of 1964–1982 was the so-called ‘cut-and-patch’
               mechanism [47], whereby an endonuclease controlled by the Uvr proteins in
               E. coli, and XP proteins in humans, made an incision 5’ to the T<>T, and then
               an exonuclease removed the T<>T in a reaction coupled with repair synthesis




ook.indb 147                                                                                        5/12/16 1:53 PM


           148                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 7. General model for nucleotide excision repair for E. coli and humans that was
           developed over the period of 1964–1982. It is referred to as the endonuclease/exonuclease
           coupled with repair synthesis or the cut-and-patch model.




           Figure 8. Identification of E. coli Uvr proteins. In the maxicell method, a recA–uvrA–
           mutant strain containing a plasmid carrying the gene of interest is irradiated with a mod-
           erate UV dose that hits the chromosomal DNA at multiple sites but not the much smaller
           (typically 500–1000 fold) plasmid. This causes total degradation of the chromosomal
           DNA in 6–12 hours leaving cells (maxicells) with only plasmid DNA. At this point, addi-
           tion of the 35S-methionine radiolabel to the medium labels only the plasmid encoded
           proteins which can be detected by autoradiography. This is an autoradiogram of three E.
           coli maxicells expressing UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC, respectively. The lower molecular weight
           bands are proteins encoded by the drug resistance genes, tetracycline and ampicillin.




ook.indb 148                                                                                            5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease149


               that filled in the single-stranded gap, followed by ligation of the repair patch to
               complete the repair process.
                   In 1977, I joined the laboratory of Dean Rupp at Yale University to work on
               the mechanism of nucleotide excision repair in E. coli. I invented the maxicell
               method to specifically radiolabel plasmid-encoded proteins [48], which enabled
               me to identify and clone the three genes implicated in excision repair: uvrA,
               uvrB, and uvrC [49–51]. Nothing was known about the specific functions of
               these genes at the time. I found that the three genes encoded proteins of 100 kDa,
               85 kDa, and 66 kDa, respectively (Fig. 8). With the aid of the maxicell method, I
               then purified the three proteins in milligram quantities (Fig. 9) and investigated
               their effects on UV-damaged DNA. I found that the UvrA, B, C proteins repaired
               DNA by a mechanism different from the classic endonuclease/exonuclease (cut-
               and-paste) model: The three proteins instead act together to carry out concerted
               dual incisions at precise distances from the photoproduct [52], seven nucleotides
               5’ and three nucleotides 3’ from the damage to generate a dodecamer (12-mer)
               carrying the T<>T photoproduct. The excised oligomer is then removed from
               the duplex, and the resulting gap is filled and ligated (Fig. 10). Later on at the
               University of North Carolina, my colleagues and I investigated the roles of the
               three proteins in the repair reaction. We found that UvrA and UvrB are ATPases
               and that UvrC is a nuclease, and we carried out detailed biochemical studies to
               develop the reaction mechanism shown in Fig. 11 [53–68]: UvrA recognizes the
               damage and recruits UvrB to the damage site, which promotes the formation of




               Figure 9. Purification of the UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC proteins. The proteins were purified
               from maxicells expressing the respective proteins, and the purification was monitored by
               radioactivity. The final purification products were analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by
               Coomassie Blue staining. The last lane contains molecular size markers.




ook.indb 149                                                                                              5/12/16 1:53 PM


           150                                                               The Nobel Prizes


           a stable UvrB-DNA complex in an ATP hydrolysis-dependent reaction. UvrA
           then disassociates from the complex, and UvrB recruits UvrC to the damage
           site. UvrC has two nuclease active sites, which make the 5’ and 3’ incisions in
           a concerted manner [69, 70]. UvrC and the excised oligomer are then released
           from the duplex by the action of the UvrD helicase [61]. Finally, DNA Poly-
           merase I displaces UvrB and fills in the gap, and the repair patch is sealed by
           DNA ligase [67].

           Transcription-coupled repair
           While we were characterizing the reaction mechanism of the E. coli excision
           nuclease (excinuclease), Philip Hanawalt of Stanford University reported that
           transcription strongly stimulated repair in vivo in both mammalian cells and
           in E. coli [71–73]. It was proposed that this was the consequence of RNA poly-
           merase accelerating the rate of the damage recognition, which is the rate limiting
           step in nucleotide excision repair. We therefore initiated a project to study the
           mechanism of E. coli transcription-coupled repair in a defined system using a
           labeled DNA damage substrate, purified RNA polymerase, and the UvrA, B, and
           C proteins. We found that DNA damage blocked the progression of RNA poly-
           merase, as predicted, and led to the formation of a very stable RNA polymerase




           Figure 10. Excision by dual incisions in E. coli. UvrA + UvrB + UvrC proteins in the
           presence of ATP + Mg2+ incise 7 nucleotides 5’ and 3–4 nucleotides 3’ to the thymine
           dimer (T<>T) as shown in the 3-D model (left) and line diagram representation (right).
           The 12–13-nucleotide gap is filled in by polymerases and ligated.




ook.indb 150                                                                                        5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease151




               Figure 11. Reaction mechanism of excision repair in E. coli. The damage is recognized
               by the (UvrA)2 homodimer which functions as a molecular matchmaker to recruit UvrB
               to the damage site. An ATP hydrolysis-dependent reaction then promotes the formation
               of a very stable UvrB-DNA complex. This complex recruits UvrC, which incises 5’ and 3’
               to the damage due to active site nucleases within the N-terminal and C-terminal halves
               of the protein. UvrC and the excised dodecamer (12-mer) are then displaced by the UvrD
               helicase, and UvrB is displaced by DNA Polymerase I as it fills in the gap. The gap is then
               sealed by ligase.



               elongation complex at the damage site. However, contrary to expectations that
               this stalled complex would accelerate repair by constituting a large target for the
               repair enzyme, we found instead that stalled RNA polymerase did not stimulate
               but actually inhibited repair, presumably by interfering with the access of UvrA,
               B, C to the damage site [74]. We reasoned that there must be a missing factor that
               performs two functions. First, it overcomes the repair inhibitory effect of stalled
               RNA polymerase, and second, it helps in recruiting UvrA, B, and C to the damage
               site to accelerate the repair rate. We developed an in vitro biochemical assay to
               purify this coupling factor. We succeeded in purifying a protein of 130 kDa that
               performed both functions [75–83]. We named the protein transcription-repair
               coupling factor (TRCF). Using an entirely defined system, we elucidated the
               reaction mechanism of transcription-coupled repair in E. coli (Fig. 12): TRCF is
               a translocase that recognizes stalled RNA polymerase and displaces it from the
               damage site while concomitantly recruiting UvrA to accelerate the repair rate.




ook.indb 151                                                                                                 5/12/16 1:53 PM


           152                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 12. Molecular mechanism of transcription-coupled repair in E. coli. RNA Poly-
           merase stops when it encounters a T<>T in the transcribed strand of DNA. The ternary
           complex (DNA + RNA Polymerase + RNA) is stable for hours. The T<>T within this com-
           plex is not accessible to UvrA, and therefore repair is inhibited. The transcription-repair
           coupling factor (TRCF; also known as Mfd, mutation frequency decline) is a translocase
           (but not a helicase) with high sequence similarity to UvrB and affinity to RNA polymerase.
           Mfd (TRCF) recognizes the stalled complex and uses its translocase activity to displace
           RNA polymerase along with the truncated RNA. Because of its similarity to UvrB, Mfd
           simultaneously recruits UvrA, thus promoting the formation of a transient Mfd-UvrA-
           UvrB-DNA complex at the damage site and facilitating the rapid formation of the preinci-
           sion UvrB-DNA complex, which is then followed by recruitment of UvrC and the dual
           incisions. The panel in the center shows the purification steps of Mfd (TRCF) from cells
           overproducing Mfd and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Blue staining.




           We also showed that TRCF was encoded by the mfd gene (mutation frequency
           decline) that was discovered by Evelyn M. Witkin in 1966 as a gene responsible
           for preventing a specific type of UV-induced mutagenesis. The discovery of the
           equivalency of TRCF and Mfd provided a mechanistic explanation for the mfd–
           phenotype that had remained mysterious for 25 years [84].

           Excision repair in humans
           Having described the E. coli excision repair mechanism in some detail in 1987,
           we started to work on human excision repair. At that time, it was presumed that




ook.indb 152                                                                                             5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease153




               Figure 13. A xeroderma pigmentosum patient. The patients in complementation groups
               A–G are very sensitive to sunlight and even regular white light from electric light sources.
               XP patients exhibit a several thousand-fold higher incidence of skin cancer compared to
               normal individuals.


               human excision repair proceeded by an 5’ endonuclease/exonuclease mecha-
               nism (cut-and-patch), as in the classical E. coli model [47] (Fig. 7). Importantly,
               James Cleaver of the University of California, San Francisco had discovered in
               1968 that patients with the hereditary disease xeroderma pigmentosum (XP)
               were defective in excision repair [44]. These patients are extremely sensitive to
               sunlight and exhibit ~5,000-fold increase in sunlight-induced skin cancer rela-
               tive to individuals with normal excision repair (Fig. 13). Genetic analysis of XP
               patients revealed that seven genes, termed XPA through XPG, were responsible
               for the removal of UV-induced photoproducts [45]. Using our expertise from
               working on E. coli excision repair, we proceeded to characterize human excision
               repair [85]. From the very beginning, we found that, as in E. coli, nucleotide
               excision repair was carried out in humans by dual incisions and not by the con-
               ventional model [86–91]. Beyond that, the human excision repair mechanism
               turned out to be very different from E. coli excision repair [87–126]. To begin
               with, in humans, not just three proteins (UvrA, B, C), but 16 proteins in six
               repair factors [93, 97] were necessary for making the dual incisions (Fig. 14).
               Furthermore, these human proteins are not evolutionarily related to the E. coli
               excision repair proteins. Secondly, even though in principle both E. coli and
               humans carry out nucleotide excision repair by dual incisions, the dual incision




ook.indb 153                                                                                                  5/12/16 1:53 PM


           154                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 14. Human excision repair factors. Six repair factors encompassing 16 proteins
           are needed for making the dual incisions in humans. Note that RPA also functions in
           replication and recombination. TFIIH, which contains eight other subunits in addition to
           the XPB and XPD helicases encoded by the respective XP genes, is a general transcription
           factor for the initiation of transcription by RNA Polymerase II. These human excision
           repair proteins are not evolutionarily related to prokaryotic excision repair proteins. The
           figure shows purified repair factors separated by SDS-PAGE and silver stained.




           mechanisms are quite different. Whereas in E. coli the 5’ incision is seven nucleo-
           tides away from the damage, and the 3’ incision is three nucleotides away from
           the damage, the human excision repair system incises the damaged strand 20–22
           nucleotides 5’ and five nucleotides 3’ to the damage to release an excised oligo-
           mer of 27–30 nt in length [86], in contrast to the 12–13 nt oligomer generated
           by E. coli dual incisions (Fig. 15). Finally, the actual damage recognition and
           processing is also different: Whereas damage is recognized by UvrA in E. coli,
           damage is instead recognized in humans by RPA, XPA, and XPC, followed by
           recruitment of TFIIH, which contains the XPB and XPD helicases that unwind
           the helix and recruit the XPG and XPF nucleases to make the 3’ and 5’ incisions.
           The dual incision event is followed by the release of the 30-nucleotide excised
           oligomer, gap filling and ligation by DNA polymerase and ligase to produce a
           30-nucleotide repair patch [102]. Fig. 16 summarizes our current model for the
           mechanism of human nucleotide excision repair. Most recently, this work led us
           to study other cellular responses to DNA damage including the DNA damage
           checkpoints [127–130].




ook.indb 154                                                                                             5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Figure 15. Excision by dual incisions in humans. In humans, thymine dimers (T<>T)
               and other bulky base adducts are removed by dual incisions located 20±5 phosphodiester
               bonds 5’ and 6±3 phosphodiester bonds 3’ to the damage, which releases an oligonucle-
               otide 24–32 nt in length (referred to as nominal 30-mers). Left panel: Dual incision sites
               on a 3-D representation of DNA. Right panel: Schematic of human dual incisions fol-
               lowed by repair synthesis and ligation.




               Figure 16. Reaction mechanism of the human excision nuclease system. The damage is
               recognized by cooperative interactions of RPA, XPA, and XPC followed by recruitment of
               TFIIH. The helicase activity of TFIIH provides the major specificity by kinetic proofread-
               ing and results in formation of a tight complex from which XPC is ejected. Note that XPC
               plays a role similar to that of E. coli UvrA by playing an essential role in damage recogni-
               tion, leaving the complex to allow subsequent steps to proceed (molecular matchmaker).
               Concomitant with the dissociation of XPC, the XPG and XPF nucleases are recruited to
               make the 3’ and 5’ incisions in a concerted reaction. The excised “30-mer” is released in a
               tight complex with TFIIH. The excision gap is filled in by DNA polymerases and ligated
               to produce a 30 nucleotide-long repair patch.




ook.indb 155                                                                                                  5/12/16 1:53 PM


           156                                                               The Nobel Prizes


           Excision repair map of the human genome at single nucleotide resolution
           Our discovery of excision of a nominal 30-mer by the human nucleotide exci-
           sion repair system in cell extracts and with the reconstituted enzyme system was
           confirmed by other groups. However, these findings were at odds with numerous
           reports that the excised T<>T’s were in the form of oligomers 4–6 nucleotides
           in length in human cells [40–42]. This discrepancy between the in vivo and in
           vitro data remained unresolved for two decades. The solution to the problem
           came from the analysis of the fate of the excised 30-mer in vitro using cell-free
           extracts and reconstituted repair reactions. We found that the excised 30-mer
           released from the duplex is in a tight complex with TFIIH in in vitro reactions
           [131, 132]. We reasoned that this may be the case in vivo as well. To test this
           prediction, we irradiated human cells and after incubating for 1–6 hours to allow
           for repair, we lysed the cells, immunoprecipitated TFIIH, and analyzed the DNA
           fragments associated with TFIIH. We found that the excision products generated
           in vivo were in fact 30-nucleotides in length, as in the case of the in vitro reaction
           [133–137]. Upon longer incubation, the primary excision product is degraded to
           smaller fragments less than 10 nucleotides in length, which explained the previ-
           ous in vivo studies in which the excised oligonucleotides were typically isolated
           from the cells 24 hours after irradiation.
               Our ability to isolate the primary excision product not only solved the appar-
           ent discrepancy between the in vivo and in vitro excision reactions, it also pro-
           vided a means for generating a repair map of the entire human genome [138]
           (Fig. 17). Following irradiation of cells with UV and incubation for a period
           of time to allow for repair, we then lysed cells and immunoprecipitated TFIIH
           to isolate the associated excised oligomers. The excised oligomers are then
           sequenced using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS). In a typical experiment
           we obtain 15–20 million reads. We align these reads to the human genome to
           place all of the excision products at specific locations, thus generating a repair
           map. Fig. 18 shows the repair map of the 22 somatic and 2 sex chromosomes of
           a male individual. The black tracks represent transcription and the green tracks
           represent the repair tracks of the two photoproducts for the two strands of the
           entire genome. This figure is a screenshot of the repair map of the entire genome,
           and is meant to illustrate the coverage of repair over the whole genome. However,
           it does not reveal much information about the determinants of repair mode and
           rate at a given locus. By concentrating on one specific chromosome at various
           resolutions, the information contained within this map becomes apparent. Fig.
           19 shows the repair map of chromosome 17. This chromosome is 83 megabases
           in length and carries the p53 gene, which is mutated in about 50% of human




ook.indb 156                                                                                        5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease157




               Figure 17. The XR-seq (eXcision Repair-sequencing) method for generating the human
               excision repair map. UV-irradiated cells are lysed, following an incubation period, and
               TFIIH is immunoprecipitated. The excised nominal 30-mers (24–32 nt) which co-precip-
               itate with TFIIH are extracted and ligated to adaptors. The oligomers containing cyclobu-
               tane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) or (6–4) pyrimidine-pyrimidone photoproducts are then
               immunoprecipitated with the corresponding photoproduct antibodies. The photoprod-
               ucts are repaired by the appropriate photolyases, and the oligomers are amplified by PCR,
               gel purified, and subjected to sequencing by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) using
               the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform.




               cancers. The map shows the transcripts along the entire chromosome in both
               strands in black and the excision repair (XR-seq) tracks for both strands in green.
               The repair map is a map in the true, geographic sense of the word. It has moun-
               tains, it has valleys, and it has canyons, meaning there are regions of high repair,
               low repair and no repair at all. Importantly, with such a map, we can answer the
               question of the repair mode and efficiency at any given nucleotide in the genome.
               As an example, Fig. 19 shows the p53 transcription and repair maps at kilobase
               resolution (middle). Finally, at single nucleotide resolution (bottom) the map
               shows the repair efficiency and the mode of repair of a p53 mutation hotspot




ook.indb 157                                                                                               5/12/16 1:53 PM


           158                                                                 The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 18. Excision repair map of the entire human genome. The locations of the XR-seq
           signals for CPD and (6–4)PP in both strands of the duplex across all chromosomes of
           the human NHF1 cell genome (male) are indicated by green tracks. The ENCODE total
           stranded RNA-seq tracks in black are plotted on top of the XR-seq tracks for comparison.
           Chromosome 17, which is boxed in red, carries the p53 gene which is mutated in nearly
           50% of cancers.



           at T-T (7,577,150-7,577,151) dinucleotide position. The thymine dimer at this
           position is removed by incision 20 nucleotides 5’ and 4 nucleotides 3’ to the
           photoproduct. It is evident that much more information can be gathered from
           this map regarding the determinants of repair of UV damage at any given loca-
           tion of the genome. More importantly, nucleotide excision repair also repairs the
           DNA damage caused by the major anticancer drug, cisplatin. We are currently
           generating a cisplatin damage repair map of the genomes of normal and cancer-
           ous human cells that we hope will have some implications for cancer treatment.
               To summarize (Fig. 20) our work on nucleotide excision repair [67, 68, 82,
           83, 120, 121, 124]: Repair is initiated by dual incisions both in E. coli and in
           humans, which generates 12–13-mers in E. coli and ~30-mers in humans. The
           dual incisions require UvrA, B, and C proteins in E. coli and six repair factors
           encompassing 16 proteins, including the proteins encoded by the XPA through
           the XPG genes, in humans. Following excision, the gap is filled in by DNA poly-
           merases and ligated to generate repair patches of 12–13 and ~30 nucleotides in




ook.indb 158                                                                                          5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease159




               Figure 19. Excision repair at single nucleotide resolution. The transcription and repair
               maps of chromosome 17 are shown in an XP-C mutant cell line, which can only carry
               out transcription-coupled repair, to illustrate the dramatic effect of transcription on
               repair. The red line indicates the position of the mutation hotspot in the p53 gene. Top:
               Transcription and repair map at megabase resolution. Middle: Transcription and repair
               maps at kilobase resolution. Note the strong repair signal in the transcribed strands of
               the p53 and WRAP53 genes with a nearly absolute lack of repair in the non-transcribed
               strand. Bottom: The repair pattern of T<>T dinucleotide at a mutagenic hotspot, posi-
               tion 7,577,150-7,577,151. The photodimer is removed in the form of a 26-mer by dual
               incisions 20 nucleotides 5’ and 4 nucleotides 3’ to the dimer.




               Figure 20. Excision repair in E. coli and humans. In both organisms, excision is by dual
               incisions. However, the proteins required for the dual incisions, the mechanisms for
               damage recognition, and the dual incision patterns are entirely different.




ook.indb 159                                                                                               5/12/16 1:53 PM


           160                                                             The Nobel Prizes


           E. coli and humans, respectively. Finally, by capturing the excised 30-mer gener-
           ated by human nucleotide excision repair in vivo, we have generated the excision
           repair map of UV damage of the whole human genome.



           Cryptochrome, Circadian Clock, and Closing the Circle

           I wish to conclude this presentation by explaining how our work on photolyase
           led to the discovery of cryptochrome as an essential component of the mam-
           malian circadian clock, and how the circadian clock regulates nucleotide exci-
           sion repair in mammals, thus linking the two subjects of our long-term research
           projects, photolyase and nucleotide excision repair.

           Discovery of mammalian cryptochrome
           I have discussed the excision repair mechanisms in both humans and E. coli,
           although I only presented photolyase data for E. coli. This is because humans do
           not have photolyase [139]. In fact, for 30 years after the discovery of photolyase
           in E. coli, its presence in humans was a matter of controversy. Some investigators
           reported that photolyase was not detectable in human cell lines, while others
           reported robust photolyase activity in human cells and reported purification of
           the enzyme to homogeneity from human white blood cells [140]. Having devel-
           oped very sensitive and specific assays for photolyase in the 1980s, we decided
           to resolve this controversy. We conducted a comprehensive search for photolyase
           in freshly isolated human white blood cells. We detected no photolyase activity
           and then published a paper in 1993 [139] categorically stating that humans do
           not have photolyase (Fig. 21). However, two years later, in one of the first public
           releases of the human genome project, one of the ESTs (expressed sequence
           tags) was listed as the photolyase homolog [141]. Reasoning that we may have
           missed the photolyase activity in our earlier work, we decided to investigate
           the function of the gene by obtaining the entire cDNA clone, expressing it, and
           analyzing its function. While this work was in progress we discovered a second
           photolyase “homolog” in the human genome. We obtained the entire cDNAs
           of both genes. They are remarkably similar to E. coli photolyase at the sequence
           level and equally remarkable at the 3-D structure level (Fig. 21). We expressed
           and purified the proteins encoded by these genes and established that they had
           no photolyase activity and concluded that they were photolyase paralogs. This
           work was completed in April 1996, and not knowing what functions of these
           paralogs might be, we were reluctant to publish our findings (Fig. 22). In May




ook.indb 160                                                                                     5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease161


               1996, I made my annual pilgrimage to Turkey to visit my family. On my return
               trip I read an article on jetlag in the airline magazine entitled “Internal Time-
               keeping,” by William Schwartz [142]. I believe this was the first time I learned
               the meaning of the phrase “circadian clock.” The article, among other things,
               noted that the circadian clock was synchronized to the physical clock by light,
               and was particularly sensitive to blue light. After reading this article, I suspected
               that the human photolyase paralogs might be clock proteins that sense blue light.
               Upon returning to the lab, I suggested to my coworkers that we publish our data
               and that we name the human photolyase paralogs cryptochromes in analogy
               with the plant blue light photoreceptors with sequence similarity to photolyase
               [143]. I also proposed that we suggest that the human cryptochromes (CRY1 and
               CRY2) are circadian clock proteins [144]. We wrote the paper and submitted it
               for publication in August, and it was published in November 1996 [144]. We then
               proceeded to test this claim [145] by knocking out the CRY genes in mice and
               testing them for circadian clock function.




               Figure 21. Photolyase-cryptochrome connection. Top: Key papers leading to the discov-
               ery of the human cryptochromes. Middle: Sequence similarities among E. coli photoly-
               ase and human cryptochromes 1 and 2. Bottom: Three-dimensional structures of E. coli
               photolyase and Arabidopsis cryptochrome 1 showing the similarities in the photolyase
               homology domain. Side panel: Purified E. coli photolyase and hCRY1 and hCRY2 ana-
               lyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie Blue staining.




ook.indb 161                                                                                           5/12/16 1:53 PM


           162                                                                    The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 22. Sequence of events leading to discovery of human CRY as a circadian clock
           protein. Although the prediction was that CRY was the blue light sensor of the mamma-
           lian clock, genetic analysis revealed it to be an essential cog in the core clock machinery.




           The circadian clock
           Before presenting the data on the mouse CRY knockouts, I will briefly sum-
           marize what the circadian clock is (Fig. 23) [146–149]: The clock, in general,
           is a timekeeping object/system. The circadian clock is similar to the clocks we




           Figure 23. Clock and circadian clock. The circadian clock, like mechanical and electronic
           clocks, measure time independent of external stimuli, but it is instead made up of mol-
           ecules rather than gears and levies or electronic circuits.




ook.indb 162                                                                                              5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease163




               Figure 24. Behavioral analyses of cryptochrome knockout mice. Mice of the indicated
               genotypes were kept in cages with running wheels for 28 days and their activity profiles
               were recorded (actogram). The rpm of the running wheel is plotted on the y axis, and the
               time of the day is plotted on the x axis. The bar on top indicates the dark and light phases
               of the day. On the 7th day, indicated by arrows, the mice were switched from 12 hr light:
               12 hr dark (LD) cycle into constant darkness (DD). Note that under LD all 4 mice exhibit
               similar activity and rest phases with a 24 hr periodicity. In DD, the mice exhibit activity/
               rest phases with periodicities imposed by their intrinsic clock: wild type 23.7 hr; Cry1–/–
               22.7 hr; Cry2–/– 24.7 hr. The Cry1–/– Cry2–/– double knockout is arrhythmic because it has
               no functional circadian clock.



               are familiar with, including mechanical and electrical clocks that are based on
               mechanical and electronic principles. The circadian clock has the same kind of
               design except that the components that make up the clock are molecules, and
               the function of the clock is to inform us of the time of the day. By doing so, the
               circadian clock maintains daily rhythmicity in biochemical, physiological, and
               behavioral functions of the organism even in the absence of external input.

               Role of cryptochrome in the circadian clock
               To test whether CRYs are circadian clock proteins, we generated mice with muta-
               tions in either CRY1 or CRY2, or both, and analyzed their circadian clock by




ook.indb 163                                                                                                  5/12/16 1:53 PM


           164                                                               The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 25. Mammalian clock genes and proteins. The four genes and their paralogs were
           cloned, and the proteins were characterized over the course of five years.



           recording their daily wheel running activity for 28 days [150, 151]. For the first
           week the mice were kept under 12 hours of light and 12 hours of dark (LD12:12),
           and for the final 3 weeks they were kept in constant darkness. The results are
           shown in Fig. 24. Under these light:dark conditions, wild-type (WT) mice and
           mutant mice were active during the dark and rested during the day, as would
           be expected because mice are nocturnal animals. However, under conditions
           of continuous darkness with no external stimuli, the mice behaved differently.
           Whereas the WT mouse exhibited an activity-rest rhythm with a periodicity of
           23.7 hours, the CRY2 mutant exhibited a longer period of 24.7 hours and the
           CRY1 mutant had a rhythmicity with a period of 22.7 hours. More strikingly,
           the CRY1–/–CRY2–/– double knockout totally lost rhythmic behavior in constant
           darkness. These findings established cryptochromes as core clock proteins.
           While this work was going on in our lab [152–170], there was a great deal of
           scientific discoveries in the circadian field over the period of 1996–2000 that led
           to the identification of the four classes of proteins (Fig. 25) that are essential for
           controlling the circadian clock in humans [146–149, 171, 172]. The following
           model was developed for the molecular clock: CLOCK and BMAL1 activate the
           transcription of CRY and PER, which after a time delay, enter the nucleus and
           inhibit their own transcription resulting in rise and fall of CRY and PER levels
           with a periodicity of about 24 hours. In addition, these core clock proteins con-
           trol the expression of about 30% of all genes in a given tissue to confer this cyclic
           expression pattern and thus a daily rhythmicity of functions (Fig. 26).


           Circadian Clock, Control of Excision Repair, and Carcinogenesis

           Among the genes regulated by the circadian clock, we found that the excision
           repair protein XPA is controlled by the biological clock, and we therefore asked
           whether the entire nucleotide excision repair oscillates with daily periodicity.
           As shown in Fig. 27, XPA transcription and protein levels are at a maximum at




ook.indb 164                                                                                        5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease165




               Figure 26. Molecular mechanism of the mammalian circadian clock. CLOCK and
               BMAL1 are transcriptional activators, which form a CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimer that
               binds to the E-box sequence (CACGTG) in the promoters of Cry and Per genes to activate
               their transcription. CRY and PER are transcriptional repressors, and after an appropriate
               time delay following protein synthesis and nuclear entry, they inhibit their own transcrip-
               tion, thus causing the rise and fall of CRY and PER levels with circa 24 hour periodicity
               (core clock). The core clock proteins also act on other genes that have E-boxes in their
               regulatory regions. As a consequence, about 30% of all genes are clock-controlled genes
               (CCG) in a given tissue, and hence exhibit daily rhythmicity. Among these genes, the
               Xpa gene, which is essential for nucleotide excision repair, is also controlled by the clock.



               around 5 pm and at a minimum at around 5 am. Importantly, the entire excision
               repair activity shows the same pattern [173–175]. This led to the prediction that
               mice would be more sensitive to UV light when exposed at 5 am (when repair is
               low), compared to 5 pm (when repair is high). We proceeded to test this predic-
               tion. We irradiated two groups of mice with UV at 5 am and 5 pm, respectively,
               and found that the group irradiated at 5 am exhibited 4–5 fold higher incidence
               of invasive skin carcinoma than the group irradiated at 5 pm [176]. Currently,
               we are investigating whether this rhythmicity of excision repair exists in humans,




ook.indb 165                                                                                                   5/12/16 1:53 PM


           166                                                                  The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 27. Circadian control of excision repair and photocarcinogenesis in mice. The
           core circadian clock machinery controls the rhythmic expression of XPA, such that XPA
           RNA and protein levels are at a minimum at 5 am and at a maximum at 5 pm. The entire
           excision repair system therefore exhibits the same type of daily periodicity. As a conse-
           quence, when mice are irradiated with UVB at 5 am they develop invasive skin carcinoma
           at about 5-fold higher frequency compared to mice irradiated at 5 pm when repair is at
           its maximum. The mouse in the picture belongs to the 5 am group with multiple invasive
           skin carcinomas at the conclusion of the experiment.




           and if it does, whether it can be used to make public health recommendations
           to prevent skin cancer [170, 177]. Equally important, excision repair is also the
           repair mechanism for the DNA damage caused by the anticancer drug cisplatin.
           We are thus also investigating whether this periodicity of excision repair can be
           used to improve cisplatin treatment in cancer.


           Summary

           To conclude, Fig. 28 is the summary of my 40 years of work on photolyase, 35
           years of work on nucleotide excision repair in E. coli and humans, and 20 years
           of work on photolyase-related cryptochrome that links these two repair pathways
           that I have worked with all my career.




ook.indb 166                                                                                           5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease167




               Figure 28. Photorepair, cryptochrome, and nucleotide excision repair. I have worked for
               over 40 years on photolyase, whose photocycle is shown here. I have spent 35 years on
               nucleotide excision repair and discovered two different dual incision patterns in E. coli
               and humans as shown. The photolyase work eventually led to the discovery of crypto-
               chrome as a core clock protein, as exemplified by these actograms. The core clock controls
               nucleotide excision repair in mice which revealed that a photolyase-like protein (crypto-
               chrome) with no repair activity nevertheless controls repair through the circadian clock.




               Acknowledgements

               I have had the good fortune of having worked with outstanding students and
               postdocs over the course of my career who have conducted most of the experi-
               ments I described here (Fig. 29). I am grateful to my internal medicine professor,
               Muzaffer Aksoy, who encouraged me to go to the United States to do research.
               My mentor, Dr. Rupert, discovered DNA repair in the modern sense, and he has
               been my role model throughout my scientific career. W. Dean Rupp and Paul
               Howard-Flanders introduced me to nucleotide excision repair and helped lay
               the scientific foundation for my research on DNA repair (Fig. 30).
                   I have been very fortunate to have had collaborators who were leaders in
               the field of flavin photochemistry, analytical chemistry, crystallography, ultra-
               fast chemistry, and the mammalian circadian clock (Fig. 30). Finally, I wish to
               acknowledge the scientists who have made important contributions in the fields
               of photolyase, excision repair, and circadian clock research. In this lecture I was
               not able to fully reference all contributions to these fields, but have tried to place




ook.indb 167                                                                                                5/12/16 1:53 PM


           168                                                                  The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 29. Sancar lab members. I have been fortunate to have had outstanding post-
           doctoral fellows, students, and technicians who have carried out the experimental work
           described in this lecture.




           Figure 30. Mentors and collaborators. Professor Muzaffer Aksoy, my internal medicine
           professor at the Istanbul University School of Medicine, taught me the scientific method.
           Professor Claud S. Rupert, my doctoral advisor at the University of Texas at Dallas, has
           had the most impact on my development as a scientist. He is my role model. Professors W.
           Dean Rupp and Paul Howard-Flanders introduced me to the field of nucleotide excision
           repair and helped create an exciting DNA repair research environment at Yale University.
           My collaborators, which are listed here, have been instrumental to the accomplishment of
           all three major research projects in our lab. My research programs have been supported
           by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for the past 33 years.




ook.indb 168                                                                                           5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease                          169




               Figure 31. Contributors. Many scientists listed here contributed to our research by their
               ideas, findings, and regents and made crucial findings in the respective areas that we have
               benefited from in our three major research projects.



               our work in historical context. Science is not done in a vacuum. We have greatly
               benefited from work done on these topics by our predecessors as well as our con-
               temporaries who carried out similar work on these topics (Fig. 31). Their ideas,
               findings, and shared reagents have been critical to the success of my laboratory.
               I wish to acknowledge Laura Lindsey-Boltz, Michael Kemp, and Rita Meganck
               for their assistance preparing this lecture and manuscript.


               References
                1. Kelner, A. (1949) Effect of Visible Light on the Recovery of Streptomyces Griseus
                   Conidia from Ultra-violet Irradiation Injury. Proceedings of the National Academy
                   of Sciences of the United States of America 35, 73–79.
                2. Kelner, A. (1949) Photoreactivation of Ultraviolet-Irradiated Escherichia Coli, with
                   Special Reference to the Dose-Reduction Principle and to Ultraviolet-Induced
                   Mutation. Journal of Bacteriology 58, 511–522.
                3. Rupert, C. S., Goodgal, S. H., and Herriott, R. M. (1958) Photoreactivation in vitro
                   of ultraviolet-inactivated Hemophilus influenzae transforming factor. Journal of
                   General Physiology 41, 451–471.
                4. Rupert, C. S. (1960) Photoreactivation of transforming DNA by an enzyme from
                   bakers’ yeast. Journal of General Physiology 43, 573–595.
                5. Rupert, C. S. (1962) Photoenzymatic repair of ultraviolet damage in DNA. I. Kinetics
                   of the reaction. Journal of General Physiology 45, 703–724.
                6. Rupert, C. S. (1962) Photoenzymatic repair of ultraviolet damage in DNA.
                   II. Formation of an enzyme-substrate complex. Journal of General Physiology
                   45, 725–741.
                7. Wulff, D. L., and Rupert, C. S. (1962) Disappearance of thymine photodimer in ultra-
                   violet irradiated DNA upon treatment with a photoreactivating enzyme from baker’s
                   yeast. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 7, 237–240.




ook.indb 169                                                                                                 5/12/16 1:53 PM


           170                                                                       The Nobel Prizes


                8. Sancar, A. (1977) A study of photoreactivating enzyme (DNA photolyase) of
                   Escherichia coli. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Texas at Dallas.
                9. Sancar, A., and Rupert, C. S. (1978) Cloning of the phr gene and amplification of
                   photolyase in Escherichia coli. Gene 4, 295–308.
               10. Sancar, A., and Sancar, G. B. (1984) Escherichia coli DNA photolyase is a flavoprotein.
                   Journal of Molecular Biology 172, 223–227.
               11. Sancar, A., Smith, F. W., and Sancar, G. B. (1984) Purification of Escherichia coli DNA
                   photolyase. Journal of Biological Chemistry 259, 6028–6032.
               12. Jorns, M. S., Sancar, G. B., and Sancar, A. (1984) Identification of a neutral flavin
                   radical and characterization of a second chromophore in Escherichia coli DNA pho-
                   tolyase. Biochemistry 23, 2673–2679.
               13. Sancar, G. B., Smith, F. W., Reid, R., Payne, G., Levy, M., and Sancar, A. (1987)
                   Action mechanism of Escherichia coli DNA photolyase. I. Formation of the enzyme-
                   substrate complex. Journal of Biological Chemistry 262, 478–485.
               14. Jorns, M. S., Baldwin, E. T., Sancar, G. B., and Sancar, A. (1987) Action mechanism
                   of Escherichia coli DNA photolyase. II. Role of the chromophores in catalysis. Journal
                   of Biological Chemistry 262, 486–491.
               15. Sancar, G. B., Jorns, M. S., Payne, G., Fluke, D. J., Rupert, C. S., and Sancar, A.
                   (1987) Action mechanism of Escherichia coli DNA photolyase. III. Photolysis of the
                   enzyme-substrate complex and the absolute action spectrum. Journal of Biological
                   Chemistry 262, 492–498.
               16. Heelis, P. F., Payne, G., and Sancar, A. (1987) Photochemical properties of Escherichia
                   coli DNA photolyase: selective photodecomposition of the second chromophore.
                   Biochemistry 26, 4634–4640.
               17. Payne, G., Heelis, P. F., Rohrs, B. R., and Sancar, A. (1987) The active form of
                   Escherichia coli DNA photolyase contains a fully reduced flavin and not a flavin
                   radical, both in vivo and in vitro. Biochemistry 26, 7121–7127.
               18. Husain, I., Sancar, G. B., Holbrook, S. R., and Sancar, A. (1987) Mechanism of damage
                   recognition by Escherichia coli DNA photolyase. Journal of Biological Chemistry 262,
                   13188–13197.
               19. Johnson, J. L., Hamm-Alvarez, S., Payne, G., Sancar, G. B., Rajagopalan, K. V., and
                   Sancar, A. (1988) Identification of the second chromophore of Escherichia coli and
                   yeast DNA photolyases as 5,10-methenyltetrahydrofolate. Proceedings of the National
                   Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 85, 2046–2050.
               20. Li, Y. F., and Sancar, A. (1990) Active site of Escherichia coli DNA photolyase: muta-
                   tions at Trp277 alter the selectivity of the enzyme without affecting the quantum
                   yield of photorepair. Biochemistry 29, 5698–5706.
               21. Li, Y. F., Heelis, P. F., and Sancar, A. (1991) Active site of DNA photolyase: trypto-
                   phan-306 is the intrinsic hydrogen atom donor essential for flavin radical photore-
                   duction and DNA repair in vitro. Biochemistry 30, 6322–6329.
               22. Kim, S. T., Heelis, P. F., Okamura, T., Hirata, Y., Mataga, N., and Sancar, A. (1991)
                   Determination of rates and yields of interchromophore (folate—flavin) energy trans-
                   fer and intermolecular (flavin—DNA) electron transfer in Escherichia coli photoly-
                   ase by time-resolved fluorescence and absorption spectroscopy. Biochemistry 30,
                   11262–11270.




ook.indb 170                                                                                                 5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease171


               23. Langenbacher, T., Zhao, X. D., Bieser, G., Heelis, P. F., Sancar, A., and Michel-Beyerle,
                   M. E. (1997) Substrate and temperature dependence of DNA Photolyase repair activ-
                   ity examined with ultrafast spectroscopy. Journal of the American Chemical Society
                   119, 10532–10536.
               24. Payne, G., and Sancar, A. (1990) Absolute action spectrum of E-FADH2 and E-FADH2-
                   MTHF forms of Escherichia coli DNA photolyase. Biochemistry 29, 7715–7727.
               25. Okamura, T., Sancar, A., Heelis, P. F., Begley, T. P., Hirata, Y., and Mataga, N. (1991)
                   Picosecond Laser Photolysis Studies on the Photorepair of Pyrimidine Dimers by
                   DNA Photolyase.1. Laser Photolysis of Photolyase-2-Deoxyuridine Dinucleotide
                   Photodimer Complex. Journal of the American Chemical Society 113, 3143–3145.
               26. Kavakli, I. H., and Sancar, A. (2004) Analysis of the role of intraprotein electron trans-
                   fer in photoreactivation by DNA photolyase in vivo. Biochemistry 43, 15103–15110.
               27. Sancar, A. (2003) Structure and function of DNA photolyase and cryptochrome
                   blue-light photoreceptors. Chemical Reviews 103, 2203–2237.
               28. Sancar, A. (2008) Structure and function of photolyase and in vivo enzymology: 50th
                   anniversary. Journal of Biological Chemistry 283, 32153–32157.
               29. Tan, C., Guo, L., Ai, Y., Li, J., Wang, L., Sancar, A., Luo, Y., and Zhong, D. (2014)
                   Direct determination of resonance energy transfer in photolyase: structural align-
                   ment for the functional state. Journal Physical Chemistry A 118, 10522–10530.
               30. Park, H. W., Kim, S. T., Sancar, A., and Deisenhofer, J. (1995) Crystal structure of
                   DNA photolyase from Escherichia coli. Science 268, 1866–1872.
               31. Zhong, D. P. (2015) Electron Transfer Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase.
                   Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 66, 691–715.
               32. Kao, Y. T., Saxena, C., Wang, L., Sancar, A., and Zhong, D. (2005) Direct observation
                   of thymine dimer repair in DNA by photolyase. Proceedings of the National Academy
                   of Sciences of the United States of America 102, 16128–16132.
               33. Liu, Z., Tan, C., Guo, X., Kao, Y. T., Li, J., Wang, L., Sancar, A., and Zhong, D. (2011)
                   Dynamics and mechanism of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer repair by DNA photoly-
                   ase. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
                   108, 14831–14836.
               34. Tan, C., Liu, Z. Y., Li, J., Guo, X. M., Wang, L. J., Sancar, A., and Zhong, D. P.
                   (2015) The molecular origin of high DNA-repair efficiency by photolyase. Nature
                   Communications 6, 7302.
               35. Sancar, A. (1994) Structure and function of DNA photolyase. Biochemistry 33, 2–9.
               36. Boyce, R. P., and Howard-Flanders, P. (1964) Release of Ultraviolet Light-Induced
                   Thymine Dimers from DNA in E. Coli K-12. Proceedings of the National Academy of
                   Sciences of the United States of America 51, 293–300.
               37. Setlow, R. B., and Carrier, W. L. (1964) Disappearance of Thymine Dimers from
                   DNA—Error-Correcting Mechanism. Proceedings of the National Academy of
                   Sciences of the United States of America 51, 226–231.
               38. Castellani, Jagger, J., and Setlow, R. B. (1964) Overlap of Photoreactivation and
                   Liquid Holding Recovery in Escherichia coli B. Science 143, 1170–1171.
               39. Rasmussen, R. E., and Painter, R. B. (1964) Evidence for Repair of Ultra-Violet
                   Damaged Deoxyribonucleic Acid in Cultured Mammalian Cells. Nature 203, 1360–​
                   1362.




ook.indb 171                                                                                                    5/12/16 1:53 PM


           172                                                                       The Nobel Prizes


               40. Regan, J. D., Trosko, J. E., and Carrier, W. L. (1968) Evidence for Excision of
                   Ultraviolet-Induced Pyrimidine Dimers from DNA of Human Cells in Vitro.
                   Biophysical Journal 8, 319–325.
               41. La Belle, M., and Linn, S. (1982) In vivo Excision of Pyrimidine Dimers Is Mediated
                   by a DNA N-Glycosylase in Micrococcus-Luteus but Not in Human-Fibroblasts.
                   Photochemistry and Photobiology 36, 319–324.
               42. Weinfeld, M., Gentner, N. E., Johnson, L. D., and Paterson, M. C. (1986) Photoreversal-
                   Dependent Release of Thymidine and Thymidine Monophosphate from Pyrimidine
                   Dimer-Containing DNA Excision Fragments Isolated from Ultraviolet-Damaged
                   Human-Fibroblasts. Biochemistry 25, 2656–2664.
               43. Howard-Flanders, P., Boyce, R. P., and Theriot, L. (1966) Three Loci in Escherichia
                   coli K-12 That Control Excision of Pyrimidine Dimers and Certain Other Mutagen
                   Products from DNA. Genetics 53, 1119–1136.
               44. Cleaver, J. E. (1968) Defective Repair Replication of DNA in Xeroderma
                   Pigmentosum. Nature 218, 652–656.
               45. Cleaver, J. E., and Bootsma, D. (1975) Xeroderma Pigmentosum—Biochemical and
                   Genetic Characteristics. Annual Review of Genetics 9, 19–38.
               46. Pettijohn, D. E., and Hanawalt, P. (1964) Evidence for Repair-Replication of
                   Ultraviolet Damaged DNA in Bacteria. Journal of Molecular Biology 9, 395–410.
               47. Haseltine, W. A. (1983) Ultraviolet-Light Repair and Mutagenesis Revisited. Cell
                   33, 13–17.
               48. Sancar, A., Hack, A. M., and Rupp, W. D. (1979) Simple Method for Identification of
                   Plasmid-Coded Proteins. Journal of Bacteriology 137, 692–693.
               49. Sancar, A., Wharton, R. P., Seltzer, S., Kacinski, B. M., Clarke, N. D., and Rupp, W.
                   D. (1981) Identification of the UvrA-Gene Product. Journal of Molecular Biology
                   148, 45–62.
               50. Sancar, A., Clarke, N. D., Griswold, J., Kennedy, W. J., and Rupp, W. D. (1981)
                   Identification of the UvrB-Gene Product. Journal of Molecular Biology 148, 63–76.
               51. Sancar, A., Kacinski, B. M., Mott, D. L., and Rupp, W. D. (1981) Identification of the
                   UvrC-Gene Product. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
                   States of America 78, 5450–5454.
               52. Sancar, A., and Rupp, W. D. (1983) A Novel Repair Enzyme—UvrABC Excision
                   Nuclease of Escherichia coli Cuts a DNA Strand on Both Sides of the Damaged
                   Region. Cell 33, 249–260.
               53. Thomas, D. C., Levy, M., and Sancar, A. (1985) Amplification and Purification of
                   Uvra, Uvrb, and Uvrc Proteins of Escherichia coli. Journal of Biological Chemistry
                   260, 9875–9883.
               54. Husain, I., Van Houten, B., Thomas, D. C., Abdelmonem, M., and Sancar, A. (1985)
                   Effect of DNA Polymerase I and DNA Helicase II on the Turnover Rate of UvrABC
                   Excision Nuclease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
                   States of America 82, 6774–6778.
               55. Van Houten, B., Gamper, H., Hearst, J. E., and Sancar, A. (1986) Construction of
                   DNA Substrates Modified with Psoralen at a Unique Site and Study of the Action
                   Mechanism of ABC Excinuclease on These Uniformly Modified Substrates. Journal
                   of Biological Chemistry 261, 14135–14141.




ook.indb 172                                                                                                 5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease173


               56. Van Houten, B., Gamper, H., Holbrook, S. R., Hearst, J. E., and Sancar, A. (1986)
                   Action Mechanism of ABC Excision Nuclease on a DNA Substrate Containing a
                   Psoralen Cross-Link at a Defined Position. Proceedings of the National Academy of
                   Sciences of the United States of America 83, 8077–8081.
               57. Van Houten, B., Gamper, H., Sancar, A., and Hearst, J. E. (1987) Dnase-I Footprint
                   of ABC Excinuclease. Journal of Biological Chemistry 262, 13180–13187.
               58. Van Houten, B., Gamper, H., Hearst, J. E., and Sancar, A. (1988) Analysis of
                   sequential steps of nucleotide excision repair in Escherichia coli using synthetic
                   substrates containing single psoralen adducts. Journal of Biological Chemistry 263,
                   16553–16560.
               59. Orren, D. K., and Sancar, A. (1989) The (a)Bc Excinuclease of Escherichia coli
                   Has Only the Uvrb and Uvrc Subunits in the Incision Complex. Proceedings of the
                   National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 86, 5237–5241.
               60. Orren, D. K., and Sancar, A. (1990) Formation and enzymatic properties of the UvrB.
                   DNA complex. Journal of Biological Chemistry 265, 15796–15803.
               61. Orren, D. K., Selby, C. P., Hearst, J. E., and Sancar, A. (1992) Post-Incision Steps
                   of Nucleotide Excision Repair in Escherichia coli Disassembly of the UvrBC-DNA
                   Complex by Helicase II and DNA Polymerase I. Journal of Biological Chemistry
                   267, 780–788.
               62. Lin, J. J., and Sancar, A. (1989) A New Mechanism for Repairing Oxidative Damage
                   to DNA—(a)Bc Excinuclease Removes AP Sites and Thymine Glycols from DNA.
                   Biochemistry 28, 7979–7984.
               63. Lin, J. J., and Sancar, A. (1992) Active-Site of (A)BC Excinuclease .1. Evidence for 5’
                   Incision by UvrC through a Catalytic Site Involving Asp399, Asp438, Asp466, and
                   His538 Residues. Journal of Biological Chemistry 267, 17688–17692.
               64. Lin, J. J., Phillips, A. M., Hearst, J. E., and Sancar, A. (1992) Active-Site of (A)BC
                   Excinuclease .2. Binding, Bending, and Catalysis Mutants of Uvrb Reveal a Direct
                   Role in 3’ and an Indirect Role in 5’ Incision. Journal of Biological Chemistry 267,
                   17693–17700.
               65. Lin, J. J., and Sancar, A. (1992) (A)BC Excinuclease—the Escherichia coli Nucleotide
                   Excision Repair Enzyme. Molecular Microbiology 6, 2219–2224.
               66. Sancar, A., and Hearst, J. E. (1993) Molecular Matchmakers. Science 259, 1415–1420
               67. Sibghat, U., Sancar, A., and Hearst, J. E. (1990) The repair patch of E. coli (A)BC
                   excinuclease. Nucleic Acids Res 18, 5051–5053.
               68. Sancar, A., and Sancar, G. B. (1988) DNA-Repair Enzymes. Annual Review of
                   Biochemistry 57, 29–67.
               69. Verhoeven, E. E. A., van Kesteren, M., Moolenaar, G. F., Visse, R., and Goosen, N.
                   (2000) Catalytic sites for 3’ and 5’ incision of Escherichia coli nucleotide excision
                   repair are both located in UvrC. Journal of Biological Chemistry 275, 5120–5123.
               70. Aravind, L., Walker, D. R., and Koonin, E. V. (1999) Conserved domains in
                   DNA repair proteins and evolution of repair systems. Nucleic Acids Research 27,
                   1223–1242.
               71. Bohr, V. A., Smith, C. A., Okumoto, D. S., and Hanawalt, P. C. (1985) DNA-Repair in
                   an Active Gene—Removal of Pyrimidine Dimers from the Dhfr Gene of Cho Cells
                   Is Much More Efficient Than in the Genome Overall. Cell 40, 359–369.




ook.indb 173                                                                                                 5/12/16 1:53 PM


           174                                                                        The Nobel Prizes


               72. Mellon, I., Spivak, G., and Hanawalt, P. C. (1987) Selective Removal of Transcription-
                   Blocking DNA Damage from the Transcribed Strand of the Mammalian Dhfr Gene.
                   Cell 51, 241–249.
               73. Mellon, I., and Hanawalt, P. C. (1989) Induction of the Escherichia coli Lactose Operon
                   Selectively Increases Repair of Its Transcribed DNA Strand. Nature 342, 95–98.
               74. Selby, C. P., and Sancar, A. (1990) Transcription preferentially inhibits nucleotide
                   excision repair of the template DNA strand in vitro. Journal of Biological Chemistry
                   265, 21330–21336.
               75. Selby, C. P., and Sancar, A. (1991) Gene- and strand-specific repair in vitro: partial
                   purification of a transcription-repair coupling factor. Proceedings of the National
                   Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 88, 8232–8236.
               76. Selby, C. P., Witkin, E. M., and Sancar, A. (1991) Escherichia coli mfd mutant deficient
                   in “mutation frequency decline” lacks strand-specific repair: in vitro complementa-
                   tion with purified coupling factor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
                   of the United States of America 88, 11574–11578.
               77. Selby, C. P., and Sancar, A. (1993) Molecular Mechanism of Transcription-Repair
                   Coupling. Science 260, 53–58.
               78. Selby, C. P., and Sancar, A. (1994) Mechanisms of transcription-repair coupling and
                   mutation frequency decline. Microbiological Reviews 58, 317–329.
               79. Selby, C. P., and Sancar, A. (1995) Structure and Function of Transcription-Repair
                   Coupling Factor. 1. Structural Domains and Binding Properties. Journal of Biological
                   Chemistry 270, 4882–4889.
               80. Selby, C. P., and Sancar, A. (1995) Structure and Function of Transcription-Repair
                   Coupling Factor. 2. Catalytic Properties. Journal of Biological Chemistry 270,
                   4890–4895.
               81. Selby, C. P., Drapkin, R., Reinberg, D., and Sancar, A. (1997) RNA polymerase II
                   stalled at a thymine dimer: footprint and effect on excision repair. Nucleic Acids
                   Research 25, 787–793.
               82. Sancar, A. (1994) Mechanisms of DNA excision repair. Science 266, 1954–1956.
               83. Sancar, A., and Tang, M. S. (1993) Nucleotide Excision Repair. Photochemistry and
                   Photobiology 57, 905–921.
               84. Witkin, E. M. (1966) Radiation-Induced Mutations and Their Repair. Science 152,
                   1345–1353.
               85. Sibghatullah, Husain, I., Carlton, W., and Sancar, A. (1989) Human Nucleotide
                   Excision Repair In vitro—Repair of Pyrimidine Dimers, Psoralen and Cisplatin
                   Adducts by Hela Cell-Free Extract. Nucleic Acids Research 17, 4471–4484.
               86. Huang, J. C., Svoboda, D. L., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (1992) Human nucleotide
                   excision nuclease removes thymine dimers from DNA by incising the 22nd phospho-
                   diester bond 5’ and the 6th phosphodiester bond 3’ to the photodimer. Proceedings
                   of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 89, 3664–3668.
               87. Nichols, A. F., and Sancar, A. (1992) Purification of PCNA as a Nucleotide Excision
                   Repair Protein. Nucleic Acids Research 20, 2441–2446.
               88. Reardon, J. T., Thompson, L. H., and Sancar, A. (1993) Excision Repair in Man and
                   the Molecular Basis of Xeroderma Pigmentosum Syndrome. Cold Spring Harbor
                   Symposia on Quantitative Biology 58, 605–617.




ook.indb 174                                                                                                  5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease175


               89. Svoboda, D. L., Taylor, J. S., Hearst, J. E., and Sancar, A. (1993) DNA Repair by
                    Eukaryotic Nucleotide Excision Nuclease—Removal of Thymine Dimer and Psoralen
                    Monoadduct by Hela Cell-Free Extract and of Thymine Dimer by Xenopus Laevis
                    Oocytes. Journal of Biological Chemistry 268, 1931–1936.
               90. Huang, J. C., Zamble, D. B., Reardon, J. T., Lippard, S. J., and Sancar, A. (1994)
                    HMG-domain proteins specifically inhibit the repair of the major DNA adduct of
                    the anticancer drug cisplatin by human excision nuclease. Proceedings of the National
                    Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 91, 10394–10398.
               91. Huang, J. C., Hsu, D. S., Kazantsev, A., and Sancar, A. (1994) Substrate spectrum
                    of human excinuclease: repair of abasic sites, methylated bases, mismatches, and
                    bulky adducts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
                    of America 91, 12213–12217.
               92. Drapkin, R., Reardon, J. T., Ansari, A., Huang, J. C., Zawel, L., Ahn, K., Sancar, A.,
                    and Reinberg, D. (1994) Dual role of TFIIH in DNA excision repair and in transcrip-
                    tion by RNA polymerase II. Nature 368, 769–772.
               93. Mu, D., Park, C. H., Matsunaga, T., Hsu, D. S., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (1995)
                    Reconstitution of human DNA repair excision nuclease in a highly defined system.
                    Journal of Biological Chemistry 270, 2415–2418.
               94. Park, C. H., and Sancar, A. (1994) Formation of a ternary complex by human XPA,
                    ERCC1, and ERCC4(XPF) excision repair proteins. Proceedings of the National
                    Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 91, 5017–5021.
               95. Matsunaga, T., Mu, D., Park, C. H., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (1995) Human
                    DNA-Repair Excision Nuclease—Analysis of the Roles of the Subunits Involved in
                    Dual Incisions by Using Anti-XPG and Anti-ERCC1 Antibodies. Journal of Biological
                    Chemistry 270, 20862–20869.
               96. Park, C. H., Bessho, T., Matsunaga, T., and Sancar, A. (1995) Purification and
                    Characterization of the XPF-ERCC1 Complex of Human DNA Repair Excision
                    Nuclease. Journal of Biological Chemistry 270, 22657–22660.
               97. Mu, D., Hsu, D. S., and Sancar, A. (1996) Reaction mechanism of human DNA repair
                    excision nuclease. Journal of Biological Chemistry 271, 8285–8294.
               98. Matsunaga, T., Park, C. H., Bessho, T., Mu, D., and Sancar, A. (1996) Replication
                    protein A confers structure-specific endonuclease activities to the XPF-ERCC1
                    and XPG subunits of human DNA repair excision nucleases. Journal of Biological
                    Chemistry 271, 11047–11050.
               99. Reardon, J. T., Mu, D., and Sancar, A. (1996) Overproduction, purification, and char-
                    acterization of the XPC subunit of the human DNA repair excision nuclease. Journal
                    of Biological Chemistry 271, 19451–19456.
               100. Mu, D., Tursun, M., Duckett, D. R., Drummond, J. T., Modrich, P., and Sancar, A.
                    (1997) Recognition and repair of compound DNA lesions (base damage and mis-
                    match) by human mismatch repair and excision repair systems. Molecular and
                    Cellular Biology 17, 760–769
               101. Bessho, T., Sancar, A., Thompson, L. H., and Thelen, M. P. (1997) Reconstitution
                    of human excision nuclease with recombinant XPF-ERCC1 complex. Journal of
                    Biological Chemistry 272, 3833–3837.
               102. Reardon, J. T., Thompson, L. H., and Sancar, A. (1997) Rodent UV-sensitive mutant




ook.indb 175                                                                                                5/12/16 1:53 PM


           176                                                                        The Nobel Prizes


                  cell lines in complementation groups 6–10 have normal general excision repair activ-
                  ity. Nucleic Acids Research 25, 1015–1021.
           103.   Mu, D., Wakasugi, M., Hsu, D. S., and Sancar, A. (1997) Characterization of reaction
                  intermediates of human excision repair nuclease. Journal of Biological Chemistry
                  272, 28971–28979.
           104.   Wakasugi, M., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (1997) The non-catalytic function of
                  XPG protein human nucleotide excision repair. Journal of Biological Chemistry 272,
                  16030–16034.
           105.   Wakasugi, M., and Sancar, A. (1998) Assembly, subunit composition, and footprint
                  of human DNA repair excision nuclease. Proceedings of the National Academy of
                  Sciences of the United States of America 95, 6669–6674.
           106.   Wakasugi, M., and Sancar, A. (1999) Order of assembly of human DNA repair exci-
                  sion nuclease. Journal of Biological Chemistry 274, 18759–18768.
           107.   Reardon, J. T., Vaisman, A., Chaney, S. G., and Sancar, A. (1999) Efficient nucle-
                  otide excision repair of cisplatin, oxaliplatin, and Bis-aceto-ammine-dichloro-
                  cyclohexylamine-platinum(IV) (JM216) platinum intrastrand DNA diadducts.
                  Cancer Research 59, 3968–3971.
           108.   Bessho, T., Mu, D., and Sancar, A. (1997) Initiation of DNA interstrand cross-link
                  repair in humans: the nucleotide excision repair system makes dual incisions 5’ to
                  the cross-linked base and removes a 22- to 28-nucleotide-long damage-free strand.
                  Molecular and Cellular Biology 17, 6822–6830.
           109.   Mu, D., Bessho, T., Nechev, L. V., Chen, D. J., Harris, T. M., Hearst, J. E., and Sancar,
                  A. (2000) DNA interstrand cross-links induce futile repair synthesis in mammalian
                  cell extracts. Molecular and Cellular Biology 20, 2446–2454.
           110.   Hara, R., Mo, J. Y., and Sancar, A. (2000) DNA damage in the nucleosome core is
                  refractory to repair by human excision nuclease. Molecular and Cellular Biology 20,
                  9173–9181.
           111.   Hara, R., and Sancar, A. (2002) The SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling factor stim-
                  ulates repair by human excision nuclease in the mononucleosome core particle.
                  Molecular and Cellular Biology 22, 6779–6787.
           112.   Hara, R., and Sancar, A. (2003) Effect of damage type on stimulation of human
                  excision nuclease by SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling factor. Molecular and Cellular
                  Biology 23, 4121–4125.
           113.   Wang, D., Hara, R., Singh, G., Sancar, A., and Lippard, S. J. (2003) Nucleotide exci-
                  sion repair from site-specifically platinum-modified nucleosomes. Biochemistry 42,
                  6747–6753.
           114.   Branum, M. E., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (2001) DNA repair excision nuclease
                  attacks undamaged DNA—A potential source of spontaneous mutations. Journal of
                  Biological Chemistry 276, 25421–25426.
           115.   Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (2003) Recognition and repair of the cyclobutane thy-
                  mine dimer, a major cause of skin cancers, by the human excision nuclease. Genes
                  and Development 17, 2539–2551.
           116.   Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (2004) Thermodynamic cooperativity and kinetic
                  proofreading in DNA damage recognition and repair. Cell Cycle 3, 141–144.




ook.indb 176                                                                                                  5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease177


               117. Kesseler, K. J., Kaufmann, W. K., Reardon, J. T., Elston, T. C., and Sancar, A. (2007)
                    A mathematical model for human nucleotide excision repair: damage recognition
                    by random order assembly and kinetic proofreading. Journal of Theoretical Biology
                    249, 361–375.
               118. Kulaksiz, G., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (2005) Xeroderma pigmentosum comple-
                    mentation group E protein (XPE/DDB2): Purification of various complexes of XPE
                    and analyses of their damaged DNA binding and putative DNA repair properties.
                    Molecular and Cellular Biology 25, 9784–9792.
               119. Selby, C. P., and Sancar, A. (2003) Characterization of transcription-repair coupling
                    factors in E. coli and humans. Methods in Enzymology 371, 300–324.
               120. Sancar, A. (1996) DNA excision repair. Annual Review of Biochemistry 65, 43–81.
               121. Petit, C., and Sancar, A. (1999) Nucleotide excision repair: From E. coli to man.
                    Biochimie 81, 15–25.
               122. Sancar, A., Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., Unsal-Kacmaz, K., and Linn, S. (2004) Molecular
                    mechanisms of mammalian DNA repair and the DNA damage checkpoints. Annual
                    Review of Biochemistry 73, 39–85.
               123. Sancar, A., and Reardon, J. T. (2004) Nucleotide excision repair in E. coli and man.
                    DNA Repair and Replication 69, 43–71.
               124. Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (2005) Nucleotide excision repair. Progress in Nucleic
                    Acid Research and Molecular Biology 79, 183–235.
               125. Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (2006) Purification and characterization of Escherichia
                    coli and human nucleotide excision repair enzyme systems. DNA Repair, Pt A
                    408, 189–213.
               126. Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (2006) Repair of DNA-polypeptide crosslinks by
                    human excision nuclease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
                    United States of America 103, 4056–4061.
               127. Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., Bermudez, V. P., Hurwitz, J., and Sancar, A. (2001) Purification
                    and characterization of human DNA damage checkpoint Rad complexes. Proceedings
                    of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 98, 11236–11241.
               128. Bermudez, V. P., Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., Cesare, A. J., Maniwa, Y., Griffith, J. D.,
                    Hurwitz, J., and Sancar, A. (2003) Loading of the human 9-1-1 checkpoint complex
                    onto DNA by the checkpoint clamp loader hRad17-replication factor C complex in
                    vitro. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
                    100, 1633–1638.
               129. Choi, J. H., Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., Kemp, M., Mason, A. C., Wold, M. S., and Sancar,
                    A. (2010) Reconstitution of RPA-covered single-stranded DNA-activated ATR-Chk1
                    signaling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
                    America 107, 13660–13665.
               130. Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., Kemp, M. G., Reardon, J. T., DeRocco, V., Iyer, R. R., Modrich,
                    P., and Sancar, A. (2014) Coupling of human DNA excision repair and the DNA
                    damage checkpoint in a defined in vitro system. Journal of Biological Chemistry 289,
                    5074–5082.
               131. Kemp, M. G., Reardon, J. T., Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., and Sancar, A. (2012) Mechanism
                    of release and fate of excised oligonucleotides during nucleotide excision repair.
                    Journal of Biological Chemistry 287, 22889–22899.




ook.indb 177                                                                                                 5/12/16 1:53 PM


           178                                                                    The Nobel Prizes


           132. Kemp, M. G., and Sancar, A. (2012) DNA excision repair: where do all the dimers
                go? Cell Cycle 11, 2997–3002.
           133. Hu, J., Choi, J. H., Gaddameedhi, S., Kemp, M. G., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A.
                (2013) Nucleotide excision repair in human cells: fate of the excised oligonucleotide
                carrying DNA damage in vivo. Journal of Biological Chemistry 288, 20918–20926.
           134. Choi, J. H., Gaddameedhi, S., Kim, S. Y., Hu, J., Kemp, M. G., and Sancar, A. (2014)
                Highly specific and sensitive method for measuring nucleotide excision repair kinet-
                ics of ultraviolet photoproducts in human cells. Nucleic Acids Research 42, e29.
           135. Kemp, M. G., Gaddameedhi, S., Choi, J. H., Hu, J., and Sancar, A. (2014) DNA repair
                synthesis and ligation affect the processing of excised oligonucleotides generated by
                human nucleotide excision repair. Journal of Biological Chemistry 289, 26574–26583.
           136. Choi, J. H., Kim, S. Y., Kim, S. K., Kemp, M. G., and Sancar, A. (2015) An Integrated
                Approach for Analysis of the DNA Damage Response in Mammalian Cells:
                Nucleotide Excision Repair, DNA Damage Checkpoint, and Apoptosis. Journal of
                Biological Chemistry 290, 28812–28821.
           137. Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., Kemp, M. G., Hu, J., and Sancar, A. (2015) Analysis of
                Ribonucleotide Removal from DNA by Human Nucleotide Excision Repair. Journal
                of Biological Chemistry 290, 29801–29807.
           138. Hu, J., Adar, S., Selby, C. P., Lieb, J. D., and Sancar, A. (2015) Genome-wide analysis
                of human global and transcription-coupled excision repair of UV damage at single-
                nucleotide resolution. Genes and Development 29, 948–960.
           139. Li, Y. F., Kim, S. T., and Sancar, A. (1993) Evidence for lack of DNA photoreactivat-
                ing enzyme in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
                States of America 90, 4389–4393.
           140. Sutherland, B. M. (1974) Photoreactivating enzyme from human leukocytes. Nature
                248, 109–112.
           141. Adams, M. D., Kerlavage, A. R., Fleischmann, R. D., Fuldner, R. A., Bult, C. J., Lee,
                N. H., Kirkness, E. F., Weinstock, K. G., Gocayne, J. D., White, O., and et al. (1995)
                Initial assessment of human gene diversity and expression patterns based upon 83
                million nucleotides of cDNA sequence. Nature 377, 3–174
           142. Schwartz, W. J. (1996) Internal timekeeping. Science & Medicine 3, 44–53
           143. Malhotra, K., Kim, S. T., Batschauer, A., Dawut, L., and Sancar, A. (1995) Putative
                blue-light photoreceptors from Arabidopsis thaliana and Sinapis alba with a high
                degree of sequence homology to DNA photolyase contain the two photolyase cofac-
                tors but lack DNA repair activity. Biochemistry 34, 6892–6899.
           144. Hsu, D. S., Zhao, X., Zhao, S., Kazantsev, A., Wang, R. P., Todo, T., Wei, Y. F., and
                Sancar, A. (1996) Putative human blue-light photoreceptors hCRY1 and hCRY2 are
                flavoproteins. Biochemistry 35, 13871–13877.
           145. Miyamoto, Y., and Sancar, A. (1998) Vitamin B2-based blue-light photoreceptors in
                the retinohypothalamic tract as the photoactive pigments for setting the circadian
                clock in mammals. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
                States of America 95, 6097–6102.
           146. Schibler, U., and Sassone-Corsi, P. (2002) A web of circadian pacemakers. Cell
                111, 919–922.




ook.indb 178                                                                                              5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease179


               147. Reppert, S. M., and Weaver, D. R. (2002) Coordination of circadian timing in mam-
                    mals. Nature 418, 935–941.
               148. Hastings, M. H., Reddy, A. B., and Maywood, E. S. (2003) A clockwork web: circadian
                    timing in brain and periphery, in health and disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 4, 649–661.
               149. Partch, C. L., Green, C. B., and Takahashi, J. S. (2014) Molecular architecture of the
                    mammalian circadian clock. Trends in Cell Biology 24, 90–99.
               150. Thresher, R. J., Vitaterna, M. H., Miyamoto, Y., Kazantsev, A., Hsu, D. S., Petit, C.,
                    Selby, C. P., Dawut, L., Smithies, O., Takahashi, J. S., and Sancar, A. (1998) Role of
                    mouse cryptochrome blue-light photoreceptor in circadian photoresponses. Science
                    282, 1490–1494.
               151. Vitaterna, M. H., Selby, C. P., Todo, T., Niwa, H., Thompson, C., Fruechte, E. M.,
                    Hitomi, K., Thresher, R. J., Ishikawa, T., Miyazaki, J., Takahashi, J. S., and Sancar, A.
                    (1999) Differential regulation of mammalian period genes and circadian rhythmic-
                    ity by cryptochromes 1 and 2. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
                    United States of America 96, 12114–12119.
               152. Miyamoto, Y., and Sancar, A. (1999) Circadian regulation of cryptochrome genes in
                    the mouse. Brain Research Molecular Brain Research 71, 238–243.
               153. Sancar, A. (2000) Cryptochrome: the second photoactive pigment in the eye and its
                    role in circadian photoreception. Annual Review of Biochemistry 69, 31–67.
               154. Selby, C. P., Thompson, C., Schmitz, T. M., Van Gelder, R. N., and Sancar, A. (2000)
                    Functional redundancy of cryptochromes and classical photoreceptors for nonvisual
                    ocular photoreception in mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
                    United States of America 97, 14697–14702.
               155. Sancar, A., Thompson, C., Thresher, R. J., Araujo, F., Mo, J., Ozgur, S., Vagas, E.,
                    Dawut, L., and Selby, C. P. (2000) Photolyase/cryptochrome family blue-light pho-
                    toreceptors use light energy to repair DNA or set the circadian clock. Cold Spring
                    Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 65, 157–171.
               156. Thompson, C. L., Bowes Rickman, C., Shaw, S. J., Ebright, J. N., Kelly, U., Sancar,
                    A., and Rickman, D. W. (2003) Expression of the blue-light receptor cryptochrome
                    in the human retina. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science 44, 4515–
                    4521.
               157. Thompson, C. L., Selby, C. P., Partch, C. L., Plante, D. T., Thresher, R. J., Araujo, F.,
                    and Sancar, A. (2004) Further evidence for the role of cryptochromes in retino-
                    hypothalamic photoreception/phototransduction. Brain Research Molecular Brain
                    Research 122, 158–166.
               158. Sancar, A. (2004) Regulation of the mammalian circadian clock by cryptochrome.
                    Journal of Biological Chemistry 279, 34079–34082.
               159. Thompson, C. L., Selby, C. P., Van Gelder, R. N., Blaner, W. S., Lee, J., Quadro, L., Lai,
                    K., Gottesman, M. E., and Sancar, A. (2004) Effect of vitamin A depletion on non-
                    visual phototransduction pathways in cryptochromeless mice. Journal of Biological
                    Rhythms 19, 504–517.
               160. Partch, C. L., Clarkson, M. W., Ozgur, S., Lee, A. L., and Sancar, A. (2005) Role of
                    structural plasticity in signal transduction by the cryptochrome blue-light photore-
                    ceptor. Biochemistry 44, 3795–3805.




ook.indb 179                                                                                                     5/12/16 1:53 PM


           180                                                                    The Nobel Prizes


           161. Partch, C. L., and Sancar, A. (2005) Cryptochromes and circadian photoreception in
                animals. Methods in Enzymology 393, 726–745.
           162. Gauger, M. A., and Sancar, A. (2005) Cryptochrome, circadian cycle, cell cycle check-
                points, and cancer. Cancer Research 65, 6828–6834.
           163. Ozgur, S., and Sancar, A. (2006) Analysis of autophosphorylating kinase activities of
                Arabidopsis and human cryptochromes. Biochemistry 45, 13369–13374.
           164. Song, S. H., Ozturk, N., Denaro, T. R., Arat, N. O., Kao, Y. T., Zhu, H., Zhong, D.,
                Reppert, S. M., and Sancar, A. (2007) Formation and function of flavin anion radi-
                cal in cryptochrome 1 blue-light photoreceptor of monarch butterfly. Journal of
                Biological Chemistry 282, 17608–17612.
           165. Ozturk, N., Song, S. H., Ozgur, S., Selby, C. P., Morrison, L., Partch, C., Zhong, D.,
                and Sancar, A. (2007) Structure and function of animal cryptochromes. Cold Spring
                Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 72, 119–131.
           166. Ozturk, N., Selby, C. P., Annayev, Y., Zhong, D., and Sancar, A. (2011) Reaction
                mechanism of Drosophila cryptochrome. Proceedings of the National Academy of
                Sciences of the United States of America 108, 516–521.
           167. Ozturk, N., Lee, J. H., Gaddameedhi, S., and Sancar, A. (2009) Loss of cryptochrome
                reduces cancer risk in p53 mutant mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of
                Sciences of the United States of America 106, 2841–2846.
           168. Lee, J. H., and Sancar, A. (2011) Circadian clock disruption improves the efficacy
                of chemotherapy through p73-mediated apoptosis. Proceedings of the National
                Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108, 10668–10672.
           169. Sancar, A., Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., Gaddameedhi, S., Selby, C. P., Ye, R., Chiou, Y. Y.,
                Kemp, M. G., Hu, J., Lee, J. H., and Ozturk, N. (2015) Circadian clock, cancer, and
                chemotherapy. Biochemistry 54, 110–123.
           170. Sancar, A., Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., Kang, T. H., Reardon, J. T., Lee, J. H., and Ozturk,
                N. (2010) Circadian clock control of the cellular response to DNA damage. FEBS
                Letters 584, 2618–2625.
           171. Ye, R., Selby, C. P., Ozturk, N., Annayev, Y., and Sancar, A. (2011) Biochemical analy-
                sis of the canonical model for the mammalian circadian clock. Journal of Biological
                Chemistry 286, 25891–25902.
           172. Ye, R., Selby, C. P., Chiou, Y. Y., Ozkan-Dagliyan, I., Gaddameedhi, S., and Sancar,
                A. (2014) Dual modes of CLOCK:BMAL1 inhibition mediated by Cryptochrome
                and Period proteins in the mammalian circadian clock. Genes and Development 28,
                1989–1998.
           173. Kang, T. H., Reardon, J. T., Kemp, M., and Sancar, A. (2009) Circadian oscillation of
                nucleotide excision repair in mammalian brain. Proceedings of the National Academy
                of Sciences of the United States of America 106, 2864–2867.
           174. Kang, T. H., Lindsey-Boltz, L. A., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (2010) Circadian
                control of XPA and excision repair of cisplatin-DNA damage by cryptochrome
                and HERC2 ubiquitin ligase. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
                United States of America 107, 4890–4895.
           175. Kang, T. H., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (2011) Regulation of nucleotide excision
                repair activity by transcriptional and post-transcriptional control of the XPA protein.
                Nucleic Acids Res 39, 3176–3187.




ook.indb 180                                                                                              5/12/16 1:53 PM


               Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Photolyase and Excision Nuclease181


               176. Gaddameedhi, S., Selby, C. P., Kaufmann, W. K., Smart, R. C., and Sancar, A. (2011)
                    Control of skin cancer by the circadian rhythm. Proceedings of the National Academy
                    of Sciences of the United States of America 108, 18790–18795.
               177. Gaddameedhi, S., Selby, C. P., Kemp, M. G., Ye, R., and Sancar, A. (2015) The cir-
                    cadian clock controls sunburn apoptosis and erythema in mouse skin. Journal of
                    Investigative Dermatology 135, 1119–1127.




ook.indb 181                                                                                              5/12/16 1:53 PM
