                              CARL BOSCH


          The development of the chemical
    high pressure method during the establishment
            of the new ammonia industry
                        Nobel Lecture, May 21, 1932



The eminent distinction of the Nobel Prize award which imposes on me the
pleasant duty of delivering a lecture to you to-day is in recognition of the
development of the high pressure techniques, i.e. the methods used to
perform chemical reactions at elevated temperature under pressures of 100
atmospheres and higher.
   The technical development of these processes within the I.G. Farbenindus-
trie concern, a task with which I have been entrusted for about 25 years, posed
a profusion of scientific, technical and economic problems the solution of
which occupied hundreds of scientists and which affords a living to many
thousands of people.
   I can only report here on a small section of our sphere of work and with an
eye to the motives underlying the award of the prize I have chosen to discuss
the solution to the question of apparatus.
   Partly as a result of the Lecture given by Haber here in Stockholm in 1920
it has been learned that in 1908 he approached the Badische Anilin- und So-
dafabrik with the suggestion to attempt the technical synthesis of ammonia
from hydrogen and nitrogen under high pressure. In the course of his studies
on the position of the equilibrium in the system ammonia ' hydrogen +
nitrogen he ascertained that the foreseeable shifts in equilibrium for high
pressures actually occur in favour of the ammonia, but - and this was a partic-
ularly encouraging and for us decisive fact - he also found that osmium and
uranium markedly accelerated the attainment of the equilibrium and brought
it about at a far lower temperature than the catalysts exclusively used hither-
to, i.e. manganese, iron, platinum, etc.
   When the management at the time entrusted me with the task of expanding
the conversion of this high pressure synthesis to an industrial scale with a
view to its economic application, it was obvious that there were three main
problems which had necessarily to be settled before the construction of a


198                               1931 C.BOSCH

 plant could be undertaken. These were: supply of raw materials, i.e. of the
 gases hydrogen and nitrogen, at a lower price than hitherto possible, the
 manufacture of effective and stable catalysts, and lastly the construction of
 the apparatus. These problems were dealt with simultaneously.
    To begin with, sufficient pure hydrogen for the tests was available from
 chlorine electrolysis and yielded the required nitrogen-hydrogen mixture by
 combustion with air. None of the then known hydrogen processes was
 suitable for large-scale manufacture. We examined all of them but without
 exception they were too expensive or yielded insufficiently pure gases. It
 must not be forgotten that the procurement of hydrogen is the largest item
 in the prime cost, at least nowadays since because of the efficiency of the high
 pressure synthesis the conversion of the ready-made gas mixture into ammo-
 nia is only a minor cost factor. Since we were dependent on coal as a starting
 material we at once decided on the sole eligible source in our situation, water
 gas from which nowadays, after a short transition period - separation of the
 hydrogen by Linde’s low temperature liquefaction method - hydrogen is
 manufactured in enormous quantities by a catalytic process developed by us. 1
    The accomplishment of the second task was no less significant. Osmium,
 a very good catalyst, was difficult to maintain since when in its active, i.e.
 finely disperse, form it comes into contact with air (never wholly avoidable
 under industrial conditions) it readily volatilizes as osmium tetroxide, but in
 particular because the whole world’s supply amounted to only a few kilo-
 grams, hence at best we could have based only a very moderate manufacture
 on osmium. Uranium was expensive, of course, yet nevertheless obtainable
in some quantity but proved extremely sensitive to oxygen and water and it
could not, and still cannot, be converted by any means into a form that can
be used for a mass-production process. However, as a result of very broadly
based series of experiments using our rapidly expanded experimental tech-
nique, we succeeded in preparing relatively fast-acting, technically perfect,
easily manipulable, stable and inexpensive catalysts, chiefly those with iron
as the active substance* which are currently in universal use presumably ex-
clusively for the synthesis of ammonia. They are a completely new type of
catalyst, their characteristic being that they no longer consist of pure elements
in varyingly fine form, but are mixtures. It was only after studies extending
                                             2



over many years and also only in the light of recent theoretical knowledge

* Molybdenum, particularly in mixtures, was also found to be an excellent catalyst;
D.R.P. 246, 377, October 22, 1910.


         HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                                     199
that we were able to clarify the specific action of these mixed catalysts,
although at the very outset we had formed empirically a broadly correct idea
which assisted us not a little in our studies.*
    The successful conclusion of the third task, which is the only one I intend
to discuss to-day in more detail, related to the apparatus. There were no exam-
ples in industry. The only technique, and that of a physical nature, involving
high pressures, was Linde’s liquefaction of air. The conventional apparatus
for this was made from soft soldered copper and was hence unsuitable for
temperatures up to 600oC and locally still higher. In true awareness that the
manufacture of the apparatus would be one of the most difficult tasks, quite
apart from surprises yet to come and soon forthcoming, an immediate start
(a typical feature of our work) was made on fitting up a workshop specially
adapted to our needs which first had to make the apparatus necessary for the
laboratory work. Right from the start this test apparatus was of very serv-
iceable design since the individual tests all took a very long time as it was
particularly important to ascertain the stability of the new catalysts in experi-
ments of long duration. We took as our starting point the apparatus used by
Haber for his tests and of which I append an illustration (Fig.1). The contact
mass, surrounded by tightly packed insulation, is in the centre of the steel
vessel which is cooled with ice water. The gas lead, heating arrangement and
temperature measuring device are plainly shown in the figure. As this appa-
ratus suffered from many drawbacks for prolonged experiments, it was com-
pletely redesigned and finally in this form (Fig. 2) 24 of them were in con-
tinuous day and night service for years.
    With its aid we were able to conduct the many separate examinations neces-
sary for the discovery of the catalysts and for development to maximum effi-
ciency, which over the years grew to the number of 20,000. With a small
 model of this sort there are no special difficulties since air cooling ensures the
 stability of the outer pressure-bearing parts and of course the mechanical
 stress on the inner parts is only slight.
    The state of affairs was soon to change when we started to build a smaller
 convertor as a production apparatus. Haber had already attempted something

* "The outstandingly potent action of catalysts made in that way... is presumably
attributable to the fact that the admixtures referred to dissolve or become finely disperse
in the highly heated metal oxide, whereby during the subsequent reduction an other-
wise scarcely perceptible skeleton forms within the metal mass and inhibits extremely
effectively any deterioration of the surface and hence of the catalytic properties". (Ex-
tract from D.R.P., 254,437, April 22, 1910.)


 200                                 1931 C.BOSCH

  along those lines on a very small scale but had only run it for one or two hours
  when it failed for design reasons.
     We therefore then built an apparatus of which the chief, and for us the
  most important and interesting part, except for a circulation pump and the
  ammonia separator, was a contact tube of the shape and size illustrated in
  Fig. 3 (wall thickness about 30 mm). This tube was heated on the outside.
  Being cautious we had housed it in a strong, reinforced concrete chamber far
  away from all the busy centres of activity since in the meantime we had also
 become familiar with the danger of fires and flarebacks which occur, fre-
  quently with spontaneous ignition, when hydrogen emerges at high pressure.
    The two tubes drawn by Mannesmann had each done service for 80 hours,
 then they burst. If we had charged them with osmium instead of with our
 new catalyst, the world’s supply of this rare metal which we had already
 bought up would have disappeared.
    It was found on examination of the burst tubes that they were swollen and
 it was apparent that owing to some change of the material the inner wall had
 altogether lost its elasticity and the change had continued until finally the
 undamaged part became too thin and yielded to the internal pressure. This is
 illustrated in Fig. 4A. A chemical attack was the first thought. But what
 could have happened? To begin with, hydrogen seemed harmless, nitrogen
being more suspect since, according to the available literature, iron nitride
was apt to form and was described as a silvery, brittle compound forming
readily from ammonia and iron. Chemical analysis showed no trace of nitro-
gen in the embrittled material. More detailed information was obtained by
metallographic analysis, a test procedure then almost unknown in chemical
engineering and with which I was acquainted only because I had begun my
career as a metallurgist. The following. picture emerged:
    Carbon steel, the only suitable type owing to its mechanical strength, has
a structure in which carbonaceous perlite is dispersed in a matrix of pure iron
(ferrite). In the changed inside of the used tubes the perlite had disappeared
and the structure had been destroyed by cracking. Decarburization of the iron
had thus occurred and pure, soft iron should have been formed. But that was
obviously not the case as the changed material was hard and brittle. Hydrogen
was in fact found to have penetrated the iron and formed a brittle alloy, in
the same way as carbon forms brittle iron carbide with iron.*
* As subsequent examinations showed the cracking is essentially caused by the decar-
burization of the perlite with the formation of methane which becomes enclosed in the
structure under extremely high pressure and, together with the mechanical stress on the
material, loosens the structure.


HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY              201




      Fig. I. Haber’s experimental convertor, 1909.




           Fig. 2. Laboratory convertor, 1910.


202                          1931 C.BOSCH




      Fig. 3. Contact tube as used in first technical trial, 1910.




             Fig. 4. Unprotected convertor tube, 1910.


HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                                203




   Fig. 5. First convertor with liner and external heating, 1911.




Fig. 6. Brittle fracture of a fitting owing to hydrogen attack, 1930.


204                               1931 C.BOSCH




          Fig. 7. Destroyed tube cluster from a heat exchanger, 1910.




      Fig. S. Hydrogen attack on a mild steel forging. General view, 1930.




           Fig. 9. Effect of wall thickness on decarburization, 1913.


                                                                                  205




Fig. IO. Protection against hydrogen attack by liner and degasification channels, 1913.




                         Fig. II. Steel jacket with liner, 1911.




                Fig. 1 2. Fine structure of undestroyed mild steel (x 36).


206




  Fig. 13. Unprotected convertor tube. Fine structure of destroyed interior, 1910.




   Fig. 14. Fine structure of destroyed 4.8 x 6 mm steel tube from-a heat exchanger,
                                       1910 (x50).




 Fig. 15. Hydrogen attack on a mild steel forging. Fine structure in a ramified crack,
                                    1930(x25).


                                                                            307




Fig. 16. Hydrogen attack on a mild steel forging. Breakdown-of perlite by
                      decarburization,1930(X50).




          Fig. 17. Effect of hydrogen on structure of mild steel.




                    Fig. 18. Technical copper ( x 40).


208                                1931 C.BOSCH

    We were then in a dilemma. A number of attempts to obviate the difficul-
 ties which had arisen were in the first instance unsuccessful or else unprom-
 ising. Even when overheating was most painstakingly avoided the same
 phenomena appeared, albeit after a longer period. Tests of materials in the
 laboratory revealed that at high pressure and quite high temperature, carbon
 steel is invariably corroded by hydrogen in the manner outlined. It is just
  a question of time. In our case at any rate, since the best catalysts then used
  by us required working temperatures of not less than 400-450°C it was only
  a matter of hours and days. To dispense with external heating and use stronger
 internal insulation with cooling on the outside and heating on the inside
 seemed ineffective and uneconomical, particularly since it transpired that
 with hydrogen under high pressure all insulations failed - and the good insu-
 lations at that - the effect of which is based on their porosity since of course
 compressed hydrogen has a very high thermal conductivity. Furthermore a
 systematic study was undertaken of all suitable metals and materials with
 which it would be possible to protect the steel available to us for pressure-
 bearing construction material. But these again were either destroyed or per-
 mitted very ready trans-diffusion of hydrogen so that no protection was
 achieved. Only refined steels, as we found in subsequent studies, gave better
                                                                                    3
 results so that they were a suitable building material and are still in use to-day.
    Meanwhile we had found a better and quite general solution to the problem
 of making apparatus with unlimited stability to hydrogen at high temperature
 under all conditions.
    We assumed to start with that the diffusion of hydrogen into the iron, the
 decarburization of the perlite, and the formation of brittle iron hydride are
just unavoidable. They had to be rendered harmless by a modification in
 design. The wall of the convertor serves two purposes: it holds the pressure
 of the highly compressed gases, and provides a gas-tight seal. What would
 be the result of separating these two functions and allocating them to different
 components? It soon proved practicable to do this. The very first test con-
 vertor built on this principle validated this reasoning.
    The long-sought solution consisted in fitting a pressure-bearing steel jacket
 internally with a quite thin lining of soft steel in such a way that as the hydro-
 gen, which of course only diffuses, passes through the thin lining it is able
 to escape without building up pressure before it can attack the outer steel
jacket at the high temperature. This is readily achieved by the grooves
 produced on the outside when the tube is being turned, and by a large num-
 ber of holes drilled in the steel jacket through which the hydrogen is free


         HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                             209

to emerge. Right at the outset the thin lining tube fits tightly against the
jacket under the high pressure and later, when it has become brittle, there is
no way of expanding it again so that no cracks occur. Diffusion losses are
minimal. 4
    The solution appeared simple and was in fact so but yet the entire develop-
 ment of the process depended on it to a greater or lesser extent. To-day, after
 20 years’ experience we know that hydrogen still attacks unprotected iron
 at temperatures even below 300oC and sooner or later causes breakdowns
 at points where frequently they would not have been expected.
    I shall now demonstrate the design for you using lantern slides and then
 illustrate the destroying action of hydrogen using particularly explicit
 examples:
    Our first convertor dating from March, 1911 with lining tube, still heated
 on the outside (Fig. 5). The regenerator is located outside the convertor.
    Now examples of typical breakdowns: the extensive splintering of the
 material is immediately noticeable (Fig. 6). The tubes (6 mm outside diam-
 eter) had become so very brittle that they shattered on withdrawal of the
 cluster (Fig. 7). In Fig. 8 the zone destroyed by the hydrogen is shown in
 white. The finely ramified paths of attack advancing in the material as extreme-
 ly fine hairline cracks are noteworthy. The next photograph (Fig. 9) shows
 the etched cross-section of a hollow test rod of carbon steel with a uniform
 inner cavity and different wall thicknesses. At the top of the thick collar a fine
 perforation is visible which was drilled through of the wall thickness. The
 decarburized zone of the material shows up light against the dark intact zone.
 The extent of the decarburization depends on the existing temperature, the
 partial pressure (diffusion pressure) of the hydrogen active in the structure
 and on the magnitude of the mechanical stress.
    As measured in absolute terms therefore the decarburization has penetrated
  further in the thick wall, while measured in relative terms it has penetrated
 further in the thin wall. Owing to the low local diffusion pressure the corro-
 sion recedes at the cavity.
    Fig.10 shows how the hydrogen attack is rendered harmless by lining
  tube and gas exhaust channels. Removal of the gas has made it impossible for
 the hydrogen completely to destroy the lining tube or even attack the jacket.
 Apart from numerous cracks the lining tube ( Fig. I I ) also exhibits blistering
  caused by the formation of methane and steam owing to diffusing hydrogen.
  The steel jacket itself shows no cracking at all but has widened owing to ther-
  mal expansion. Microscopic examination of the fine structure affords the best


210                              1931 C.BOSCH

insight into the destruction. Firstly, in Fig. 12 the fine structure of an intact
ingot steel can be seen. The matrix of pure iron (ferrite) is light, the dispersed
carbon-containing crystals (perlite) are dark.
    A number of photographs then follow which show the destruction of the
structure, a very instructive example being Fig.1 3. The material is completely
decarburized and loosened at the grain boundaries.
    In Fig. 14 the material is also completely decarburized and loosened at the
grain boundaries. Oxides are embedded everywhere in the structure.
    Fig. 15 shows the fine structure of a ramification of the attacked forging
in Fig. 8.
    Similarly Fig. 16 which brings out particularly clearly the incipient dis-
solution of the perlite near grain-boundary breakdowns.
    The same progression of the effect induced by the hydrogen appears in
Fig. 17.
    The two following photographs show copper which was tested as material
for the jacket and lining, proving inferior to iron. First copper with a normal
structure (Fig. I 8) and then Fig. 19 showing the structure after brief exposure
to the action of hydrogen at high pressure and temperature. After 40 hours
the destruction had become so far advanced that the copper, in this case from
a regenerator coil, was completely permeable to gas. Besides hydrogen
attack on the structure there is a further factor which frequently causes break-
downs, i.e. severe cavitation within the metal (Fig. 20). The hydrogen which
has diffused into the material, the methane formed by decarburizationand
any steam formed by the reduction of oxides are present under highpres-
sure in the structure of the steel.
    When the pressure of the ambient gas atmosphere is rapidly released the
material readily expands, particularly at higher temperature at sites with
small coherence beforehand such as incompletely welded blow holes and
pipes or sites where there are large accumulations of slag.
    I have already stated that in what are termed refined steels we found a
suitable material which finds particular application at points in apparatus
which are awkward to protect by a lining. Fig. 21 follows for comparison
 with iron (ingot steel). Refined steels are merely carbon-containing iron
alloys, e.g. with Cr, W, and Ni.
    Examination showed that perlite nickel steel is very sensitive to hydrogen
 attack, in many cases more sensitive even than ordinary ingot steel. The sen-
 sitivity rises with increasing nickel content. This influence of nickel can be
 offset by the appropriate addition of alloying metals such as chromium, tung-


         HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                            211

sten, molybdenum, etc. The graph (Fig. 22) shows that for instance a tungsten
content of 2% is insufficient compensation and that the loss of strength and
expansion increases strongly with the nickel content. A 5% tungsten addition
is adequately effective.
   Next comes a figure to illustrate the effect of degasification (Fig. 23). It
can clearly be seen that the destruction stops short a certain distance from the
degasification channels and that the jacket tube is not attacked. In the present
instance the jacket and lining tubes are of different materials (jacket tube of
ingot steel, lining tube of ingot iron).
   A further means to inhibit the attack of hydrogen on the iron is to flush
the space between the lining tube and the jacket continuously with nitrogen. 5
As I have previously mentioned nitrogen is not harmful to iron. The effect
of this arrangement is exactly like that of gas exhaustion, as shown in Fig. 24.
 The method is applied on a wide scale in conjunction with gas exhaustion.
   Elsewhere6 it was found that instead of the neutral gas a bath of metals,
liquid at the working temperature and impermeable to hydrogen, can be
 used (Fig. 25, scale as in Fig. 24). In this case, however, the separating steel
 tube is decarburized through its entire wall and loosened at the grain bound-
aries, hence mechanically completely destroyed.
   I now come to the design of the convertor.
   It was obvious from the outset that the economy of the process necessitated
 extracting a large proportion of the heat required for heating the gas mixture
 by exchange from the exhaust gases. Yet the yield of ammonia after a single
pass over the contact catalyst was only about of the original mixture.
    Although at the beginning of our tests we had counted on compensating
 for the heat losses by heating the convertor, even with this arrangement the
 utmost economies had to be made since the amounts of gas passing through
 are enormous and the heat has invariably to be supplied to the hottest point
 before the catalyst. Moreover, care had to be taken to avoid an excessive
 temperature gradient owing to the passage of heat through the convertor
jacket since in any case at the temperatures prevailing the strength of steel
 drops markedly, as shown in Fig. 26. In view of the low conversions involved
 we dared not count on replacing the heat losses by the heat of reaction alone.
    Based on Knietsch’s well-known design for the sulphuric acid contact pro-
 cess, the convertor was conceived as shown in Fig. 27. The design reproduced
 here for the ammonia convertor incorporates all the characteristics of the best
 modern tube convertor, the heat of reaction being removed as evenly as
 possible. The counter-current principle in the heat exchange has been retained


212                             1931 C.BOSCH

without modification. The admission of cold gas at the top enables the reac-
tion to be controlled. The contact chamber is largely subdivided by the
regenerator tubes.
   At the time the design was shelved because the knowledge that the material
is destroyed by hydrogen imposed the need for simplification. Copper
regenerator tubes had been thought of and as transpired a few weeks later
copper is particularly severely attacked by hydrogen (cf. Fig. 19).
   As we were unable to incorporate the whole of the necessary heat ex-
changers in a convertor, two further regenerators were arranged in front of
the contact tube so that the whole arrangement then appeared as shown in
Fig. 28. Apart from the cluster of regenerator tubes in the convertor, this
design also features a vertical cluster of regenerator tubes connected to a
double spiral. The tubes between the convertor and the vertical regenerator
were lined. The double spiral, too, was later dropped because the tempera-
tures arising in it led to destruction by hydrogen and its resistance to flow
was very high. A second vertical regenerator then replaced the double spiral.
   The contact tube was heated on the outside using gas. With this apparatus
quite prolonged operation was possible for the first time. But the hope that
we were now at the end of all our difficulties was not fulfilled. Even without
being destroyed by hydrogen, the steel jackets of the convertors were in the
long run unequal to the high pressure at the high temperature imposed by
the external heating. They buckled and cracked and the result was a series
of heavy explosions which we were able to render harmless of course by
accommodating the tubes in explosion-proof chambers but the continual
high repair costs threatened the economics of the process. A different answer
had thus to be found and consisted in supplying the heat from inside. Even
then we still did not trust electrical inside heating as we were faced with
unavoidable high losses to avoid overheating of the jacket. We thus tried gas
heating by burning hydrogen (synthetic gas) with admitted air in the con-
vertor. A certain amount of water was formed but did not appear to harm the
contact catalyst. At any rate this was the lesser evil.
   To avoid the risk of an explosion of the hydrogen-air mixture with every
expectation of its being extremely violent, we studied the problem on the
arrangement shown in Fig. 29. The flame in the pressureless apparatus was a
pale greyish blue, at a pressure of 100atm. the flame appeared a shiny bright
blue.
   The ultimate version of a convertor appeared as in Fig. 30.
   The figure illustrates the design of a large convertor of 800 mm inside


HIGH PRESSURE METHOD                IN    AMMONIA         INDUSTRY   213




Fig. 19. Structure of copper tube destroyed by hydrogen. ( X36).




    F i g.20. Cavitation of‘sheet iron and rolled stock, 1913.


214                               1931 C.BOSCH




Fig.21. Loss of strength and extension after treatment for 24 hours in hydrogen at
                            580 o C and 150 atm., 1911.




Fig.22. Effect of nickel content on hydrogen attack on nickel tungsten steel, 1916.


 HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                              215




Fig. 23. Fine structure of a liner with degas&cation channels, 1910.




            Fig. 24. Protection of jacket by neutral gas.


216                            1931 C.BOSCH




                 Fig.25. Protection of jacket by metal bath.




      Fig. 26. Tensile strength and extension of mild steel (Bach, 1904).


 HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                              217




                    Fig. 27. Convertor, 1910.




Fig.28 Convertor with heat exchanger and external gas heating, 1911.


218                                  1931 C.BOSCH




      Fig.29. Experimental apparatus with internal gas heating under pressure, 1911.




                      Fig. 30. Convertor with nitrogen flushing, 1916.


HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY
                                              219




          Fig. 31. Electrical burner, 1918.




           Fig. 32. Coil absorber, 1913,


220               1931 C.BOSCH




          Fig. 33. Coil absorption, 1915.




      Fig. 34. Large ammonia absorber, 1920.


        HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                             221

diameter - an "800 oven" - with gas heating on the inside, a central tube and
nitrogen flushing. The inside system of gas heating was retained until 1922.
During the more than 10 years that this method was used under production
conditions, no explosions occurred in the convertors. Observations of the
thermocouples, particularly the one fitted to the burner, showed when it was
necessary to apply additional heating to the oven, even below a pressure of
200 atm., by forcing in air.
   As we moved to bigger and bigger production units it was found that
beyond a certain size it was possible, given good heat exchange, to offset the
heat losses by the heat of reaction. This represented quite a considerable ad-
vance for then we were able to dispense entirely with continuous heating
during the operation. It was just a matter of bringing the convertor to the
correct initial reaction temperature. Gas heating had essentially the drawback
that during the heating-up period the gas circuit had to be reversed with
respect to normal operation in order to keep the combustion products away
from the contact area, often causing stoppages owing to cracks in the con-
vertor lining. Moreover the heat had to be applied across a high gradient to
the gas at a relatively small point. These drawbacks were overcome by the
electrical heater, about 5 m long, accommodated in the central tube (Fig. 31).
   As the design of the convertors advanced we also turned our attention of
course to the other parts of the high pressure apparatus. There was firstly the
matter of withdrawing from the circuit the ammonia formed. The answer
was to use water in the following way:
   To prevent the entailment of water, water and gas flowed in the same direc-
tion through a spiral tube system cooled on the outside (Fig. 32).However, to
achieve a counter-current and obtain the maximum concentration of am-
monia water with the optimum scrubbing effect, three such systems were
stacked one on top of the other which then operated on the counter-current
principle (Fig. 33). Later it was learned how to build simple scrubbers (Fig.
34). This was an obvious answer but only practicable after long experience.
   To-day, to cut down transport costs, a large part of the ammonia is liquefied
free from water by intense cooling.
   Initially the high pressure compressors were a great source of worry. Hither-
to large compressors had only been used in engineering for compressing air.
In the main they were used to produce compressed air for running compressed
air locomotives in mines and for Linde type air liquefaction plants. These
compressors were only designed in modest sizes. The chief trouble, however,
was that little attention had been paid to the stuffing boxes. In the case of air,


222                                1931 C.BOSCH

leaks were not important and a brief stoppage was accepted. Matters are
different where hydrogen and the sensitive contact process are concerned.
Losses of hydrogen mean money and the risk of explosion, and the contact
apparatus could not stand stoppages. Probably all the designs then built were
tried out by us and in years of work, on the basis of the experience which we
gained from those small compressors which ran for not more than half a
day without stopping, we succeeded in building the gigantic 3,000 horse
power units which function reliably and without stoppage for 6 months,
after which they receive their regular, periodic clean. At this juncture I should
like to stress how important completely smooth running is for the synthesis
of ammonia. Every stoppage at a single point affects the entire plant and after
a stoppage it takes hours until everything is back to normal. It is no exagger-
ation for me to say that, technically speaking, it depends entirely on smooth,
continuous operation whether the process is economical. It has taken us years
to reach that point. Of particular assistance here were the monitoring instru-
ments to which we turned our attention right at the outset since it soon tran-
spired that it was possible to follow the events in the convertors only by
continuous recording. Nowadays that is obvious and most of the instruments
are even available commercially but in those days we had to build and try
them all out ourselves. Of the abundance of characteristic examples I shall
deal only with a few. Besides accurate temperature monitoring at all points
in the convertor by simple thermocouples, and the determination of the am-
monia, the main factor of interest is the intensity of the gas stream. A pressure
balance, as it is termed, permits measurement of the gas stream with the maxi-
mum precision at the highest pressures (Fig. 35). Measurement of the amounts
of gas, steam and liquid under high pressure necessitates recording the pressure
difference arising in the jets or orific plates in the pipe line, the square root
of which is proportional to the amount. The pressure balance records these
square roots by means of a semi-circular, U-tube housed in one of the balance
arms and half filled with mercury. The pressures prevailing in front of and
behind the orifice plate are applied to both ends of the balance via elastic
capillary tube solenoids. The square of this value is plotted on a cylinder via
a swinging lever fitted with a guide.
   The composition of the circulating gas stream also has an important bearing
on the process. It is indicated by the automatic density recorder (Figs. 36 and 37).
The density recorder is based on Bunsen’s law relating to flow and both con-
trols the proportion of the mixture of hydrogen and other gas admixtures,
and accurately records the gas density which has to be allowed for when the


        HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                           223
amount of gas is measured by means of a jet. Errors induced by temperature
and pressure are compensated by comparing the flow volumes of the gas mix-
ture and a standard gas (air) in the same times and at the same temperatures.
   It is very important to monitor the process for any oxygen content, not only
because of the explosion risk but also because of the steam created in the hot
catalyst which, as we now know, reduces the yield.
   The procedure here is as follows (Fig. 38). To record small contents of
oxygen down to 0.01% the hydrogen mixture is guided through an electri-
cally heated combustion tube with a differential thermopile, the even num-
bered junctions of which carry collars of catalyst of minimum thermal capac-
ity where the reaction




produces a temperature rise with respect to the uneven numbered junctions.
The thermoelectric current generated is recorded and trips an alarm on reach-
ing a given danger level. With the addition of electrolytic hydrogen the in-
strument records the oxygen content of Linde nitrogen. It is used also for
other exothermic reactions, e.g. to detect benzine vapour in the air.
   No less attention had to be paid to monitoring the carbon monoxide con-
tent since next to sulphur this is the greatest enemy of the iron contact
catalyst.
   The water-gas equilibrium, which in our process at low temperature and
with excess water vapour we displace to the right hand side of the equation

                           C O + H 2 O = C O2 + H2

 is at about 2% CO under technical conditions.
    After the carbon dioxide has been removed by scrubbing with water under
 pressure, carbon monoxide is removed by means of an ammoniacal solution
 of cuprous oxide. The carbon monoxide dissolved in this solution is driven
 off by gentle heating and reduction of the pressure. A solution containing
just cuprous oxide precipitates metallic copper since carbon monoxide has a
 slow reducing action. To avoid that effect a little oxygen is continuously
 added to maintain the solution at an accurately controllable concentration of
 cuprous oxide. The apparatus used is that shown here (Fig.39). The apparatus
 monitors the degree of oxidation of the cuprous oxide solution which absorbs
 the carbon monoxide. The blue cupric ions of the solution flowing through


224                              1931 C.BOSCH

the cell absorb part of the light from an incandescent lamp striking a thermo-
pile. The difference between the thermoelectric power of this thermopile
and a second one irradiated via a standard filter is recorded. It is approxi-
mately proportional to the cupric ion concentration and thus to the amount
of oxygen taken up by the solution.
   The construction of such a large interconnected apparatus as at present in-
stalled in our works at Oppau and Leuna and the thousands of metres of
tubing, and the thousands of flanges and valves associated with it also neces-
sitates a special study, of course. Above all, everything has to be gas-tight and
the appropriate measures have been so successful that the gas losses are just
sufficient to prevent the argon content originating from the air and the accu-
mulating methane attaining too high a level in the circulating system.
   The apparatus has to be perfectly reliable and permit extremely rapid shut
down and evacuation of parts in the event of stoppages. Over the years we
have been able to cull sufficient experience, especially during the war when
the Oppau works were bombed night after night, and we are still of the
opinion today that one cannot be too careful. Consequently we have always
played for safety, and ultimately took over ourselves the design and a major
part of the manufacture of the fittings in our own workshops. Apart from
seamless tubes, only steel forgings are used. Briefly I should like to cite a
few examples (Figs. 40, 41 and 42).
   In the quick-acting valve (Fig. 40) the magnetic coil mounted on a com-
pression-resistant jacket of V2A non-magnetic steel is energized by contact
manometers operating on the steady flow principle, in the event of a tube
breakage. The self-closing valve (Fig. 41) with spring release and by-pass
valves is automatically sealed off at one side or the other by the gas stream
when the rate of flow becomes too high owing to tube breakage.
   The slide valve illustrated in Fig. 42 which is designed as a venturi tube is
rapidly closed in the event of tube breakage by the descending piston and by
the release of pressure via the needle valve on the adjustable pin. When the
exhaust channel milled in the slide valve pin enters the false bottom, the closing
action is retarded. Two circulating pumps (Figs. 43 and 44) are worthy of
mention as examples of further important new designs. The design in Fig. 43
is marked by the passage of the piston rod through the cylinder head to
prevent as far as possible deposits of liquid and dust settling on the stuffing
box. The feature of the rotating gas circulating pump (Fig. 44) is that the
electric motor and the centrifugal pump function in a pressure vessel at
200 atm.


        HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY
                                                                               225




                Fig. 35. Mercury pressure balance for gas, 1914.




Fig. 36. Gas density recorder (A = three-way valve; B = d.c. relay; C = gas jet;
                               D= filter), 1914.


226                              1931 C.BOSCH




                       Fig. 37. Gas density recorder, 1914.




      Fig. 38. Instrument to detect traces of oxygen by thermal effect, 1919.


                                                                     227
HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY




Fig. 39. Colorimeter to measure oxygen in copper solution, 1921.




 Fig. 40. Magnetically operated quick-acting valve, February 1913.


228                 1931 C.BOSCH




      Fig.41. Self-closing valve, October 1912.




      Fig.42. Quick-acting slide valve, 1926.


HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                        229




                 -0

                   Fig. 43. Large piston circulating pump.




   Gas inlet
        I




               Fig.44. Rotary gas circulating pump, May 1922.


230                         1931 C.BOSCH




      Fig.45. Increasing size of ammonia convertors, 1910-1915.




      Fig.46. Increasing size of ammonia convertors, 1910-1915.


   HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                                 231




Fig.47. Output of large convertor in tons of nitrogen per day, 1917-1931.


232                              1931 C.BOSCH




  Fig.49. Comparison of sizes of blast furnace and ammonia convertor for same
                             throughput value, 1930.




                      Fig. 50. Laboratory convertor, 1910.


         HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                            233
   In broad outline that is how the high pressure process for the synthesis of
ammonia developed.
   As a further illustration of the developments that have come about over
the years I would like you to compare a few figures: Figs. 45 and 46 vs.
Fig. 47.
   The increase in the capacity of the large convertor from 1917 to 1931
(Fig. 47) was achieved by altering the design of the lining, improving the
material and improving the gas purification. The reduction in the weight of
steel for the same output of nitrogen (Fig. 48) was accomplished through im-
proved design, better lining material and better gas purification.
   Fig. 49 gives a comparison between a blast furnace and an ammonia con-
vertor.
   Figs. 50-59 incl. are a further few photographs which illustrate the trend
of progress from the first test convertor to the enormous Leuna works.
   I am now coming to the end of my account. The development of the am-
monia manufacturing process which partly as a result of Germany’s isolation
owing to the war, was perfected in a relatively short space of time by har-
nessing all our efforts and resources, has also of course stimulated the develop-
ment of other reactions which proceed markedly better under high pressure
than under atmospheric pressure. Experience has shown that in general it is
often much more economical to operate at high pressure but even when the
technical high pressure synthesis has been mastered, measures must be taken
to ensure that the partial pressures, whether of the reaction gases or of the
impurities, are correspondingly high.
   Let us assume that 0.01% CO has to be removed from a gas mixture. Tech-
nically, at the high speed of the gas flow and low pressure, this is practically
impossible by scrubbing with an absorbent, but very easy at 200 atm. with a
carbon monoxide partial pressure of 1/50 atm.
   Right at the outset of our studies we looked into the reduction of carbon
monoxide with hydrogen and found that liquid reaction products could be
obtained which proved to be mixtures of aliphatic alcohols, aldehydes, ketones
                                                                            8
and acids derived from them.7 Not until later (early 1923 ) was it realized that
the first reaction product, methyl alcohol, is only formed in quantity if gas free
from iron carbonyl and iron-free contact catalysts (particularly ZnO-Cr 2O3
is used and the influence of iron vessel walls avoided as they condense methyl
alcohol. The optimum operating conditions to achieve high yields of pure
methyl alcohol were soon found, thereby facilitating the very rapid develop-
ment of the synthesis, so that to-day methanol has become one of the cheapest


234                              1931 C.BOSCH

products of the chemical industry. Possibly the annual production by the high
pressure method of synthesis is not less than 40,000 tons.
   A further reaction which very soon claimed attention is the manufacture
of urea from carbon dioxide and ammonia with the formation of water.9
   When a mixture of carbon dioxide and ammonia or ammonium carbamate
is heated to 130-140oC in a closed vessel, a mixture of urea and water plus
carbon dioxide and ammonia is formed. The equilibrium is favourable at
about 40% of the theoretical yield of urea. If such a mixture were allowed
slowly to cool, the water formed would re-saponify most of the urea and so
impair the yield. Furthermore the thermal economy would be very poor. We
therefore separate the reaction mixture by distillation at high pressure by
suctioning off the excess ammonia and the carbon dioxide using heated com-
pressors and condensing the gases again above the solidification point.
   Fig. 60 gives an illustration of the compressors used for that purpose. By
this process we are able to produce about 40,000 tons of urea annually at our
Oppau works.
   Besides other, less important, pressure processes coal hydrogenation has
attracted particular interest in recent years. As he will shortly report, Bergius
had found that when coal is heated with hydrogen under pressure, large
quantities of liquid reaction products are formed. In our laboratories it was
subsequently ascertained that by using catalysts these reactions can be better
controlled and may yield any products from light hydrocarbons to lubricating
oil. After Bergius’ basic patents had been acquired this process was intro-
duced on a wide scale in Oppau and Leuna on the basis of our experience
with the high pressure process and catalyst manufacture and currently pro-
vides 120,000 tons of benzine a year.
   Most of the large oil companies also acquired the process for the hydrogena-
tion of crude oils that are not readily processed. The present economic situa-
tion and the keen competition on the oil market have held up development.
Nevertheless these processes are destined to play a very important part in the
future.
   Finally, I would like to draw your attention to another photograph (Fig. 61)
of a large convertor in our coal hydrogenation plant. This shows the sizes
we have reached (over-all length of convertor 18 m). Only on a mass produc-
tion scale can these processes compete with the natural products.

I have to-day been able to inform you about only a small section of the work
which has been carried out in our firm since 1908 in the field under discussion.


          HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                         235
It scarcely need be added that this achievement has only been made possible
by a large staff of colleagues. It is probably true to assert that such numbers
have never before been engaged on one single problem. I sincerely wish to
mention in particular two colleagues present here to-day who threw them-
selves heart and soul into our work from the very outset, namely Dr. Mit-
tasch, head of the scientific laboratory, and Dr. Lappe who was in charge of
technical development. To them I would like to acknowledge now my grati-
tude for their unstinting, loyal co-operation.




1. D.R.P., 292, 615 (1912).
2. D.R.P., 249, 447, Jan. 9, 1910, together with supplements.
3. D.R.P., 291, 582 (1912); 298, 199 (1913) and 306, 333 (1916).
4. D.R.P., 254, 571 (Febr. 12, 1911) and 256, 296 (Sept. 6, 1911).
5.D.R.P., 265, 295 (1912).
6. Zentralstelle Neubabelsberg, D.R.P., 290, 877 (1913).
7. D.R.P., 293, 787 (1913).
8. Various patents issued in 1923 and subsequent years.
9. D.R.P., 295, 075 (1915) and 301, 279 (1916) and others.




                       [For Figs. 51-61 incl., see pages 236-241.]


236                       1931 C.BOSCH




      Fig. 51. Experimental circulating pump. August 1910.




          Fig. 52. High pressure compressor 1,000 h.p.


HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY
                                                    237




     Fig. 53. High pressure compressor 3,000 h.p.




   Fig. 54. High pressure compressor 3,000 h.p.


238                      1931 C.BOSCH




      Fig. 55. High pressure lye pumps for gas purification.




              Fig. 56. Large piston circulating pump.


HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY      239




              Fig. 57. Oppau works.




       Fig. 58. Ammonia works at Merseburg.


240                                 1931 C.BOSCH




Fig. 59. World and I.G. Farbenindustrie annual capacity in tons of synthetic nitrogen.




             Fig. 60. Heated high pressure compressors for urea factory.


   HIGH PRESSURE METHOD IN AMMONIA INDUSTRY                             241




Fig. 61. Convertor and high pressure chambers of hydrogenation plant.
