                              D. H. R.BARTON


         The principles of conformational analysis
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1969




The importance of conformational analysis in Chemistry became manifest
during the decade immediately after the last World War. This lecture is,
therefore, more an account of chemical history than of recent advances. In
order to appreciate the significance of conformational analysis, a short intro-
duction describing the development of structural theory in Organic Chem-
istry is necessary.
   In the second half of the nineteenth century it became possible, thanks to the
theories of Kekulé and others, to assign a constitution to each organic sub-
stance. The constitution is simply the specification of which atoms are bonded
to which in the molecule and, in the great majority of cases, is unambiguous.
A constitutional formula has no stereochemistry. The necessity to consider
the stereochemistry of molecules became self-evident when two or more
distinctly different substances were found to have the same constitution. It
was Le Bel and, especially, Van ‘t Hoff who, also in the nineteenth century,
introduced the idea of configuration. One can consider that the configura-
tions of a molecule of a given constitution represent the specification of the
order of the bonds in space about the atoms, or groups in the molecule which
give rise to stereoisomers. For the great majority of substances this means the
specification of the order of the bonds about an asymmetric "double bond" or
about a "centre of asymmetry", normally a carbon atom substituted by four
different groups. The first type of stereoisomerism is called "geometrical
isomerism", the latter "optical isomerism". The number of possible stereo-
isomers of a given configuration then becomes x                   where is the


          PRINCIPLES OF CONFORMATIONAL ANALYSIS                             299
number of "asymmetric double bonds" and m is the number of "centres of
asymmetry". This formula of Van ‘t Hoff, the first winner of a Nobel Prize,
is still of fundamental importance today, nearly a century after it was first
written down. Organic chemists have been very busy in demonstrating the
truth of constitutional and configurational theory. Between one and two
million different organic compounds have so far been prepared and we can
prepare as many more millions as are required.
   Van ‘t Hoff had a very clear idea of the reason for the success of the
formula. It was based on the concept of "restricted" rotation about double
bonds and of "free" rotation about single bonds. The latter concept was neces-
sary to explain why most "optical isomers" did not have a myriad of isomers
themselves. We shall not be concerned in this lecture with "geometrical
isomerism" about double bonds. Optical isomerism is based on the idea of
chirality, or the non-superposability of object and mirror image.




The first indication that rotation about single bonds was not always free
came in 1922 when Christie and Kenner1 were able to resolve 2,2’-dinitro-
diphenyl-6,6’-dicarbonylic acid (I) into optically active forms. This resolu-
tion is possible because the four bulky groups at the 2,2’-, 6- and 6’-positions
prevent rotation about the central carbon-carbon single bond. Many analo-
gous examples of restricted rotation of this type were later investigated2. It
does not seem, however, that organic chemists were much worried about
barriers to rotation in organic molecules in general at that time because there
was no technique available to demonstrate the phenomenon experimentally.
   In the decade starting in 1930, chemical physicists noted a discrepancy be-
tween the observed and calculated entropy of ethane. It was clear that this
could only be explained by a barrier to free rotation about the two methyl
groups, but whether this barrier was attractive or repulsive in origin with
respect to the hydrogen atoms of the two methyl groups was a subject of con-
siderable argument. However, the existence of such a barrier to free rotation in
ethane implied that such barriers existed for aliphatic and alicyclic compounds
in general.


300                         1969 D.H.R.BARTON

     The problem was clarified by studies on the simple alicyclic hydrocarbon
 cyclohexane (II) and on derivatives of this compound. It had been appreciated
 for many years that cyclohexane molecules could be constructed in two forms,
 the boat (IV) and the chair (III), both free from angle strain. This distinction
 had, however, no meaning to organic chemists since there was no reason to
 know which form was preferred, nor was it understood that the preference
 would have any chemical consequences. It was the fundamental electron-
 diffraction work of Hassels3,4 that established clearly that the chair conforma-
 tion (III) was always preferred. In this chair conformation the hydrogen
 atoms are as far apart as possible and correspond to the "staggered" form of
ethane and of aliphatic compound in general. Similar considerations apply
 to medium and large alicyclic rings . One can conclude, therefore, that the
                                        5



barrier to rotation in such substances is repulsive rather than attractive in
character.
    Rather than use the vague terms boat and chair forms of cyclohexane, it is
convenient to have a general term. In fact, the appropriate word "conforma-
tion" had already been used in sugar chemistry by W. N. Haworth 6. The most
general definition of conformation is as follows7: "the conformations of a
molecule (of defined constitution and configuration) are those arrangements
in space of the atoms of the molecule which are not superposable upon each
other". Such a definition includes arrangements of atoms in which angle
strain has been introduced, as well as bond extension and compression. It
replaces an earlier definition which excluded angle strain and bond exten-
                                8,9



sion or compression. Thus all molecules have theoretically an infinite number
of conformations. It is fortunate that the complexities which might arise from
such a definition are minimised by the fact that, in general, only a few of the
possible conformations are energetically preferred. One may therefore con-
sider "chair", "boat" and "twist-boat" (a conformation half-way between
two boats; see ref. 10) conformations of cyclohexane all of which are free
from angle strain. The stability order is chair>twist-boat>boat.
    It is obvious that in the chair conformation of cyclohexane two geometri-
cally distinct types of carbon-hydrogen bonds are presents3,11. Six of the C-H
bonds are parallel to the three-fold axis ofsymmetry (V) and are called <axial>
(ref. 12). The other six (VI) are approximately in an equatorial belt around the
three-fold axis and hence are called <equatorial>. As soon as a substituent is
introduced into a cyclohexane ring the molecule may adopt a preferred chair
conformation with the substituent either axial or equatorial. Owing to repul-
sive non-bonded interactions between axial groups the equatorial conforma-


          PRINCIPLES OF CONFORMATIONAL ANALYSIS                            301
tion is, in general favoured3,11 . In the case of multiply substituted cyclo-
hexanes the preferred conformation is, provided dipolar interactions are not
dominant, that with the maximum possible number of substituents equatorial.




When two cyclohexane rings are fused together as in the configurational
isomers trans- (VII) and cis- (VIII) decalin, a unique two-chair conforma-
tion, (IX) and (X) respectively, can be written for both molecules. Bastiansen
and Hassel13 showed that, as expected from consideration of non-bonded
interactions, these two conformations were indeed the preferred ones.




At about this time the first semi-empirical, semi-quantitative calculations
of non-bonded interactions were appearing in the literature*+. Application of
these methods to ethane, to cyclohexane and to the trans - and cis-decalins 15
gave results in qualitative agreement with the findings of Hassel and others
mentioned above. In order to carry out these calculations, which at that time,
in the absence of computers, were exceedingly arduous, special models were
constructed 16 which later proved to be very useful in working out the prin-
ciples of conformational analysis. The same models were also useful in under-
standing, in conformational terms, the dissociation constants of the tricarbox-
ylic acid (XI) obtained by the oxidative degradation of abieric acid (XII) 17.
This was, in fact, an early example of the use of conformational analysis.
   The stage was now set for a much fuller appreciation of the meaning of
conformational analysis. At the time (1950) when our paper in Experientia 8
was written, steroid chemistry was already a major branch of science 18 which


302                         1969 D.H.R.BARTON

had just received a strong additional stimulus from the discovery of the utility
of cortisone. There was an enormous literature of stereochemical fact which
had not been interpreted properly in its three-dimensional aspects. Most
steroids contain three six-membered rings fused trans to a five-membered
ring and the two commonest configurational arrangements can be represented
as in (XI I I) and (XIV). Accepting that the three six-membered rings will in




both cases adopt the preferred and unique three-chair conformation then
(XII) may be represented in three dimensions as (XV) and (XIV) as (XVI).
In steroid chemistry it is convenient to designate substituents on the same side
of the molecule as the two methyl groups as β-oriented. Those on the opposite
side of the molecule are then said to be α-oriented. Substituents attached to




the steroid nucleus thus have a configuration which is α or    and which can be
determined by the classical methods of stereochemistry (ring formation, ring
fission, etc.). The key to the application of conformational analysis is that the
ring fusions of the steroid nucleus fix the conformation of the whole molecule
such that a substituent necessarily has both a configuration (a or    and a con-
formation (equatorial or axial). Since, at a given carbon atom in the steroid
nucleus, a substituent will be more stable equatorial than axial it follows
that one can at once predict the more stable configuration between a pair of
isomers. Thus a       -substituted (equatorial) trans A/B steroid (XVII) should
be more stable than the corresponding                        (axial) compound


          PRINCIPLES OF CONFORMATIONAL ANALYSIS                               303




(XVIII). This is in agreement with experiment. The same argument applies
to all the other substitutable positions in the steroid nucleus in the six-mem-
bered rings, and, in general, good agreement with experiment is seen. The
same applies for all molecules, for example triterpenoids, where fused all-
chair conformations are present.
   The relative stability of substituents is determined by repulsive non- bonded
interactions (steric compression). Therefore, not only can one predict which
isomer (α- or -) will be formed in a chemical reaction which for mechanistic
reasons gives the more stable product, but also any reaction which involves
steric compression can be understood better. Thus in the alkaline hydrolysis
of esters where the transition state for the reaction is more space-demanding
than the initial state, one can predict that an equatorial isomer will hydrolyse
faster than an axial isomer attached to the same carbon atom. This is, in general,
true, and the principle aids in the prediction of selective hydrolysis reactions.
   Every chemical reaction has a transition state. Many transition states have a
well-defined preferred geometrical requirement. Thus in an E2 type reac-
tion19, where two substituents attached to α-carbons are eliminated simul-
taneously by the attack of a reagent, the preferred geometry is that where the
two carbons and the two substituents (X and Y) are coplanar. The two pos-
sible arrangements are anti (XIX) and syn (XX). The latter geometry is not
available in steroids without distortion of a chair conformation. The former
geometry (XIX) is, however, inevitably present in trans-1:2-diaxially sub-
stituted compounds (e.g. XXI), but not present in the corresponding trans-
 1:2-diequatorially substituted isomer (e.g. XXII). Such geometrical rela-
tionships are clearly shown if one looks along the C5-C 6bond. Thus in
(XXI) the projection (XXIII) is seen and in (XXII) the projection (XXIV).


304                          1969    D.H.R.BARTON

Thus for a bimolecular E2 reaction of the two bromine atoms induced by
iodide ion (see XXV)20, it could be predicted that the dibromide (XXI)
would eliminate much faster than dibromide (XXII). Fortunately both di-
bromides could be prepared and their configurations determined21. As antic-
ipated, the rate of elimination of bromines for the dibromide (XXI) was
several powers of ten faster than the rate of the corresponding elimination
from the dibromide (XX11)21. This was the first example of a phenomenon
that was demonstrated later to be quite general for dibromides and many
other types of eliminatable functions 2 2 , 2 3 . In general the geometrical require-
ments of the transition states of all chemical reactions are advantageously
examined in conformational terms using steroids or other molecules with
locked conformations.




The phenomenon of neighbouring group participation demands a con-
formational interpretation (diaxial participation) which is well exemplified
in steroids24. Similarly, the opening of small membered rings like the halo-
nium ion 24,25 or the epoxide group 9,26 gives predominantly diaxial rather
than diequatorial products.
   When the diaxial dibromide (XXI) is kept in solution at room temperature
it rearranges spontaneously to an equilibrium with the more stable di-
equatorial dibromide (XXII). In effect two axial C-Br bonds are exchanged
for two equatorial C-Br bonds. This is a general reaction 22,23 for 1,2-di-
bromides. We conceived that this rearrangement should be part of a general-
ised diaxial      diequatorial rearrangement process as in the scheme (XXVI)
      (XXVII). By an appropriate choice of X and Y the truth of the propo-
sition was demonstrated27-29 . In practise, this reaction is a convenient route
for shifting an oxygen function from one carbon atom to the adjacent carbon.
   In the above discussion we have mainly correlated asymmetric centres of
known configuration with their predicted conformations. The argument can,
of course, be reversed and then provides a powerful method for deducing the
configurations of compounds where a preferred all-chair conformation can
be postulated. The first serious applications were in triterpenoid chemistry.


          PRINCIPLES OF CONFORMATIONAL ANALYSIS                          305




The natural compound oleanolic acid (XXVIII) has 8 centres of asymmetry
and can exist in principle in 2 7 = 128 racemic configurations. Only one con-
figuration [(+) or (-)] is synth esised by Nature. Because the analysis of
conformations is easier with saturated six-membered rings we studied the
saturated oleananolic acid (XXIX) which corresponds [(+) or (-)] to one
racemate from a possible 28= 256 racemic configurations. Such is the power
of the conformational method that the problem of configuration was reduced
by chemical procedures only to a choice between two configurations (XXX




and XXXI)30. The latter was shown to be correct by a later X-ray crystallog-
raphy study31. It corresponds to the planar formula (XXIX).
   By conformational analysis configurations could be assigned to typical
triterpenoids like lanosterol (XXXII) 32, euphol (XXXIII)33, cycloartenol


306                        1969 D. H. R. BARTON




(XXXIV) 34, and onocerin (XXXV) 35 at the same time as their constitutions
were determined. Nowadays, of course, X-ray crystallographic analyses are
done so easily and speedily that there is no special merit in the conformational
method of determination of configuration. But it was important in the early
 1950’s and is useful today when the investigator does not have ready access to
X-ray facilities. The X-ray method has the overall-advantage that it deter-
mines constitution, configuration and preferred (in the crystalline state) con-
formation all at the same time. In general the preferred conformation in the
crystalline state is that which would be predicted by the principles of con-
formational analysis.
   Until 1957 there were no exceptions to the rule of preferred chair con-
formations in molecules where the configurations of the asymmetric centres
permitted a choice between boat and chair to be made. In the course of
studies 36 of the bromination of lanostenone (XXXVI) two bromo-ketones




assigned the        (XXXVII) and    - (XXXVIII) configurations respectively,
both based on a ring A chair conformation. However, by both infrared and
ultraviolet spectroscopy it was shown that both of these compounds had their
bromine equatorial. Further chemical investigations then demonstrated that
the 2β-bromo-compound has, in fact, the boat (or more correctly twist-
boat) conformation (XXXIX). This first exception to the normal confor-
mational preference is due to the large methyl-methyl-bromine 1:3-diaxial


          PRINCIPLES OF CONFORMATIONAL ANALYSIS                            307
interactions in the conformation (XXXVIII) and to the fact that the A ring
contains one trigonal atom (the carbon of the carbonyl group). Later this
conformational anomaly was extensively investigated37 and its reality has
been further confirmed by nuclear magnetic resonance studies38.




Conformational analysis was put on a quantitative basis by Winstein and
Holness 39 and especially by Eliel40. The latter author, a recognised authority
in the field, has made a thorough study41 of the differences in free energy
between axial and equatorial substituents in six-membered rings. There
remain, however, certain subtle aspects of the conformations of molecules
such as steroids and triterpenoids which still demand an adequate explanation
from quantitative theory. Thus we have shown23,42 that if benzaldehyde
condenses with lanostenone (XXXVI) under mildly basic conditions at a rate




of (say) 100 to give the 2-benzylidene derivative (XL), then the simple
non-polar derivative lanostanone (XLI) condenses at a rate of 55 and the
isomeric olefin (XLII) at a rate of only 17. Similarly, cholestanone (XLIII,
R = C8H17) give the 2 - benzylidene derivative (XLIV) at a rate of 182. Simple
side-chain derivatives (see XLIII)) condense at the same rate. However, the
isomeric olefins (XLV) and (XLVI) condense at rates of 645 and 43, a differ-
ence of nearly thirty-fold for only a change in position of a (relatively)
remote double bond. We have attributed these long-range effects to "con-
formational transmission" implying a distortion of bond angles by substit-
uents that is transmitted through molecules to much greater distances than
hitherto suspected. Such phenomena are beginning to receive adequate ex-
planation, at least in qualitative and semi-quantitative terms 43.


308                         1969 D. H. R. BARTON




As already mentioned above, conformation preferences can be calculated
by semi-empirical methods. Now that computers have taken away the
arduous arithmetic involved it has been possible to make rapid progress. For
example, preferred conformations have been calculated for alicyclic rings
larger than six-membered. These calculations provide valuable clues to an
understanding of the chemistry of such systems44. Undoubtedly it will be
possible soon to calculate fine details of conformation, and at that point long-
range effects will also be calculable. At that time also optical activity, optical
rotatory dispersion and circular dichroism will be understandable in their
quantitative magnitudes45.
   Although the principles of conformational analysis are most clearly demon-
strated in saturated six-membered cyclohexane ring systems, nevertheless the
same basic approach is useful in understanding the reactions of unsaturated
and of heterocyclic compounds. For example, cyclohexene can be assigned
the conformation (XLVII) with equatorial and axial hydrogens as indicated.
The hydrogens marked with a prime can then be called quasi-equatorial and
quasi- axial46. The conformation of cyclohexene is more easily deformed than


          PRINCIPLES OF CONFORMATIONAL ANALYSIS                              309
that of cyclohexane even when fixed to other ring systems. Nevertheless the
symbol (XLVII) has found general favour in conformational analysis as an
expression of reality.




(XLVIII) or pyran (XLIX) raises conformational problems of considerable
interest and sophistication. Thus one must consider if pairs of p-electrons
have bulk or not and if so, is it greater or less than the hydrogen when attached
to the heteroatom7. In this way a new field of conformational analysis has
rapidly developed41,47 .
   As has already been discussed, the choice of a preferred conformation was
originally made on the basis of inference from the electron-diffraction
work on simple compounds and from other physical evidence. X-Ray crys-
tallography is nowadays an accurate and rapid method of determining con-
formation in the crystal lattice, which conformation usually corresponds to
the preferred conformation in solution. There is, however, another physical
method, nuclear magnetic resonance, which in the last decade has become-
with every justification-predominant in the determination of conformation
in solution. In many cases extremely detailed conformational analysis can be
carried out. A simple example, which had great consequences for carbo-
hydrate chemists, is the work of Lemieux and his colleague48,
   An enzymatic reaction involves a large molecule - the enzyme - and a rela-
tively small molecule - the substrate. Any complete understanding of the
mode of action of an enzyme will require a knowledge of the conformations
of the substrate and of the enzyme, as well as of the functional group reactivity.
We are now in a position with most substrates to specify the preferred con-
formation involved in the reaction. In the case of steroidal substrates the con-
formation can be described in a detail which will soon be quite exact. This
knowledge must soon have important consequences in biology.


310                            1969 D. H. R. BARTON

   Conformational analysis may be said to have come of age in that two ex-
cellent monographs have now appeared
                                          4 1 , 4 9
                                                    which review present knowledge
in detail. It is interesting to observe how an acorn of hypothesis can become
a tree ofknowledge.




13.
14.                                 C.K.Ingold,
      heimer     J.E.Mayer,               14           733 ; F.H. Westbeimer,


16.                                            1136.
17.
I 8. L. F. Fieser and M. Fieser,     Products related to            3rd ed., Reinhold,
     New York,
                              C.K.Ingold, A.M.M.Mandour, G.A.Maw and L.I.
    Woolf,
20. W. G.Young,                 and C.                          61      1640; S.
    Wiitein,                   W.G.Young, ibid.,
21. D. H.R. Barton and E. Miller,        Chem.    72      1066.
22. D.H.R.Barton and W.                                      1048; D.H.R.Barton,
    Bull.                             ; D.H.R.Barton, A. da S.Campos-Neves
    R. C.                              3
23.
24.
    D.H.R.Barton, E. Miller
26. D.              and G. A.Morrison,                                      165.
27. D. H. R. Barton and J. F. King,].


