MOLECULAR DYNAMICS OF
ELEMENTARY CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Nobel Lecture. 8 December 1986



DUDLEY R. HERSCHBACH

Department of Chemistry, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, U.S.A.




The vast field of Chemical Kinetics embraces three distinct levels of under-
standing or abstraction [1]. Th e b roadest level is qualitative description. Here
the emphasis is on substances: what products are obtained from what reagents
under what conditions. The information gathered is encyclopedic, but quite
feeble in predictive power. This is because the overall observed transformation
in most reactions comprises a more or less complex sequence or network of
elementary steps.
   At the next level, the aim is to identify the distinct elementary steps and to
determine quantitatively the rate factors of the Arrhenius equation, k = Aexp
              a remarkably durable formula now nearly a century old! Some
steps involve intermediate species that do not appear among the final products;
whenever possible, these intermediates are also characterized by structural,
spectral, and thermodynamic properties. Over about the past 70 years, im-
mense effort has been devoted to compiling such quantitative data. It is of great
practical value because predictions can be made for many reaction systems, on
the usually reliable assumption that the rate parameters for each indivisible
elementary step can be carried over from one system to another.
   As well as mapping the cooperation and competition among elementary
processes, kinetic studies at this level also gave rise to many key chemical ideas.
These include such concepts as chain reactions carried by free radical interme-
diates, collisional energy transfer, and the time-lag for energy flow within an
excited molecule. Most fundamental was the idea introduced by Henry Eyring
and Michael Polanyi of a transition-state on a potential energy surface. This
has guided qualitative reasoning about molecular mechanisms, and when
augmented by resourceful semitheoretical approximations for potential param-
eters has enabled limited but useful estimates of rate factors. However, these
valuable insights were won despite frustrating handicaps. The basic experi-
mental variables of concentration and temperature are not incisive enough to
allow further progress. Postulated elementary steps or intermediates often
prove incomplete or illusory. The observable rate factors, which represent
averages over myriad random collisions, are too remote from the molecular
interactions.


266                                 Chemistry 1986


Emergence of Chemical Dynamics
Over the past 30 years a new level has been attained by study of the intimate
molecular dynamics of individual reactive collisions. One of the chief experimental
approaches is molecular beam scattering. This involves forming the reagent
molecules into two collimated beams, each so dilute that collisions within them
are negligible. The two beams intersect in a vacuum and the direction and
velocity of the product molecules emitted from the collision zone are measured.
A host of reactions can now be studied readily in this way, by virtue of an
extremely sensitive mass spectrometric detector and the use of supersonic
nozzles which generate beams with greatly enhanced intensity and with colli-
sion energies much higher than provided by ordinary thermal sources. The
coupling of spectroscopic techniques with molecular beams has provided fur-
ther advances in selectivity and sensitivity, particularly by use of intense laser
light sources.
   The reaction properties now accessible include the disposal of energy among
translation, rotation, and vibration of the product molecules; angles of product
emission; angular momentum and its orientation in space; and variation of
reaction yield and other attributes with impact energy, closeness of collision,
rotational orientation or vibrational excitation of the target molecule. From the
earliest stages these experiments have stimulated and responded to a vigorous
outburst of theoretical developments. Especially helpful are computer simula-
tions in which dynamical properties are predicted for various postulated forces
by Monte Carlo sampling of huge numbers of calculated collisions trajectories.
Both the laboratory experiments and computer simulations have prompted a
variety of insightful mechanical models as well as very useful diagnostic proce-
dures based on information theory. Ab initio electronic structure calculations
have also begun to contribute significantly to the exploration of reaction
dynamics, although (except for H + H 2) satifying overall accuracy has yet to be
achieved for potential energy surfaces.
   As urged by my students, on this occasion I want both to view our still
youthful field of research from a wider perspective and to recount some favor-
ite, instructive episodes from its infancy. I will also briefly discuss several
prototype reactions that have served to develop heuristic models and to reveal
how electronic structure governs the reaction dynamics. More technical and
systematic surveys are abundant [2]. Particularly recommended are recent
books by Bernstein and by Levine and Bernstein [3]. The latter, about to
appear in its second edition, contains references to 500 review articles in the
field of molecular reaction dynamics. Nobody has tried recently to count the
research papers in this prolific field; these probably now exceed 5000. This does
not include kindred developments in the study of molecular dynamics in
solution or the solid phase.
   The emergence of chemical dynamics captivated many enterprising scien-
tists and imbued them with a sense of historical imperative. Figure 1 indicates
this in the wider context of physical chemistry. The subject began with thermo-
chemistry, still its foundation. The thermochemical era can be considered to
reach a pinnacle in 1923, with the publication of the classic text by Lewis and


                                          D. R. Herschbach                                            267


Randall. This was shortly before the discovery of quantum mechanics ushered
in the new structural era (and spawned chemical physics). In turn, the grand
pursuit of molecular structure and spectra reached a twin pinnacle in 1951 and
1953 with the monumental discoveries of the alpha-helix by Pauling and the
DNA double-helix by Watson and Crick. This was shortly before the early
molecular beam and infrared chemiluminescence experiments appeared as
har-




 Fig. 1. Historical perspective. Ascending mountains represent three eras, since thermochemistry was
 prerequisite for the structure era and both underlie the dynamics era. All three connect to a vast range
 representing synthetic chemistry, which draws closest to dynamics as both disappear heavenwards
 into clouds symbolizing the ultimate triumph of ab initio quantum chemistry.


268                                 Chemistry 1986


bingers of the dynamics era. It is striking that the prequantum models of Lewis
and Langmuir, still valued today, came well before the onset of the structural
era. Likewise, the potential surface and transition-state concepts of Eyring and
Polanyi anticipated the dynamics era.
   Not evident in Fig. 1, and in contrast to the scientific continuity, are cultural
chasms between the eras. Linus Pauling once told me of the gulf his students
encountered in the late 1920’s when, as candidates for an academic position,
they presented seminars describing molecular structures they had determined
by electron diffraction. All the faculty in the audience had done their Ph.D.'s in
thermochemistry, and so imbibed a tradition which emphasized that it did not
need to postulate the existence of molecules! Worse, interpretation of the
diffraction rings then relied entirely on the so-called “visual method”. A
densitometer tracing showed only monotonically decreasing intensity curves;
the rings could only be seen because the human eye can detect slight changes in
intensity. The molecular structures obtained thus depended on an “optical
illusion,” incomprehensible and reprehensible to many professors of thermody-
namics. Forty years later, my own students encountered a similar gulf when
presenting seminars describing our early crude molecular beam reactive scat-
tering studies. Almost all the incumbent faculty then had done their Ph.D.'s in
structure or spectroscopy. They were dubious about work that depended on
drawing velocity vector diagrams to interpret bumps on scattering curves.

Molecular Beams Before Chemical Dynamics
The first molecular beam experiments were carried out 75 years ago, immedi-
ately after the invention of the high speed vacuum pump had made it possible
to form directed “rays” of neutral molecules at sufficiently low pressures to
prevent their disruption by collisions with background gas. Figure 2 indicates
the historical progression. Systematic research began with Otto Stern, who
developed many aspects of beam techniques. He had retired and was living in
Berkeley when I arrived there in 1959. Occasionally Stern attended seminars,
and I had the opportunity to hear from him several memorable stories about
his work. Two of these are pertinent here.
   In his first work, done at Frankfurt in 1919, Stern undertook to test the
Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution by analyzing the speeds of a silver
atom beam with a rotating device. Gleefully, he described how the money to
build the apparatus was supplied by Max Born; the great theoretical physicist
was renowed as a public speaker and gave a special lecture series to raise the
funds. Stern found that his experimental results were in approximate agree-
ment with the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, but deviated from it in a
systematic way. He said [4]:
      “After my paper was sent off, I received a letter pointing out that I had
      overlooked an extra factor of v (the velocity) which enters because the
      detected atoms must pass through a slit. When this factor was inserted,
      the agreement became quantitative. That letter came from Albert Ein-
      stein!”
The “extra factor” represents the Jacobian for the transformation from number


                                      D. R Herschbach                          269




Fig. 2. Evolution of molecular beam and kindred methods.


density (atoms cm - 3) to flux density (atoms cm -2 s e c-1 ). That same factor and
Jacobians for numerous other transformations often appear in chemical dy-
namics, so I’ve had reason to tell Stern’s story to many bedeviled students. As
noted below, some striking effects in molecular collisions are due entirely to a
Jacobian factor.
   The other favorite story concerns the celebrated Stern-Gerlach experiment,
in which a beam of silver atoms was sent through an inhomogeneous magnetic
field and discovered to split into two, thereby revealing the space-quantization
of the electron spin. This is how Stern told the story [4]:


270                                  Chemistry 1986

        “The question whether a gas might be magnetically birefringent (in the
        words we used in those days) was raised at a seminar. The next morning
        I awoke early, too early to go to the lab. As it was too cold to get out of
        bed, I lay there thinking about the seminar question and had the idea for
        the experiment. When I got to the lab, I recruited Gerlach as a collabora-
        tor. He was a skilful experimentalist, while I was not. In fact, each part of
        the apparatus that I constructed had to be remade by Gerlach.”
            “We were never able to get the apparatus to work before midnight.
        When finally all seemed to function properly, we had a strange experi-
        ence. After venting to release the vacuum, Gerlach removed the detector
        flange. But he could see no trace of the silver atom beam and handed the
        flange to me. With Gerlach looking over my shoulder as I peered closely
        at the plate, we were surprised to see gradually emerge two distinct traces
        of the beam. Several times we repeated the experiment, with the same
        mysterious result. Finally we realized what it was. I was then the equiv-
        alent of an assistant professor. My salary was too low to afford good
        cigars, so I smoked bad cigars. These had a lot of sulfur in them, so my
        breath on the plate turned the silver into silver sulfide, which is jet black
        so easily visible. It was like developing a photographic film.”
Although I’ve rarely tried a cigar, our first reactive scattering work also
benefited from lucky contamination of the detector, as described later.
    Soon Stern could afford good cigars, as he was appointed professor of
physical chemistry at Hamburg. His Institute there conducted a series of
remarkable molecular beam studies, including invention of the surface ioniza-
tion that was to be so vital in the “alkali age” of chemical dynamics. This
detector, derived from Langmuir’s studies of surface ionization, has since been
used in thousands of experiments. It consists simply of a heated filament of a
metal such as tungsten and will ionize with nearly 100 % efficiency materials
having ionization potentials lower than about 4 or 5 volts, such as alkali atoms.
Stern had to abandon his splendid work at Hamburg in 1933 when Hitler took
office.
    Other epochal molecular beam contributions to physics came from Isidor
Rabi. He had also been educated as a chemist and worked with Stern as a
postdoctoral fellow before joining the physics faculty at Columbia. In 1937 he
invented his magnetic resonance method. This followed a seminar by Gorter
from Leiden describing his failed attempt to detect nuclear magnetic resonance
in a crystal. It was then not obvious that the tiny nucleus, with dimensions of
t h e o r d e r 1 0- 1 3 cm, would interact appreciably with the external atomic elec-
tron distribution, with dimensions of the order 10 -8 cm. If not, the different
nuclear spin orientations (favorable: “up” or unfavorable: “down”) would
remain equally probable even when subjected to an external magnetic field.
There would then be no net absorption of radiofrequency radiation in the
magnetic resonance experiment. Spin flips induced by the radiation are equally
likely up or down, so net absorption cannot occur unless interactions permit the
spins to relax toward thermal equilibrium where more will be up than down.
    Rabi immediately realized how to exploit beams to escape this constraint. He


                                 D. R Herschbach                            271


introduced two opposing Stern-Gerlach fields. A beam traversing the first field
(denoted A) is split into its nuclear spin components, but on passing through
the second field (denoted B) these are recombined. Between these fields, which
act like diverging and converging lenses, Rabi introduced a third field (the C-
field). This was homogeneous and so had no lens action, but it served the role
of Gorter’s field in defining “up” and “down”. Since there are no collisions in
the beam, there is no means to relax the spin component populations. But now
none is needed. Radiofrequency radiation in the C-field region will at reso-
nance flip equal numbers of spins up or down; but now any spin changing its
orientation after the A-field will not be refocussed in the B-held. In this
ingenious way, Rabi could detect which frequencies produced resonances. He
thus created a versatile new spectroscopy with extremely high resolving power.
It has provided a wealth of information about nuclear structure. An analogous
electric resonance spectroscopy operates with rotational states of polar mole-
cules. This has likewise been very fruitful for molecular structure. It has also
been used to fully analyze the quantum states of products in some reactive
scattering experiments.
   Shortly before inventing his resonance spectroscopy, Rabi undertook some
simple elastic scattering studies by observing the attenuation of an alkali atom
beam sent through a gas-filled chamber and detected on a surface ionization
filament. If Gorter had not come by, perhaps Rabi would have continued on to
develop reactive scattering. Another quirk of fate was only revealed in 1945,
when nuclear magnetic resonance was successfully done in liquids and solids
by Purcell at Harvard and Block at Stanford. Only then did it become clear
that Gorter’s original experiment would have worked if he had used a material
with magnetic impurities which would have induced the necessary relaxation.
Yet another epilogue, also of great portent, was the invention of the maser in
1955 by Townes at Columbia. In this device, the precursor of lasers, he sent a
beam of ammonia molecules through an electric quadrupole focussing field
which selected an energetically unfavorable state. When illuminated with
microwave radiation, the molecule reverted to the energetically favorable state,
emitting the excess energy as a photon. Thus was born molecular amplifiers
and oscillators and the now vast industry of quantum electronics. The idea
came to Townes on a sunny park bench, 35 years after Stern woke up early in
his warm bed.

My first Encounters with Kinetics and Beams
Within days of my arrival at college, I first learned something of the challeng-
ing field of chemical kinetics from my freshman advisor, Harold S. Johnston.
He was then a young assistant professor at Stanford University, applying new
methods of his own devising to measure rates of fast gas-phase reactions in
regimes previously inaccessible. In the summer after my sophomore year, and
again after my junior year, Hal hired me as a lab assistant for his research
group. One project involved weeks of glassblowing, silver soldering, and plas-
tering with great quantities of asbestos paste (now outlawed) to install a large
volume reaction vessel that could be maintained at a high and uniform tem-


272                                Chemistry 1986


perature. I was greatly impressed with the care and attention to detail shown
by Hal and his graduate students, and his emphasis on testing theory. He
stressed that this could only be done with a reaction known to be an elementary
step - and that we could never be entirely certain that all steps and interme-
diates had been correctly identified.
   In my senior year, I took Hal’s excellent course in chemical kinetics, and the
following year a study of transition-state theory begun there became my
master’s thesis. In this, we calculated the Arrhenius A-factors for twelve well-
characterized bimolecular reactions involving only 4 to 6 atoms. Necessary
assumptions about the properties of the transition state were made uniform for
the whole set and consistent with similar stable molecules. Internal rotations of
the reaction complexes received special attention, thanks to the help of Ken-
neth Pitzer at Berkeley, who kindly showed me how to design a sensible
approximation. Previous tests had been piecemeal and often capricious about
internal rotations; Hal expected our test might prove embarassing for the
theory. In fact, the agreement with experiment was good. This persuaded Hal
that the theory deserved further development; over the next decade he carried
this out and produced an exemplary book. Although Hal’s contagious enthusi-
asm had long since convinced me that I wanted to pursue kinetics, the thesis
project made me decide to study first the dynamics of stable molecules. Thus I
applied to the chemical physics program at Harvard in order to do Ph.D.
research with E. Bright Wilson, Jr.
   A few weeks before turning in the master’s thesis, I first heard of molecular
beams. In his course on statistical thermodynamics, Walter Meyerhof briefly
described Stern’s test of the Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution. It was
love at first sight. I remember a flush of excitement at the thought that this was
the way to study elementary reactions, the unequivocal way to know a reaction
is elementary and to study directly its properties. This was the spring of 1955. I
did not imagine that 5 years later my own first beam apparatus would be nearly
complete at Berkeley and I would have met Otto Stern himself.
   On arrival at Harvard in the fall, I was delighted to discover that Norman
Ramsey was offering a seminar course based on the proof sheets of his book on
molecular beams. E. B. Wilson was giving a course using his just published
book on molecular vibrations. Roy Glauber provided a rigorous treatment of
electromagnetic theory, working through all the mathematical derivations in
class with no notes at all. The dessert course of this remarkable academic menu
was entitled “Chemical Physics”, and given by the legendary Peter Debye, a
visitor that year. His course had 40 or more auditors, but only 3 of us took it for
credit and thus had individual oral exams with Debye. I still relish the memory
of his lucid lectures and the twinkle in his eye as he so often began, “Let me tell
you a story . . . ” Early in Ramsey’s course, he too discussed Stern’s velocity
analysis study and actually announced, in his booming voice: “This would be a
wonderful way to do chemistry!” In the spring term I took among others
Kenneth Bainbridge’s course on nuclear physics to learn something about
nuclear reactions; this was indeed to prove very useful later.
   Even more exhilerating that year and thereafter was my experience in Bright


                                          D. R. Herschbach                                         273


Wilson’s research group. With microwave spectroscopy, he and his students
were developing an elegant new way to study internal rotation by exploiting the
tunnel effect. Typical systems had a methyl group attached to an asymmetric
molecular frame. The torsion or internal rotation of the methyl group about its
axis is hindered by a sinusoidal potential barrier with three equivalent minima.
If the barrier is very high, then essentially there are only small torsional
oscillations in three separate potential wells, and to good approximation the
microwave spectrum is that of a rigid rotor molecule. If the barrier is low
enough, however, tunneling between the well occurs and this causes the micro-
wave rotational transitions to split into doublets. These splittings are very
sensitive to the barrier height, so an approximate dynamical theory is adequate
to extract an accurate value for the barrier. Since I already had seen how
prevalent internal rotation is, not only in stable molecules but in transition-
states for reaction, I was very excited about this new method. It was such a
fresh and powerful approach that almost every day some member of the group
had an unanticipated result to report. Because the microwave spectra display a
forest of transitions, there was ample need to work out variations on the basic
theme and satisfying opportunity for definitive tests.
    Although this research was entirely different in character from molecular
collisions, I learned invaluable lessons from it and from working with Bright
and his extremely able group. A microwave spectroscopist simply must calcu-
late as much as possible before plunging into the forest; for a molecular
 beamist, the need is less obvious but just as vital. Bright’s high standards and
a b s o l u t e i n t e g r i t y h a d g r e a t i m p a c t o n h i s s tudents . Thus he put s trong
 emphasis on analyzing and clearly stating what is well-established and what is
 really based on unproven assumptions. He also gave strong emphasis to
 blocking out the big questions and on coupling theoretical investigations with
 experiments.
    Microwaves soon led to my first work with beams, in collaboration with an
 ebullient young instructor, Bill Klemperer. He had developed a technique for
 high temperature infrared spectroscopy and was using it to study alkali halides
 (later to become my favorite molecules). Bill invited me to help build a high
 temperature microwave spectrometer, again a project requiring much asbestos
 paste. One day Bill came in with a paper just published by Marple and
 Trischka reporting an electric resonance study of lithium chloride. They had
 used the venerable tungsten surface ionization filiment as a detector. Depend-
 ing on resonance field settings, the apparatus could resolve four vibrational
 states. However, the vibrational frequency derived from the relative intensities
 was much lower than Bill had measured in the infrared. We examined various
 possibilities and concluded that most likely was an increase in the efficiency of
 the surface reaction (dissociation of the salt molecule to ions) with vibrational
 excitation of the incident molecule [5]. This was near Christmas, 1956. Almost
  15 years later, the vibrational excitation mechanism was confirmed and recent-
 ly it has become a leading issue in surface chemistry.
    We were eager to study the surface ionization process experimentally. Since
 an electric resonance apparatus was not available (at that time only 3 existed,


274                                 Chemistry 1986


none closer than 300 miles of Cambridge), we could not study alkali halide
molecules. Hence we decided to study ionization of alkali atoms as a function of
the surface temperature. Ramsey kindly lent us one of his machines over
Christmas vacation and we quickly obtained a hundred pages or so of data
from which we derived residence times and heats of adsorption for atoms on
tungsten and platinum surfaces. Then we discovered that very similar data
existed in the Russian literature, so did not publish our results. However, this
was a key episode for both Bill and me. He too fell in love with molecular
beams, and immediately undertook to build an electric resonance apparatus.
Bill and his students have since turned this into a cornocopia for molecular
spectroscopy, unprecedented in resolution and chemical scope. Especially re-
vealing have been their studies in recent years of molecules held together by
weak van der Waals forces. This work is building an understanding of these
ubiquitous forces which may help elucidate the specificity and selectivity of
interactions in biomolecules.
   In studying the literature on surface ionization, I was elated to discover [6] a
paper by Taylor and Datz from Oak Ridge describing an actual crossed beam
study of the reaction K +            KBr + H. Although the traditional tungsten
surface ionization detector is about equally sensitive to K and KBr, Taylor and
Datz found that a platinum alloy is much more effective for K than for KBr.
From the difference in the signals read on the two detector filaments, they were
able to distinguish the small amount of reactively scattered KBr from the large
background of elastically scattered K atoms. Small as it was, the little differ-
ence bump was a joyful sight. In a series of classic studies in the 1920’s,
Michael Polanyi had shown that many alkali reactions proceeded at rates
corresponding to “reaction at every collision”. With this differential surface
ionization detector, there was now prospect that crossed-beam studies of many
of these reactions could be made with relatively simple apparatus.
   Soon I found another intriguing crossed-beam study, published two years
before by Bull and Moon at Birmingham. They bombarded a stream of Cs
vapor with a pulsed accelerated beam of CCl 4 produced by swatting with a
paddle attached to a high-s peed rotor. The intense CCl4 b e a m c o u l d b e
monitored with a simple ionization gauge and signal pulses due to scattered Cs
or CsCl were detected by surface ionization on a tungsten filament. Although
there was no direct means to distinguish between Cs and CsCl, the observed
signal pulses appeared to come primarily from reactively scattered CsCl, on the
basis of time-of-flight analysis and blank runs with the CCl 4 replaced by Hg
vapor. Unjustly, these experiments were long discounted or ignored. This was
due to the misconception that elastic scattering would always predominate.
The high-speed rotor technique also intimidated other prospective experiment-
ers; thus this line early work did not have the impact deserved.
   During the spring of 1958, while completing my Ph.D thesis, I visited several
universities as a faculty candidate. My seminar about internal rotation was
always well received, but my plans for beam experiments sometimes produced
outright dismay. Yet the response was often enthusiastic from faculty young in
either age or spirit. I was delighted to accept an assistant professorship at


                                D. R. Herschbach                            275


Berkeley, especially since Hal Johnston was now there and also Bruce Mahan,
who had the year before completed his Ph.D. at Harvard in kinetics with
George Kistiakowsky. My appointment was to take effect a year later; mean-
while I continued at Harvard as a Junior Fellow of the Society of Fellows. The
intervening year was extremely useful. It gave me time to work out detailed
calculations for design of the beam apparatus and a kinematic theory for
interpreting crossed-beam experiments. Membership in the Society of Fellows
was also a great pleasure because it brought together intense people from all
academic disciplines. Monday night dinners included the two dozen Junior
Fellows, ten Senior Fellows and typically ten guests, in a “neo-pickwickian
atmosphere” with ample wine and cigars too good to have saved the Stern-
Gerlach experiment [7].
   Just before departing to Berkeley, I went to say goodbye to Kistiakowsky.
Like so many others, I revered him as a scientist and a sage as well as an
awesome personality. He confirmed a legendary story about a molecular beam
experiment he and Slichter had tried in 1951 to test early theoretical calcula-
tions on the properties of supersonic expansions [8]. Because of inadequate
pumping speed, the experiment was inconclusive and a miserable struggle.
Afterwards, Kisty destroyed the apparatus with an ax! He said to me, with his
extra heavy Russian accent (conveying whimsey - or so I hoped): "So you have
been bitten by the molecular beam bug. Too bad! The trouble is that there are
no collisions in one beam, and no collisions in the other beam, so when you
cross them there are still no collisions!”


Early Alkali Age of Reactive Scattering
At Berkeley, I was soon joined by two graduate students, George Kwei and Jim
Norris. Space was in short supply, and we were content with a corner (only
4 m × 6m) of a lab in Lewis Hall. Our first task was to remove a large
calorimeter that had long occupied that corner; this we viewed as a rite of
passage, with the historical perspective of Fig. 1 already in mind. The beam
apparatus we installed (dubbed Big Bertha) was almost rudimentary. As shown
in Fig. 3, the beams were formed by thermal effusion from ovens mounted on
turnable which could be rotated to sweep the angular distribution of scattered
atoms and molecules past the surface ionization detector. Typically, the dis-
tance from the scattering center to the alkali oven was 10 cm, to the other oven
1.5 cm, and to the detector 10 cm. Use of a double-chamber oven for the alkali
allowed the temperature of the beam emerging from the upper chamber to be
varied by about 300 degrees independently of the vapor pressure established in
the lower chamber (about 0.1 torr), which governed the beam intensity. The
oven for the reactant gas was connected to an external barostat by a supply
tube which passed through the support column in the rotatable lid. Cold
shields and collimating slits hid both ovens from the scattering center, and a
cold shield also surrounded the detector. The entire scattering chamber was
enclosed in a copper box attached to a large liquid nitrogen trap. Since the
reactants are condensable, the cold shields and trap provided very high pump-
ing speed. This kept the background vacuum in the scattering chamber low


276                                    Chemistry 1986


MICROMETER
                                                             PERMANENT GAS
SCREW
                                                             OVEN SUPPORT

                                                              ROTATABLE PLATFORM
DOUBLE CHAMBER
OVEN SUPPORT


                                                                    ,-BALL BEARINGS




                                                                       O-RING SEAL
                                                                       PERMANENT




Fig. 3. Crossed-beam apparatus Big Bertha for study of alkali atom reactions. Cold shields,
collimating slits, shutters to interrupt the beams, and other details omitted.


enough (of the order 10 - 7 torr) to ensure that collisions with background gas
were negligible for both the reactant beams and the product molecules in flight
to the detector.
   In typical experiments, the concentration of alkali atoms within the volume
defined by the intersection of the beams was about 10 1 0 / c m3 , equivalent to a
pressure of 10 - 6 torr, and that of the reactant gas molecules was about 100-fold
greater. About 10 1 4 alkali atoms/sec entered the reaction volume, of which
roughly 0.1-1% reacted to form products while about 10% underwent elastic
scattering. The steady-state concentration of products in the reaction volume
was roughly 10 7 to 10 8 molecules/cm 3 , the pressure about 10 -9 to 10 -10 torr. At
the peak of the angular distribution of reactive scattering about 10 10 to 10 1 1
product molecules/cm 2/sec arrive at the detector. Since conversion to ions on a
hot tungsten or platinum surface is nearly 100% efficient for alkali species,
such yields gave readily measureable signals of the order of 10 -13 Amps. For
many of the reactions studied more than a month would be required to deposit
a monolayer of product molecules, so it was essential to have a detector far
more sensitive than Stern’s cigar.

Experiments Revealing Product Recoil
Our first experiments were begun in the fall of 1960. On the basis of simple
theoretical considerations, we decided to try


                                         D. R. Herschbach                                       277


From the angular distribution of the reactively scattered KI we hoped to learn
whether there was any preferred direction relating the reactant and product
relative velocity vectors and also to get some idea how the reaction energy is
partitioned between internal excitation. of the product molecules and their
relative translational motion. Our rationale was based on the CH 3 /KI mass
ratio. A simple kinematic calculation (displayed later in Fig. 5) showed that
this ratio was large enough to permit the detected product KI to recoil
sufficiently far away from the centroid to reveal any directional preference, but
small enough to inhibit the KI from spraying out so widely that the reactive
scattering became too weak to observe. Happily, even the first experiments
worked nicely. Our kinematic rationale was vindicated, but it was not until
three years later that we learned how lucky was this choice of reaction system;
it turned out that CH 3I played the role of Stern’s cigar.
   Figure 4 shows typical results. In (a), the parent K beam was attentuated
7 % by the perpendicularly crossed CH 3I beam; that represents chiefly elastic
scattering. Readings on the platinum detector (solid points) were normalized to
those on tungsten (open points) at the parent beam peak. In this case, the use
of differential detection was not crucial, as the KI distribution is displaced




Fig. 4. Reactive scattering data: (a) Parent K beam of 5 x 10 -8 A attenuated 7 % by crossed CH3I
beam. Readings on Pt detector (solid circles) normalized to W (open circles) at parent beam peak.
(b) KI distributions; circles derived from (a), triangles from a replicate experiment several months
later. Area under curves gives collision yield.


278                                        Chemistry 1986


far enough from the K beam to appear as a pronounced bump in the signal
from the tungsten detector. In (b), the KI distribution is normalized so that the
area under the curve gives the collision yield (integrated intensity of KI divided
by total K scattered out of the parent beam). This is about 5 × 10 - 4 a n d
indicated the reaction cross section (or effective target area) is about 7 A 2 .
Measurements at several temperatures of the incident beams indicated that the
activation energy for the reaction is negligibly small, less than 0.3 kcal/mol.
The new dynamical information we were after is contained in the location and
shape of the product angular distribution, however. To extract that informa-
tion we used a kinematic analysis derived from conservation laws that hold
regardless of the forces governing the collision.

Kinematic Analysis Via Newton Diagrams
Velocity vector diagrams such as Fig. 5 are a convenient aid in the kinematic
analysis. The vectors pertain to the asymptotic initial and final states of the
collision. By virtue of momentum conservation, the center-of-mass velocity
vector C remains constant throughout; only motion relative to C involves
chemical interactions. The recoil velocity u which carries the product KI a w a y
from C can have any direction but energy conservation limits its magnitude.
Thus, the possible spectrum of recoil vectors u is represented by a set of




Fig. 5. Newton diagram corresponding to most probable velocitites of reactants in Fig 4. Spheres
indicate range of KI recoil vectors allowed by conservation of energy and linear momentum; each is
labelled by value of E'(kcal/mol), the final relative translational kinetic energy. Distribution of
recoil vectors must have cylindrical symmetry about initial relative velocity vector, by virtue of
“dart board” randomness of collisions. Three sample recoil vectors are shown that correspond to
the KI observed at the peak of the angular distribution. Also shown is estimate of most probable
recoil vector for CH3 product.


                                  D. R. Herschbach                              279


spheres, one for each accessible value of the final relative translational energy of
the products. This energy ranges up to a maximum determined by the initial
collision energy and the difference in dissociation energy of the new bond
formed and the old bond broken.
   From the velocity vector diagram we see that the broad peak observed near
83º in the laboratory corresponds to reactive scattering in which an observer
riding with the center-of-mass would see the product KI recoil into the back-
ward hemisphere (and the CH 3 forwards) with respect to the incoming K beam.
Markedly anisotropic scattering of this kind evidently corresponds to a “hard”
collision dominated by repulsion, as the K atom, the CH 3 g r o u p , a n d t h e
center-of-mass of KI must all reverse direction. We called this the r e b o u n d
mechanism. It was later found for many other reactions dominated by repul-
sion.
   Comparison with the velocity vector diagram also permits an estimate of the
energy in product relative translation. This affects the displacement of the
laboratory angular distribution from that of C as computed from the initial
conditions. In assessing the displacement, it is necessary to take proper account
of a Jacobian factor which enhances the intensity of the laboratory scattering at
low recoil velocities. We failed to include this Jacobian in our early work
(thereby unwittingly emulating Otto Stern) and hence underestimated the
product translation. The correct analysis showed that for the K + CH 3 I reac-
tion about half of the available energy appears in recoil of the products. This
result, later confirmed by direct measurement of the KI velocity distributions,
again exhibited the dominant role of repulsive forces in a rebound reaction.
   For kinematic analysis, Newton’s laws suffice. In the asymptotic transla-
tional states the beam molecules are too far apart to interact, hence need not be
precisely localized in space and can be assigned definite momenta despite
Heisenberg’s principle. Accordingly, we named our velocity vector construc-
tions “Newton diagrams”. These are still much used today, as kinematic
analysis is an essential part of the design and interpretation of any collision
experiment.

Frustrations and Preparations
We were very happy to find this clear evidence for a preferred range of product
recoil and energy and were eager to study other alkali atom reactions to look for
variations in the scattering patterns that might be correlated with electronic
structure. However, we encountered frustrating difficulties with the surface
ionization detector. Many reactant gases (other than alkyl halides) poisoned
the Pt filament, inducing spurious and irreproducible responses that precluded
measurement of reactive scattering. This difficulty stymied us until the fall of
1963, when we finally eliminated it by means of a procedure due to Touw and
Trischka. They demonstrated that the Pt filament could be stabilized in either
of two distinct modes. The Pt filament becomes essentially nondetecting for alkali
compounds (but still detects alkali atoms) if it is preheated while doused with
methane or another hydrocarbon. The Pt filament becomes detecting for alkali
compounds and acts just like a W filament if it is instead preheated while


280                                      Chemistry 1986


doused with oxygen or merely operated in sufficiently clean vacuum. The
nondetecting mode evidently requires a stable carbon layer on the filament.
Thus, the differential detection so useful for alkali reactive scattering results
from a dirty surface. Before the preheating procedure was developed, the
carbon deposit was a matter of luck, supplied either by pump oil vapor if the
vacuum were poor or by hydrocarbon-rich reactant species such as methyl
iodide; either acted like Stern’s cigar.
   During the lean period of more than two years before rescue by a dirty
detector, our only successful reactive scattering experiments dealt with variants
of the K + CH3 I reaction, involving other alkali atoms and alkyl groups with
up to seven carbon atoms. However, in this period our research group expand-
ed rapidly and we constructed much new apparatus, experimental and theo-
retical, that was destined to bring a harvest of results. Jim Kinsey, Ken
Cashion, Mark Child and Malcolm Fluendy joined as a postdoctoral fellows,
and Phil Brooks, Kent Wilson, John Birely, Ron Herm, Jim Cross and Dick
Zare as graduate students. Figure 6 provides a succinct summary, indicating
the chief projects pursued by this distinguished roster during our Berkeley era.
   In particular, we note among the apparatus construction projects three
analyzing devices: rotating slotted-disk velocity selector, inhomogeneous mag-
netic deflecting field, and inhomogeneous electric deflecting field. These de-
vices are quite similar to those used by Otto Stern; we liked to say that reactive
scattering followed the evolutionary principle, “Ontogeny recapitulates Phy-
logeny”. As seen already, velocity analysis was essential to obtain quantitative




Fig. 6. Roster of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows with chief research projects during
Berkeley era. Our first apparatus was a helium leak detector called Annie; hence our successive
beam machines were named Bertha, Charity, Dodo, Eve, Faith, Gloria, Stars indicate comple-
tion of Ph. D. theses or postdoctoral terms.


                                  D. R. Herschbach                             281


data for the recoil angle and translational energy distributions. Magnetic
analysis provided, among other things, a definitive test of our detection tech-
nique, immune to poisoning of the filaments. By deflecting away most of the
paramagnetic alkali atoms, we could measure directly the distribution of
diamagnetic alkali halide molecules produced by reactive scattering. Electric
deflection of these polar molecules enabled us to determine the rotational
angular momentum. This had special appeal for me because of my background
in rotational spectroscopy. Furthermore, since mass, velocity, and position all
enter into angular momentum, it was clearly a key property for theoretical
models of reaction dynamics.
    Among our theoretical studies of this period was a treatment of the velocity
 vector distribution of fragments from molecular photodissociation. This was
 undertaken because already we had vague notions of a kinship between chemi-
 cal reactions and photodissociation. In electronic excitation by photons, the
 angular dependence is determined simply by the dipole selection rule whereas
 the exit velocity of the photofragments is determined by the repulsive potential
 of the excited state. This “half-collision” model, worked out nicely by Dick
 Zare, provided rather general “form factors” for numerous properties [9].
 Subsequently, this has served as the basis for extracting a lode of information
 about dissociative excited states by means of laser spectroscopy, and the
 suspected link with reaction dynamics did indeed emerge.
    Our Berkeley days also included several memorable visits with others
 captivated by reaction dynamics. One of these occurred in the early summer of
 1961, when I visited Don Bunker at Los Alamos. He had undertaken the first
 realistic Monte Carlo calculations of classical trajectories for chemical reac-
 tions, and his initial aim was to interpret our results for the K + CH 3 I system
 in terms of potential surface features. The scene in his office comes back vividly
 [10]:
       He was decorating the walls with strips of recorder chart paper several
       yards long, on which were plotted a series of undulating, intertwined
       curves. These were the first results of his Monte Carlo calculations... The
       room was bright with sunshine and the varicolored curves seemed to
       shimmer and dance about, as if choreographed to Don’s crisp and witty
       description. It was an exhilerating moment. Henceforth the mechanics of
       molecular collisions for any postulated force field could be computed, as he
       liked to say, “in instructive and entertaining detail.”
 Such classical trajectory calculations, as developed especially by Martin Kar-
 plus and John Polanyi, have indeed proven invaluable for interpreting data and
 testing concepts of reaction dynamics.
    Other inspiring encounters came in April, 1962, at a Faraday Society Discus-
 sion held at Cambridge University, where I met many leading workers in
 chemical kinetics. Equally inspiring was a solo visit to Berkeley a few months
 later by Michael Polanyi. He witnessed an unsuccessful scattering experiment
 on the K + Br2 reaction while he described to us his prescient speculations of
 30 years before that it might proceed by a stripping mechanism with high
 vibrational excitation of the KBr product. He also mentioned that he liked to


282                                          Chemistry 1986


think that the attacking alkali atom used its valence electron to “harpoon” the
halogen. Later I adopted this term to enliven numerous discussions of electron
transfer reactions.

From Rebound to Stripping with Rainbows Between
Within a few months my group was discussing an unanticipated transfer to
Harvard. We had expected to relocate in a new lab about 100 m away in the
basement of the nearly completed Latimer Hall, but in the late summer of 1963
instead moved 5000 km to the basement of Mallinckrodt Laboratory. I went
even further that summer, as I’d agreed to present a lecture course on molecu-
lar collisions at Göttingen University. There I strolled daily along the path
atop the encircling medieval wall, the path taken by many of the pioneers of
quantum mechanics during ambulatory debates. But only by communing with
the charming little Goose Girl in the Rathaus fountain was I reconciled to the
quantum-like dualities of the Harvard/Berkeley choice.
   Our new lab was in nearly full swing by Halloween and soon we learned how
to avoid poisoning our detector filaments. Thereafter results were rapidly
obtained for a wide range of alkali reactions. As illustrated in Fig. 7, many
showed striking contrasts to the methyl iodide reaction. We found that for



and similar systems the reaction cross section is remarkably large, ~ 200 A 2 ,
and most of the alkali halide product recoils into the forward hemisphere with
respect to the incident alkali atom. These features indicate dominantly attrac-
tive interaction in which the bond exchange can occur for quite large impact
parameters. This suggests a stripping mechanism of the type familiar in nuclear
p h y s ics . I n an in d ep en d en t s tu d y o f th e Br2 r e a c t i o n , M i n t u r n a n d D a t z
obtained similar results and many other examples of stripping reactions were
soon found.
   Before long, we had examples for which the reaction cross section is of
intermediate size and the product peaks sideways, giving a conical angular
distribution about the direction of the initial relative velocity vector. Such a
case is the reaction



A strong correlation emerged: as the magnitude of the total reaction cross
section increases, the preferred recoil direction of the alkali halide product
shifts forwards. This is exemplified as K        Rb    Cs for the CCl 4 reaction,
whereas the angular distributions do not change much with the identity of the
alkali atom for the CH 3 I case or the Br 2 case. Velocity analysis experiments
likewise show a nice contrast. The product translational energy is large for the
C H3 I case and small for the Br 2 case, but the angular distributions do not
change much with the exit energy. For the CCl 4 reaction, the preferred direc-
tion of the product moves forward rapidly as the translational recoil energy
increases. The form of this strong angle-energy coupling resembles the rainbows
familiar in elastic scattering of molecules and in sunny but moist skies.


                                        D. R. Herschbach                                       283




Fig. 7. Comparison of scattering angle distributions for reactions of alkali atoms with Br2, CCl4,
and CH 3 I, illustrating stripping, transitional, and rebound behavior. Ordinate scale indicates
approximate normalization to total reaction cross sections. Distributions show angular varation
that would be seen by a hypothetical observer traveling with the center-of-mass. Scattering angle
indicates deviation of product relative velocity from reactant relative velocity; for =  the alkali
halide emerges in same direction as incident alkali atom.



   The marked anisotropy of the product angular distributions for this family of
reactions, ranging between rebound and stripping, indicates that all proceed by
a direct or impulsive mechanism. The duration of the reactive collisions must be
so short that most of the transient collision complexes decompose before
rotating through 180°. Since the rotational velocities are quite high, roughly
half or more of the complexes must decompose within about 5 x 1 0 sec, a                 -13



time not much longer than a vibrational period.
   The dynamical properties and chemical variations found for these alkali
reactions were well suited to the early Monte Carlo trajectory studies and also
prompted several insightful heuristic models. Ironically, trajectory studies of
product angular distributions suffered at first from an instructive malady akin
to the poisoning problem that had held up our experiments. The calculations


284                                 Chemistry 1986


for atom exchange reactions, A + BC           AB + C, used plausible forms of
potential energy surfaces with empirical parameters. These surfaces were con-
structed by adding up pairwise interactions modulated by switching functions
to weaken each bond as the collision partner draws nigh. Blais and Bunker
found that reactive trajectories for such surfaces gave chiefly backward scatter-
ing, in satisfying agreement with our first experiments. But this rebound
behavior was unduly prevalent; for about two years after the discovery of
stripping and rainbow-like reactive scattering, trajectory calculations remained
unable to obtain anything but backward scattering. Godfrey and Karplus
cured this affliction using potential surfaces derived from approximate quan-
tum mechanical secular equations. This ensured a smooth surface, free from
spurious bumps and wrinkles that appeared in surfaces constructed by adding
piecewise interactions. It was “contamination by such warts” that induced too
much backward scattering. By varying the repulsive or attractive character of
the wartless surfaces, the trajectory calculations nicely elucidated the various
trends associated with transition from rebound to stripping. Likewise, trajec-
tory studies by John Polanyi and his students mapped out the systematics of
energy disposal among product translation, vibration, and rotation.
   We now could also relate these genera1 dynamical properties of alkali reac-
tions to the electronic structure of the target molecules. All these reactions
involve converting a covalent bond into an ionic bond, and in effect are gas-
phase acid-base or ion-recombination processes, via



According to Michael Polanyi’s harpooning model, the attacking alkali atom
tosses out its valence electron, hooks the halogen-containing molecule, and
hauls it in with the Coulomb force. The basic features of the initial electron
transfer had been examined as early as 1940 in an exemplary theoretical study
by Magee. As pictured schematically in Fig. 8, the transfer occurs in the
vicinity of “curve crossing” between zeroth-order “purely covalent” and “ion-
pair” potential surfaces. When the crossing radius r c is large enough, Coulom-
bic attraction is dominant there and this radius may be estimated from



the difference in the ionization potential of the alkali atom and the electron
affinity of the target molecule. This relates the size of the reaction cross section
to the energy required to create the ion-pair.
   However, the dynamical properties are also greatly influenced by the exit
interaction as the A+ ion approaches the intermediate molecule-ion BC ,
                                                                                   -



which is severely distorted by the strong electric field and dissociates. Accor-
dingly, many dynamical features will differ with the shape and particularly the
location of the asymptote of the potential curve for the negative molecule ion.
Often we could estimate the relevant potential curves for the BC - ion from
data obtained in electron impact experiments or by means of arguments
developed by Mulliken for the analysis of charge-transfer spectra. Figure 9
classifies some of the possibilities.


                                         D. R. Herschbach                                      285




                                                                                          M+X




Fig. 8. Potential energy curves for an alkali halide molecule (drawn for KBr) showing the “zeroth-
order” crossing of the ionic and covalent states.




Fig. 9. Classification of electron attachment processes producing negative molecule-ions (XY + e
    XY-). Here D denotes the bond dissociation energy, E the adiabatic and     the vertical electron
affinity.


286                                Chemistry 1986


   For instance, the case designated           pertains to the CH 3 I reaction and
many other examples of rebound reactions. The negative ion is then formed in
a strongly repulsive state, because the harpooning electron enters a strongly
antibonding molecular orbital with a node between the originally bonded
atoms. This is usually the same orbital that governs photodissociation of the
parent molecule, so we could derive the location and shape of the exit potential
curve from its absorption spectrum.
   In contrast, the case designated I + A pertains to the Br2 reaction and many of
the prototype stripping systems. These involve exceptionally large electron
affinities, which accounts for the very big reaction cross section and the long-
range attraction that gives forward scattering. Here the intermediate negative
molecule ion would be stable in the absence of the positive ion, although highly
excited vibrationally. But when the ions are within the crossing radius of about
7 A2, the Coulomb field exceeds 3 x 109 V/cm and thus the negative ion will be
pulled apart in a time comparable to a vibrational period, or ~10 -13 sec. This
accounts for the direct character of the reaction. However, the transient attrac-
tive coupling between B - and C in the exit channel has a major role in the
energy disposal.
   The harpooning model prompted treatments of many other properties, such
as the mechanics of curve crossing and dissociative electron attachment, orien-
tation dependence, and orbiting outside a centrifugal barrier at the crossing
radius. But in terms of chemical perspective, the most striking aspect was the
connection to charge-transfer spectra. In retrospect, the detection-imposed
limitation of early beam studies was fortunate, as this alkali family was ideally
suited for relating reaction dynamics to the electronic structure of reactant
molecules.

Elucidating Polanyi Flame Reactions
As well as demonstrating very large reaction rates, the classic studies of alkali-
halogen reactions by Michael Polanyi also revealed intense emission from
electronically excited alkali atoms. This had a major role in early discussions
about interaction of electronic and nuclear motions, as the Polanyi flames
preceded by a few years the Born-Oppenheimer and Franck-Condon approx-
imations, both found in 1925. Some central questions concerning the chemilu-
minescence remained unresolved 40 years later, however, when we undertook
beam experiments to examine each of the postulated elementary steps in the
flame mechanism. Again, the results exemplified prototypcial aspects of elect-
ronic structure.
   One of the key steps producing chemiluminescence involves vibrational-to-
electronic energy transfer. This we studied by means of a “triple-beam” experi-
ment. Vibrationally excited               was formed at the intersection of crossed
beams of K and Br2 and sent into a second scattering chamber containing a Na
crossed beam, where fluorescence from K* was observed. The cross section
found for this reactive transfer process,


                                        D. R Herschbach                                        287




is at least tenfold smaller. (The dagger denotes high vibrational energy, the
asterisk denotes the lowest 2P excited electronic state.) This result is interesting
because the initial energy distributions of the reactants are nearly the same in
the Na + KBr + and the K + NaBr + experiments and the same set of potential
surfaces is accessible in both cases. On energetic or statistical grounds, both
processes might have been expected to form K* + NaBr with the same probabi-
lity. The interpretation becomes clear when the ionic character of the bonding
is considered. If in the intermediate (AB) + X - complex the (AB) + ion decom-
poses rapidly and irreversibly in the field of the X - ion, configurations in which
both A and B are symmetrical with respect to both charge-sharing and interac-
t i o n w i t h X- may seldom be traversed. The chemical exchange process
(A +                             + B*) is then more favorable for electronic excitation
because it involves charge-transfer                             +       B*) whereas the nonreactive
process (A +                      A* +                   does not involve charge-transfer. Later,
we found translational-to-electronic energy transfer for these systems exhibits the
same strong preference for reactive over nonreactive transfer, although the
cross sections are a thousandfold smaller. Potential surface calculations indica-
te this preference appears to involve a “stereospecific” orientation dependence.
The potential surfaces for the ground and excited states remain widely separa-
ted except for nearly collinear configurations with the halogen between the two
alkali atoms.
    I n t h e o t h e r m a j o r c h e m i l u m i n e s c e n t s tep, the same potential surface
complex is reached via harpooning, X +                                                   + B*. This
we studied by generating a beam of halogen atoms from thermal dissociation in
a graphite oven and a beam of alkali dimers from a supersonic expansion.
Contrary to previous indirect evidence, our beam experiments showed that this
step occurs with a large cross section, ~ 10 A . A “degeneracy-induced” excita-
                                                                    2



tion mechanism proposed long before by Magee was thereby vindicated. The
reactant halogen atom has three-fold orbital degeneracy, corresponding to
location of its valence-shell “hole” in the p x, pY , or pz orbital, whereas the
reactant and product molecules are in nondegenerate electronic states. Thus
the reactants give rise to three distinct potential energy surfaces but only one of
these can lead to the nondegenerate ground state of the product alkali atom and
the other two surfaces must lead to electronically excited states.
    Many other aspects of the harpooning mechanism were revealed in subsequ-
ent studies of electronic excitation processes [11]. Particularly striking was
evidence for an “internal reflection” mechanism. This is illustrated in Fig. 10
for K + SO 2 collisions. Intense emission of K*( 2 P) fluorescence is seen at
collision energies above the endoergicity (1.6 eV) for this excitation. The
emission increases strongly up to the threshold (3 eV) for formation of
K + + S O2 - ion-pairs and then declines steeply. At energies above the A* + X
a s y m p t o t e b u t b e l o w t h e A+ + X- asymptote, trajectories which make the
A +              A+ X - crossing and intend to exit via the ion-pair channel find it


288                                        Chemistry 1986




Fig. 10. Cross sections for electronic excitation and ion-pair formation on impact of K atoms with
SO, molecules, as functions of initial relative kinetic energy. Schematic potential curves at right
show reaction path illustrating “internal reflection” mechanism.



closed. This flux must be reflected back and redistributed at the
           A* + X and             A + X crossings until ultimately it escapes via
either the excitation channel or the original entrance channel.

Persistent Collision Complexes with Glorys Galore
   Until late 1966, the alkali reactions studied in crossed beams or in Polanyi
flames all converted a covalent bond into an ionic bond, and all appeared to
involve abrupt, impulsive reaction dynamics. Likewise, by then trajectory calcu-
lations for A + BC reactions had explored a variety of “mountain-pass” and
“ski-run” potential energy surfaces, and found that the lifetime of the transient
A-B-C complex is usually too short for rotational or even vibrational motions;
the products typically emerge within 10 - 1 3 sec or less. However, we expected
that suitable systems would form a lingering or persistent complex with lifetime
long compared to rotational as well as vibrational periods. In this regime, the
angle and energy distributions of the scattered products would give information
about the unimolecular decomposition of the complex.
   Among alkali reactions likely candidates were the exchange reactions with
alkali halides,



at ordinary thermal energies, too low to permit electronic excitation. For these
             reactions, since an ion-pair is present throughout, electron transfer
can enhance attraction rather than induce exit repulsion. Furthermore, the
near equality of the A+ X - a n d B X b o n d s t r e n g t h s a n d t h e e x c e p t i o n a l
                                      +  -



stability of the diatomic alkali molecule-ions (just then confirmed in the Ph.D.
work of Yuan Lee with Bruce Mahan) favor formation of an (AB) +X - complex
of appreciable lifetime. Electronic structure calculations subsequently de-


                                  D. R. Herschbach                             289


monstrated that the potential energy surfaces for dialkali halides indeed have a
pronounced basin, corresponding at its minimum to a triangular complex stable
by about 10 kcal/mol or more with respect to the separated products.
   With the aim of studying these alkali atom + akali halide reactions, before
departing Berkeley we had begun constructing an apparatus with a mass
spectrometer behind the surface ionization filament, to provide differential
detection for both of the product species and both of the reactant species.
Walter Miller and Sanford Safron completed the apparatus at Harvard and
obtained lovely evidence for persistent collision complexes in more than a
dozen of these exchange reactions. In each case, the angular distribution of
products has symmetry about 90º and peaks very strongly near 0º and 180º.
Furthermore, at wide angles the nonreactive scattering shows a “sticky colli-
sion bump” arising from break-up of the complex to reform the reactants rather
than proceed to products.
   We found the angular distributions could be nicely interpreted in terms of a
statistical model adapted from the compound nucleus treatment of nuclear
fission. The symmetry about 90° indicates that the complex persists for at least
a few rotational periods and hence many vibrational periods. This permits a
rough estimate of 5 x 10 - 1 2 sec as a lower limit for the mean lifetime of the
complex. The strong peaking at 0º and 180º indicates that the typical complex
forms and dissociates with centrifugal angular momentum much larger than
the rotational momenta of the reactant or product salt molecules. As illustrated
in Fig. 11, the products emerge with equal probability at all azimuthal angles
about the total angular momentum vector J of the complex, like water from a
lawn sprinkler. The complete angular distribution is obtained by averaging
uniformly over all orientations of the sprinkler about the relative velocity vector
V of the reactants. The result corresponds to the intersections of circles of
latitude and longitude on a globe. The product intensity is low in the equatorial
regions but becomes very high in the polar regions, near 0° and 180°. This
prominent peaking forward or backward along V is called a “glory”, after an
analogous effect in light scattering from raindrops.
    The glory peaks are rounded off when much of the angular momentum J
appears in rotational tumbling of the reactant or product molecules rather than
centrifugal motion. As seen in Fig. 11, this tilts the spinning sprinkler away
from the polar regions. The shape of the product angular distribution thus
reveals the relative contribution of the centrifugal and tumbling motions. This
is illustrated in Fig. 12. In turn, the statistical model links the angular momen-
 tum disposal to the moments of inertia of the complex in the transition-states
for formation and decomposition. The arrangement of atoms and the rotational
 motions in the transition-state thereby can leave its imprint in the product
 angular distribution, even though the complex may dissociate after only a few
 rotations.
    The product energy distributions are more directly related to properties long
 familiar in the theory of unimolecular reaction rates. The main features are
 governed primarily by the statistical densities of rotational and vibrational
 states at the transition-state, as in the Rice-Ramsberger-Kassel-Marcus treat-


290                                         Chemistry 1986




Fig. 11. Relationships among initial and final angular momenta and relative velocity vectors for a
long-lived collision complex. In case (a) there is no rotational momentum for either the reactant or
product molecules; in (b) it is present only for the products; in (c) for both reactants and products.
For fixed magnitudes of the total angular momentum J and the projections m and m’ on the
relative velocity vectors the product angular distribution is generated by uniform precessions of V’
about J and J about V.




ment of unimolecular rates. Qualitative aspects are illustrated in Fig. 13. In
partitioning the available energy among relative translation, vibration, and
rotation of the products, the statistically favored situation puts only a small
part into translation, since the vibrational and rotational modes are more
numerous. Thus, the probability distribution decline rather rapidly with incre-


                                          D. R. Herschbach                                        291




Fig. 12. Angular distributions for the statistical complex model, averaged over distributions of
angular momenta appropriate to a prolate complex (solid curves) or an oblate complex (dashed
curves), for case (b) of Fig. 11. All the curves are symmetric about 90º. The index gives the ratio of
the maximum value of reactant orbital angular momentum                   to the average value of the
projection m’ for the dissocating complex; thus the index indicates the relative contribution of
centrifugal and tumbling motions.


ase in product translational energy. This decline becomes more rapid as the
number of atoms in the complex increases and hence the number of vibrational
modes increases. Another effect enters when the complex is rotating, however.
The energy in centrifugal motion is not available for statistical distribution
among the other modes. On decomposition of the complex this centrifugal
energy is converted into relative motion of the emerging product molecules.
This changes the shape of the product translational energy distribution. The
low energy region is determined by the centrifugal contribution, the high
energy region by the statistical contribution.
  As outlined here, the statistical model pertains to a “loose” complex defined
by the exit and entrance centrifugal barriers associated with long-range attrac-


292




Fig. 13. Schematic distribution of product relative kinetic energy as predicted from statistical
theory, without (dashed) and with (solid) the centrifugal contribution that enters for a rotating
complex.




tion. Within these barriers, the energy disposal is assumed to be statistical;
outside, the collision partners are assumed to rotate freely and travel like point
masses subject to two-body forces. This simple model has worked well for many
reactions, although various refinements are needed for quantitative analysis.
Other basic factors enter for a “tight” complex. The transition-state then
occurs at a potential barrier rather than a centrifugal barrier, and bond
deformations are required to surmount the barrier. This implies that energy
can be exchanged between different degrees of freedom as the system moves
from the transition-state to the separated products. With allowance for such
effects, statistical treatments akin to the RRKM theory usually prove adequate
in the persistent complex realm.
   A major, instructive discrepancy appeared for the dialkali halide systems,
however. Despite its good agreement with the angle and energy distributions,
the statistical model overestimated the ratio of reactive to nonreactive decay of
the collision complex, often by a factor of 3 to 5 or more. This striking discre-
pancy is attributed to preferred reaction geometry. The potential energy sur-
faces predict that the preferred direction of approach is collinear, with the
incoming alkali atom attacking the “wrong end” of the salt molecule. This


                                       D. R Herschbach                                      293


corresponds to linear (AB) + X - and reflects the stability of the dialkali ion. By
virtue of the strong long-range attraction, most complexes are formed in
collisions with large impact parameters and thus the centrifugal momentum
often restrains the roughly collinear (AB) + X - configurations from bending
into the triangular configurations required for reaction. Later, we found many
similar instances of preferred reaction geometry.
   In search of another prototypical deviation from the statistical case, we
looked for a collision complex with lifetime comparable to its mean rotational
period. This is called an osculating complex, a term applied by Wigner to an
analogous realm in nuclear reactions. As indicated in Fig. 14, our model
calculations for this case assume that during rotation about its total angular
momentum J the complex is subject to decomposition with a random lifetime




Fig. 14. Ratio of intensity appearing at angle to the peak intensity for forward scattering
as calculated for the osculating model. The corresponding angular distribution is obtained by-
multiplying this “falloff function” by the appropriate curve from Fig. 12. The faloff curves are
labelled by the ratio of the mean lifetime of the complex to a typical rotational period.


294                                 Chemistry 1986


distribution, exp(-τ/τ). This gives an angle-dependent form factor governed by
the ratio τ/τ, of the mean lifetime to a typical rotational period. The angular
distribution is approximated by multiplying that for a persistant complex by
this factor. For         we thus expect the forward and backward glory peaks to
be about equally strong, whereas for τ-τ, the backward peak should be
attenuated by about 50%. Reactions of alkali atoms with thallium halides were
examined as likely candidates. We expected the lifetime of the complex might
be shortened by the higher ionization potential of the Tl atom, which inhibits
the sharing of charge, and by the higher reaction exoergicity. Indeed, George
Fisk and Doug McDonald found these systems show the glory peaks character-
istic of a complex, but the backword peak is substantially weaker, by 30% to
50%. Again, similar behavior was later found for many other reactions. Attrac-
tive chemistry often yields not a persistent coupling but just a flirtatious whirl.
    Another aspect of unimolecular kinetics explored with alkali reactions is the
dependence on the number of degrees of freedom. Even some
reactions with sizable exoergicity proved to involve persistent or osculating
complexes when six or eight atoms are involved. The most fully characterized
example is the Cs + SF 6 reaction; in addition to angle and velocity distribu-
 tions, we measured the CsF rotational excitation by electric deflection and the
vibrational populations by electric resonance spectroscopy. Although the avail-
 able energy is rather large, 40-50 kcal/mol, the reaction appears throughly
statistical. It has symmetrical forward and backward glory peaks and the same
effective temperatures for translation, rotation, and vibration, corresponding to
equipartition of energy. In this study, a miniature crossed-beam apparatus was
joined with Klemperer’s electric resonance spectrometer. This enabled quan-
 tum states of the reactively scattered CsF to be completely identified with
 respect to vibrational level, rotational angular momentum, and space orienta-
 tion of the angular momentum. It also completed another link with the saga of
 Stern and Rabi.

Beyond the Alkali Age
From the beginning, we spoke of the “early alkali age”, a phrase both wistful
and whimsical. It was intended to suggest that broader ages would inevitably
follow, without predicting how soon. Skeptics discounted alkali reactions as an
eccentric, unrepresentative family, but we gladly persisted because they re-
vealed such instructive dynamical variety. Meanwhile, an unduly pessimistic
view of prospects for beam studies of nonalkali reactions arose elsewhere. This
came from attempts to use mass spectrometric detection which failed to reduce
sufficiently the interfering background in the electron bombardment region. In
March of 1967 we began designing av new apparatus, to be named Hope. O n l y
nine months later it would take us “beyond the alkali age”.


Universal Detector and Supersonic Nozzles
Hope was undertaken when Yuan Lee joined our group as a postdoctoral
fellow. With Bruce Mahan at Berkeley, he had already built a major apparatus
for beam studies of ion-molecule reactions. In this, as in Hope, he made elegant


                                      D. R Herschbach                                     295


use of ion counting techniques adapted from nuclear physics. Yuan was teamed
with two beginning graduate students, Pierre LeBreton and Doug McDonald,
and several machinists in our Departmental Shop, headed by George Pisiello.
It was a group of extraordinary skill and zeal, inspired by Yuan’s genius and
fervent sense of mission. Blissfully, as each of the myriad design questions was
settled, we all relished his verdict: “Should be all right”.
   The main features of Hope are shown in Fig. 15. The entire detector unit is
mounted on a rotatable lid and the beam sources are fixed, to facilitate
changing the source modules and strong pumping of the source chambers. The
key component of the detector, the electron bombardment ionizer, is located
within three nested chambers, each differentially pumped by ion pumps and
cryogenic traps. This fulfills two vital design criteria for the ionization region.
(1) The background gas (at the mass of interest) which diffuses in from the
scattering chamber must be reduced to a partial pressure comparable to or
lower than the product species which enters in free flight. This partial pressure
is typically ~ 1 0 torr, only tenfold above the vacuum in interstellar space.
                  -14



(2) Background from deposit of product molecules on surfaces near the ionizer




Fig. 15. Cutaway view of crossed beam apparatus Hope with mass spectrometric detector, showing
beam geometry and arrangement ofdifferential pumping for detector and source chambers.


296                                Chemistry 1986


must be avoided. This is accomplished by the nested design, which permits
product molecules that pass through the ionizer without being ionized (the fate
of 99.9%!) to fly on to another differentially pumped region before hitting a
surface. In practice, Hope and its successors made accessible reactions with
much smaller yields as well as greatly extending the chemical scope. Respect-
able reactive scattering data are now often obtained with product fluxes of only
~ 103 molecules/sec.
   Supersonic nozzles also greatly expanded the variety and scope of beam
experiments. Beyond providing very high intensity (typically ~10 18 molecules/
steradian/sec), beams generated from such nozzles can be aptly viewed as a
“new state of matter”, with special properties much different from the old
trinity of gas, liquid, and solid. The collisions occurring the high pressure
region of a supersonic nozzle organize the beam molecules to a remarkable
extent. The exiting crowd of molecules may have mean separations of only 50
diameters, yet have nearly the same velocity and direction and hence suffer
almost no collisions. Likewise, the temperatures associated with relative trans-
lation and rotation of molecules within the beam are typically very low (of the
order of 1      or less) whereas the vibrational temperature can be kept high or
made low by choice of conditions. Another option is translational acceleration
by “seeding”. The reactant gas is mixed with a large excess (typically 100-fold)
of light diluent gas such as helium or hydrogen. Collisions during the superson-
ic expansion then bring the seeded molecules to the same exit velocity as the
diluent gas, and also concentrate the heavier species along the beam axis.
Intense beams are thereby obtained with kinetic energy readily variable over a
wide range extending well above typical activation energies for chemical reac-
tions.
   Like many others since, our adoption of supersonic nozzles was spurred by
John Fenn and Jim Anderson, ardent evangelists among the chemical engi-
neers then exploring fluid flow in nozzles. Again, there was a cultural gap to be
bridged; at a 1965 ecumenical meeting [12]:
   “The engineers spoke only to one another about Reynolds numbers;
   the chemists likewise talked just to each other about harpooning electrons.”
The Kistiakowsky ax story also prompted us to try nozzles and indeed we had
already used them in a modest way in alkali studies. Later we extended the
scope of the seeding technique by a nozzle design suitable for solid or liquid
substances, and others have developed many variants that have found wide
application in both collision and spectroscopic experiments. The splinters from
Kisty’s ax sprouted into a bountiful garden.

Recognizing Covalent and Ionic Cousins
For our first experiments with Hope, we chose to study



and other exchange reactions of halogen atoms and molecules. These were
inviting because the reactant beams were easy to produce and all species could
be very effectively pumped cryogenically. Furthermore, trihalogen complexes


                                          D. R. Herschbach                                        297


had long been postulated as intermediates in the mechanism of halogen atom
recombination and other processes. Such complexes had not been detected in
the gas phase, and the only rate constants available for the exchange reactions
had been derived from the always equivocal analysis of multistep processes in
photochemical systems.
   O u r f i r s t a t t e m p t t o s t u d y C l + B r2 gave data of excellent quality and
revealed instructive dynamical features. Although the total reaction cross
section is ~ 10 A2, smaller than the hard-sphere cross section, the BrCl angular
distribution peaks strongly in the forward hemisphere. This indicates that the
dominant interaction is short-range and yet attractive. In previous beam
experiments and trajectory calculations, the reactive scattering had always
peaked backwards when the cross section was smaller than the hard-sphere
value. However, despite its much smaller reaction cross section, the Cl + Br2
reaction gives product angle and translational energy distributions quite simi-
lar in form to the K + Br 2 reaction. We suggested this was evidence for an
osculating complex mechanism.
   Only a few months after our results for Cl + Br2 were announced, groups at
Freiburg and Los Alamos had confirmed our study, using mass spectrometric
apparatus of appreciably different design. This illustrates the value of choosing
a n a m e n a b l e s y s t e m t o t e s t n e w a p p a r a t u s or to extend an experimental
domain. Yet the reaction cross sections found in the beam studies indicated
that the rate constants derived from the photochemical experiments were about
 100-fold too low. Later the photochemical studies were repeated, with results in
agreement with the beam work.
    In studies of other trihalogen systems, we obtained further evidence for an
osculating complex with preferred reaction geometry. The wide-angle reactive
scattering indicates complexes containing iodine are more stable than those
with only bromine or chlorine, in accord with simple electronic structure
 arguments. Likewise, for complexes containing different atoms, the most stable
 configuration has the least electronegative atom in the central position. One of
 the striking results attributed to this preferred geometry appeared in the Br +
ClI case. The yield of BrCl is about 5-fold smaller than otherwise expected and
its angular distribution peaks backwards, indicating repulsive interaction.
 Subsequent studies, including variation of collision energy, brought out other
dynamical features. Often these could also be interpreted by analogy to alkali
 reactions, despite the marked contrast in covalent and ionic bonding.
    N e x t w e p u r s u e d t h e r e a c t i o n t h a t J o h n P o lan y i h ad emp lo y ed as th e
 prototype in developing his infrared chemiluminescence method,



This system proved to have a gratifying kinship both to photodissociation of C1 2
and to the K + CH 3 I reaction. Angle-velocity contour maps displaying this
comparison are shown in Fig. 16. For the Polanyi reaction, the product angular
distribution is broad but quite anisotropic, with the HCl recoiling backwards
and Cl forwards with respect to the incident H atom. The product velocity is
very high, about 1600 m/sec at the peak of the distribution. This corresponds to


298                                      Chemistry 1986




Fig. 16. Comparison of contour maps for photodissociation of the Cl 2 molecule and for reactive
scattering of H + Cl, and K + CH3I. Map for the latter case from work of A.M. Rulis and R.B.
Bernstein [3]. For each map, origin is at center-of-mass and horizontal axis is along reactant
relative velocity vector, with direction of incident atom or photon designated =     Tic marks
along radial lines indicate velocity internals of 200 m/sec.



release of about half of the available energy (reaction exoergicity of ~45 kcal/
mol plus initial collision energy of -10 kcal/mol) in the translational recoil of
HCl and Cl. The rest appears in vibrational and rotational excitation of HCl,
which is observed in the infrared luminescence. The form of the angular
distribution indicates collinear H-Cl-Cl as the preferred reaction geometry and
the high recoil energy shows that strong repulsive forces are abruptly released.
   The contour map for photodissociation was constructed from the continuous
absorption spectrum of Cl 2 , which shows directly the distribution of relative
translational energy of the fragment Cl atoms and hence the repulsive energy
release. The spectrum can be closely approximated by simply “reflecting” the
Gaussian vibrational distribution of the ground electronic state from the steep
(~7 eV/A) repulsive wall of the dissociative excited electronic state. The
angular distribution is governed by the dipole selection rule for absorption,
which makes the transition probability vary as the square of the cosine of the
angle between the Cl-Cl axis and the photon beam direction. We see that H +
C l2 and hν + Cl 2 give remarkably similar angle-velocity maps.
   More remarkable still is the close resemblance of H + Cl 2 and K + CH 3 I ;
except for a change of scale, the contour maps are almost congruent. In terms
of electronic structure, as already noted, the analogy to photodissociation is
obvious in the K + CH3I case because the harpooning electron enters the same
strongly antibonding molecular orbital excited in photodissociation. In the H
+ Cl2 case the analogy is not obvious, since the very high ionization potential of


                                           D. R Herschbach                                         299


         REACTANTS                                                COMPLEX
                     x - x                                         H - X - X




Fig. 17. Schematic construction of the three molecular orbitals of collinear H-X-X. The frontier
orbital, 2σ, may be regarded as a superposition of two components, one H-X antibonding and X-X
bonding, the other vice-versa.




the H atom prohibits electron transfer. However, we found a molecular orbital
rationale using the “frontier orbital” concept of Fukui. This is indicated in Fig.
 17. Collinear approach of the H atom generates three                orbitals for the H-Cl-Cl
complex. The middle one of these,                    is expected to be the highest occupied
orbital in the reaction complex. This frontier orbital has one node, resulting
from the superposition of two components, one H-Cl antibonding and Cl-Cl
bonding, the other vice versa. Simple calculations based on empirical data
indicate the latter component is dominant. Thus, the frontier node lies roughly
midway between the chlorine atoms, just as in the lowest-lying unoccupied
orbital of Cl2, the orbital excited during photodissociation. The similarity in the
contour maps stems from the congruence in frontier nodes which govern the
repulsive energy release in both reaction and photodissociation.
    I t i s u n c a n n y t h a t t h e H + C l2 a n d K + C H3 I r e a c t i o n s , s e m i n a l i n
developing the infrared chemiluminescence and molecular beam methods,
proved to be so closely related; not only are both rebound reactions, they are
even “kissing cousins.” T he nineteenth century notation still used to write
down chemical reactions gives no hint of such kinships, whereas electronic
structure interpretations often bring out the underlying simplicity and broad
scope of reaction dynamics.
   Other hydrogen atom + halogen reactions provide instructive contrasts. As
                        the repulsive energy release becomes a smaller fraction of that
in photodissociation and the hydrogen halide angular distribution shifts from
backwards to sideways with respect to the H atom direction. These aspects are
illustrated in Fig. 18. The molecular orbital treatment relates both trends to the
decrease in halogen electronegativity. This enhances the p-character of hybrid
orbitals involving the central atom and thereby favors a bent configuration.


300                                        Chemistry 1986




Fig. 18. Comparison of angle-velocity contour maps for reactions of H atoms with halogen
molecules. Since maps must be symmetric with respect to the horizontal axis, only upper halves
are shown. Tic marks along radial lines indicate velocity intervals of 200 m/sec for Cl2 case, 100 m/
sec for Br2 and I2 . Panels at right compare distributions of product relative translational energy
(solid curves) with continuous absorption spectra of halogen molecules (dashed curves). Abscissa
scales for spectra are shifted to place origin at the dissociation asymptote, and thus show directly
the repulsive energy release in photodissociation.




The frontier node also shifts from about midway between the halogen atoms in
H-Cl-Cl to close to the central atom in H-I-I. Many analogous stable molecules
are known which have one more or one less valence electron than these H-X-X
systems. The molecules with one more electron are linear or nearly so; those
having one less electron are strongly bent, with bond angles of 90° to 110°. The
shift of the frontier node might be expected to make H-I-I resemble a case with
one less electron. Thus it is plausible that decreasing the halogen electronega-
tivity fosters bent reaction geometry and reduces the repulsive energy release.
   The H + ICl reaction is especially interesting. On an energetic or statistical
basis, reaction at the “Cl-end” would be more favorable than at the “I-end”,
since the H-Cl bond strength (102 kcal/mol) is much larger than H-I (70 kcal/
mol). The molecular orbitals suggest the H atom should prefer to attack the I-
end, however. As a consequence of the electronegativity difference, in ICl both
the highest occupied orbital ( π ∗ ) and the lowest unoccupied orbital        are
predominantly I atom orbitals. The beam studies find the HI yield is at least
comparable to HCl and probably substantially higher (although the effect of
some experimental factors that discriminate against HCI remains unresolved).
The angular distribution of HI peaks sideways, the HCl backwards. The


                                          D. R. Herschbach                                          301


infrared chemiluminescence detects only HCl and not HI, but this is compati-
ble with the beam results because the dipole derivative of HI is exceptionally
small and hence the infrared emission is very weak. The HCl energy distribu-
tion has a very unusual bimodal form. Comparison with trajectory calculations
suggests that some of the HCl results from direct attack at the Cl-end, but most
comes from indirect reaction after initial attack at the I-end. These two
reaction modes produce HCl in low and high rotation-vibration states, respec-
tively. Analogous steric preferences for many other reactions can likewise be
attributed to orbital asymmetry arising from differences in electronegativity.
   Further aspects of this theme were examined by studying reactions of oxygen
atoms with halogen molecules. We found the reaction



goes via a persistent complex with large yield and no activation energy. The
product contour map shows prominent glory peaks. For other reactions with
such maps, the intermediate complex usually corresponds to a stable molecular
species which correlates with the ground-state reactants and products. Here,
however, different spin states are involved. The reactants approach on a triplet
surface, whereas the products can depart on either a singlet or triplet surface.
The known stable OBr 2 molecule has a symmetric, strongly bent geometry and
a singlet ground state. Qualitative electronic structure arguments suggest that
the reaction goes predominantly via a less stable, triplet O-Br-Br potential
surface without transition to the more stable, singlet Br-O-Br surface. Like-
wise, the O + ICl reaction would be expected to give primarily IO + Cl rather
than ClO + I, although the latter path is much more exoergic. We indeed
found a large yield of IO but no detectable ClO, nice evidence that the reaction
i n v o l v e s e n d - on a t t a c k r a t h e r t h a n i n s e r t i on. These results led us to the
u n o r t h o d o x p r e d i c t i o n t h a t t h e O + F2 reaction should prefer the F-O-F
geometry rather than O-F-F, since oxygen is less electronegative than fluorine.
This implies a relatively high activation energy, associated with the switch to
an insertion mechanism, despite the large reaction exoergicity and the notori-
ous chemical personalities of the reactants. Subsequent experiments [13] in-
deed confirmed that O + F2 is inhibited by a large activation energy.


Migratory Atoms and Bonds
With the mass spectrometric detector, we could now also proceed to “the
organic age” and thereby pursue many further aspects of reaction dynamics.
Particularly inviting were unimolecular reactions involving isomerizations or
rearrangements. Fig. 19 shows the contour maps obtained for a favorite pair of
examples, the displacement reactions of chlorine atoms with vinyl bromide and
with allyl bromide. In these systems,



where R denotes CH 2 = C H o r C H2 = C H C H2 , respectively, the intermediate
chlorobromoalkyl radical is a known, stable species. It is vibrationally excited
by ~30 kcal/mol, the sum of the initial collision energy and thermal excitation


302                                        Chemistry 1986




Fig. 19. Comparison of contour maps for chlorolefin products from reactions of chlorine atoms with
(a) vinyl bromide and (b) ally1 bromide. Tic marks along radial lines indicate velocity intervals of
100 m/sec.




of the reactant olefin, the loss in bond strength in converting the double bond to
a single bond (~57 kcal/mol), and the gain in forming the new C-Cl bond (80
kcal/mol). Under our single-collision conditions, the excited radical cannot be
deactivated by a subsequent collision and thus must undergo unimolecular
decomposition. The net energy available to the products on reforming the
double bond and releasing the Br atom is -19 kcal/mol. These energetic
aspects are the same for the vinylic and the allylic reactions.
   The customary theory of unimolecular processes predicts that the allylic
reaction should proceed more slowly and hence show more nearly statistical
behavior, since it involves more atoms and therefore the excitation energy


                                         D. R. Herschbach                                        303


shuffles among more vibrational modes than in the vinylic reaction. On the
contrary, the contour map for the vinylic reaction indicates a persistent com-
plex, that for the allylic reaction an osculating complex. Some special feature
must intervene to make the vinylic reaction more nearly statistical than the
allylic reaction. Indeed, this was anticipated in choosing these systems for
study. According to a large body of work on organic reaction mechanisms, the
initial stage in both reactions should involve addition of the Cl atom to the
carbon atom “most distant” from that with the Br atom. As pictured in Fig. 20,
this implies that a “free valence” appears on the carbon linked to Br in the
vinylic case, but not in the allylic case. Thus, the vinylic reaction seems likely to
proceed via a 1,2-chlorine atom migration, whereas the allylic reaction can go via
a 1,3-bond migration. Since the heavy atom migration would be much slower
than the bond migration, this might provide a rate-limiting process which
makes the vinylic reaction more statistical than the allylic one.
   These mechanisms require the product chlorolefin to have Cl on the carbon
to which Br was originally bonded in the vinylic case, but to remain on the
“most distant” carbon in the allylic case. We verified this by analysis of the
fragment ion mass spectra of chlorolefins formed in corresponding reactions
with a methyl group added to “label” one or another carbon atom. The methyl
substitutions also produced revealing changes in the reactive scattering. For
the vinylic cases, the angular distributions show variations which reflect
changes in the rotational motions caused by the methyl group. For the allylic
cases, the product translational energy distributions become statistical, as if the
methyl group diverts the intramolecular energy flow and thereby makes it more
random.
   Further tests of the migration mechanisms were later obtained by Rowland
using radioactive tracers [14]. In this work, the same vinylic and allylic
reactions examined in the beam experiments were studied under “bulb” condi-
tions. At low pressures, the products obtained were those expected for the
atom- and bond-migration mechanisms, respectively. At high pressures, how-




Allylic Reaction:




Fig. 20. Stereoselective mechanisms for 1,2-chlorine atom migration in vinylic reaction and 1,3-bond
migration in allylic reaction.


304                                 Chemistry 1986


ever, different products were obtained. These corresponded to the species
expected from collisional stabilization of the intermediate chlorobromoalkyl
radicals, followed by standard reactions of those radicals.
  A host of other organic reactions have now been studied by beam methods,
especially by Yuan Lee and his students. Often the intermediates and initial
elementary steps have proven to be quite different than those postulated in
conventional mechanistic studies. The wide range of bonding and stereochemi-
cal situations in organic systems ensures vast scope for dynamical detective
work in this domain.

Facile Molecular Reactions
The reaction systems discussed so far all involve attack by an open-shell atom
or free radical. One of the chief criteria invoked in postulating elementary steps
in reaction mechanisms is that only such processes have very low activation
energies, less than 5 or 10 kcal/mol. The advent of the Woodward-Hoffmann
rules focussed attention on reactions of molecules with molecules, which in-
volve the concerted making and breaking of two or three pairs of bonds. These
processes typically have activation energies above 20 kcal/mol when fully
“allowed” by the rules and above about 40 kcal/mol when “forbidden.” In this
context, we sought instructive examples of facile bimolecular and termolecular
reactions of diatomic molecules.




This might be termed a “no-electron” reaction, since the salt molecules are
essentially closed-shell ion-pairs. Accordingly, no restraints are imposed by the
molecular orbital correlations involved in the Woodward-Hoffmann rules. Yet
a contemporary theoretical paper had concluded that even this alkali halide
reaction would be subject to a high activation energy of -50 kcal/mol. This
seemed unlikely in view of the strong long-range dipole-dipole attraction. Since
alkali halides form rhombic quadrupolar dimers with dissociation energ y
∼30−50 kcal/mol, the potential surface for the exchange reaction has a deep
basin. Our beam experiments indeed found the reaction proceeds via a persis-
tent complex. There is no activation energy and the reaction cross section is
extremely large, corresponding to formation of the complex in collisions with
impact parameters up to ∼8−9 A. We therefore spoke of a “vacuum cleaner”
potential. The product angle and velocity distributions conform nicely to the
usual statistical model, but the ratio of nonreactive to reactive decay of the
complex was 2 or 3 times larger than statistical. As in the analogous atom +
salt case, this can be attributed to geometrical isomerism. Ionic model calcula-
tions predict less stabel, linear chain isomers exist in addition to the rhombic
dimer. These linear chain isomers may often dissociate nonreactively rather
than rearrange to the cyclic form required for the exchange process, especially
when the centrifugal angular momentum in the collision keeps the chain
“ e n d s ” a p a r t . It is like two pairs of ice skaters playing “crack the whip.”


                                       D. R. Herschbach                                     305


Extensive trajectory calculations by Brumer and Karplus confirmed this strik-
ing role of geometrical isomerism.
   Since the four-center ionic + ionic reaction proved facile whereas the typical
covalent + covalent case was forbidden according to Hoffmann’s obital corre-
lations, we examined several reactions involving ionic + covalent reactions.
These also proved facile at thermal collision energies; for example,



This reaction very likely involves formation of an alkali trihalide salt, Cs +
(BrICl) - , and charge migration within the trihalide anion. Although apparent-
ly unknown in the gas phase, trihalides have been much studied in solution and
in the solid state. In agreement with molecular orbital theory, the trihalide
anions are linear or nearly linear, the middle atom is always the least electrone-
gative (I, in this case) and it acquires a small positive charge whereas the end
atoms share the negative charge. Clear evidence for this structure appears in
the reactive scattering. There is no observable yield of Cs + I - + BrCl, even at
collision energies more than 20 kcal/mol above the energetic threshold for this
channel. Furthermore, as seen in Fig. 21, the IBr angle-velocity contour map
has a very unusual skewed shape. The lefthand product peak has distinctly
higher intensity and velocity than the righthand peak. This shows that colli-
sions from which IBr and CsCl rebound backwards with respect to the incident
ICl and CsBr, respectively, are more probable and involve more repulsive
energy release than collisions from which IBr and CsCl emerge in the same
direction as the incident ICl and CsBr, respectively. These properties are




Fig. 21. Contour map of IBr product distribution from CsBr + ICI reaction at collision energy of
3.9 kcal/mol.


306                                 Chemistry 1986


consistent with the expectation that in Cs + B r- + ICl reactive configurations,
B r- tends to be collinear with ICl while Cs + is likely to collide with the central
I atom. The positive charge acquired by I as the trihalide forms then repels
C s+ , which picks up the emerging Cl- and departs quickly in the direction
opposite to the incident salt. Similar ionic + covalent reactions such as CsF +
HCl and NaO + HCI [15] likewise go with near zero activation energy.
   In the domain of four-center covalent + covalent reactions, the landmark is
the classic work of Sullivan on the favorite “textbook” case,



In 1967 he showed this does not occur as a four-center reaction but involves
dissociation or near-dissociation of I2 followed by I + H2 + I. Soon after, Jaffe
and Anderson studied Hl + DI using the seeded supersonic beam technique
and found no detectable HD yield at collision energies far above the empirical
activation energy. This is certainly an allowed reaction, at least as the reverse
of I + HD + I, but apparently vibrational rather than translational activation
is required. Likewise, in our laboratory David Dixon and David King found no
evidence for the four-center exchange reaction



Their experiment employed two supersonic nozzles and scanned the collision
energy up to ~25 kcal/mol. Formation of BrCl is readily observed on mixing
the reactants in a bulb, and rate studies had indicated a relatively low activa-
tion energy, only ~15 kcal/mol. However, this was suspect because of “possible
catalysis by moisture or surfaces,” a traditional lament in kinetic studies.
Hoffmann’s molecular orbital correlation diagram predicts a much larger
activation barrier, comparable to the promotion energy of two electrons from a
bonding to an antibonding orbital and thus above the dissociation energy of the
weaker reactant bond 45 kcal/mol.
   Since a six-center, termolecular reaction is allowed by the orbital correla-
tions, we decided to look for



Scattering experiments using three crossed beams are utterly impractial, but
appreciable fluxes of reactant dimer molecules, linked by a weak van der Waals
bond, can readily be generated by a supersonic expansion. We were encour-
aged by tantalizing evidence obtained by Noyes for a third order reaction of
halogen molecules in solution. Yet analogy to other allowed six-center cases
(such as Diels-Alder reactions) suggested that the activation barrier might well
be ~20 kcal/mol, and it might also require chiefly vibrational rather than
translational excitation. Thus, we were startled when King and Dixon found
large yields of BrCl that appeared to come from the termolecular process even
at thermal collision energies of only ~3 kcal/mol. However, velocity analysis
data for this system and the analogous HI reaction provided several kinematic
consistency tests which even indicated that three sequential bond scissions can
be resolved in the termolecular exchange process. Soon another example of a


                                      D. R. Herschbach                                  307


facile molecular reaction fostered by a van der Waals dimer was provided by
Durana and McDonald [16]. They found that F2 + (HI) 2 yields intense HF
infrared chemiluminescence whereas F 2 + HI gives none. Whether or not these
processes actually involve six-center transition-states, the weak van der Waals
link is remarkably effective in promoting a reaction that otherwise does not go.
   Subsequently, we undertook potential surface calculations to examine termo-
lecular six-center bond exchange processes. For Cl 6 a traditional semiempiri-
cal treatment [17] indicates facile reaction but the approximations involved are
dubious. For hexagonal H 6 ab initio calculations of high quality were carried out
by D i x o n a n d S t e v e n s [ 1 8 ] a n d s h o w t h a t a termolecular path is indeed
accessible without breaking an H-H bond whereas there appears to be no such
path for a bimolecular, four-center exchange. The results for H4 and H 6 t h u s
conform to the rule, amply demonstrated in organic chemistry, that cycloaddi-
tion reactions involving 4m electrons are forbidden as concerted processes
while those involving 4m + 2 electrons are allowed. But it turns out that H 6
obeys this rule only through configuration interaction, not by virtue of the
usually invoked nodal properties.
   The special role of H 6 was elucidated further by comparison with several
previous calculations for larger H n polygons, available for n = 4m + 2 extend-
ing from n = 14 to 62. These calculations, pertinent to model treatments of
metallic hydrogen, found the bond length and cohesive energy (binding per
atom) to be nearly constant for the whole series. Since our values for H 6 proved
to be practically the same, we can reliably estimate the stability of H 1 0 a n d
higher polygons by taking the cohesive energy as constant. This shows that H6
is the only H 4 m + 2 polygon that is stable with respect to dissociation of an H 2
bond and hence the only polygon that can serve as transition-state for a
concerted bond exchange. The customary orbital symmetry criterion thus fails
for all the higher 4m + 2 polygons; it must be supplemented by an energetic
criterion in order to predict whether a reaction is concerted.
   The unique stability of H6 relative to dissociation of an H2 bond also suggests
that solid molecular hydrogen might undergo a high pressure transition to form
a new phase involving termolecular complexes before transistion to the long-
sought atomic or metallic phase (predicted in 1948 by Wigner). This possibility
was examined by Rich LeSar by means of lattice-energy calculations employ-
ing approximate pair potentials [19]. Although uncertainties in the potentials
prevent a definite conclusion, the results obtained for a range of parameters
indicate that a phase comprising a “partly dissociated” form of the six-center
transition state may be stable at pressures above a few hundred kilobars. As
shown in Fig. 22, repulsive forces from the neighboring units in the crystal
prevent dissociation of this complex to diatoms. A marked drop in the H 2
stretching frequency observed at high pressure is qualitatively consistent with
formation of molecular clusters but by no means a clear test. In any case, these
calculations serve to illustrate how pursuit of reaction dynamics can lead to far
distant domains!


                                          Chemistry 1986




Fig. 22. Potential energy profile for dissociation of a hexagonal H 6 complex in free space (solid
curve) and in a hexagonal closest-packed crystal (dashed curve, computed for pressure of 400 kbar)
in which repulsive interactions with neighbors prevent the dissociation. At right are shown
configurations of the thermolecular complexes corresponding to positions marked along abcissa. The
circles for each H atom have a radius of half of the free H2 bond length.



Van der Waals Dimers and Clusters
Supersonic expansions make accessible a vast range of species and processes
involving feeble bonds. In effect, the very low internal temperaturs in superson-
ic beams circumvent the Second Law, since the entropy term in the free energy,
∆ H - T∆ S, can be made negligible. Even a weakly favorable enthalpy term
then suffices to produce large yields of dimers or bigger clusters. This permits
studies involving “solvation” of reactant species and other interactions akin to
condensed phase or surface chemistry. In the past few years such work has
created a major new field, with particular emphasis on metal clusters [20].
Here we describe some of our experiments to illustrate a few favorite themes.
   In solution kinetics, much attention has been devoted to photodissociation
and recombination processes. These are usually interpreted in terms of “the
cage effect,” in which the solvent inhibits diffusive separations of the photofrag-
ments. A different perspective has now emerged from beam experiments [21].
Complexes of I 2 with various solvent species such as Ar, N 2, benzene, . . were
formed by supersonic expansion and excited with a laser in a spectral region
above the dissociation threshold for the bare I 2 m o l e c u l e . T h i s p r o d u c e d
intense fluorescence, showing that instead of dissociating much of the iodine
relaxes into bound vibrational levels of the electronically excited B state. Energy
balance is maintained by breaking the van der Waals bond(s) of the original
solvent complex and releasing some repulsion into relative translation of the
product fragments. In solution photodissociation must likewise by mollified by
energy transfer to the solvent and the surviving excited iodine molecules may
account for features previously attributed to recombination of caged atoms.


                                       D. R. Herschbach                                      309


   Another typical role of solvation is exemplified in reactions of ammonia
clusters with hydrogen halides. For unclustered ammonia proton transfer is
endoergic to form the inoic salt, NH 4 + X - ,increasingly so for X =
In crossed-beam scattering with clustered ammonia, new mass peaks appear
that correspond to (NH 3) n HX adducts with n as large as 15 or more. Framen-
tation of these peaks appears to decrease markedly on completion of the first
solvation shell. For sufficiently large clusters the complex formation probably
involves proton transfer and is driven by solvation of the resulting NH + X - ion -
pair by the “extra” ammonia molecules in the reactant cluster.
   Although solvated ions govern a host of solution phenomena, the individual
molecular species and processes often cannot be resolved or characterized in
condensed phases. Thus studies of molecular cluster ions in the gas phase have
become another major field; for instance, the elusive hydrated electron has now
been produced in beams of unfragmented water clusters [22]. In related work,
we studied collisional electron transfer from alkali atoms to molecular clusters.
Since the process is endoergic, fast atoms are generated from a seeded super-
sonic expansion. Because the electron transfer can only occur within the
crossing radius for the ionic-covalent potential curves, the time-scale becomes
very short, typically ~0.3 psec. This limits use of the method for electron
affinity studies but also provides a means to probe the size of cluster subunits
involved in impulsive interactions [23].
   For small clusters, particularly dimers, it is feasible to study the exchange of
van der Waals bonds by the same methods employed for chemical bonds. Fig.
23 shows an angle-velocity contour map obtained by Worsnop and Buelow [24]
for the Xe + Ar2 reaction. Since thermal collision energies are typically several
times larger than the dimer well depth, conservation of energy and momentum
constrain the scattered diatom product to a narrow circular band centered on
the center-of-mass velocity; only within that band can XeAr be formed with
low enough internal excitation to hang together. However, several other fea-




Fig. 23. Contour map for XeAr from Xe + Ar2 reaction at collision energy of 1.3 kcal/mol. The
dotted circular band shows the kinematically allowed scattering region for nominal parent beam
velocities. At right angular distribution derived from experimental map (solid curve) is compared
with predictions from the hard-sphere model, including knock-out (dashed curve) and sequential
impulse (dotted curve) contributions.


310                                  Chemistry 1986


tures provide dynamical information. These include the pronounced “hole” in
the reactive scattering in the forward direction, which is accompanied by
strong peaking near        and an even stronger backward scattering.
   This pattern is remarkably similar to that found for some ion-molecule
reactions, such as the O + +                     + D reaction, for which the collision
energies and bond strengths are more than 100-fold higher. As illustrated in
Fig. 23, we find several properties are in nearly quantitative agreement with an
impulsive model based on pairwise hard sphere interactions. Two distinct
collision modes give the chief contributions. In the mode that accounts for the
forward pitched scattering, A + BC interact via sequential hard sphere elastic
collisions (A off B, then B off C); the exchange reaction occurs only when the
final relative velocity of A and B corresponds to an energy less than the AB
bond strength. For this mode, the angular distribution may be found from a
geometric construction devised by Mahan for high energy ion-molecule reac-
tions [25]. The other mode gives strong backward scattering by a process
familiar in billiards; A k n o c k s - o u t B and thereby comes nearly to rest with
respect to the C atom, so the resulting AC molecule moves briskly backward
with respect to the center-of-mass. This study of an exchange of feeble bonds
thus helped develop a more comprehensive asymptotic model applicable to any
atom transfer reaction when the ratio of collision energy to bond strength
becomes large.

Pursuit of Vector Correlations
In addition to the product angular distribution, many other directional or
vector properties of reactions are now accessible in beam experiments, especial-
ly by means of laser-induced fluorescence techniques developed by Zare which
exploit the orientation dependence of the dipole selection rule for electronic
excitation [26]. These vector properties offer much information not provided
by energetic or other scalar properties, and their study is now emerging as a
vigorous field referred to as dynamical stereochemistry or stereodynamics. F o r
instance, as indicated in Fig. 24, of special interest is the triple-vector correlation
among the initial and final relative velocities and the product rotational angu-
lar momentum. In principle, this vector correlation offers a means to undo the
“dart-board” averaging over the random azimuthal orientations of initial
impact parameters. The distributions of both k’ and j’ must have azimuthal
symmetry about k, but when a subset is selected of k’ vectors with particular j ’
(or vice-versa), this subset in general will not have azimuthal symmetry about
k. Model calulations and an early electric deflection study by Hsu and McClel-
land of the Cs + CH 3 I reaction revealed marked asymmetry; as the freshly
formed CsI recoils from the collision, its internuclear axis tends to rotate in or
near the plane of the initial and final relative velocity vectors. Far more detailed
information of this kind is in prospect from studies using laser-induced fluores-
cence, especially since the great sensitivity of the method may allow the
alignment of individual rotaton-vibration states to be measured as a function of
the scattering angle.
  We may even be optimistic about measuring some properties of the four


                                           D. R. Herschbach                                         311




                                                                 k




                                    k




Fig. 24. Three-vector correlation among initial and final relative velocity vectors, here denoted by k
and k’, and product rotational angular momentum vector j'. Upper pair of diagrams indicate the
azimuthal symmetry about k of the k’ and j’ product vectors inherent when these are observed
separately, as in the two-vector correlations (k,k’) and (k,j’). Lower pair of diagrams indicates how
the threr-vector correction (k,k’,j’) can give information about the dihedral angle            in effect
undoing the azimuthal averaging about the initial velocity.




vector correlation involving both the velocity vectors and the reactant as well as
product rotation. This correlation of course contains still more information
than found in the six two-vector and four three-vector correlations involving
pairs or triads of the four vectors. As exhibited in a model calculation [27], such
information includes the azimuthal asymmetry with respect to both k and k’,
the preferred rotational orientation of both the reactant and product molecules
with respect to the k, k’ plane, and even the relative sense of rotation (parallel
or contrary). Several averages implicit in lower order vector correlations are
thus undone. The loss of information otherwise imposed by the random aspects
of the initial conditions resembles the celebrated “phase problem” encountered
in X-ray scattering. Thus the complications required to unravel phases for a
molecular structure determination are heuristically analogous to undoing im-
pact parameter averaging by observing one or two “extra angles” in collision
experiments. In such ways, a further level of molecular resolution awaits
reaction dynamics.


312                                      Chemistry 1986


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This paper is a tour through a family album. The frequent mentions of work by
“we” pertain to my colleagues listed in Table 1 a roster of 51 graduate
students and 35 postdoctoral fellows (in italics) listed in order of their “gradu-
ation” from our research group. Their work totals about 250 years of research,
150 of that in reaction dynamics. The investment of human resources is far
greater, however. Beyond the direct contributions by the machine shop and
other staff, all of us received vital help along the way from our teachers, our
relatives, and many friends and colleagues. Sustained financial support was
likewise vital, including many scholarship and fellowship awards as well as
research grants from several agencies, especially the National Science Founda-
tion. To all who made our research possible, I am deeply grateful.
   In revisiting the album, I have lingered fondly on the early episodes because,
as in dynamics generally, the initial conditions are often as important as the
force field. I hope that students and young researchers starting their own work
might be encouraged to see how simple and naive were our first steps. I hope
also that some research administrators and funding agencies might be encour-
aged to take a longer-range view of quixotic projects. In our work the essential
impetus was the evangelical fervor of young scientists captivated by new vistas.
But to pursue such distant vistas we have freedom and support. In many
quarters this seems less fortcoming today. In expressing thanks for our good
fortune, I must urge renewed efforts to foster enterprising work on fundamental
problems.
   The family album contains far more than shown here, including many
intriguing chapters from other laboratories. Again I recommend an admirable
pair of texts [3] which survey much work deserving of honor at this forum.
Over 30 years of reaction dynamics, the fellowship of striving and joy of
discovery have created an intense sense of community. Perhaps in emulation of
our molecular friends, recruits to this field seem unusually excitable, zestful,
and generous. Working in such a community in pursuit of new insights is a
splendid prize, enhanced in the sharing. Thereby we offer thanks for the
privilege of studying our ever mysterious atoms and molecules.




‘62   J.L. Kinsey, M.S. Child
‘63   J.A. Norris, P.R. Brooks
‘64    R.N. Zare, K.R. Wilson, M.A.D. Fluendy, RJ. McNeal
‘65    M.C. Moulton, R.J. Cross, R.R. Herm, R.M. Martin, J. Chryusochoos
‘66   J.H. Birely, E.A. Gislason, M. Cosandey, J.R. Jordan, A. Niehaus
‘67   G.H. Kwei, R. Grice, E.A. Entremann, H.D. Cohen, P.M. Strudler, P.B. Empedocles
‘68    W.C. Stwalley, R.W. Anderson, Y.T. Lee, Ch. Ottinger. G.A. Fisk, J.F. Wilson, V. Aquilanti
‘69    S.A. Safron, W.B. Miller, P.E. Siska, H.L. Kramer, C. Maltz, T. Kitagawa
‘70    P.R. LeBreton, R.J. Gordon, S.J. Riley, R.H. Harris, S.M. Freund, K. Lacmann
'71   J.U. McDonald, R.M. Düren


                                                     D. R H ers c h b a c h                                                   313


'72       N. D.      W ei nst ei n, S. A. A d el m a n, W. S. Str u v e, H. J. L o es c h
'73       R. P.    M ari ell a, D. L. M c F a d d e n, D. D. P arris h, J. R. Kr e n os
'74       D. L.     Ki n g, D. S. Y. Hs u, J. T. C h e u n g, R. A. L ars e n, D. M. Li n ds a y, P. E.      Mc Na mee
'75       S. K.     N e o h, D. A. Di x o n
'76       D. A.    C as e, R. A. S a n d ers
'77        K. H.     B o we n
'78        L. D.   Tr o w bri d g e, G. W. Li es g a n g, J. J. V al e nti ni
'79       G. M.       M c Cl ell a n d, W. L e e
'80        E. L.   Q uit e vis, R. N a a m a n
'81        K. L.   S a e n g er, R. A. L es ar, N. A g m o n, O. C h e s h n o v s k y
'82        D. R.     W ors n o p, S. R a y n or, A. Y o k oz e ki
'83        S.J.    B u el o w, J. D. B ar n w ell
'84       J. G.     L o es er, C. J. S a n d r off
'86        M. R.    Z a ki n, D.J. D or e n, D. Z. G o o ds o n, S. G. G r u b b



R EF E R E N C ES
 [l ]     H. S. J o h nst o n, G as P h as e R e a cti o n R at e T h e or y, R o n al d Pr ess, N e w Y or k, 1 9 6 6.
 [ 2]     F or m o st of t h e w or k d e s cri b e d h er e, r ef er e n c e s t o t h e ori gi n al lit er at ur e m a y b e
          o bt ai n e d r e a dil y fr o m a f e w r e vi e w s. E arl y c h e mi c al a p pli c ati o n s ar e di s c u s s e d b y
          S. D at z a n d E. H. T a yl or, i n R e c e nt R es e ar c h i n M ol e c ul ar B e a ms, I. Est er m a n n, E d.,
          A c a d e mi c Pr e s s, N e w Y or k, 1 9 5 9. W e h a v e s ur v e y e d t h e d e v el o p m e nt of o ur
          st u di e s a n d alli e d w or k i n: Di s c. F ar a d a y S o c. 3 3, 1 4 9 ( 1 9 6 2); A p p. O pti c s S u p pl.
          ( C h e mi c al L a s e r s), 1 2 8 ( 1 9 6 5); A d v. C h e m. P h y s. 1 0, 3 1 9 ( 1 9 6 6); F ar a d a y Di s c.
          C h e m. S o c. 5 5, 2 3 3 ( 1 9 7 3); P ur e a n d A p pli e d C h e m. 4 7, 6 1 ( 1 9 7 6). U s u all y w e
          will o mit s p e cifi c cit ati o n e x c e pt f or p a p er s n ot r ef er e n c e d i n t h e s e r e vi e w s.
 [ 3]     R. B. B er nst ei n, C h e mi c al D y n a mi cs vi a M ol e c ul ar B e a m a n d L as er T e c h ni q u es, Cl ar e n-
          d o n Pr e s s, O xf or d, 1 9 8 2; R. D. L e vi n e a n d R. B. B er n st ei n, M ol e c ul a r R e a cti o n
          D y n a mi c s, 2 n d E d., O xf or d U ni v er sit y Pr e s s, N e w Y or k, 1 9 8 7.
 [ 4]     Of c o ur s e, t h e s e ar e n ot St er n’ s e x a ct w or d s, alt h o u g h m y m e m or y of hi m i s vi vi d.
           I h a v e pr e s e nt e d hi s st ori e s i n fir st p er s o n a s a n att e m pt t o c a pt ur e hi s w a y of
          t elli n g t h e m.
 [ 5]      W. Kl e m p e r e r a n d D. R. H e r s c h b a c h, P r o c. N atl. A c a d. S ci. ( U. S. ) 4 3, 4 2 9
           ( 1 9 5 7). T h e r e s p o n s e t o vi br ati o n al e x cit ati o n w a s s h o w n b y K. T. Gill e n a n d
          R. B. B er n st ei n, C h e m. P h y s. L ett s. 5, 2 7 5 ( 1 9 7 0).
 [ 6]     T hi s h a d b e e n p u bli s h e d a b o ut a y e ar b ef or e b ut s o m e h o w I h a d mi s s e d s e ei n g
           t h at iss u e of t h e J o u r n al of C h e mi c al P h y si c s. I n t h e s a m e v ol u m e I al s o f o u n d a n
          e x c e pti o n al p a p er o n tr a n siti o n- st at e t h e or y b y a n ot h er a ut h or n e w t o m e: J. C.
           P ol a n yi!
 [ 7]     T h e Pi c k wi c ki a n p hr a s e i s a t y pi c all y P ol a n yi a n c o m m e nt b y J o h n, d eli v er e d
          w h e n h e a n d hi s f at h er Mi c h a el vi sit e d t h e S o ci et y of F ell o w s i n 1 9 6 6.
 [ 8]      G. B. Ki sti a k o w s k y a n d W. P. Sli c ht er, R e v. S ci.I n st. 2 2, 3 3 3 ( 1 9 5 1).
 [ 9]      R. N. Z ar e a n d D. R. H er s c h b a c h, Pr o c. I. E. E. E. 5 1, 1 7 3 ( 1 9 6 3); R. N. Z ar e, M ol.
           P h ot o c h e m. 4, 1 ( 1 9 7 2); C. H. Gr e e n e a n d R. N. Z ar e, A n n. R e v. P h y s. C h e m. 3 3,
           1 1 9 ( 1 9 8 2).
 [ 1 0]     D. R. H er s c h b a c h, J. P h y s. C h e m. 8 3, 4 A ( 1 9 7 9).
 [ 1 1]     K. L a c m a n n a n d D. R. H er s c h b a c h, C h e m, P h y s. L ett s. 6, 1 0 6 ( 1 9 7 0).
 [ 1 2]     C. E. K ol b a n d D. R. H er s c h b a c h, J. P h y s. C h e m. 8 8, 4 4 4 7 ( 1 9 8 4).
 [ 1 3]     R. H. K r e c h, G. J. Di e b ol d, a n d D. L. M c F a d d e n, J. A m. C h e m. S o c. 9 9, 4 6 0 5
           ( 1 9 7 7).
 [ 1 4]      R. S. I y e r a n d F. S. R o wl a n d, C h e m. P h y s. L ett s 1 0 3, 2 1 3 ( 1 9 8 3 ). S e e al s o
           F ar a d a y Di s c. C h e m. S o c. 6 7, 2 5 0 ( 1 9 7 9). S e e al s o J. P h y s. C h e m. 8 9, 2 0 4 2, 3 7 3 0
           ( 1 9 8 5) f or e vi d e n c e s u g g e sti n g l e s s st er e o s p e cifi c a d diti o n a s w ell a s Br at o m
           mi gr ati o n.


314                                                C h e mistr y 1 9 8 6


[ 1 5] J. A. Sil v er a n d C. E. K ol b, J. P h y s. C h e m. 9 0, 3 2 6 7 ( 1 9 8 6).
[ 1 6] J. F. D ur a n a a n d J. D. M c D o n al d, J. A m. C h e m. S o c. 9 8, 1 2 8 9 ( 1 9 7 6).
[ 1 7] D. A. Di x o n a n d D. R. H er s c h b a c h, F ar a d a y Di s c. C h e m. S o c. 6 2, 1 6 2 ( 1 9 7 7);
        D. L. T h o m p s o n a n d H. H. S u z u k a w a, J. A m. C h e m. S o c. 9 9, 3 6 1 4 ( 1 9 7 7).
[ 1 8] D. A. Di x o n, R. M. St e v e n s, a n d D. R. H er s c h b a c h, F ar a d a y Di s c. C h e m. S o c. 6 2,
        1 1 0 ( 1 9 7 7).
[ 1 9] R. L e S ar a n d D. R. H er s c h b a c h, J. P h y s. C h e m. 8 5, 3 7 8 7 ( 1 9 8 1).
[ 2 0] S e e, f or e x a m pl e, F. Tr a g er a n d G. z u P utli z, E d s., M et al Cl u st e r s, Z. f. P h ys. D 3
        ( 1 9 8 6).
[ 2 1] K. L. S a e n g er, G. M. M c Cl ell a n d, a n d D. R. H er s c h b a c h. J. P h y s. C h e m. 8 5, 3 3 3 3
        ( 1 9 8 1); J. J. V al e nti ni a n d J. B. Cr o s s, J. C h e m. P h y s. 7 7, 5 7 2 ( 1 9 8 2).
[ 2 2 ] H. H a b e rl u n d, H. - G. S c hi n dl e r, a n d D. R. W o r s n o p, J. P h y s. C h e m. 8 8, 3 9 0
        ( 1 9 8 4).
[ 2 3 ] K. H. B o w e n G. W. Li e s e g a n g, B. S. S a n d e r s a n d D. R. H e r s c h b a c h, J. P h y s.
        C h e m. 8 7, 5 5 7 ( 1 9 8 3).
[ 2 4 ] D. R. W o r s n o p, S. J. B u el o w, a n d D. R. H e r s c h b a c h, J. P h y s. C h e m. 9 0, 5 1 2 1
        ( 1 9 8 6).
[ 2 5] B. H. M a h a n, W. E. W. R u s k a, a n d J. S. Wi n n, J. C h e m. P h y s. 6 5, 3 8 8 8 ( 1 9 7 6).
[ 2 6] D. A. C a s e, G. M. M c Cl ell a n d, a n d D. R. H er s c h b a c h, M ol. P h y s. 3 5, 5 4 1 ( 1 9 7 8).
[ 2 7 ] J. D. B a r n w ell, J. G. L o e s e r, a n d D. R. H e r s c h b a c h. J. P h y s. C h e m. 8 7, 2 7 8 1
        ( 1 9 8 3).
