                        MAGICAL POWER OF TRANSITION METALS:
                        PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

                        Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2010
                        by
                        EI-ICHI NEGISHI
                        Herbert C. Brown Laboratories of Chemistry, Purdue University, 560 Oval
                        Drive, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2084, U.S.A.


                        Not long ago, the primary goal of the synthesis of complex natural products
                        and related compounds of biological and medicinal interest was to be able
                        to synthesize them, preferably before anyone else. While this still remains a
                        very important goal, a number of today’s top-notch synthetic chemists must
                        feel and even think that, given ample resources and time, they are capable
                        of synthesizing virtually all natural products and many analogues thereof.
                        Accepting this notion, what would then be the major goals of organic synthesis
                        in the twenty-ﬁrst century? One thing appears to be unmistakably certain.
                        Namely, we will always need, perhaps increasingly so with time, the uniquely
                        creative ﬁeld of synthetic organic and organometallic chemistry to prepare
                        both new and existing organic compounds for the beneﬁt and well-being of
                        mankind. It then seems reasonably clear that, in addition to the question
                        of what compounds to synthesize, that of how best to synthesize them will
                        become increasingly important. As some may have said, the primary goal
                        would then shift from aiming to be the ﬁrst to synthesize a given compound
                        to seeking its ultimately satisfactory or “last synthesis”.
                           If one carefully goes over various aspects of organic synthetic methodology,
                        one would soon note how primitive and limited it had been until rather
                        recently, or perhaps even today. For the sake of argument, we may propose
                        here that the ultimate goal of organic synthesis is “to be able to synthesize any
                        desired and fundamentally synthesizable organic compounds (a) in high yields, (b)
                        efﬁciently (in as few steps as possible, for example), (c) selectively, preferably all in
                        t98–99% selectivity, (d) economically, and (e) safely, abbreviated hereafter as the
                        y(es)2 manner.”

                                                        with or without
                                                        catalyst
                                      R1M   +   R2X                     R1R2 + MX

                                      R1, R2: carbon groups. M: metal or metal-containing groups.
                                      X: halogens or other leaving groups.                        
                                     Scheme 1.




                                                                                                            151




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 1                                                                                  2011-08-29 09:41:02


                  R2 X       ArX                 X      X Ar
                                       X                                        Alkyl X     RCOX
            RM1                                                 X           X

             ArM

                                                     Some work but
                             These reactions         they are of limited
                  M
                             do not proceed          scope
                             except in special
                  M          cases

                   M                                 Capricious and
                                                     often nonselective
                                                                                Limited   Needs
           Ar                                                                   scope     special
                  M                                  Special Procedures                   procedures
                                                     are better but need
                                                     much improvement
                   M


           Alkyl M
                                                     Some work but they
                                                     are of limited scope


           N CM


           C C OM
                                                                                                       
         Table 1. Scope and Limitations of Uncatalyzed Cross-Coupling with Grignard Reagents and
         Organoalkali Metals.



         Half a century ago, however, only a limited number of cases of cross-coupling
         reactions using Grignard reagents and related organoalkali metals containing
         Li, Na, K and so on were known. Their reactions with sterically less hindered
         primary and some secondary alkyl electrophiles (R2X) are generally satisfac-
         tory. Even so, the overall scope of their cross-coupling reactions was severely
         limited. One of their most serious limitations was their inability to undergo
         satisfactory C–C bond formation with unsaturated R2X containing un-
         saturated carbon groups, such as aryl, alkenyl, and alkynyl groups, with some
         exceptions1 (Table 1).


         EVOLUTION OF THE PD-CATALYZED CROSS-COUPLING
         The cross-coupling methodology has evolved mainly over the past four
         decades into one of the most widely applicable methods for C–C bond
         formation, that is centered around the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling with
         organometals containing Al, Zn, Zr (Negishi coupling),2, 3 B (Suzuki
         coupling),2, 4 and Sn (Stille coupling)2, 5 as well as those containing
         several other metals including Cu,6 In,7 Mg,8 Mn,9 and Si10 (Hiyama
         coupling). Although of considerably more limited scope, both the seminal

         152




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 2                                                                                 2011-08-29 09:41:02


                        nature of the Ni-catalyzed Grignard cross-coupling of Tamao and Kumada11a,
                        11b
                           as well as of Corriu11c and its sustained practical synthetic values must not
                        be overlooked in cases where its overall synthetic merits are comparable with
                        or even superior to those Pd-catalyzed reactions mentioned above.
                          Evolution within the author’s group actually began with the development
                        of some selective C–C bond formation reactions of alkenylboranes leading
                        to most probably the earliest highly selective (t98%) syntheses of unsym-
                        metrically substituted conjugated (E, E)- and (E, Z)-dienes,12 following the
                        pioneering studies of alkyne hydroboration by Brown13 and subsequent C–C
                        bond formation by Zweifel14 (Scheme 2).


                                                                                  H     R1 Li           R2               R1
                                                  H                  R1
                                                      o                                           o
                                                          C, 1 h                                50 C, 1 h
                                          )2 BH                               )2 B      H                     )2 B Li


                                                                                                                        R2
                                                                                  i)    )2 BH , 0 oC, 1 h
                                   i) I2, 78 to 25 oC  R1
                                                                                                             R1
                                   ii) 3 N NaOH, 25 Co                            ii) CH3CO2H, 50 oC, 6 h
                                                                                                                             R2

                                                                 >99% E   R2                                   >98% E, Z
                                                                   1           2
                                                                                                               bombykol
                                          Yield (%)              R            R          Ref.
                                                                                                        (R1= (CH2)9OH, R2= nPr)
                                             53                  Cy       n              12b
                                                                          Hex
                                             51              n            Cy             12b
                                                           Hex
                                             63       (CH2)9OSiMe3        n              12b
                                                                              Pr
                                             60           (CH2)6OAc           Et         12c


                              Scheme 2.


                        Despite these successes, however, the author’s group concurrently began explo-
                        ring the possibility of promoting the C–C bond formation with alkenylboranes
                        and alkenylborates with some transition metals. After a series of total failures
                        with some obvious choices then, namely a couple of cuprous halides, which
                        were later shown to be rather impure, our attention was turned to a seminal
                        publication of Tamao reporting the Ni-catalyzed Grignard cross-coupling
                        (Tamao-Kumada-Corriu coupling).11 Our quixotic plans for substituting
                        Grignard reagents with alkenylboranes and alkenylborates were uniformly
                        unsuccessful.15 In retrospect, it must have been primarily due to the fact
                        that all of our experiments were run at 25oC in THF. As soon as we replaced
                        alkenylboron reagents with alkenylalanes, however, smooth Ni-catalyzed
                        cross-coupling reactions of (E)-1-alkenyldiisobutylalanes with several aryl
                        bromides and iodides took place to provide the cross-coupling products of
                        t99% E geometry.15a The corresponding Pd-catalyzed reactions were also
                        observed but no apparent advantage in the use of Pd(PPh3)4 in place of
                        Ni(PPh3)4 was noticed. One of our main goals was to be able to synthesize
                        stereo- and regio-deﬁned conjugated dienes. Indeed, both Ni- or Pd-catalyzed

                                                                                                                                  153




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 3                                                                                                        2011-08-29 09:41:02


         cross-coupling of alkenylalanes with alkenyl iodides proceeded as desired.15b
         In these reactions, however, the Pd-catalyzed reactions were distinctly
         superior to the corresponding Ni-catalyzed reactions in that the Pd-catalyzed
         reactions retained the original alkenyl geometry to the extent of t97%,
         mostly >99%, whereas the corresponding Ni-catalyzed reactions showed the
         formation of undesirable stereoisomers up to 10%.15b Our literature survey
         revealed that there was one paper by Murahashi8a reporting 4 cases of the
         Pd-catalyzed Grignard cross-coupling in 1975. We later learned that two
         other contemporaneous papers by Ishikawa8c and Fauvarque8d published in
         1976 also reported examples of the Pd-catalyzed variants of the Ni-catalyzed
         Grignard cross-coupling. With our two papers published in 1976,15 we thus
         reported, for the ﬁrst time, Ni- and Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions of non-
         Grignard reagents, namely organoalanes. Signiﬁcantly, some unmistakable advantages
         associated with Pd over Ni were also recognized for the ﬁrst time.15b
            Sensing that the major player in the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling might
         be Pd rather than the stoichiometric quantity of a metal countercation (M)
         and that the main role of M of R1M in Scheme 1 might be to effectively
         feed R1 to Pd, ten or so metals were screened by using readily preparable
         1-heptynylmetals containing them. As summarized in Table 2,3a,16 we not only
         conﬁrmed our earlier ﬁnding that Zn was highly effective8e but also found
         that B and Sn were nearly as effective as Zn, even though their reactions
         were much slower. We then learned that examples of Pd-catalyzed cross-
         coupling with allyltins by Kosugi5b had been reported a year earlier 1977 but
         that the reaction of the borate marked the discovery of the Pd-catalyzed organoboron
         cross-coupling. As is well known, extensive investigations of the Pd-catalyzed
         cross-coupling reactions of organometals containing B by Suzuki 4c,4d and Sn
         by Stille 5c,5d began in 1979.
                                               H3C           cat. PdLn                   H3C
                                                               THF             n
                              n
                                  PentCŁCM +   I                                   PentCŁC

                                                                         product             starting
                             M            temp (oC)   time (h)
                                                                         yield (%)           material (%)
                             Li             25           1                 trace                 88
                             Li             25          24                     3                 80
                             MgBr           25          24                    49                 33
                             ZnCl           25           1                    91                  8
                             HgCl           25           1                 trace                 92
                             HgCl          reflux        6                 trace                 88
                             BBu3Li         25           3                    10                 76
                             BBu3Li        reflux        1                    92                  5
                             AliBu2         25           3                    49                 46
                             AlBu3Li        25           3                     4                 80
                             AlBu3Li       reflux        1                    38                 10
                             SiMe3         reflux        1                 trace                 94
                             SnBu3          25           6                    83                  6
                             ZrCp2Cl        25           1                     0                 91
                             ZrCp2Cl       reflux        3                     0                 80
                                                                                                            
         Table 2. Reactions of 1-Heptynylmetals with o-Tolyl Iodide in the Presence of Cl2Pd(PPh3)2
         and iBu2AlH


         154




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 4                                                                                      2011-08-29 09:41:02


                        On the basis of a “three-step” mechanism consisting of (i) oxidative addition
                        of R2X to Pd(0)Ln species, where Ln represents an ensemble of ligands, (ii)
                        transmetalation between R2Pd(II)LnX and R1M, and (iii) reductive elimina-
                        tion of R1R2Pd(II)Ln to give R1R2 (Scheme 3) widely accepted as a reasonable
                        working hypothesis,3–5,8,11 we reasoned that, as long as all three microsteps
                        are kinetically accessible, the overall process shown in Scheme 1 would be
                        thermodynamically favored in most cases by the formation of MX. In view
                        of the widely observed approximate relative order of reactivity of common
                        organic halides toward Pd(0) complexes also indicated in Scheme 3, a wide
                        range of Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions of aryl, alkenyl, alkynyl, benzyl,
                        allyl, propargyl, and acyl halides and related electrophiles (R2X) as well
                        as R1M containing these carbon groups were further explored. In view of
                        distinctly lower reactivity of alkyl halides including homobenzylic, homoal-
                        lylic, and homopropargylic electrophiles, the use of alkylmetals as R1M was
                        considered.

                                                                R2    Pd(II)Ln X
                                   R2X                                                                  R1M

                                                        (i)                           (ii)

                                                                                                           R1
                                 Pd(0)Ln                                                           LnPd (II)
                                                                       (iii)                               R2
                                                   R1     R2
                                  (i) oxidative addition, (ii) transmetalation, (iii) reductive elimination
                                  R1, R2 = C groups. X = I, Br, Cl, OTf, etc. M = metal countercation.

                                  Approximate Relative Order of Reactivity of Organic Halides
                                  in Oxidative Addition to Pd
                                  Allyl       Benzyl   Alkenyl
                                            >        >         > Aryl >> simple Alkyl
                                  Propargyl   Acyl     Alkynyl                                                  
                                  Scheme 3.


                        A couple of dozen papers published by us during the ﬁrst several years of
                        the 1980s on Pd-catalyzed (i) alkylation with alkylmetals,17 (ii) cross-coupling
                        between aryl, alkenyl, or alkynyl groups and benzyl, allyl, or propargyl
                        groups,18 (iii) the use of heterosubstituted aryl, alkenyl, and other R1M
                        and R2M,17d,19 as well as acyl halides,20 and (iv) allylation of metal enolates
                        containing B and Zn that are not extra-activated by the second carbonyl
                        group21 amply supported the optimistic notion that the Pd-catalyzed cross-
                        coupling might be very widely applicable with respect to R1 and R2 to be
                        cross-coupled.


                        CURRENT PROFILE OF THE PD-CATALYZED CROSS-COUPLING
                        Today, the overall scope of the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling may be shown
                        as summarized in Table 3. Although any scientiﬁc progress is evolutionary,

                                                                                                                    155




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 5                                                                                          2011-08-29 09:41:03


         comparison of Table 3 with Table 1 does give us an impression that the
         progress made in this area has been rather revolutionary. Regardless, it
         would represent one of the most widely applicable methods for C–C bond
         formation that has begun rivaling the Grignard- and organoalkali metal-
         based conventional methods as a whole for C–C bond formation. Much more
         importantly, these two methods − one modern and the other conventional
         − are mostly complementary rather than competitive with each other. As is
         clear from Table 3, a little more than half of the seventy-two classes of cross-
         coupling listed in Table 3 generally results not only in high yields but also
         in high selectivity (t98%) in most of the critical respects. In approximately
         twenty other classes of cross-coupling, the reactions generally result in high
         overall yields, but some selectivity features need to be further improved. Only
         the remaining dozen or so classes of cross-coupling reactions either have
         remained largely unexplored or require major improvements. Fortunately, in
         most of these three dozen or so less-than-satisfactory cases, the Pd-catalyzed
         cross-coupling methodology offers satisfactory alternatives requiring modiﬁ-
         cations as simple as (a) swapping the metal (M) and the leaving group (X),
         (b) shifting the position of C–C bond formation by one bond, and (c) using
         masked or protected carbon groups, as exempliﬁed later.
            At this point, it is useful to brieﬂy discuss some of the fundamentally
         important factors contributing to the current status of the Pd-catalyzed cross-
         coupling.
            (1) Use of metals (M) of moderate electronegativity represented by Zn.
         The transition metal-catalyzed cross-coupling may have started as Grignard
         or organoalkali metal reactions with organic electrophiles to which transition
         metal-containing compounds were added in the hope of catalyzing or
         promoting such reactions. The earlier seemingly exclusive use of Grignard
         reagents and organoalkali metals as R1M in Scheme 1 strongly suggests that
         their high intrinsic reactivity was most probably thought to be indispensable.
         In reality, however, there have been a rather limited number of publications
         on the reactions of organoalkali metals catalyzed by Pd complexes,8b,22 and
         the results are mostly disappointing except in some special cases. The cur-
         rent proﬁle of the Pd- or Ni-catalyzed Grignard cross-coupling is considerably
         more favorable.8,11 In the overall sense, however, its scope is signiﬁcantly
         more limited than those employing Zn and B supplemented with Al and Zr.
         It has become increasingly apparent that Grignard reagents and organoalkali
         metals are intrinsically too reactive to allow Pd to efﬁciently participate in
         the putative three-step catalytic cross-coupling cycle (Scheme 3). Indeed,
         under stoichiometric conditions, alkali metals and Mg are often as effective
         as or even more effective than Zn and other metals.23 These results suggest
         that their excessive reactivity may serve as Pd-catalyst poisons. Another major
         difﬁculty with Grignard reagents and organoalkali metals is their gener-
         ally low chemoselectivity in the conventional sense. As one of the important
         advantageous features of the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling is that it permits
         pre-assembly of functionally elaborated R1M and R2X for the ﬁnal or nearly
         ﬁnal assemblage of R1—R2, the low chemoselectivity of Grignard reagents

         156




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 6                                                                  2011-08-29 09:41:03


                        and organoalkali metals is a critically serious limitation. Despite these
                        shortcomings, however, the Pd- or Ni-catalyzed Grignard cross-coupling8,11
                        should be given a high priority in cases where it is competitively satisfactory
                        in the overall sense, because Grignard reagents often serve as precursors to
                        other organometals. In the other cases, metals of moderate electronegativity
                        (1.4–1.7), such as Zn (1.6), Al (1.5), In (1.7), and Zr (1.4), where the numbers
                        in parentheses are the Pauling electronegativity values, should offer a
                        combination of superior reactivity under Pd-catalyzed conditions and high
                        chemoselectivity. The surprisingly high chemoselectivity of Zn has made it
                        desirable to prepare organozincs without going through organoalkali metals
                        or Grignard reagents, and intensive explorations by Knochel24 are particularly
                        noteworthy. Although B in boranes may be highly electronegative (2.0),
                        rendering organoboranes rather non-nucleophilic, its electronegativity can
                        be substantially lowered through borate formation. This dual character of B
                        makes it an attractive metal in the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling.4



                                                                    cat. PdLn
                                           R1M        +   R2X                        R1 R2        +   M X (Thermodynamic sink!)
                              1    2
                             R , R = C group. See below. M = Mg, Zn, B, Al, In, Si, Sn, Cu, Mn, Zr, etc. X = I, Br, Cl, F, OTs, OTf, etc.
                             M & X = Regio- & stereo-specifiers, which permit a genuine LEGO Game avoiding addition-elimination.

                                   R2X       ArX                                X   Ar                      X
                                                                X                         X                               Alkyl X          RCOX
                             RM1                                                                                    X
                                                                                                                         Little known
                              ArM                                                                                        until recently
                                                                                                                         Recent results
                                                                                                                         promising

                                   M                                                                                     Consider
                                                                                                                         AlkylM as
                                                                                                                         alternatives
                                                                       Alkynyl-
                                   M                                   alkenyl                                           Consider also
                                                                       coupling                                          uncatalyzed
                                                                                                                         and Cu-, Ni-,
                                                                                                                         or Fe-catalyzed
                             Ar                                                                                          processes
                                   M                                                          M                 X


                                       M
                                             Use alternate
                                             routes. Follow the
                                                                                     Ar
                                                                                              M
                                                                                                       Ar
                                                                                                                X   ?
                                             arrow                                            M                 X

                                                                                     Use the alternate routes shown
                                                                                     below
                                       M

                                                            M             X
                             Alkyl M                                      X
                                                 Ar         M
                                                                       ArX
                                                            M


                             N CM

                                                                                                  Tsuji-Trost
                             C C OM Use ofD-haloenones as enolate                                Reaction
                                            equivalents should be considered
                                                                                                                                                   
                        Table 3. LEGO Game Approach to C–C Bond Formation via Pd-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling
                        Reactions.


                                                                                                                                              157




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 7                                                                                                                    2011-08-29 09:41:03


         (2) Pd as the optimal catalyst component. Although Cu,25 Ni,11,15,26,27 Fe,28
         and even some other d-block transition metals have been shown to be useful
         elements in C–C cross-coupling, it is Pd that represents the currently most
         widely useful catalyst in catalytic cross-coupling. In a nutshell, it shares with
         other transition metals some of the crucially important features, such as an
         ability to readily interact with non-polar S-bonds, such as alkenes, alkynes, and
         arenes, leading to facile, selective, and often reversible oxidative addition,
         transmetalation, and reductive elimination shown in Scheme 3.
            In contrast with the high reactivity of proximally Y-bonded organic
         halides, most of the traditionally important heteroatom-containing func-
         tional groups, such as various carbonyl derivatives except acyl halides, are
         much less reactive toward Pd, and their presence is readily tolerated. These
         non-conventional reactivity proﬁles associated with some d-block transition
         metals have indeed provided a series of new and general synthetic paradigms
         involving transition metal catalysts, such as Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling and
         oleﬁn metathesis.29
            But, why is Pd so well suited for transition metal-catalyzed cross-coupling?
         If we compare Pd with the other two members of the Ni triad, the heavier
         and larger Pt is also capable of participating in the three microsteps in
         Scheme 3, but R1R2PtLn are much more stable than the corresponding Pd- or
         Ni-containing ones, and their reductive elimination is generally too slow to
         be synthetically useful, even though fundamentally very interesting.30 On
         the other hand, smaller Ni appears to be fundamentally more reactive and
         versatile than Pd. Whereas Pd appears to strongly favor the 0 and +2
         oxidation states separated by two electrons, Ni appears to be more prone
         to undergoing one-electron transferring redox processes in addition to
         the desired two electron redox processes, leading to less clean and more
         complex processes. Our recent comparisons of the TONs of various classes
         of Ni- and Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions between two unsaturated
         carbon groups31,32 have indicated that the Ni-catalyzed reactions generally
         display lower TONs by a factor of t102 and lower levels of retention of stereo-
         and regiochemical details, readily offsetting advantages stemming from
         the lower cost of Ni relative to Pd. On the other hand, cleaner Pd-catalyzed
         cross-coupling reactions often display TONs of t106. In some cases, TONs
         reaching or even surpassing 109 have been observed.32 Thus, for example,
         the reactions of phenylzinc bromide with p-iodotoluene and of (E)-1-
         decenylzinc bromide with iodobenzene in the presence of Cl2Pd(DPEphos)
         in THF exhibited TONs of 9.7×109 and 8.0×107, respectively, while producing
         the desired products in t97% and 80% yields, respectively.32 At these levels,
         not only cost issues but also some alleged Pd-related toxicity issues should
         become signiﬁcantly less serious.
            (3) Critical comparison of R1M and R1H. It is generally considered that
         the use of R1H in place of R1M would represent a step in the right direction
         toward “green” chemistry. This statement would be correct and signiﬁcant
         provided that all of the other things and factors are equal or comparable. In
         reality, however, the other things and factors are rarely equal or comparable,

         158




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 8                                                                   2011-08-29 09:41:03


                        and valid comparisons must be made by taking into consideration all signiﬁ-
                        cant factors. In Pd-catalyzed alkenylation and also alkynylation, development
                        of Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling versions using Zn, B, Sn, and others as M in
                        R1M were, in fact, preceded by the R1H versions, namely Heck alkenylation33
                        and Heck-Sonogashira alkynylation.34 Thus, evolution of the cross-coupling
                        version took place in the R1H-to-R1M, rather than R1M-to-R1H, direction.
                        Despite some inherent advantages associated with the R1H versions over the
                        corresponding R1M versions, the synthetic scopes of the R1H versions are
                        generally signiﬁcantly more limited than the R1M versions.35 From the per-
                        spective of synthesizing conjugated di- and oligoenes in the y(es)2 manner,
                        the following difﬁculties and limitations of Heck alkenylation must be noted.
                             i.   need for certain activated and relatively unhindered alkenes, such as
                                  styrenes and carbonyl-conjugated alkenes, for satisfactory results,36
                             ii. inability to produce either pure (t98%) E or Z isomer from a given
                                  alkene used as R1H which can be readily and fully overcome by the
                                  use of stereo-deﬁned isomerically pure (t98%) alkenylmetals as
                                  R1M,37
                             iii. frequent formation of undesirable regioisomeric and stereoisomeric
                                  mixtures of alkenes33,37 leading to lower yields of the desired alkenes,
                                  and
                             iv. lower catalyst TONs (typically d102–103) except for the syntheses
                                  of styrenes having an additional aryl, carbonyl, or proximal hetero-
                                  functional group33c as compared with those often exceeding 106 for
                                  the corresponding R1M version, especially with Zn as M,32 signiﬁcantly
                                  affecting cost and safety factors.

                        Both the fundamental and practical merits of using metals (M) as (a) regio-
                        and stereo-speciﬁers, (b) kinetic activators, and (c) thermodynamic promoters
                        are abundantly clear, and these differences must not be overlooked. Of
                        course, in those speciﬁc cases where the R–H versions of alkenylation and
                        alkynylation are more satisfactory than the R1M version in the overall sense
                        including all y(es)2 factors, their use over the R1M versions may be well
                        justiﬁed. Thus, it would still remain important and practically useful to
                        continuously seek and develop additional R1H processes that would proceed
                        in the y(es)2 manner and would be considered superior to the R1M version
                        for a given synthetic task. After all, when one speciﬁc chemical transformation
                        is desired, it is the best optimal process for that case rather than the process
                        of the widest scope and general superiority, that is to be chosen.
                           (4) Advantage associated with the two-stage (LEGO game) processes of
                        the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling. In the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling, the step
                        of the ﬁnal molecular assembly involves formation of a C–C single bond.
                        As long as it proceeds with full retention of all structural details of the R1
                        and R2 groups of R1M and R2X, an isomerically pure single product (R1–R2)
                        would be obtained except in those cases where formation of atropisomers
                        are possible. While the majority of R1 and R2 groups do retain their structural
                        details during Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling, allylic groups, especially allylic R1

                                                                                                      159




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 9                                                                            2011-08-29 09:41:03


         in R1M, and propargyl groups as R1 and/or R2 may lose their regio- and/or
         stereochemical identities through allyl and propargyl–allenyl rearrangement,
         respectively. Secondary and tertiary alkyl groups are also prone to both
         stereoisomerization and E-elimination. However, some Pd- or Ni-catalyzed
         asymmetric alkylation has been reported to proceed stereoselectively.38
         Furthermore, the preparation of R1M and R2X can be performed in totally
         separate steps by using any known methods and, for that matter, any
         satisfactory methods yet to be developed in the future as well. Signiﬁcantly,
         a wide range of R1M and R2X containing “sensitive” functional groups in a
         conventional sense, such as amides, esters, carboxylic acids, ketones, and
         even aldehydes, may be prepared and directly cross-coupled, as eloquently
         demonstrated by both regio- and chemoselective preparation and Pd-
         catalyzed cross-coupling of a wide range of aryl and related compounds,
         notably by Knochel24 and Snieckus.39
            As such, the two-stage processes for the synthesis of R1–R2 offer certain
         distinct advantages over other widely used processes in which some critical
         structural features, such as chiral asymmetric carbon centers and geometrically
         deﬁned C C bonds, are to be established in the very steps of skeletal
         construction of the entire molecular framework. Such processes include an
         ensemble of conventional carbonyl addition and condensation (oleﬁnation)
         reactions as well as modern oleﬁn metathesis.29 For example, synthesis of
         (Z)-alkenes by intermolecular cross-metathesis has just made its critical ﬁrst
         step40 towards becoming a generally satisfactory route to (Z)-alkenes in the
         y(es)2 manner.
            (5) Why d-block transition metals? Some fundamental and useful structural
         as well as mechanistic considerations. The three-step mechanistic hypothesis
         shown in Scheme 3 has provided reasonable bases not only for understanding
         various aspects of the seemingly concerted Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling but
         also for making useful predictions for exploring various types of concerted
         Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions. Of course, what is shown in Scheme 3,
         which evolved from those seminal studies with Ni,11,41 may be applicable to
         other transition metal-catalyzed processes. At the same time, it is important to
         be reminded that few mechanistic schemes have ever been ﬁrmly established
         and that they are, in most cases, not much more than useful working hypotheses
         for rational interpretations and predictions on the basis of the numbers
         of protons, electrons, and neutrons as well as space for accommodating
         them including orbitals accommodating electrons, which bring yet another
         fundamentally important factor, namely symmetry. The fundamental
         signiﬁcance of the molecular orbital (MO) theory represented by the
         frontier orbital (HOMO–LUMO) theory of Fukui,42 synergistic bonding of
         Dewar,43 exempliﬁed by the so-called Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson (DCD) model
         (Scheme 4), and the orbital symmetry theory of Woodward and Hoffmann44
         can never be overemphasized.
            In the area of C–C cross-coupling in the y(es)2 manner with Pd and
         other d-block transition metals as the central catalyst components, at least the
         following two factors must be critically important:

         160




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 10                                                                 2011-08-29 09:41:03


                              i. ability to provide simultaneously one or more each of valence-shell empty orbitals
                                 serving as LUMOs and ﬁlled non-bonding orbitals serving as HOMOs
                                 (Scheme 4) and
                            ii. ability to participate in redox processes occurring simultaneously in both
                                 oxidative and reductive directions under one set of reaction conditions in one
                                 vessel.
                        The ﬁrst of the two is partially shared by singlet carbenes and related
                        species and therefore termed “carbene-like”. With one each of empty and
                        ﬁlled non-bonding orbitals, carbenes are known to readily interact with non-
                        polar Y-bonds and even with some V-bonds. The mutually opposite di-
                        rections of HOMO–LUMO interactions which signiﬁcantly minimize
                        the effect of activation energy-boosting polarization in each HOMO–
                        LUMO interaction should be ﬁrmly recognized. These features readily
                        explain the facile and selective formation of stable S-complexes with d-block
                        transition metals, which is not readily shared by main group elements,
                        such as B and Al, as they cannot readily provide a ﬁlled non-bonding orbital
                        together with an empty orbital.

                                      Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson (D-C-D)
                                      Synergistic Bonding Scheme for -Complexation Dissociation
                                                                       _                         +
                                                                                   _ _
                                       C       C     -complex.                              C
                                                                           C                                    C       C               C     C
                                                                           + +  _
                                         +                             +    + _
                                        PdLn          -dissoc.           +                                          PdLn                    PdLn
                                                                                   Pd
                                                                           _
                                                                                    _        +


                                      Modified D-C-D Synergistic Bonding Scheme for
                                      Oxidative Addition Reductive Elimination


                                       X       Y                           +X + + Y _
                                                   oxid. add.               + + _                          oxid. add.           X       Y
                                         +                                          Pd
                                                    red. elim.             _                               red. elim.               PdLn
                                        PdLn                                            _     +



                                       -Complexation Assisted Oxidative Addition with
                                      Alkenyl (Alkynyl or Aryl) Halides with Retention
                                      (D-C-D Synergistic - and -Bonding Tandem)

                                                                               _
                                       C       C   oxid. add.      C               C                   oxid. add.
                                         + X                           _             +                                      C       C
                                                   red. elim.                       + +                red. elim.
                                        PdLn                       +
                                                                           Pd                X                                     PdLn X
                                                                       _                    + +
                                                                                    _                                       retention


                                       -Complexation Assisted Oxidative Addition with
                                      Allyl (Propargyl or Benzyl) Halides with Inversion
                                      (D-C-D Synergistic Bonding Promoted 'SN2"-like Process)

                                                      oxid. add.               C                 C                   oxid. add.              C      C
                                       C       C                               _
                                                      red. elim.                             +
                                                                                                               _     red. elim.
                                             C X                               +    Pd        + +      + +X                                  LnPd       C
                                           +                                    _            _                                                              b
                                           ab                                                        a b                                              a
                                                                                                                                                X
                                        PdLn
                                                                                                                                              inversion
                                   Scheme 4.


                                                                                                                                                                161




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 11                                                                                                                                     2011-08-29 09:41:04


         Despite the above-discussed similarity between carbenes and transition metals,
         there are some critically signiﬁcant differences between them. Thus, many
         transition metal-centered “carbene-like” species are not only of surprising thermal
         stability, even commercially available as chemicals of long shelf-lives at
         ambient temperatures, e.g., ClRh(PPh3)3 and Cl2Pd(PPh3)2, but also reversibly
         formed in redox processes permitting high catalyst TONs often exceeding a million
         or even a billion.31,32 The authors are tempted to call such species “super-
         carbenoidal”. Signiﬁcantly, the “super-carbenoidal” properties of d-block
         transition metals do not end here. In addition to numerous 16-electron
         species with one valence-shell empty orbital, there are a number of 14-electron
         species including surprisingly stable and even commercially available ones,
         such as Pd(tBu3P)2. In the oxidative addition step in Scheme 3, Pd must not
         only act like singlet carbene to generate S-complexes for binding, it must also interact
         with the proximal C–X bond with either retention or inversion, presumably in con-
         certed manners, for which the V-bond version of the synergistic bonding
         may be envisioned (Scheme 4). For such processes of low activation barriers,
         an “effective” 14-electron species may be considered to be critically desired.
         Although the transmetalation step in Scheme 3 is not at all limited to transition
         metals, the reductive elimination step, for which a concerted microscopic
         reversal of oxidative addition discussed above appears to be a reasonable and
         useful working hypothesis, must once again rely on the “super-carbenoidal”
         transition metals to complete a redox catalyst cycle. Of course, many variants
         of the mechanism shown in Scheme 3 are conceivable, and they may be useful
         in dealing with some ﬁner details.


         ALKYNE ELEMENTOMETALATION–PD-CATALYZED CROSS-COUPLING
         ROUTES TO ALKENES
         Historical background of alkene syntheses. Before the advent of Pd-catalyzed
         alkenylation15,45 and alkynylation35 in the 1970s, syntheses of regio- and
         stereodeﬁned alkenes had been mostly achieved by (a) carbonyl oleﬁnation,
         which must proceed via addition–elimination processes such as the Wittig
         reaction46 and its variants, the Horner-Wadsworth-Emmons reaction47 and its
         later modiﬁcations including Z-selective Still-Gennari48 and Ando49 versions
         as well as (b) Peterson oleﬁnation50 and its variants including Corey-
         Schlessinger-Mills methacrylaldehyde synthesis,51 and (c) Julia52 and re-
         lated oleﬁnation reactions. Even today, many of these reactions collectively
         represent the mainstay of alkene syntheses. From the viewpoint of alkene syn-
         theses in the y(es)2 manner, however, these conventional methods have been
         associated with various frustrating limitations to be overcome. With the
         exception of the alkyne addition routes, many of which can proceed in high
         (t98%) stereoselectivity, most of the widely used conventional methods
         including all of the carbonyl oleﬁnation reactions mentioned above must
         involve E-elimination, which fundamentally lacks high (t98%) stereoselectivity
         and often tends to be regiochemically capricious as well.


         162




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 12                                                                         2011-08-29 09:41:04


                            As discussed earlier, Pd-catalyzed alkenylation is thought to proceed gener-
                        ally via reductive elimination, although some involving the use of relatively
                        non-polar C–M bonds such as C–B, C–Si, and C–Sn are known to proceed
                        at least partially via carbometalation–E-elimination. In sharp contrast with
                        E-elimination, reductive elimination, which is predominantly a V-bond
                        process, can proceed in most cases with full retention of all alkenyl structural
                        details. Moreover, the scope of Pd-catalyzed alkenylation is fundamentally
                        limited only by the availability of the required alkenyl precursors, as either
                        R1M or R2X, and a wide range of methods for their preparation, both known
                        and yet to be developed, may be considered and utilized. As discussed in
                        detail, many of the Pd-catalyzed alkenylation reactions have displayed highly
                        favorable results as judged by the y(es)2 criteria. Thus, Pd-catalyzed alkenyla-
                        tion has evolved since the mid-1970s into arguably the most general and
                        highly selective (t98%) method of alkene synthesis known to date.
                            At this point, it is both useful and important to classify the alkenyl groups,
                          1
                        R and/or R2 in R1M and/or R2X, into the following ten structural types
                        (Table 4). Since our attention is mainly focused on those cases where both
                        regio- and stereochemical details critically matter, no intentional discussion
                        of Type I and II alkenyl groups is presented.


                                   Type Alkenyl Descriptor                  Structure Regiodefined? Stereodefined?

                                        I    Vinyl                          H2C CH           No             No
                                                                                R
                                        II   D-Monosubstituted              H2C C           Yes             No

                                                                             R      H
                                       III   (E)-E-Monosubstituted                          Yes            Yes
                                                                             H
                                                                             H      H
                                       IV    (Z)-E-Monosubstituted                          Yes            Yes
                                                                             R

                                                                             R2     R1
                                       V     D, E-cis-Disubstituted                         Yes            Yes
                                                                             H
                                                                             H      R1
                                       VI    D, E-trans-Disubstituted                       Yes            Yes
                                                                             R2

                                                                            RL      H
                                    VII      (E)-E, E'-Disubstituteda                       Yes            Yes
                                                                            RS
                                                                            RS      H
                                   VIII      (Z)-E, E'-Disubstituteda                       Yes            Yes
                                                                            RL

                                                                            RL      R1
                                       IX    (E)-D, E, E'-Trisubstituteda                   Yes            Yes
                                                                            RS
                                                                            RS      R1
                                       X     (Z)-D, E, E'-Trisubstituteda                   Yes            Yes
                                                                            RL
                                   a    RL takes a higher priority than RS according to the Cahn-Ingold-Prelog rule.   
                                 Table 4. Classiﬁcation and Deﬁnition of Ten Types of Alkenyl Groups.


                                                                                                                           163




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 13                                                                                                2011-08-29 09:41:04


         ELEMENTOMETALATION

         Addition of element–metal bonds (E–M), where E is H, C, a heteroatom
         (X), or a metal (Mc), to alkynes and alkenes may be collectively termed
         elementometalation. As long as M is coordinatively unsaturated, providing one
         or more valence shell empty orbitals, syn-elementometalation should, in prin-
         ciple, be feasible and facile, as suggested by the synergistic bonding scheme
         involving the bonding and antibonding orbitals of an E–M bond as a HOMO
         and LUMO pair for interacting with a S*- and S-orbital pair of alkynes
         and alkenes, as shown in Scheme 5 for hydrometalation, carbometalation,
         “heterometalation”, and metallometalation. As such, these processes are
         stoichiometric, and the metals (M and Mc) must be reasonably inexpensive.
         Besides this practically important factor, there are other chemical factors
         limiting the available choices of M. Thus, the generally high lattice energies
         of hydrides and other EMcs of alkali metals and alkaline earth metals make it
         difﬁcult to observe their favorable elementometalation reactions. In reality,
         B and Al are just about the only two reasonably inexpensive and non-toxic
         main group metals capable of readily participating in highly satisfactory
         uncatalyzed elementometalation reactions. Among d-block transition metals,
         Zr and Cu readily participate in stoichiometric syn-elementometalation reactions
         and nicely complement B and Al. For cost reasons, Ti, Mn, and Fe are also
         attractive, but their elementometalation reactions need further explorations.
         Likewise, transition metal-catalyzed elementometalation reactions of Si,
         Ge, and Sn are promising,53 but their adoption will have to be fully justiﬁed
         through objective overall comparisons with B, Al, Zr, and Cu. In this article,
         no speciﬁc discussion of alkyne metallometalation is intended.




         164




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 14                                                                 2011-08-29 09:41:04


                               Plausible concerted mechanism for syn-elementometalation

                                                                          catalyst
                                                                        (as needed)              R1              H(Z)
                               R1 C       C    H(Z)    +   E    M                                    C       C
                                                                                E      M(X)
                               R1 = C, H or heteroatom
                                                                             (often >99% syn)
                               Z = C or heteroatom
                               E = H, C, X (nonmetallic heteroatom), or M' (metal)


                               Synergistic HOMO-LUMO interaction schemes for elementometalation
                                                                                 _                               LUMO (p)
                                     HOMO (V)
                                                           _    E   +    +       M       _

                                                                                 +

                                                                                                             HOMO (S)
                                                                             + +         _
                                               LUMO (S*)               +
                                                                        _
                                                                             C       C
                                                                             _ _         +



                               Structures of various addends

                               Hydrometalation                                           Carbometalation
                                                   _                                                               _
                                                                LUMO (p)                                                     LUMO (p)
                                                       _                                     _                          _
                                          H    +   M            HOMO (V)                         C       +   +     M         HOMO (V)
                                                   +                                                               +

                                              M = B, Zr, etc.                                         M = Cu, Al-Zr, etc.

                               Heterometalation                                          Metallometalation
                                                   _                                                               _
                                                                LUMO (p)                                                     LUMO (p)
                                 _                     _                                     _                          _
                                      X   +   +    M            HOMO (V)                         M'      +   +     M         HOMO (V)
                                                   +                                                               +

                                 M = B, etc. X = Cl, Br, I, etc.                                      M' = B, Si, Sn, etc.              
                              Scheme 5.




                        Importantly, the four metals mentioned above are mutually more comple-
                        mentary than competitive. As summarized brieﬂy in Table 5, hydroboration
                        is the broadest in scope and the most highly chemoselective in the “conven-
                        tional” sense among all currently known alkyne hydrometalation reactions.
                        Although somewhat more limited in scope and chemoselectivity, Zr tends to
                        display the highest regioselectivity. More signiﬁcantly, its reactivity in the sub-
                        sequent Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling is considerably higher than that of B. In
                        many cases where Zr works well, it therefore tends to be the metal of choice.
                        Overall, B and Zr are the two best choices for hydrometalation. Difﬁculties
                        associated with the relatively high cost of commercially available HZrCp2Cl
                        and its relatively short shelf-life have been ﬁnally resolved by the develop-

                                                                                                                                            165




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 15                                                                                                                 2011-08-29 09:41:04


         ment of an operationally simple, economical, clean, and satisfactory reaction
         of ZrCp2Cl2 with one equivalent of iBu2AlH in THF for generating genuine
         HZrCp2Cl (Scheme 6).54


          syn-Elementometalation                 B                                 Zr                                Al                                   Cu

             syn-Hydrometalation   Widest scope and applicablity.     Reasonable scope.                 More limited than B or Zr.           Relatively little developed.
                (Types III-VI)     Most tolerant of carbonyl and                                        Alkynyl H or halogen abstraction
                                                                      Highly regioselective with
                                   other heterofunctional groups.     R1        H , esp. with           problematic.
                                                                      conjugated terminal enynes
                                   Relatively slow in Pd-cat.
                                                                      and some internal alkynes, etc.
                                   cross-coupling.
                                   Prone to S-additionelimination    Recent preparative procedure
                                   leading to regio- and              of HZrCp2Cl very convenient.
                                   stereo-scrambling.                 Highest reactivity in Pd-cat.
                                   Recent cross-coupling              cross-coupling among the four
                                   procedures increasingly            metals listed.
                                   satisfactory.

             syn-Carbometalation   Uncatalyzed four-centered          Zr alone tends to undergo         Zr-cat. methylalumination (ZMA)      Primary alkyl-cupration useful.
               (Types VII&VIII)    carboboration essentially          cyclic carbozirconation, but it   is of broard scope with respect      Types VII and VIII as well as
                                   unknown.                           is a good metal as catalyst for   to R1 of R1          H and of very   IV alkenyl derivatives
                                                                      carboalumination.                                                      accessible.
                                                                                                        high synthetic value.
                                                                                                        Some benzyl, allyl, and higher       Methylcupration sluggish. Use
                                                                                                        n-alkylaluminums also react          ZMA instead.
                                                                                                        readily, but selectivity             Cu-Zn combination very good
                                                                                                        problematical.                       in Pd-cat. cross-coupling.
                                                                                                        >150 complex natural prodcuts
                                                                                                        prepared.
                                                                                                        Al used together with Zn in
                                                                                                        some cases is very satisfactory
                                                                                                        in Pd-cat. cross-coupling.

             syn-Halometalation    Bromoboration of alkynes           Appears to be unknown.            Appears to be unknown.               Appears to be unknown.
               (Types VII&VIII)    facile and broadly applicable.
                                   A wide reange of Type VII and
                                   VIII alkenyl derivatives are
                                   accessible.
                                    With ethyne Type III alkenyl
                                    derivatives are accessible, but
                                    its use needs justification.
                                   Recent procedures for both
                                   bromoboration and subsequent
                                   Pd-cat. cross-coupling very
                                   promising (see Scheme 9).

         
         Table 5. Current Proﬁles of Hydro-, Carbo-, and Halometalation Reactions
         with B, Zr, Al, and Cu.




         166




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 16                                                                                                                                                    2011-08-29 09:41:05


                                                           THF, 0 oC, 0.5 h
                              ZrCp2Cl2 + HAli Bu2                                HZrCp2Cl          +       ClAli Bu2 THF      (1)54
                                                         separation        Reagent I
                                                         by simple and
                                                         facile filtration
                              HZrCp2Cl + ClAli Bu2 . THF                    HZrCp2Cl                                          (2)54
                                                                                Reagent II (generated and used in situ)
                                                                                Reagent III (isolated and stored)
                              Previously reported results
                                                                             (CH2Cl)2, 0 oC
                              0.1 ZrCp2Cl2 + HAli Bu2 +       n                                n                   M          (3)55
                                                                  Hex                              Hex
                                                                                              <1-2% (M = Al and/or Zr)

                                                                                    H Al i Bu2
                                                               PhH
                              ZrCp2Cl2 + 3 HAli Bu2                       Cp2Zr      H      Cl + 0.5 (i Bu2AlCl)2             (4)56
                                                                                    H Al iBu2
                                                                                 no effective
                                                                                 hydrozirconation
                              Hydrozirconation Iodinolysis

                                                ZrCp2Cl2 + HAli Bu2
                                                                         R1       H           I2           R1      H
                                                (Reagent I), rt, THF
                              R   1
                                            H                                                                                 (5)54
                                                                          H       MLn                       H       I

                                                                        M = Zr and Al
                                      n                           a
                              R: Hex (91%), HOCH2 (83%), TBSOCH2 (92%), HO(CH2)2 (85%),a
                                      TBSOCH(nPr) (93%), TBSOCH2CHMe (90%), PhMe2Si (81%),
                                      (E)-nHexCH=CH (95%), (E)-TBSO               (87%)

                                      HO        H          TBSO          H                             H
                                                                                  HO
                                           H   I                   H     I               H             I
                                           83%                    92%                   85%

                                                         (i) ZrCp2Cl2 + HAli Bu2
                                                             (Reagent I),
                                                             THF, rt, 3 h                                  Me
                                                         (ii) I2                                                                 54
                                                                            TBSO(CH2)n
                              TBSO(CH2)n              Me                                                        I (>98% pure) (6)
                                                                                                H
                                                                                        n: 1 (82%), 2 (74%)
                              However,                     pure HZrCp2Cl
                                                           (Reagent II),                               Me
                                                           THF, rt, 3 h        TBSO
                              TBSO(CH2)2              Me                                                   ZrCp2Cl            (7)54
                                                                                              H
                                                                                               +
                                                                                                       Me
                                                                               TBSO
                                                                                                  H
                                                                                              ZrCp2Cl
                                                                               95% (4-Zr/3-Zr = 52/48)

                              a
                                  Additional one equivalent HAli Bu2 was used to metalate OH group.                                   

                              Scheme 6.

                                                                                                                                          167




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 17                                                                                                               2011-08-29 09:41:05


         In marked contrast, direct and uncatalyzed four-centered carbobora-
         tion is still essentially unknown. This may tentatively be attributed to
         the very short, sterically hindered C–B bond. Currently, alkylcoppers57
         appear to be the only class of organometals that undergo satisfactory
         uncatalyzed, stoichiometric, and controlled single-stage carbometalation
         with alkynes. Although trialkylaluminums do react with terminal
         alkynes at elevated temperatures, it is complicated by terminal
         alumination.58 This difﬁculty was overcome for the single most
         important case of alkyne methylalumination through the discovery and
         development of the Zr-catalyzed methylalumination of alkynes with Me3Al
         (ZMA reaction).26a,59,60 Ethyl- and higher alkylaluminums60,61 as well as
         those containing allyl and benzyl groups62 react readily but display dis-
         appointingly low regioselectivity ranges due mainly to intervention of
         cyclic carbozirconation,61 which must be further improved.
            Despite such limitations the ZMA reaction has proved to be highly useful
         because of the special signiﬁcance of methyl-branched E-trisubstituted
         alkenes as a widely occurring structural unit in many isoprenoids. Detailed
         mechanistic studies have established that it involves an Al-promoted syn-
         carbozirconation of alkynes, as depicted in Scheme 7. In the interaction with
         alkynes, the active Zr–Al species must act as a “super-acidic” methylzirconium
         reagent through its interaction with an alane, i.e., operation of the “two-is-
         better-than-one” principle.63 (E)-E,E-Disubstituted
                                               ´              trisubstituted (Type VIII)
         alkenylaluminum derivatives thus generated can be in situ converted to a
         wide range of the corresponding trisubstituted alkenes, as summarized in
         Scheme 7.




         168




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 18                                                                2011-08-29 09:41:05


                              Zr-catalyzed methylalumination of alkynes (ZMA)59
                                                             Me3Al


                                                                                     R       Z
                                                     Me3Al, cat. Cp2ZrCl2
                                R                Z
                                                          Z = H, C, Si, etc.        Me       AlMe2
                                                           MeZrCp2Cl


                              proposed machanism60
                                                                                             Cl                                 Me
                                                                      transmetal.                 Me                             Cl
                              Cp2ZrCl2 + 1/2 (AlMe3)2                                    Cp2 Zr        AlMe2              Cp2Zr     AlMe2
                                                                                                  Cl                             Cl
                                16 e-
                                                                                                                           observed

                                                                                                  R1         Z
                                                     R1           Z
                              R1             Z                           +
                                                     Me ZrCp2         Cl                          Me Cp Zr Cl AlMe
                                                                           -
                                                                          AlMe2                        2           2
                                                                                                           Cl
                                                                      Cl

                                                 R1          Z
                                       1/2                             +    Cp2ZrCl2
                                             Me             AlMe2

                              Z = H, C, Si, etc.


                               R1        Z                                                                  I2            R1         Z
                                                      H2O(D2O)
                              Me         H(D)                                                                             Me         I
                                                                                                   (i) BuLi
                               R1        Z                                     R1        Z         (ii) Cp2ZrCl2          R1         Z
                                                          MeOBR'2
                              Me         BR'2                                Me          AlMe2                            Me         ZrCp2Cl
                                                                                                                 Me
                               R1        Z                                                                                R1         Z
                                                          ClCOOEt                                            O

                              Me         COOEt                                       BuLi                                 Me
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                         COMe
                                                                                                        R
                                   1                                                                             O          1
                               R         Z                  CO2                                                           R          Z
                                                                                                        R3

                              Me         COOH                                  R1        Z                                Me        OH
                                                                                                                                R2 R3
                                                                             Me          AlMe2BuLi
                               R1        Z                                                                           R2    R1        Z
                                                      ClCH2OMe                                              O                            R2
                              Me             OMe                                                                          Me
                                                                           Z = H, C, Si, etc.                                            OH

                              Scheme 7.




                                                                                                                                                169




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 19                                                                                                                     2011-08-29 09:41:05


         For selective syntheses of (Z)-E,E-disubstituted Type VIII alkenyl derivatives,
         alkyne haloboration reactions discovered by Lappert64 in the early 1960s and
         developed by Suzuki65 in the 1980s are of considerable interest. In particular,
         the alkyne bromoboration–Negishi coupling tandem process66 promised to
         provide a broadly applicable method for the head-to-tail (H-to-T) construc-
         tion of various types of trisubstituted alkenes (Scheme 8). In reality, however,
         there were a number of undesirable limitations, of which the following were
         some of the most critical:

               i.   formation of (E)-E-haloethenylboranes through essentially full
                    stereoisomerization,67
               ii. partial stereoisomerization (t10%) in the arguably single-most im-
                    portant case of propyne haloboration, 68
               iii. competitive and extensive E-dehaloboration to give the starting
                    alkynes in cases where 1-alkynes contain unsaturated aryl, alkenyl,
                    and alkynyl groups.
               iv. sluggish second Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions under the
                    reported Suzuki coupling conditions.66 To avoid this difﬁculty, use of
                    the second Negishi coupling via BlI69–71 and even BlIlLi71 trans-
                    formations have been reported as more satisfactory, if circuitous,
                    alternatives.

         Although no investigation of the item (i) has been attempted, highly sat-
         isfactory procedures have been developed for fully avoiding the difﬁculty
         described in the item (ii)70a (Eq. 1, Scheme 8) and substantially improving the
         second-stage Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling by the direct use of alkenylborane
         intermediates72 (Eq. 2, Scheme 8). Additionally, a major step towards establish-
         ment of highly general and satisfactory alkene synthetic methods based on
         elementometalation–Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling has been taken with recent
         development of the hitherto unknown arylethyne bromoboration–Pd-
         catalyzed cross-coupling tandem process71b (Eqs. 4–7, Scheme 8). At present,
         however, use of conjugated enynes and diynes in place of arylethynes appears
         to be even more challenging than the cases of arylethynes, and it is currently
         under investigation.
            Even at the current stage, the alkyne elementometalation–Pd-catalyzed
         cross-coupling tandem processes summarized in Table 5 provide collectively
         by far the most widely applicable and satisfactory routes to various types of
         acyclic alkenes.




         170




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 20                                                                  2011-08-29 09:41:05


                              Propyne bromoboration Negishi coupling route to T ype VIII alkenyl derivatives
                              Me              H

                                         (i) BBr3 (1.1 equiv)
                                             CH2Cl2, 23 oC, 2 h
                                        (ii) pinacol
                                                                                                        I2 (2 equiv)
                                   NOE 2.5%               RZnBr (1.2 equiv)    NOE                      NaOH (3 equiv) NOE
                                                          PdCl2(PPh3)2 (1%)                             THF-H2O,
                              Me         H                                  Me    H
                                                          THF, 23 oC, 1-2 h                              23 oC, 1 h Me     H
                                             O                                                  O                                       (1)70a
                                  Br     B                                          R       B                           R         I
                                             O                                                  O
                                  a (85%, >98% Z)                                       b                                     c

                              Note: Me(Br)C=CHBBr2 was not isolated and therefore is not shown.

                                                                          a
                                                              Yield (%)                                                Yield (%)a
                                             R                                                            R
                                                               b      c                                                b          c
                                                  n
                                                   Hex         87     86                            (E)-nHexCH=CH      96         -b
                                                      i
                                                       Bu      86     82                    (E)-nHex(Me)C=CH           83         81
                                                  c
                                                      Hex      84     88                     (E)-HOCH2CH=CH             -c        77d
                                       Me2C=CHCH2              79     84                    (E)-TBSOCH2C=CH            90         84
                                                 PhCH2         83     81                                 Ph            86         86
                                   Me2C=CCH2CH2                73     87                               4-MeOC6H4       87         89
                                       PhCH2CH2                76     80                                 4-ClC6H4      85         85
                                  n
                                   HexC CCH2CH2                79     90                                  n
                                                                                                          BuC C        83         87
                                                                                                                          e
                                             CH2=CH            82     84                                 TBSC C        90         88
                              a
                                  Isolated yields of b and c are based on a.
                              c                       b                       d
                                  Not isolated.           Not prepared.           Based on MeC CH and HOCH2C CH.


                                                                    R'X, nBu4NF or CsF
                                  Me      H                 cat. PdCl2(DPEphos), 60 oC, 10-24 h                   Me    H
                                              O                                                                                         (2)72
                              n
                              Hex         B                         R' = aryl, alkenyl, etc.                  n
                                                                                                               Hex     R'
                                              O                                                               80-90%, >98% Z                     




                                                                                                                                             171




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 21                                                                                                                     2011-08-29 09:41:05


                                                    i) 0.5% Pd(t Bu3P)2,
                                                       THF, 23 oC, 2 h
              Ph        H                                                Ph              H
                                                    ii) I2, NaOAc
                                  + nHexZnBr                                                  + Ph         H     (3)70b
                                                                         n
              Br        BBr2                                                Hex          I
                                                                                   14%               78%
                                                                t
                                                    i) 0.5% Pd( Bu3P)2,
                                                       THF, 23 oC, 2 h
              Ph        H                                               Ph               H
                                                    ii) I2, NaOH
                              O   + nHexZnBr                                                  + Ph         H     (4)70b
              Br        B                                                n
                                                                             Hex         I
                              O
                                                                         86%, >98% E                 <2%

                                                    0.5% PdLn,
                                                    THF,         Ph                 H
              Ph        H               H      ZnBr 23 oC, 2 h H                        O       + Ph           H (5)70b
                              O   +                                                 B
              Br        B          n
                                       Hex     H              n
                                                                Hex          H          O
                              O                                              e
                                        1.2 equiv
                   d
                                             PdLn (0.5 mol %)       e (%)        Ph             H (%)      d (%)
                                             Pd(t Bu3P)2            77                   <2                <2
                                             PEPPSI                 77                   <2                <2
                                             Pd(DPEphos)Cl2         <2                   20                67
                                             Pd(dppf)Cl2            <2                   22                52
                                             PdCl2                  38                   15                35
                                                                                                                          




                                                                                                                    
           Scheme 8.

         172




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 22                                                                                                   2011-08-29 09:41:06


                        ALKYNE SYN-ELEMENTOMETALATION FOLLOWED BY STEREO- AND/
                        OR REGIOISOMERIZATION

                        (a) syn-Hydroboration of 1-halo-1-alkynes. syn-Hydroboration of internal
                        alkynes tends to give a mixture of two possible regioisomers. In cases where
                        1-halo-1-alkynes are used as internal alkynes, however the reaction is nearly
                        100% regioselective, placing B at the halogen-bound carbon. The resultant
                        (Z)-D-haloalkenylboranes can be used to prepare (i) (Z)-1-alkenylboranes
                        (Type IV),73 (ii) (Z)-D,E-disubstituted alkenylboranes (Type V),76 and (iii)
                        (E)-D,E-disubstituted alkenylboranes (Type VI),74,75 as summarized in
                        Scheme 9.




                              Scheme 9.


                        (b) syn-Hydroboration of 1-alkynes followed by halogenolysis with either
                        retention or inversion. Hydroboration of 1-alkynes followed by iodinolysis
                        proceeds with retention to give (E)-1-iodoalkenes (Type III) of >99%
                        purity,77 whereas the corresponding brominolysis in the presence of NaOMe
                        in MeOH produces the stereoinverted Z-isomer (Type IV) of >99% purity78
                        (Scheme 10).




                                                                                                 

                              Scheme 10.

                                                                                                 173




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 23                                                                      2011-08-29 09:41:06


         (c) syn-Zr-catalyzed carboalumination (ZMA) of proximally heterofunctional
         alkynes followed by stereoisomerization. The ZMA reaction of homopro-
         pargyl alcohol followed by treatment with AlCl3 at 50oC for several hours
         provides the corresponding Z isomer.79,80 Its mono- and diiodo derivatives
         have proven to be useful Type VIII alkenyl reagents for the synthesis of a
         variety of Z-alkene-containing terpenoids, as discussed later in detail
         (Scheme 11).




                                                                                      
               Scheme 11.



         MAGICAL POWER OF TRANSITION METALS: PRESENT AND FUTURE
         OUTLOOK

         As a LEGO-game like tool for synthesizing all conceivable types of organic
         compounds, the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling between R1M (M = Zn, Al, B, Zr,
         etc.) and R2X (X = halogens, etc.) for producing R1–R2 as organic products
         has emerged as the currently most widely applicable and satisfactory method
         in the y(es)2 manner. A glance at Table 3 might give us an impression that
         our task in the “LEGO-game” might be a little more than halfway complete,
         provided that both R1M and R2X are available in the desirable forms. At
         present, one may state that the overall scope of the syntheses of R1–R2 is limited
         more by the availability of appropriately structured R1M and R2X. One of the
         most challenging aspects of organic syntheses is to be able to synthesize not
         only all conceivable types of monoenes shown in Table 4, for which various
         types of alkyne elementometalation reactions (Schemes 5–11 and Table 5)
         are indispensable, but also any of their desired combinations, such as all
         conceivable types of di-, tri- and higher oligoenes, and so on. Although no
         details are presented here, it is gratifying that, through the use of various
         combinations of alkyne elementometalation reactions and the Pd-catalyzed

         174




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 24                                                                   2011-08-29 09:41:06


                        alkenyl–alkenyl cross-coupling procedures, mostly Negishi which is supple-
                        mented with Suzuki, we have just synthesized four possible types of conjugated
                        dienes and eight possible types of conjugated trienes in high overall yields
                        and in t98% stereoselectivities throughout the syntheses, in other words,
                        without generating detectable amounts of any stereoisomers.37a
                           Although there are some pending issues, such as alkynyl–alkynyl cross-
                        coupling that is prone to produce mixtures of all three possible conjugated
                        diynes (R1C{CC{CR2, R1C{CC{CR1, and R2C{CC{CR2), the Pd-catalyzed
                        cross-coupling reactions between two unsaturated carbon groups, i.e., aryl,
                        alkenyl, and alkynyl groups are generally well-behaved (Table 3). Even in the
                        cases of conjugated diyne syntheses, indirect but efﬁcient and selective routes
                        are available.19b,81
                           As we turn our attention to the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling involving
                        alkylmetals and/or alkyl electrophiles including allyl, benzyl, propargyl, and
                        their higher homologues, it is readily noted from Table 3 that the use of alkyl
                        electrophiles lacking proximal S-bonds is considerably more challenging,
                        although some notable progress has been made in recent years. On the
                        other hand, alkylmetals and proximally S-bonded alkyl electrophiles display
                        sufﬁciently high reactivities, as illustrated for the cases of allylic electrophiles
                        (Scheme 4). Clearly, this is one large area of Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling
                        corresponding to nearly 30 out of 72 cases of cross-coupling combinations
                        shown in Table 3 requiring major attentions. As many of these cases are
                        being further investigated, it should be clearly noted that the following satis-
                        factory options do exist: (1) Those nine cases of cross-coupling involving two
                        allyl, benzyl, and/or propargyl cross-coupling partners are at best capricious,
                        but the same desired products may be obtained in the y(es)2 manner by
                        shifting the point of C–C bond formation by one82,83 (Table 3). (2) For alkyl–
                        alkyl coupling without the involvement of proximal S-bonds, the reaction of
                        alkyl Grignard reagents with alkyl halides and related electrophiles catalyzed
                        with Li2CuCl4 or other related Cu catalysts still appears to be the current best
                        option.25


                        ZIRCONIUM-CATALYZED ASYMMETRIC CARBOALUMINATION OF
                        ALKENES (ZACA REACTION)
                        At the time we discovered the Zr-catalyzed carboalumination of alkynes
                        (ZMA) in 1978 (Scheme 7),59 a dreamy thought of expanding the scope of
                        this reaction so as to embrace its alkene version for asymmetric C–C bond
                        formation, which would amount to the single-step version of the Ziegler-
                        Natta alkene polymerization captured my mind. However, this seemingly easy
                        task proved to be quite challenging, and several intermittent attempts over
                        seventeen years supported heavily by our ongoing systematic investigations
                        of zirconocene chemistry were needed to ﬁnally discover in 1995 the
                        Zirconium-catalyzed Asymmetric Carboalumination of Alkenes (ZACA
                        reaction hereafter),84 as detailed below.
                           Historical and mechanistic background of carbometalation of alkenes and

                                                                                                        175




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 25                                                                             2011-08-29 09:41:06


         alkynes with alkylzirconocenes derivatives. The Zr-catalyzed methylalumina-
         tion of alkynes (ZMA reaction) was shown to involve one-step syn-addition
         of a Me–Zr bond to 1-alkynes in an anti-Markovnikov manner followed by
         Zr-to-Al transmetalation on the resultant carbon group.60 This reaction
         involves acyclic carbometalation of a “super-acidic”63,85 Zr-Al bimetallic
         system (Scheme 7).
            Several years later, Dzhemilev reported a seemingly analogous reaction
         of Zr-catalyzed carbomagnesiation of alkenes with EtMgBr (Scheme 12).86
         There did not appear any compelling reasons to suspect that the mechanisms
         of these two closely analogous reactions should be radically different.
         Through our systematic investigations of the “ZrCp2” chemistry,87 however,
         we accidentally clariﬁed that the Dzhemilev ethylmagnesiation of alkenes
         actually proceeded via a highly intricate series of transformations via (i)
         formation of Et2ZrCp2, (ii) E-agostic interaction-induced intramolecular
         “acid-base” interaction producing a zirconacyclopropane (i–a) which
         may also be viewed as a zirconocene-ethylene S-complex (i–b), (iii)
         cyclic carbozirconation of an alkene with i to give, typically a 3-substituted
         zirconacyclopentane (ii), (iv) subsequent reaction of ii with another
         molecule of EtMgBr leading to E-agostic interaction-induced “acid-base”
         interaction producing a 2-ethyl-1-alkylmagnesium bromide with regenera-
         tion of ethylene-ZrCp2 S-complex (i). All of the steps proposed above have
         been independently and amply supported (Scheme 12).87,88 We believe that
         both the discovery of the Dzhemilev ethylmagnesiation and our mechanistic
         clariﬁcation88 have not only clearly established the existence of both acyclic
         and cyclic carbozirconation processes but also alerted us to sharply and
         carefully distinguish some seemingly analogous carbometalation reactions
         of zirconocene derivatives. We were later further surprised by the existence
         of bimetallic (involving both Zr and Al) cyclic carbozirconation of alkynes
         and alkenes that may be viewed as a hybrid of acyclic and cyclic carbozir-
         conation61 (Scheme 13). We also noted that our bimetallic (Zr-Al) cyclic
         carbozirconation process closely resembled the corresponding carbotitana-
         tion of alkenes with titanium-carbene species that can be viewed as a two-
         membered titanacycle (Tebbe reagent) generated from a Ti-Al bimetallic
         system.89 Without going into detailed mechanistic discussions, the following
         brief summary may be presented: (i) Formation of metallacycles includ-
         ing metal-carbene complexes (two-membered metallacycles) is a widely
         observable phenomenon with coordinatively unsaturated organotransition
         metal complexes, especially in those cases where coordinatively unsaturated
         dialkylated organotransition metal species that are readily prone to E or even
         D-agostic interaction-induced cyclization are generated.90 (ii) The propen-
         sity for generating the requisite “coordinatively unsaturated dialkyltransition
         metal species” rests on a delicate balance between the alkylating power of
         alkylmetal reagents, e.g., RLi > RMgX > RAlX2, and their ability to avoid
         formation of coordinatively saturated “ate” complexes. Thus, for example,
         trialkylalanes, e.g., Et3Al, do not dialkylate ZrCp2Cl2 to give Et2ZrCp2. On
         the other hand, Grignard reagents, e.g., EtMgBr, readily dialkylate to give

         176




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 26                                                                2011-08-29 09:41:07


                        a 16 e– Et2ZrCp2. Triethylation does proceed, but it is readily reversible. All
                        these make alkylmagnesium derivatives some of the optimal reagents for
                        converting ZrCp2Cl2 into zirconacycles. (iii) Even with alkylalanes, however,
                        zirconacycles may still be formed via “bimetallic intramolecular acid-base
                        interaction” discussed above.




                                                                                                                                                                        
                        Scheme 12. Cyclic carbozirconation mechanism for Dzhemilev ethylmagnesiation.




                          Overall equation
                                                                            n           n
                                                                                Bu          Bu
                          n             nBu
                              Bu                  + 2 Et3Al                                      + EtH
                                                                                        AlEt

                          Catalyst generation and catalytic cycle
                                                                                                                 CH2
                                                                  Et                                     H2C
                                                                           Cl           Et3Al                    H    Et
                          Cp2ZrCl2 + Et3Al                   Cp2Zr              AlEt2                Cp2Zr            AlEt2   Cp2Zr        AlEt2   Cp2Zr        AlEt2
                                                                                                                 +                    +
                                                                           Cl                                    Cl                   Cl                   Cl

                                                                                                     n
                                                                  n                                  Bu
                                                                      Bu
                                                                                                 n
                              n             nBu          n                                        Bu
                                  Bu                         Bu                                                 Al
                                                                                                                Et
                                                              Cp2Zr              AlEt2
                                                                            Cl
                                                                                                           Et
                              Cp2Zr         AlEt2                                                Cp2Zr
                                       Cl                                                                  Cl
                                                                CH2
                                  isolatable               H 2C    Et
                                  bimetallic                    H                                    Et3Al
                                  catalyst   EtH         Cp2Zr + - AlEt2
                                                                Cl                                                                                                          

                        Scheme 13. Bimetallic cyclic carboalumination mechanism.61


                                                                                                                                                                177




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 27                                                                                                                                      2011-08-29 09:41:07


         Catalytic asymmetric carbometalation of alkenes proceeding via Dzhemilev
         ethylmagnesiation. The ﬁrst catalytic and highly enantioselective alkene
         carbometalation with zirconocene derivatives was reported by Hoveyda in
         1993.91 Highly satisfactory results have been obtained through the use of
         Dzhemilev ethylmagnesiation of allyl ethers and allylamines (Scheme 14) .
         Similar developments were also made later.92


                                EtMgCl
                               10 mol% cat.
                                                   73%, 95% ee
                                              HO
                                                                    cat. =
                                n
            O                    PrMgCl                                             Zr (BINOL)
                              10 mol% cat.         35-40%, 98% ee
                                              HO                                                 
         Scheme 14. Catalytic asymmetric carbometalation-elimination of allyl ethers with ethylmag-
         nesium and chiral zirconocene derivatives.




         Although the enantioselectivity in some cases is spectacularly high, a few
         critical limitations should be noted. As might be expected from mechanistic
         details of Dzhemilev carbomagnesiation discussed above, introduction of
         the singularly important Me group is not readily feasible. While introduc-
         tion of Et is satisfactory, that of nPr and longer alkyl groups is accompanied
         by regioisomerization leading to the formation of unattractive product
         mixtures.91–93 Clearly, new alternate reactions not requiring zirconacycles were
         needed, especially for the most highly desirable case of enantioselective
         methylmetalation. In the meantime, our own efforts toward this goal were
         miserably failing. We then noted that all of our very tentative feasibility
         investigations leading to negative results were conducted with the parent
         ZrCp2Cl2. We ﬁnally decided to commit ourselves to the following two stud-
         ies: (1) detailed fact-ﬁnding investigation of the reaction of 1-decene with
         10 mol% of ZrCp2Cl2 in CH2Cl2 and (2) search for satisfactory procedures
         based on (1). These studies immediately led to some most useful results
         shown in Scheme 15. With (Me5C5)2ZrCl2, no reaction was observed under
         the same conditions.84 Clearly, zirconocene derivatives of sufﬁciently, but not
         excessively, bulky ligands to suppress unwanted side reactions, most notably
         E-H transfer hydrometalation, while promoting the desired carbometalation,
         were needed for realizing our goal.




         178




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 28                                                                           2011-08-29 09:41:07


                                                 10 mol% ZrCp2Cl2                                                                                           n
                                                                                           Et                        H                          Et              Decyl
                                                   CH2Cl2, 23 oC
                                                                                    nOct            AlEt2 +   nOct           AlEt2 +     nOct        +   nOct
                                                                                           <5%
                                                                                                                major product
                              n                                          ZrCl2
                              Oct               10 mol%
                                                                                               Et                                Et
                                                     CH2Cl2, 23 oC                                              O2                        OH
                                                                                     n               AlEt2               nOct
                                                                                         Oct
                                                                                                                                >85%

                                                                               Et
                                     Et                                                                             Et               H
                                                 n               n
                                                     Oct             Oct
                              nOct                                         H         MLn                     nOct        +    nOct          AlEt2
                                     H    MLn    M = Zr or Al
                                                                     n
                                                                         Oct                                                                                         

                        Scheme 15. Reaction of 1-decene with Et3Al in the presence of various zirconocene
                        derivatives.




                        Yet another ambush we brieﬂy encountered was the initially unexpected
                        Al-Zr bimetallic cyclic carbometalation of alkenes. Before 1995, we believed
                        that dialkylation of zirconocene derivatives would be mandatory for observing
                        the formation of zirconacyclopropanes via E-agostic interaction-induced
                        cyclization. We were, however, surprised to ﬁnd out that the reaction of
                        1-decene with Et3Al in the presence of (NMI)2ZrCl294a in hexanes would
                        proceed by cyclic carbometalation84b (Scheme 16), even though there were
                        ample indications that trialkylalanes do not lead to dialkylation of zirconocene
                        derivatives. It was indeed this surprising ﬁnding that led to the clariﬁcation
                        and establishment of the bimetallic cyclic mechanism for carbozirconation of
                        alkynes mentioned earlier (Scheme 13).61 Fortunately, we soon learned that
                        the use of more polar solvents including CH2Cl2, CH3CHCl2, and (CH2Cl)2
                        almost totally suppressed the undesired cyclic carbometalation process,
                        thereby promoting formation of the desired products (Scheme 16).84




                                                                                                                                                                 



                        Scheme 16. Marked solvent effect in the reaction of 1-decene with Et3Al in the presence of
                        (NMI)2ZrCl2.



                        Throughout our investigations, we were very much concerned about the
                        third potential side reaction, i.e., Zr-catalyzed alkene polymerization of
                        Ziegler and Natta.95 However, this has hardly been of any serious concern.

                                                                                                                                                                 179




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 29                                                                                                                                      2011-08-29 09:41:07


         In retrospect, this is not surprising, if one considers (i) essentially 1:1 alkene-
         to-alane ratios and (ii) absence of highly efﬁcient polymerization promotors,
         such as methylaluminoxane (MAO), typically required in large quantities
         relative to trialkylalanes. In our ZACA reaction, the use of MAO and other
         promoters is not mandatory and typically not necessary, although addition of
         one equivalent or less of water or the corresponding amount of performed
         MAO can signiﬁcantly promote otherwise slow ZACA reaction,96 such as that
         of styrenes.
            Having learned about three major pitfalls, namely (1) cyclic carbometalation,
         (2) H-transfer hydrometalation, and (3) Ziegler-Natta-type alkene polymeriza-
         tion as well as how to avoid them, our remaining major task was to ﬁnd some
         satisfactory chiral zirconocene catalysts. In this respect, we have not yet made
         a systematic catalyst optimization involving catalyst designing. Instead, we
         have merely screened a dozen to ﬁfteen known chiral zirconocene complexes.
         In our cases, widely used (ebi)ZrCl294b and its partially hydrogenated
         derivatives94c were less effective. The most effective among those tested thus
         far is Erker’s (NMI)2ZrCl2.94a With either (R)- or (S)-isomer of commercially
         available (NMI)2ZrCl2,94d the approximate ranges of enantiomeric excesses
         observed in three mutually complementary ZACA reactions shown in
         Scheme 17 are 70–95% ee and the product yields are generally satisfactory,
         although there clearly exists room for improvement (Scheme 17).

                                                                    Me                       Me
                                              cat. ZrL*n                         O2
          I.      R1          + Me AlR2                                   AlR2           1        OH
                                                               R1                       R *
                  Yields: good to excellent
                  ee: 70-90%
                                 Me                                 Me                       Me
                                              cat. ZrL*n                         O2
          II.     R1 AlR2 +                                               AlR2                    OH
                                                               R1                       R1 *
                  Yields: modest to good (need improvement)
                   ee: 85-95%
                                                               R2Al
                                                                                             Me
                                              cat. ZrL*n                         H3O+
          III.   R1 AlR2 +            OZ                              1    OZ                     OH
                                      m    m = 1, 2, 3, etc.     R         m            R1        m
                  Yields: good to excellent
                  ee: 90-95%

         Scheme 17. Three protocols for enantioselective synthesis of methyl-substituted 1-alkanols.



         CURRENT SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATION OF
         ZACA REACTION AND CONCLUSION


         Although no detailed discussion of applications of the ZACA reaction is
         intended here, the following favorable features of this novel asymmetric
         C–C bond formation reaction may be noted and exploited. In the interest

         180




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 30                                                                            2011-08-29 09:41:08


                        of providing a full list of the publications on ZACA reaction by the author’s
                        group, all original papers and pertinent reviews and so on are listed as
                        references.63,69,75,84,87,97–120

                              1. The ZACA reaction is a novel and rare catalytic asymmetric C–C bond
                                 formation reaction of terminal alkenes of one-point-binding without requiring
                                 any other functional groups, even though various functional groups
                                 may be present.
                            2. There are a few or possibly more alternate and mutually complementary
                                 procedures to choose from, allowing highly ﬂexible designs for the
                                 syntheses of chiral organic compounds98,100 (Scheme 17).
                            3. In cases where ZACA products are obtained as 2-chirally branched 1-
                                 alcohols via simple oxidation, typically with O2, of alanes, lipase-
                                 catalyzed acetylation–ordinary column chromatography provides a widely
                                 applicable and convenient method of puriﬁcation by taking advantage of
                                 the sufﬁciently high ZACA-generated 70–95% enantiomeric excess
                                 levels of the crude products.106
                            4. In more demanding cases, proximally (J or G) heterofunctional and hence
                                 readily puriﬁable 2-chiral 1-alcohols may be prepared ﬁrst, puriﬁed, and further
                                 converted.120
                            5. In the syntheses of compounds with two or more chiral centers, the principle
                                 of statistical enantiomeric ampliﬁcation is operative. For the syntheses of
                                 deoxypolypropionates, for example, homologation by one 1,2-pro-
                                 pylidene unit can be performed in one pot via ZACA–Pd-catalyzed
                                 vinylation tandem process.103 At a realistic average enantioselectivity
                                 level of 80% ee, di, tri and tetrameric deoxypolypropionates are reli-
                                 ably predicted to be ca. 98, 99.9, and 99.99% ee, respectively.99,100
                                 The only remaining task for preparing ultra-pure deoxypolypropionates
                                 is ordinary and very facile chromatographic puriﬁcation of newly formed
                                 2,4-dimethyl-1-hydroxybutyl moiety one at a time.99–101,103,104
                        We believe that the ZACA reaction is a widely applicable, high-yielding, efﬁcient
                        and selective method for asymmetric C–C bond formation that is potentially
                        economical. As of today, however, it has not yet been widely embraced by the
                        organic synthetic community, although its application to natural products
                        synthesis by other workers is known.96 In the meantime, our own efforts to
                        apply it to catalytic asymmetric syntheses of chiral natural products have
                        been very enjoyable and most rewarding. In this review, only the names and
                        structures of natural products and related compounds including about a
                        dozen that have been totally synthesized through the use of ZACA reaction
                        are presented in Table 6. It is indeed gratifying to note that ZACA–Pd or Cu-
                        catalyzed cross-coupling synergy does provide, in most cases, substantial improvements
                        in efﬁciency and selectivity leading to signiﬁcant increases in overall yields of pure
                        desired compounds over the previous syntheses of the same or related com-
                        pounds. Coupled with various ﬂexible options for purifying optically active
                        products to ultra-high (>>99%) purity levels, its widespread application in
                        the near future may be anticipated.

                                                                                                            181




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 31                                                                                 2011-08-29 09:41:08


         182




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 32   2011-08-29 09:41:09


                         Table 6. (Contined.)
                                 chiral compounds of biological                                                                      total or
                         entry                                                      structure
                                 and medicinal interest (year)ref                                                                    fragment synthesis
                                                                                            O

                                                                                                 NMe
                                                                                   Ph
                         (17) (-)-spongidepsin (2007)107                                                                             total synthesis
                                                                                        O        O




                                                                          HO
                         (18) (+)-discodermolide (2007)75                                                                            C11-C17 fragment
                                                                     O   O                                    OH OCONH2

                                                                                            OH

                                                                         OH
                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                          O
                         (19) (-)-callystatin A (2007)75                                                                             C1-C11 fragment

                                                                               OH O


                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                     S
                                                                         O         O                          O       N
                                                                                                     N                H

                                                                               R
                         (20) archazolides A and B (2007)75                                                    OMe                   C7-C15 fragment
                                              A: R = Me                            OH
                                              B: R = H
                                                                                                         OH



                                               108                                                                        O
                         (21) nafuredin (2008)                                                                                        C9-C18 fragment
                                                                                                                  O                (formal total synthesis)
                                                                                                                              OH
                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                            O
                                                                                                     O

                         (22) milbemycin               108                         O        O                                        C1-C13 fragment
                                              3   (2008)



                                                                                        OH

                                                                                                         OMe
                                                                                                 O                            OH
                         (23) bafilomycin A1 (2008)108                              O       OH O
                                                                                                                                     C1-C11 fragment
                                                                         HO
                                                                                   HO
                                                                                                         OMe




                                                                                                         OH
                         (24) fluvirucinin A1 (2008)109                                                                              total synthesis
                                                                                            O

                                                                                                 NH


                                 4,6,8,10,16,18-hexamethyldocosane
                         (25)                                                                                                        total synthesis
                                 (2008)110



                         (26) yellow scale pheromone (2008)69                                                  OAc                   total synthesis

                                                                                                                                                              
                        Table 6. Natural Products and Related Compounds of Biological and Medical Interest
                        Synthesized via ZACA Reaction by the Author’s Group.




                                                                                                                                                       183




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 33                                                                                                                            2011-08-29 09:41:09


         FUTURE OUTLOOK

         Aside from ﬁner aspects of mechanisms, all of the d-block transition metal-
         catalyzed processes discussed above may be considered to proceed by two-
         electron transfer processes. As we pursue d-block transition metal-catalyzed
         processes involving photochemical and other related processes, their cata-
         lytic activities via one-electron transfer processes would seem to prove to be
         similarly important. From the abiological organic synthetic viewpoint, it still
         appears to be a largely unexplored ﬁeld of vast potential.


         ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
         I deeply thank all of my coworkers whose names appear in our publications
         cited herein. I also thank Drs. Guangwei Wang, Ching-Tien Lee, Shiqing
         Xu, and Ms. Donna Bertram for their assistance in the preparation of the
         manuscript. Our research work discussed above has been mainly supported
         by NSF, NIH, ACS-PRF, Purdue University, Syracuse University, and a number
         of industrial chemical organizations including Albemarle, Aldrich, Boulder
         Scientiﬁc, Johnson-Matthey, and Wako Chemical.




         184




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 34                                                                2011-08-29 09:41:09


                        REFERENCES
                          1.   For alkylation of aryl and alkenyl halides with alkyllithiums via rapid halogen-lithium
                               exchange, see: (a) Merrill, R. E.; Negishi, E. (1974), “Tetrahydrofuran-promoted
                               aryl–alkyl coupling involving organolithium reagents,” J. Org. Chem. 39, 3452-3453.
                               (b) Linstrumelle. G.; Michelot, D. (1975), “Simple route to mono-, di-, and tri-
                               substituted allenic compounds,” J. C. S. Chem. Comm., 561–562.
                          2.   For listing of the Negishi, Suzuki, and Stille coupling reactions as the three represen-
                               tative Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, see (a) The Merck Index, 13th Ed., O’Neal,
                               M. J.; Smith, A.; Heckelman, P. E., Eds., Merck & Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, NJ,
                               (2001), ONR-73, ONR-100, ONR-102. (b) Kürti, L.; Czakó, B. Strategic Applications of
                               Named Reactions in Organic Synthesis, Elsevier Academic Press, Burlington, MA, (2005),
                               758 pp.
                          3.   For early and recent overviews of the Negishi coupling, see (a) Negishi, E. (1982),
                               “Palladium- or nickel-catalyzed cross-coupling. A new selective method for carbon-
                               carbon bond formation,” Acc. Chem. Res. 15, 340-348. (b) Negishi, E. (2007),
                               “Transition metal-catalyzed organometallic reactions that have revolutionized
                               organic synthesis,” Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 80, 233–257.
                          4.   (a) Miyaura, N.; Suzuki, A. (1995), “Palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions
                               of organoboron compounds” Chem. Rev. 95, 2457–2483. (b) Suzuki, A.; Brown, H.
                               C. Organic Syntheses via Boranes. Vol. 3: Suzuki Coupling, Aldrich Chemical Co., Inc.,
                               Milwaukee, WI, (2003), 314pp. (c) Miyaura, N.; Yamada, A.; Suzuki, A. (1979),
                               “A new stereospeciﬁc cross-coupling by the palladium-catalyzed reaction of 1-
                               alkenylboranes with 1-alkenyl or 1-alkynyl halides,” Tetrahedron Lett. 20, 3437–3440.
                               (d) Miyaura, N.; Suzuki, A. (1979), “Stereoselective synthesis of arylated (E)-alkenes
                               by the reaction of alk-1-enylboranes with aryl halides in the presence of palladium
                               catalyst,” J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Comm., 866–867. (e) Yanagi, T.; Oh-e, T.; Miyaura, N.;
                               Suzuki, A. (1989), “Stereoselective synthesis of conjugated 2,4-alkadienoates via the
                               palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling of 1-alkenylboronates with 3-bromo-2-alkenoates,”
                               Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 62, 3892–3895.
                          5.   (a) For a review, see: Farina, V.; Krishnamurthy, V.; Scott, W. J. (1997), “The Stille
                               reaction,” Org. React. 50, 1–652. (b) For a seminal contribution by Kosugi, see: Kosugi,
                               M.; Sasazawa, K.; Shimizu, Y.; Migita, T. (1997), “Reactions of allyltin compounds.
                               III. Allylation of aromatic halides with allyltributyltin in the presence
                               of tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium(0),” Chem. Lett., 301–302. (c) Milstein,
                               D.; Stille, J. K. (1979), “Mechanism of reductive elimination. Reaction of
                               alkylpalladium(II) complexes with tetraorganotin, organolithium, and Grignard
                               reagents. Evidence for palladium(IV) intermediacy,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 101,
                               4981–4991. (d) Milstein, D.; Stille, J. K. (1979), “Palladium-catalyzed coupling of
                               tetraorganotin compounds with aryl and benzyl halides. Synthetic utility and
                               mechanism,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 101, 4992–4998.
                          6.   (a) Jabri, N.; Alexakis, A.; Normant, J. F. (1981), “Vinyl-copper derivatives. XIII.
                               Synthesis of conjugated dienes of very high stereoisomeric purity,” Tetrahedron Lett. 22,
                               959–962. (b) Jabri, N.; Alexakis, A.; Normant, J. F. (1982), “Vinyl-copper derivatives.
                               An efﬁcient synthesis of polysubstituted conjugated dienes,” Tetrahedron Lett. 23,
                               1589–1592.
                          7.   (a) Pérez, I.; Sestelo, J. P.; Sarandeses, L. A. (1999), “Palladium-catalyzed cross-
                               coupling reactions of triorganoindium compounds with vinyl and aryl triﬂates or
                               iodides,” Org. Lett. 1, 1267–1269. (b) Pérez, I.; Sestelo, J. P.; Sarandeses, L. A. (2001),
                               “Atom-efﬁcient metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction of indium organometallics
                               with organic electrophiles,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 4155–4160.
                          8.   (a) Yamamura, M.; Moritani, I.; Murahashi, S. -I. (1975), “Reaction of V-vinyl-
                               palladium complexes with alkyllithiums. Stereospeciﬁc synthesis of oleﬁns from
                               vinyl halides and alkyllithiums,” J. Organomet. Chem. 91, C39–C42. (b) Murahashi;
                               S. I.; Yamamura, M.; Yanagisawa, K. I.; Mita, N.; Kondo, K. (1979), “Stereoselective


                                                                                                                     185




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 35                                                                                          2011-08-29 09:41:09


                 synthesis of alkenes and alkenyl sulﬁdes from alkenyl halides using palladium and
                 ruthenium catalysts,” J. Org. Chem. 44, 2408–2417. (c) Sekiya, A.; Ishikawa, N. (1976),
                 “The cross-coupling of aryl halides with Grignard reagents catalyzed by iodo(phenyl)
                 bis(triphenylphosphine)palladium(II),” J. Organomet. Chem. 118, 349–354. (d)
                 Fauvarque, J. F.; Jutand, A. (1976), “Reaction of various nucleophiles with organo-
                 palladium compounds,” Bull. Soc. Chim. Fr., 765–770. (e) Negishi, E.; King, A. O.;
                 Okukado, N. (1977), “Selective carbon-carbon bond formation via transition metal
                 catalysis. A highly selective synthesis of unsymmetrical biaryls and diarylmethanes by
                 the nickel- or palladium-catalyzed reaction of aryl- and benzylzinc derivatives with
                 aryl halides,” J. Org. Chem. 42, 1821–1823. (f) Dang, H. P.; Linstrumelle, G. (1978),
                 “An efﬁcient stereospeciﬁc synthesis of oleﬁns by the palladium-catalyzed reaction of
                 Grignard reagents with alkenyl iodides,” Tetrahedron Lett., 191–194. (g) For a review
                 of early contributions of the Pd-catalyzed Grignard cross-coupling, see: Murahashi,
                 S. -I. (2002), “Palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction of organic halides with
                 Grignard reagents, organolithium compounds and heteroatom nucleophiles,” J.
                 Organomet. Chem. 653, 27–33.
           9.    See, for example, Cahiez, G.; Marquais, S. (1996), “Highly chemo- and stereoselective
                 Fe-catalyzed alkenylation of organomanganese reagents.” Tetrahedron Lett. 37, 1773–
                 1776.
         10.     (a) For a historical overview of the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling of organosilanes, see:
                 Hiyama, T. (2002), “How I came across the silicon-based cross-coupling reaction,” J.
                 Organomet. Chem. 653, 58–61. (b) For a review of recent developments by Denmark,
                 see: Denmark, S. E. (2009), “The interplay of invention, discovery, development,
                 and application in organic synthetic methodology: A case study,” J. Org. Chem. 74,
                 2915–2927.
         11.     (a) Tamao, K.; Sumitani, K.; Kumada, M. (1972), “Selective carbon-carbon bond
                 formation by cross-coupling of Grignard reagents with organic halides. Catalysis by
                 nickel-phosphine complexes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 94, 4374–4376. (b) For a historical
                 note, see: Tamao, K. (2002), “Discovery of the cross-coupling reaction between
                 Grignard reagents and C(sp2) halides catalyzed by nickel-phosphine complexes,”
                 J. Organomet. Chem. 653, 23–26. (c) Corriu, R. J. P.; Masse, J. P. (1972), “Activation
                 of Grignard reagents by transition-metal complexes. New and simple synthesis of
                 trans-stilbenes and polyphenyls,” J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 144.
         12.     (a) Negishi, E.; Yoshida, T. (1973), “A stereoselective synthesis of conjugated trans,
                 trans-dienes and trans-alkenyl ketones via hydroboration,” Chem. Commun., 606–607.
                 (b) Negishi, E.; Lew, G.; Yoshida, T. (1973), “A highly stereoselective synthesis of
                 conjugated trans-enynes readily convertible into conjugated cis, trans-dienes and its
                 application to the synthesis of the pheromone bombykol,” Chem. Commun., 874–875.
                 (c) Negishi, E.; Abramovitch, A. (1977), “A highly efﬁcient chemo-, regio-, and
                 stereoselective synthesis of (7E,9E)-dodecadien-1-yl acetate. A sex pheromone of
                 lobesia botrana, via a functionalized organoborate,” Tetrahedron Lett., 411–414.
         13.     Brown, H. C.; Zweifel, G. (1961), “Hydroboration. XI. The hydroboration of acetylenes-
                 a convenient conversion of internal acetylenes into cis-oleﬁns and of terminal
                 acetylenes into aldehydes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 83, 3834–3840.
         14.     (a) Zweifel, G.; Arzoumanian, H.; Whitney, C. C. (1967), “A convenient stereoselec-
                 tive synthesis of substituted alkenes via hydroboration–iodination of alkynes,” J. Am.
                 Chem. Soc. 89, 3652–3653. (b) Zweifel, G.; Polston, N. L. (1970), “Selective hydrobora-
                 tion of conjugated diynes with dialkylboranes. A convenient route to conjugated
                 cis-enynes, D,E-acetylenic ketones, and cis,cis-dienes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 92, 4068–4071.
         15.     (a) Negishi, E.; Baba, S. (1976), “Novel stereoselective alkenyl–aryl coupling via
                 nickel-catalyzed reaction of alkenylalanes with aryl halides,” J. C. S. Chem. Comm.,
                 596–597. (b) Baba, S.; Negishi, E. (1976), “A novel stereospeciﬁc alkenyl–alkenyl
                 cross-coupling of a palladium- or nickel-catalyzed reaction of alkenylalanes with
                 alkenyl halides,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 98, 6729–6731.



         186




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 36                                                                                  2011-08-29 09:41:09


                        16.   Negishi, E. “Selective carbon-carbon formation via transition metal catalysis: Is nickel
                              or palladium better than copper?” in Aspects of Mechanism and Organometallic Chemistry,
                              Brewster, J. H., Ed., Plenum Press, New York, (1978), 285–317. See also Ref. 3a.
                        17.   (a) Negishi, E.; Valente, L. F.; Kobayashi, M. (1980), “Palladium-catalyzed cross-cou-
                              pling reaction of homoallylic or homopropargylic organozincs with alkenyl halides as
                              a new selective route to 1,5-dienes and 1,5-enynes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 102, 3298–3299.
                              (b) Kobayashi, M.; Negishi, E. (1980), “A Pd-catalyzed stereospeciﬁc substitution
                              reaction of homoallylzincs with E-bromo-substituted D,E-unsaturated carbonyl
                              derivatives as a novel route to butenoilides and related natural products of terpenoid
                              origin. A highly selective synthesis of mokupalide,” J. Org. Chem. 45, 5223–5225. (c)
                              Rand, C. L.; Van Horn, D. E.; Moore, M. W.; Negishi, E. (1981), “A versatile and selec-
                              tive route to difunctional trisubstituted (E)-alkene synthons via zirconium-catalyzed
                              carboalumination of alkynes,” J. Org. Chem. 46, 4093–4096. (d) Negishi, E.; Luo,
                              F. -T.; Frisbee, R.; Matsushita, H. (1982), “A regiospeciﬁc synthesis of carbosubstituted
                              heteroaromatic derivatives via Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling,” Heterocycles 18, 117–122.
                              (e) Negishi, E.; Matsushita, H.; Kobayashi, M.; Rand, C. L. (1983), “A convenient
                              synthesis of unsymmetrical bibenzyls, homoallylarenes, and homopropargylarenes via
                              palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling,” Tetrahedron Lett. 24, 3823–3824.
                        18.   (a) Matsushita, H.; Negishi, E. (1981), “Palladium-catalyzed stereo- and regiospeciﬁc
                              coupling of allylic derivatives with alkenyl and arylmetals. A highly selective synthesis
                              of 1,4-dienes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 103, 2882–2884. (b) Negishi, E.; Matsushita,
                              H.; Okukado, N. (1981), “Highly selected synthesis of allylated arenes and diaryl-
                              methanes via palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling involving benzylic derivatives,”
                              Tetrahedron Lett. 22, 2715–2718. (c) Negishi, E.; Chatterjee, S.; Matsushita, H.
                              (1981), “Scope of the palladium-catalyzed coupling reaction of organometallics with
                              allylic electrophiles. Effect of the leaving group,” Tetrahedron Lett. 22, 3737–3740. (d)
                              Matsushita, H.; Negishi, E. (1982), “Anti-stereospeciﬁcity in the palladium-catalyzed
                              reactions of alkenylalanes with allylic electrophiles and its mechanistic implication,”
                              J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Comm., 160–161. (e) Negishi, E.; Luo, F. T.; Rand, C. L. (1982),
                              “Stereo- and regioselective routes to allylic silanes,” Tetrahedron Lett. 23, 27–30. (f)
                              Chatterjee, S.; Negishi, E. (1985), “Palladium-catalyzed cyclization via intramolecu-
                              lar allylation of alkenylmetals,” J. Organomet. Chem. 285, C1–C4. (g) Chatterjee, S.;
                              Negishi, E. (1985), “Palladium-catalyzed reaction of organometals with allylic acetals
                              and orthoesters ad conjugate addition equivalents,” J. Org. Chem. 50, 3406–3408.
                        19.   (a) Negishi, E.; Luo, F. -T. (1983), “Palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction
                              of D-heterosubstituted alkenylmetals. A stereoselective route to heterosubstituted
                              dienes suitable for the Diels-Alder reaction,” J. Org. Chem. 48, 1560–1562. (b) Negishi,
                              E.; Okukado, N.; Lovich, S. F.; Luo, F. -T. (1984), “A general method for the prepara-
                              tion of terminal and internal conjugated diynes via the palladium-catalyzed cross-
                              coupling,” J. Org. Chem. 49, 2629–2632.
                        20.   Negishi, E.; Bagheri, V.; Chatterjee, S.; Luo, F. -T.; Miller, J. A. Stoll, A. T. (1983),
                              “Palladium-catalyzed acylation of organozincs and other organometallics as a
                              convenient route to ketones,” Tetrahedron Lett. 24, 5181–5184.
                        21.   (a) Negishi, E.; Matsushita, H.; Chatterjee, S.; John, R. A. (1982), “A highly regio- and
                              stereospeciﬁc palladium-catalyzed allylation of enolates derived from ketones,” J. Org.
                              Chem. 47, 3188–3190. (b) Negishi, E.; Luo, F. T.; Pecora, A. J.; Silveira, A., Jr. (1983),
                              “1,4- and 1,5-Diketones via palladium-catalyzed allylation of potassium enoxyborates,”
                              J. Org. Chem. 48, 2427–2429. (c) Luo, F. T.; Negishi, E. (1985), “Palladium-catalyzed
                              allylation of lithium 3-alkenyl-1-cyclopentenolates-triethylborane and its application
                              to a selective synthesis of methyl (Z)-jasmonate, Tetrahedron Lett. 26, 2177–2180. (d)
                              Luo, F. T.; Negishi, E. (1985), “A selective synthesis of 11-deoxyprostaglandin E2
                              methyl ester and its 15-epimer,” J. Org. Chem. 50, 4762–4766.
                        22.   For Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions of organoalkali metals, see, in addition
                              to Refs. 8a, 8b, 8g: (a) Takagi, K.; Okamoto, T.; Sakakibara, Y.; Oka, S. (1973),



                                                                                                                   187




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 37                                                                                        2011-08-29 09:41:09


                 “Palladium(II) catalyzed synthesis of aryl cyanides from aryl halides,” Chem. Lett.,
                 471–474. (b) Cassar, L. (1975), “Synthesis of aryl- and vinyl-substituted acetylene
                 derivatives by the use of nickel and palladium complexes,” J. Organomet. Chem. 93,
                 253–257. (c) Yamamura, K.; Murahashi, S.-I. (1977), “The palladium(0) catalyzed
                 synthesis of vinylnitriles from vinyl halides,” Tetrahedron Lett., 4429–4430.
         23.     See, for example: (a) Negishi, E.; Takahashi, T.; Akiyoshi, K. (1986),
                 “Bis(triphenylphosphine)palladium: Its generation, characterization, and reactions,”
                 J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Comm., 1338–1339. (b) Negishi, E.; Akiyoshi, K.; Takahashi, T. (1987),
                 “Inhibition of reductive elimination of diorganopalladium species by formation
                 of tetraorganopalladates,” J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Comm., 477–478. (c) Negishi, E.;
                 Takahashi, T.; Akiyoshi, K. (1987), “Palladium-catalyzed or -promoted reductive
                 carbon-carbon coupling. Effects of phosphines and carbon ligands,” J. Organomet.
                 Chem. 334, 181–194.
         24.     Knochel, P.; Leuser, H.; Gong, L.-Z.; Perrone, S.; Kneisel, F. F., “Functionalized
                 organozinc compounds,” in The Chemistry of Organozinc Compound, Rappoport, Z.;
                 Marek, I., Eds., Wiley, Chichester, UK, (2006), pp 287–393.
         25.     Tamura, M.; Kochi, J. (1971), “Coupling of Grignard reagents with organic halides,”
                 Synthesis, 303–305.
         26.     (a) Negishi, E.; Okukado, N.; King, A. O.; Van Horn, D. E.; Spiegel, B. I. (1978),
                 “Double and multiple catalysis in the cross-coupling reaction and its application to
                 the stereo- and regioselective synthesis of trisubstituted oleﬁns,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 100,
                 2254–2256. (b) For a recent review of the Pd- or Ni-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions
                 with organozincs, see: Negishi, E.; Hu, Q.; Huang, Z.; Wang, G.; Yin, N. “Palladium-
                 or nickel-catalyzed cross-coupling with organozincs and related organometals,” in The
                 Chemistry of Organozinc Compounds, Rappoport, Z.; Marek, I., Eds., John Wiley & Sons,
                 Ltd., Chichester, England, (2006), Chap. 11, pp 453–553.
         27.     Negishi, E.; Van Horn, D. E. (1977), “Selective carbon-carbon bond formation via
                 transition metal catalysis. A novel approach to cross-coupling exempliﬁed by the
                 Ni-catalyzed reaction of alkenylzirconium derivatives with aryl halides,” J. Am. Chem.
                 Soc. 99, 3168–3170.
         28.     (a) Tamura, M.; Kochi, J. (1971), “Vinylation of Grignard reagents. Catalysis by
                 iron,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 93, 1487–1489. (b) Molander, G. A.; Rahn, B. J.; Shubert,
                 D. C.; Bonde, S. E. (1983), “ Iron-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions. Synthesis of
                 arylethenes,” Tetrahedron Lett. 24, 5449–5452. (c) Cahiez, G.; Avedissian, H. (1998),
                 “Highly stereo- and chemoselective iron-catalyzed alkenylation of organomagnesium
                 compounds,” Synthesis, 1199–1205. (d) Fürstner, A.; Leitner, A.; Mendez, M.; Krause,
                 H. (2002), “Iron-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 13856–
                 13863.
         29.     (a) Grubbs, R. H.; Brunck T. K. (1972), “Possible intermediate in the tungsten-
                 catalyzed oleﬁn metathesis reaction,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 94, 2538–2540. (b) Schrock,
                 R. R.; Meakin P. (1974), “Pentamethyl complexes of niobium and tantalum,” J. Am.
                 Chem. Soc. 96, 5288–5290. For recent reviews, see: (c) Grubbs, R. H., Ed. Handbook
                 of Metathesis, Wiley-VCH, (2003), pp.1234. (d) Connon, S. J.; Blechert, S. (2003),
                 “Recent developments in oleﬁn cross-metathesis,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 42, 1900–
                 1923. (e) Grubbs, R. H. (2004), “Oleﬁn metathesis,” Tetrahedron 60, 7117–7140. (f)
                 Dieters, A.; Martin, S. F. (2004), “Synthesis of oxygen- and nitrogen-containing het-
                 erocycles by ring-closing metathesis,” Chem. Rev. 104, 2199–2238. (g) Nicolaou, K. C.;
                 Bulger, P. G.; Sarlah, D. (2005), “Synthesis of oxygen- and nitrogen-containing hetero-
                 cycles by ring-closing metathesis,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 44, 4490–4527. (h) Hoveyda,
                 A. H.; Malcolmson, S. J.; Meek, S. J.; Zhugralin, A. R. (2010), “Catalytic enantioselec-
                 tive oleﬁn metathesis in natural product synthesis. Chiral metal-based complexes
                 that deliver high enantioselectivity and more,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 49, 34–44. (i)
                 Vougioukalakis, G. C.; Grubbs, R. H. (2010), “Ruthenium-based heterocyclic carbene-
                 coordinated oleﬁn metathesis catalysts,” Chem. Rev. 110, 1746–1787.



         188




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 38                                                                                   2011-08-29 09:41:09


                        30.   (a) Brown, J. M.; Cooley, N. A. (1998), “Carbon-carbon bond formation through
                              organometallic elimination reactions,” Chem. Rev. 88, 1031–1046. (b) Brown, J.
                              M.; Cooley, N. A.; Price, D. W. (1989), “Arylation of alkenyl bromides catalyzed by
                              platinum complexes,” J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 458–460.
                        31.   Huang, Z.; Qian, M.; Babinski, D. T.; Negishi, E. (2005), “Palladium-catalyzed cross-
                              coupling reactions with zinc, boron, and indium exhibiting high turnover numbers
                              (TONs): Use of bidentate phosphines and other critical factors in achieving high
                              TONs,” Organometallics 24, 475–478.
                        32.   Negishi, E.; Rao, H.; Truex, N.; Tobrman, T.; Qian, M.; Huang, Z.; Gao, J.; Maishal, T.
                              Manuscript in preparation.
                        33.   (a) Heck, R. F.; Nolley, Jr., J. P. (1972), “Palladium-catalyzed vinylic hydrogen
                              substitution reactions with aryl, benzyl, and styryl halides,” J. Org. Chem. 37,
                              2320–2322. (b) Heck, R. F. (1982), “Palladium-catalyzed vinylation of organic
                              halides,” Org. React. 27, 345–390. (c) Beletskaya, I. P.; Cheprakov, A. V., “Focus on
                              catalyst development and ligand design,” in The Mizoroki-Heck Reaction; Oestreich,
                              M., Ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, United Kingdom, (2009), Chap.
                              2, pp 51–132. (d) Jeffery, T. (1985), “Highly stereospeciﬁc palladium-catalyzed
                              vinylation of vinylic halides under solid-liquid phase transfer conditions,”
                              Tetrahedron Lett. 26, 2667–2670. (e) Lemhadri, M.; Battace, A.; Berthiol, F.;
                              Zair, T.; Doucet, H.; Santelli, M. (2008), “Palladium-tetraphosphine complex
                              catalysed heck reaction of vinyl bromides with alkenes: A powerful access to
                              conjugated dienes,” Synthesis, 1142–1152. Note: Three out of over forty examples
                              display TONs of 7,000, 8,100, and 9,500, which represent the three highest
                              TONs exceeding 1,000 in this study.
                        34.   (a) Dieck, H. A.; Heck, F. R. (1975), “Palladium catalyzed synthesis of aryl,
                              heterocyclic, and vinylic acetylene derivatives,” J. Organomet. Chem. 93, 259–263.
                              (b) Sonogashira, K.; Tohda, Y.; Hagihara, N. (1975), “Convenient synthesis of
                              acetylenes. Catalytic substitutions of acetylenic hydrogen with bromo alkenes,
                              iodo arenes, and bromopyridines,” Tetrahedron Lett. 16, 4467–4470. (c) For a
                              recent review, see: Chinchilla, R.; Nájera, C. (2007), “The Sonogashira reaction: A
                              booming methodology in synthetic organic chemistry,” Chem. Rev. 107, 874–922.
                        35.   For a detailed review on this aspect, see: Negishi, E.; Anastasia, L. (2003),
                              “Palladium-catalyzed alkynylation,” Chem. Rev. 103, 1979–2017.
                        36.   Larhed, M.; Hallberg, A. In Handbook of Organopalladium Chemistry for Organic
                              Synthesis; Negishi, E.; de Meijere, A., Eds.; Wiley-Interscience: New York, (2002);
                              pp 1133–1178.
                        37.   (a) Wang, G.; Mohan, S.; Negishi, E. (2011), “Highly selective synthesis of con-
                              jugated dienoic and trienoic esters via alkyne elementometalation–Pd-catalyzed
                              cross-coupling,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 108, 11344–11349. (b) For examples
                              of stereo-retention of (Z)-ICH=CHCO2Me, see: Lu, X.; Huang, X.; Ma, S.
                              (1992), “A convenient stereoselective synthesis of conjugated (2Z)-en-4-ynoic
                              and (2Z, 4Z)- and (2Z, 4E)-dienoic acid derivatives from propiolic acid deriva-
                              tives,” Tetrahedron Lett. 33, 2535–2538.
                        38.   Hayashi, T. “Palladium-catalyzed asymmetric cross-coupling,” in Handbook
                              of Organopalladium chemistry synthesis; Negishi, E.; de Meijere, A. Eds. Wiley-
                              Interscience, New York, (2002); part III, chap. III. 2. 16; pp. 791-806.
                        39.   For reviews, see: (a) Snieckus, V. (1990), “Directed ortho metalation. Tertiary
                              amide and O-carbamate directors in synthetic strategies for polysubstituted
                              aromatics,” Chem. Rev. 90, 879–933. (b) Anctil, E. J.-G.; Snieckus, V. (2002),
                              “The directed ortho metalation–cross-coupling symbiosis. Regioselective meth-
                              odologies for biaryls and heterobiaryls. Deployment in aromatic and heteroaro-
                              matic natural product synthesis,” J. Organomet. Chem. 653, 150–160.
                        40.   Jiang, A. J.; Zhao, Y.; Schrock, R. R.; Hoveyda, A. H. (2009), “Highly Z-selective
                              metathesis homocoupling of terminal oleﬁns,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 16630–



                                                                                                                189




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 39                                                                                     2011-08-29 09:41:09


             16631.
         41. Yamamoto, A. (2002), “A reminiscence and a future prospect of transition
             metal-catalyzed cross-coupling processes,” J. Organomet. Chem. 653, 5–10.
         42. Fukui, K. (1971), “Recognition of stereochemical paths by orbital interaction,”
             Acc. Chem. Res. 4, 57–64.
         43. (a) Dewar, M. (1951), “A review of the S-complex theory,” Bull. Soc. Chim. Fr. 18,
             C79. (b) Chatt, J.; Duncanson, L. A. (1953), “Oleﬁn co-ordination compounds.
             Part III. Infra-red spectra and structure: Attempted preparation of acetylene
             complexes,” J. Chem. Soc., 2939–2947. (c) Chatt, J.; Duncanson, L. A.; Venanzi,
             L. M. (1955), “Directing effects in inorganic substitution reactions. Part I. A
             hypothesis to explain the trans-effect,” J. Chem. Soc., 4456–4460.
         44. (a) Woodward, R. B.; Hoffmann, R. (1965), “Stereochemistry of electrocyclic
             reactions,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 395–397. (b) Woodward, R. B.; Hoffmann, R.,
             The Conservation of Orbital Symmetry, Verlag Chemie, Weihein, (1970), pp177.
         45. For a review, see: Handbook of Organopalladium Chemistry for Organic Synthesis,
             Negishi, E.; de Meijere, A., Eds.; Wiley-Interscience: New York, (2002), Part III,
             pp 215–993, in particular, Chap.III.2.6, pp 335–408; Chap.III.2.9, pp 551–589;
             Chap.III.2.11, pp 597–633; Chap.III.2.12, pp 635–655; Chap.III.2.14, pp 693–
             766; Chap.III.2.15, pp 767–789; Chap.III.2.17.1, pp 807–823; Chap.III.2.18, pp
             863–942.
         46. For a comprehensive review on the Wittig reaction and related oleﬁnations, see:
             Maryanoff, B. E.; Reitz, A. B. (1989), “The Wittig oleﬁnation reaction and modiﬁca-
             tions involving phosphoryl-stabilized carbanions. Stereochemistry, mechanism, and
             selected synthetic aspects,” Chem. Rev. 89, 863–927.
         47. (a) Horner, L.; Hoffmann, H.; Wippel, J. H. G.; Klahre, G. (1959), “Phosphorus
             organic compounds. XX. Phosphine oxides as reagents for oleﬁn formation,” Chem. Ber.
             92, 2499–2505. (b) Wadsworth, W. S., Jr.; Emmons, W. D. “The utility of phosphonate
             carbanions in oleﬁn synthesis,” J. Am. Soc. Chem. 83, 1733–1738.
         48. For a seminal work on the Still-Gennari oleﬁnation, see: Still, W. C.; Gennari, C.
             (1983), “Direct synthesis of Z-unsaturated esters. A useful modiﬁcation of the
             Horner-Emmons oleﬁnation,” Tetrahedron Lett. 24, 4405–4408.
         49. Ando, K. (1995), “Practical synthesis of Z-unsaturated esters by using a new
             Horner-Emmons reagent, ethyl diphenylphosphonoacetate,” Tetrahedron Lett.
             36, 4105–4108.
         50. Peterson, D. J. (1968), “Carbonyl oleﬁnation reaction using silyl-substituted organo-
             metallic compounds,” J. Org. Chem. 33, 780–784.
         51. (a) Corey, E. J.; Enders, D.; Bock, M. G. (1976), “A simple and highly effective route
             to D,E-unsaturated aldehydes,” Tetrahedron Lett., 7–10. (b) Schlessinger, R. H., Poss,
             M. A., Richardson, S., Lin, P. (1985), “The vinylogation of aldehydes: An improved
             method for the preparation of alpha formylethylidenetriphenylphosphorane, and an
             improved alpha silyl imine reagent of propionaldehyde,” Tetrahedron Lett. 26, 2391–
             2394. (c) Desmond, R., Mills, S. G., Volante, R. P., Shinkai, I. (1988), “A highly selec-
             tive method for the synthesis of (E)-D-methyl-D,E-unsaturated aldehydes,” Tetrahedron
             Lett. 29, 3895–3898.
         52. (a) Julia, M.; Paris, J.-M. (1973), “Syntheses a l’aide de sulfones. Methode de synthese
             generale de doubles liaisons,” Tetrahedron Lett. 14, 4833–4836. (b) Kocienski, P. J.;
             Lythgoe, B.; Ruston, S. (1978), “Scope and stereochemistry of an oleﬁn synthesis
             from E-hydroxysulphones,” J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 829–834.
         53. (a) For a seminal paper on alkyne hydrosilation catalyzed by transition metals,
             see: Benkeser, R. A.; Burrons, M. L.; Nelson, L. E.; Swisher, J. V. (1961), “The
             stereochemistry of the addition of silicochloroform to acetylenes. A comparison
             of catalyst systems,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 83, 4385–4389. (b) For a review on catalytic
             alkyne hydrosilation, see: Benkeser, R. A. (1971), “Chemistry of trichlorosilane-
             tertiary amine combinations,” Acc. Chem. Res. 4, 94–100. (c) For a recent review



         190




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 40                                                                              2011-08-29 09:41:10


                            containing pertinent references on transition metal-catalyzed hydrostannation,
                            stannylmetalation, and so on, see: Marshall, J. A., In Organometallics in Synthesis, 2nd
                            Ed., Schlosser, M., Ed.; Wiley, Chichester, U.K., (2002), Chap.II, pp 353–464.
                        54. Huang, Z.; Negishi, E. (2006), “A convenient and genuine equivalent to HZrCp2Cl
                            generated in situ from ZrCp2Cl2–DlBAL-H,” Org. Lett. 8, 3675–3678.
                        55. Negishi, E.; Yoshida, T. (1980), “A novel zirconium-catalzyed hydroalumination of
                            oleﬁns,” Tetrahedron Lett., 1501–1504.
                        56. Carr, D. B.; Schwartz, J. (1979), “Preparation of organoaluminum compounds by
                            hydrozirconation-transmetalation,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 101, 3521–3531.
                        57. (a) Normant, J. F.; Bourgain, M. (1971), “Synthese stereospeciﬁque and reactivite
                            d’ organocuivreux vinyliques,” Tetrahedron Lett., 2583–2586. (b) Normant, J. F.;
                            Alexakis, A. (1981), “Carbometallation (C-metallation) of alkynes: Stereospeciﬁc
                            synthesis of alkenyl derivatives,” Synthesis, 841–870.
                        58. Mole, T.; Jeffery, E. A., Organoaluminum Compounds, Elsevier, Amsterdam, (1972), 465
                            pp.
                        59. Van Horn, D. E.; Negishi, E. (1978), “Controlled carbometallation. the reaction of
                            acetylenes with organoalane-zirconocene dichlorides complexes as a route to stereo-
                            and regio-deﬁned trisubstituted oleﬁns,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 100, 2252–2254.
                        60. Negishi, E.; Van Horn, D. E.; Yoshida, T. (1985), “Carbometallation reaction of
                            alkynes with organoalane-zirconocene derivatives as a route to stereo- and regio-
                            deﬁned trisubstituted alkenes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 107, 6639–6647.
                        61. Negishi, E.; Kondakov, D. Y.; Choueiry, D.; Kasai, K.; Takahashi, T. (1996), “Multiple
                            mechanistic pathways for zirconium-catalyzed carboalumination of alkynes,” J. Am.
                            Chem. Soc., 118, 9577–9588.
                        62. Miller, J. A.; Negishi, E. (1984), “Zirconium-catalyzed allylalumination and benzylalu-
                            mination of alkynes,” Tetrahedron Lett. 25, 5863–5866.
                        63. Negishi, E. (1999), “Principle of activation of electrophiles by electrophiles
                            through dimeric association – Two is better than one,” Chem. Eur. J. 5, 411–420.
                        64. Lappert, M. F.; Prokai, B. (1964), “Chloroboration and allied reactions of unsaturated
                            compounds II. Haloboration and phenylboration of acetylenes; preparation of some
                            alkynylboranes,” J. Organomet. Chem. 1, 384−400.
                        65. (a) Hara, S.; Dojo, H.; Takinami, S.; Suzuki, A. (1983), “Organic synthesis using
                            haloboration reaction I. A simple and selective synthesis of 2-bromo- and 2-iodo-
                            1-alkenes,” Tetrahedron Lett. 24, 731–734. (b) Hara, S.; Kato, T.; Shimizu, H.; Suzuki, A.
                            (1985), “Organic synthesis using haloboration reaction VIII. Stereo- and regioselec-
                            tive synthesis of (Z)-1,2-dihalo-1-alkenes,” Tetrahedron Lett. 26, 1065–1068.
                        66. Satoh, Y.; Serizawa, H.; Miyaura, N.; Hara, S.; Suzuki, A. (1988), “Organic synthesis
                            using haloboration reactions. A formal carboboration reaction of 1-alkynes and its
                            application to di- and trisubstituted alkene synthesis,” Tetrahedron Lett. 29, 1811–1814.
                        67. Hyuga, S.; Chiba, Y.; Yamashina, N.; Hara, S.; Suzuki, A. (1987), “(E)-(2-
                            Bromoethenyl)dibromoborane. A new precursor for (E)-1,2-disubstituted ethenes,”
                            Chem. Lett., 1757–1760.
                        68. Sato, M.; Yamamoto, Y.; Hara, S.; Suzuki, A. (1993), “A stereoselective synthesis
                            of 3,3-disubstituted allylborane derivatives using haloboration reaction and their
                            application to the diastereospeciﬁc synthesis of homoallylic alcohols having quaternary
                            carbon,” Tetrahedron Lett. 34, 7071−7014.
                        69. Xu, Z.; Negishi, E. (2008), “Efﬁcient and stereoselective synthesis of yellow scale
                            pheromone via alkyne haloboration, Zr-catalyzed asymmetric carboalumination of
                            alkenes (ZACA Reaction), and Pd-catalyzed tandem Negishi coupling,” Org. Lett. 10,
                            4311–4314.
                        70. (a) Wang, C.; Tobrman, T.; Xu, Z.; Negishi, E. (2009), “Highly regio and stereoselec-
                            tive synthesis of Z-trisubstituted alkenes via propyne bromoboration and tandem Pd-
                            catalyzed cross-coupling,” Org. Lett. 11, 4092–4095. (b) Wang, C.; Tobrman, T.; Xu,
                            Z.; Negishi, E. (2010), “Arylethyne bromoboration–Negishi coupling route to E- or



                                                                                                                 191




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 41                                                                                      2011-08-29 09:41:10


                 Z-aryl-substituted trisubstituted alkenes of t98% isomeric purity. New horizon in the
                 highly selective synthesis of trisubstituted alkenes,” Adv. Synth. Catal. 352, 627–631.
         71.     (a) Wang, K. K.; Wang, Z. (1994), “A convenient procedure for the synthesis of
                 enyne-allenes,” Tetrahedron Lett. 35, 1829−1832. (b) Wang, K. K.; Wang, Z.; Tarli,
                 A.; Gannett, P. (1996), “Cascade radical cyclizations via biradicals generated from
                 (Z)-1,2,4-heptatrien-6-ynes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118, 10783−10791. (c) Tarli, A.; Wang,
                 K. K. (1997), “Synthesis and thermolysis of enediynyl ethyl ethers as precursors of
                 enyne-ketenes,” J. Org. Chem. 62, 8841−8847.
         72.     Negishi, E.; Tobrman, T.; Rao, H.; Xu, S.; Lee, C.-T. (2010), “Highly (>98%)
                 selective trisubstituted alkene synthesis of wide applicability via ﬂuouride-pro-
                 moted Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling of alkenylboranes,” Isr. J. Chem. 50, 696-701.
         73.     (a) Negishi, E.; Williams, R. M.; Lew, G.; Yoshida, T. (1975), “A convenient synthesis
                 of cis-alkenylboranes and its application to the synthesis of disubstituted trans-alkenes
                 and conjugated cis-enynes,” J. Organometal. Chem. 92, C4–C6. (b) Brown, H. C.;
                 Somayaji, V. (1984), “Convenient procedure for the synthesis of (E)-1-bromo-
                 1-alkenes and (Z)-1-iodo-1-alkenes,” Synthesis, 919–920. (c) Campbell, J. B., Jr.;
                 Molander, G. A. (1978), “An improved synthesis of cis-alkenylboranes,” J. Organomet.
                 Chem. 156, 71–79.
         74.     Brown, H. C.; Basavaiah, D.; Kulkarmi, S. U. (1982), “A general and stereospeciﬁc
                 synthesis of trans-alkenes and regiospeciﬁc synthesis of ketones via stepwise hydrobo-
                 ration,” J. Org. Chem. 47, 3808–3810.
         75.     Huang, Z.; Negishi, E. (2007), “Highly stereo and regioselective synthesis of (Z)-
                 trisubstituted alkenes via 1-bromo-1-alkyne hydroboration–migratory insertion–Zn-
                 promoted iodinolysis and Pd-catalyzed organozinc cross-coupling,” J. Am. Chem. Soc.
                 129, 14788–14792.
         76.     Moriya, T.; Miyaura, N.; Suzuki, A. (1993), “Stereoselective synthesis of (Z)-(1-organo-
                 1-alkenyl)boronic esters by the palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction of (Z)-(1-
                 iodo-1-alkenyl)boronic esters with organozinc reagents,” Chem. Lett., 1429–1432.
         77.     Brown, H. C.; Hamaoka, T.; Ravindran, N. (1973), “Reaction of alkenylboronic acids
                 with iodine under the inﬂuence of base. Simple procedure for the stereospeciﬁc
                 conversion of terminal alkynes into trans-1-alkenyl iodides via hydroboration,” J. Am.
                 Soc. Chem. 95, 5786–5788.
         78.     Brown, H. C.; Hamaoka, T.; Ravindran, N. (1973), “Stereospeciﬁc conversion of
                 alkenylboronic acids into alkenyl bromides with inversion of conﬁguration. Striking
                 differences in the stereochemistry of the replacement of the boronic acid substituent
                 by bromine and iodine and its signiﬁcance in terms of the reaction mechanism,” J.
                 Am. Soc. Chem. 95, 6456–6457.
         79.     For initial thermal isomerization at 150oC, see: Ma, S.; Negishi, E. (1997), “Anti-
                 carbometallation of homopropargyl alcohols and their higher homologues via non-
                 chelation-controlled syn-carbometallation and chelation-controlled isomerization,” J.
                 Org. Chem. 62, 784–785.
         80.     For the AlCl3-catalyzed procedure, see: Wang, G.; Negishi, E. (2009), “AlCl3-
                 Promoted facile E-to-Z isomerization route to (Z)-2-methyl-1-buten-1,4-ylidene
                 synthons for highly efﬁcient and selective (Z)-isoprenoid synthesis,” Eur. J. Org. Chem.,
                 1679–1682.
         81.     Negishi, E.; Hata, M.; Xu, C. (2000), “A strictly “pair”-selective synthesis of
                 conjugated diynes via Pd-catalyzed cross coupling of 1,3-diynylzincs: A superior
                 alternative to the Cadiot-Chodkiewicz reaction,” Org. Lett. 2000, 2, 3687–3689.
         82.     Negishi, E.; Holmes, S.J.; Tour, J.M.; Miller, J. A. (1985), “Zirconium-promoted bicy-
                 clization of enynes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 107, 2568-2569.
         83.     Negishi, E.; Liou, S. Y.; Xu, C.; Huo, S. (2002), “A novel, highly selective, and general
                 methodology for the synthesis of 1,5-diene-containing oligoisoprenoids of all possible
                 geometrical combinations exempliﬁed by an iterative and convergent synthesis of
                 coenzyme Q10,” Org. Lett. 4, 261–264.


         192




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 42                                                                                  2011-08-29 09:41:10


                        84.   (a) Kondakov, D. Y.; Negishi, E. (1995), “Zirconium-catalyzed enantioselective
                              methylalumination of monosubstituted alkenes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117, 10771–10772.
                              (b) Kondakov, D. Y.; Negishi, E. (1996), “Zirconium-catalyzed enantioselective
                              alkylalumination of monosubstituted alkenes proceeding via noncyclic mechanism,”
                              J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118, 1577–1578.
                        85.   Olah, G. A. (1993), “Superelectrophiles,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 32, 767–788.
                        86.   Dzhemilev, U. M.; Vostrikova, O. S.; Sultanov, R. M. (1983), “New reaction of D-oleﬁns
                              with diethylmagnesium catalyzed by biscyclopentadienylzirconium chloride,” Izv.
                              Akad. Nauk SSSR, Ser. Khim. 218–220.
                        87.   For a review, see: Negishi, E.; Kondakov, D. Y. (1996), “An odyssey from stoichiomet-
                              ric carbotitanation of alkynes to zirconium-catalyzed enantioselective carboalumina-
                              tion of alkenes,” Chem. Soc. Rev. 417–426.
                        88.   Takahashi, T.; Seki, T.; Nitto, Y.; Saburi, M.; Rousset, C. J.; Negishi, E. (1991),
                              “Remarkably “pair”-selective and regioselective carbon-carbon bond forming reaction
                              of zirconacylclopentane derivatives with Grignard reagents,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 113,
                              6266–6268.
                        89.   Ott, K. C.; deBoer, E. J. M.; Grubbs, R. H. (1984), “An investigation of the reaction of
                              bis(cyclopentadienyl)titanium dichlorides with trimethylaluminum. Mechanism of
                              an D-hydrogen abstraction reaction,” Organometallics 3, 223–230.
                        90.   For a review of this subject, see: Negishi, E.; Novak, T. (2007), “C-C bond formation
                              (part 1) by addition reactions: through carbometallation mediated by Group 4–7
                              metals,” In Comprehensive Organometallic Chemistry III; Ojima, I., Ed.; Elsevier:
                              Oxford, Chap. 10.06, pp251–297.
                        91.   (a) Morken, J. P.; Didiuk, M. T.; Hoveyda, A. H. (1993), “Zirconium-catalyzed asymmetric
                              carbomagnesiation,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115, 6997–6998. (b) Didiuk, M. T.; Johannes,
                              C. W.; Morken, J. P.; Hoveyda, A. H. (1995), “Enantio-, diastereo-, and regioselec-
                              tive zirconium-catalyzed carbomagnesiation of cyclic ethers with higher alkyls of
                              magnesium. Utility in synthesis and mechanistic implications,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117,
                              7097–7104.
                        92.   (a) Bell, L.; Whitby, R. J.; Jones, R. V. H.; Standen, M. C. H. (1996), “Catalytic asym-
                              metric carbomagnesiation of unactivated alkenes. A new, effective, active, cheap and
                              recoverable chiral zirconocene,” Tetrahedron Lett. 37, 7139–7142. (b) Yamamura, Y.;
                              Hyakutake, M.; Mori, M. (1997), “Synthesis of heterocycles using zirconium-catalyzed
                              asymmetric diene cyclization,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119, 7615–7616.
                        93.   For a study of zirconocene-catalyzed alkene carbomagnesiation with longer alkylmag-
                              nesium derivatives, see: Rousset, C. J.; Negishi, E.; Suzuki, N.; Takahashi, T. (1992),
                              “Novel head-to-tail alkyl-alkene or alkene-alkene coupling via zirconium-catalyzed
                              reaction of alkylmagnesium derivatives with monosubstituted alkenes,” Tetrahedron
                              Lett, 33, 1965–1968.
                        94.   (a) Erker, G.; Aulbach, M.; Knickmeier, M.; Wingbermuhle, D.; Krüger, C.; Nolte,
                              M.; Werner, S. (1993), “The role of torsional isomers of planarly chiral nonbridged
                              bis(indenyl)metal type complexes in stereoselective propene polymerization,” J. Am.
                              Chem. Soc. 115, 4590–4601. (b) Wild, F. R. W. P.; Zsolnai, L.; Huttner, G.; Brintzinger,
                              H. H. (1982), “ansa-Metallocene derivatives. IV. Synthesis and molecular struc-
                              tures of chiral ansa-titanocene derivatives with bridged tetrahydroindenyl ligands,”
                              J. Organomet. Chem. 232, 233–247. (c) Wild, F. R. W. P.; Wasiucionek, M.; Huttner,
                              G.; Brintzinger, H. H. (1985), “ansa-Metallocene derivatives. VII. Synthesis and
                              crystal structure of a chiral ansa-zirconocene derivative with ethylene-bridged
                              tetrahydroindenyl ligands,” J. Organomet. Chem. 288, 63–67. (d) Available from
                              Aldrich Chemical Co., Milwaukee, WI.
                        95.   For a recent review, see: Alt, H. G.; Koppl, A. (2000), “Effect of the nature
                              of Metallocene complexes of Group IV metals on their performance in catalytic
                              ethylene and propylene polymerization,” Chem. Rev. 100, 1205–1222.
                        96.   (a) Wipf, P.; Ribe, S. (2000), “Water/MAO acceleration of the zirconocene-catalyzed



                                                                                                                 193




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 43                                                                                      2011-08-29 09:41:10


                 asymmetric methylalumination of D-oleﬁns,” Org. Lett, 2, 1713–1716. (b) Ribe, S.;
                 Kondru, R. K.; Beratan, D. N.; Wipf, P. (2000), “Optical rotation computation, total
                 synthesis, and stereochemistry assignment of the marine natural product Pitiamide
                 A,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 4608–4617.
         97.     Huo, S.; Negishi, E. (2001), “A convenient and asymmetric protocol for the synthe-
                 sis of natural products containing chiral alkyl chains via Zr-catalyzed asymmetric
                 carboalumination of alkenes. Syntheses of phytol and vitamins E and K,” Org. Lett. 3,
                 3253–3256.
         98.     Huo, S.; Shi, J.; Negishi, E. (2002), “A new protocol for the enantioselective synthesis
                 of methyl-substituted chiral alkanols and their derivatives via hydroalumination–
                 zirconium catalyzed alkylalumination tandem process,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 41,
                 2141–2143.
         99.     Tan, Z.; Negishi, E. (2004), “An efﬁcient and general method for the synthesis of a,w-
                 difunctional reduced polypropionates by Zr-catalyzed asymmetric carboalumination:
                 synthesis of the scyphostatin sidechain,” Agnew. Chem. Int. Ed., 43, 2911–2914.
         100.    Negishi, E.; Tan, Z.; Liang, B.; Novak, T. (2004), “A new, efﬁcient, and general route
                 to reduced polypropionates via Zr-catalyzed asymmetric C–C Bond formation,” Proc.
                 Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 5782–5787.
         101.    Magnin-Lachaux, M.; Tan, Z.; Liang, B.; Negishi, E. (2004), “Efﬁcient and selective
                 synthesis of siphonarienolone and related reduced polypropionates via Zr-catalyzed
                 asymmetric carboalumination, “ Org. Lett., 6, 1425–1427.
         102.    Zeng, X.; Zeng, F.; Negishi, E. (2004), “Efﬁcient and selective synthesis of 6,7-dehy-
                 drostipiamide via Zr-catalyzed asymmetric carboalumination and Pd-catalyzed cross-
                 coupling of organozincs,” Org. Lett., 6, 3245–3248.
         103.    Novak, T.; Tan, Z.; Liang, B.; Negishi, E. (2005), “All-catalytic, efﬁcient, and
                 asymmetric synthesis of a,w-diheterofunctional reduced polypropionates via ‘one-
                 pot’ Zr-catalyzed asymmetric carboalumination-Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling tandem
                 process,” J. Am. Chem. Soc., 127, 2838–2839.
         104.    Liang, B.; Novak, T.; Tan. Z.; Negishi, E. (2006), “Catalytic, efﬁcient, and syn-selective
                 construction of deoxypolypropionates and other chiral compounds via Zr-catalyzed
                 asymmetric carboalumination of allyl Alcohol,” J. Am. Chem. Soc., 128, 2770–2771.
         105.    Tan, Z.; Liang, B.; Huo, S.; Shi, J.; Negishi, E. (2006), “Zirconium-catalyzed
                 asymmetric carboalumination (ZACA Reaction) of 1,4-dienes,” Tetrahedron:
                 Asymmetry, 17, 512–515.
         106.    Huang, Z.; Tan, Z.; Novak, T.; Zhu, G.; Negishi, E. (2007), “Zirconium-catalyzed
                 carboalumination of alkenes: ZACA-lipase-catalyzed acetylation synergy,”Adv. Synth.
                 Catal. 349, 539–545.
         107.    Zhu, G.; Negishi, E. (2007), “Fully reagent-controlled asymmetric synthesis of
                 (–)-spongidepsin via the Zr-catalyzed asymmetric carboalumination of alkenes
                 (ZACA Reaction),” Org. Lett. 9, 2771–2774.
         108.    Zhu, G.; Negishi, E. (2008), “1,4-Pentenynes as a ﬁve-carbon synthon for efﬁcient and
                 selective syntheses of natural products containing 2,4-dimethyl-1-penten-1,5-ylidene
                 and related moieties via Zr-catalyzed carboalumination of alkynes and alkenes,” Chem.
                 Eur. J. 14, 311–318.
         109.    Liang, B.; Negishi, E. (2008), “Highly efﬁcient asymmetric synthesis of ﬂuvirucinine
                 A1 via Zr-catalyzed asymmetric carboalumination of alkenes (ZACA)–lipase-catalyzed
                 acetylation tandem process,” Org. Lett. 10, 193–195.
         110.    Zhu, G.; Liang, B.; Negishi, E. (2008), “Efﬁcient and selective synthesis of
                 (S,R,R,S,R,S)-4,6,8,10,16,18-hexamethyldocosane via Zr-catalyzed asymmetric carboa-
                 lumination of alkenes (ZACA) reaction” Org. Lett.. 10, 1099–1101.
         111.    Pitsinos, E.; Athinaios, N.; Xu, Z.; Wang, G.; Negishi, E. (2010), “Total synthesis of (+)-
                 scyphostatin featuring an enantioselective and highly efﬁcient route to the side-chain
                 via Zr-catalyzed asymmetric carboalumination of alkenes (ZACA),” Chem. Commun.
                 46, 2200–2202.



         194




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 44                                                                                    2011-08-29 09:41:10


                        112. Negishi, E. (2000), “Asymmetric carbometallations, “Chapter 4 in Catalytic Asymmetric
                             Synthesis II,” Ojima, I., Ed., J. Wiley-VCH, New York, 165–189.
                        113. Negishi, E. (2001), “Some newer aspects of organozirconium chemistry of relevance
                             to organic synthesis. Zr-catalyzed enantioselective carbometallation,” Pure Appl. Chem.
                             73, 239–242.
                        114. Negishi, E.; Huo, S. (2002), “Zirconium-catalyzed enantioselective carboalumination
                             of ‘unactivated’ alkenes as a new synthetic tool for asymmetric carbon-carbon bond
                             formation,” Pure Appl. Chem. 74, 151–157.
                        115. Negishi, E.; Huo, S. (2002), “Synthesis and reactivity of zirconocene derivatives,”
                             Chapter 1 in Titanium and Zirconium in Organic Synthesis, Marek, I., Ed., Wiley-VCH,
                             Weinheim, 1–49.
                        116. Negishi, E.; Tan, Z. (2004), “Disasteroselective, enantioselective, and regioselec-
                             tive carboalumination reactions catalyzed by zirconocene derivatives,” Topics in
                             Organometallic Chemistry, Takahashi, T., Ed., Chap. 4, 139–176.
                        117. Negishi, E. (2005), “A quarter of a century of explorations in organozirconium chem-
                             istry,” Dalton Trans. 827–848.
                        118. Negishi, E.; Kondakov, D. Y. (1999), “Chiral organoalanes and their organic de-
                             rivatives via zirconium-catalyzed asymmetric carboalumination of terminal alkenes,”
                             (Purdue Research Foundation) US Patent 6,002,037, Dec. 14, 1999 (Applied Oct. 14,
                             1997).
                        119. Negishi, E.; Huo, S. (2002), “(-)-Dichlorobis[(1,2,3,3a,7ah)-1-[(1S,2S,5R)-5-methyl-2-
                             (1-methyl-ethyl)cyclohexyl-1H-inden-1-yl]zirconium and its (+)-(1R,2R,5S)-isomer,”
                             In Encyclopedia of Reagents for Organic Synthesis, Paquette, L. A., Ed., Wiley, New York.
                        120. Negishi, E.; Wang, G.; Lee, C. T.; Xu, S. Manuscript in preparation.

                        Portrait photo of Professor Negishi by photographer Ulla Montan.




                                                                                                                 195




hi_Negishi_lect_181.indd 45                                                                                      2011-08-29 09:41:10
