THE LOGIC OF CHEMICAL SYNTHESIS:
MULTISTEP SYNTHESIS OF COMPLEX
CARBOGENIC MOLECULES
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1990

by
E L I A S JA M E S C O R E Y

Department of Chemistry, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA




Carbogens, members of the family of carbon-containing compounds, can
exist in an infinite variety of compositions, forms and sizes. The naturally
occurring carbogens, or organic substances as they are known more tradi-
tionally, constitute the matter of all life on earth, and their science at the
molecular level defines a fundamental language of that life. The chemical
synthesis of these naturally occurring carbogens and many millions of
unnatural carbogenic substances has been one of the major enterprises of
science in this century. That fact is affirmed by the award of the Nobel Prize
in Chemistry for 1990 for the “development of the theory and methodology
of organic synthesis”. Chemical synthesis is uniquely positioned at the heart
of chemistry, the central science, and its impact on our lives and society is all
pervasive. For instance, many of today’s medicines are synthetic and many
of tomorrow’s will be conceived and produced by synthetic chemists. To the
field of synthetic chemistry belongs an array of responsibilities which are
crucial for the future of mankind, not only with regard to the health,
material and economic needs of our society, but also for the attainment of
an understanding of matter, chemical change and life at the highest level of
which the human mind is capable.
   The post World War II period encompassed remarkable achievement in
chemical synthesis. In the first two decades of this period chemical syntheses
were developed which could not have been anticipated in the earlier part of
this century. For the first time, several very complex molecules were assem-
bled by elaborately conceived multistep processes, for example vitamin A
(O. Isler, 1949), cortisone (R. B. Woodward, R. Robinson, 1951), morphine
(M. Gates, 1956), penicillin (J. C. Sheehan, 1957), and chlorophyll (R. B.
Woodward, 1960).1 This striking leap forward, which was recognized by the
award of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry to R. B. Woodward in 1965,2 was
followed by an equally dramatic scientific advance during the past three
decades, in which chemical synthesis has been raised to a qualitatively
higher level of sophistication. Today, in many laboratories around the world
chemists are synthesizing at an astonishing rate complex carbogenic struc-
tures which could not have been made effectively in the 1950’s or early


                                    E. J. Corey                               687


1960’s. This advance has been propelled by the availability of more power-
ful conceptual processes for the planning of chemical syntheses, the use of
new chemical methods, in the form of reactions and reagents, and the
advent of improved methods for analysis, separation and determination of
structure. Many talented investigators all over the world have contributed
to the latest surge of chemical synthesis. Their efforts constitute a collective
undertaking of vast dimensions, even though made independently, and
their ideas and discoveries interact synergistically to the benefit of all. I am
happy to have been selected by the Nobel Committee for contributions to
the science of chemical synthesis, but I am even more pleased that this
important field of science has again received high recognition.

Genesis
In the fall of 1947, as an undergraduate at the Massachusetts Institute, I
took a course in Advanced Synthetic Organic Chemistry, taught by the
distinguished chemist A. C. Cope, in which the major reactions of synthesis
were surveyed. It was explained that very few new synthetic methods re-
mained to be found, since only five important reactions had been discov-
ered in the preceding fifty years; and we students were advised to learn how
to devise chemical syntheses using the available portfolio of known con-
structions. We were given numerous molecular structures as synthetic prob-
lems. After doing a few of the problem sets, I had developed sufficient skill
and experience to handle all of the remaining assignments with ease, much
as I had learned to use the English language, to prove mathematical theo-
rems, or to play chess. My new found competence in chemical problem
solving seemed to result from an automatic “know how” rather than from
the conscious application of well-defined procedures. Nonetheless, even
though I had mastered the classical reactions, designing syntheses of mole-
cules beyond the modest level of complexity of these instructional problems
still eluded me. Molecules such as morphine, cholesterol, penicillin, or
sucrose were so forbidding that they defined the frontiers of 1947; each
seemed to be unique and to require a very high level of creativity and
invention. Much of my research over the years has been devoted to probing
those frontiers and advancing the level of synthetic science by an approach
consisting of three integral components: the development of more general
and powerful ways of thinking about synthetic problems, the invention of
new general reactions and reagents for synthesis, and the design and
execution of efficient multistep syntheses of complex molecules at the limits
of contemporary synthetic science.

Retrosynthtic Analysis
During the first half of this century most syntheses were developed by
selecting an appropriate starting material, after a trial and error search for
commercially available compounds having a structural resemblance to the
target of synthesis. Suitable reactions were then sought for elaboration of
the chosen starting material to the desired product. Synthetic planning in


688                                Chemistry 1990


most instances was strongly dependent on an assumed starting point. In the
fall of 1957 I came upon a simple idea which led to an entirely different way
of designing a chemical synthesis. In this approach the target structure is
subjected to a deconstruction process which corresponds to the reverse of a
synthetic reaction, so as to convert that target structure to simpler pecursor
structures, without any assumptions with regard to starting materials. Each of the
precursors so generated is then examined in the same way, and the process
is repeated until simple or commercially available structures result. This
“retrosynthetic” or “antithetic” procedure constitutes the basis of a gener-
al logic of synthetic planning which was developed and demonstrated in
practice over the ensuing decade.3, 4, 5 In an early example, retrosynthetic
planning for the tricyclic sesquiterpene longifolene (1) (Chart I) produced
several attractive pathways for synthesis, one of which was selected and
validated by experimental execution. 6 The basic ideas of retrosynthetic
analysis were used to design many other syntheses and to develop a comput-
er program for generating possible synthetic routes to a complex target
structure without any input of potential starting materials or intermediates
for the synthesis.4, 5 T h e princip les of retrosynthetic analysis have been
summarized most recently in the textbook, “The Logic of Chemical Synthe-
sis”7 which was written for advanced undergraduate and graduate students
of chemistry. The retrosynthetic way of thinking about chemical synthesis
also provided a logical and efficient way to teach synthetic planning to
intermediate and advanced students, a good example of the intimate link
between teaching and research in an academic setting. A brief synopsis of
the retrosynthetic planning of syntheses will now be given.
   Retrosynthetic8 (or antithetic) analysis is a problem-solving technique for
transforming the structure of a synthetic target (TGT) molecule to a sequence
of progressively simpler structures along a pathway which ultimately leads
to simple or commercially available starting materials for a chemical synthe-
sis. The transformation of a molecule to a synthetic precursor is accom-
plished by the application of a transform, the exact reverse of a synthetic
reaction, to a target structure. Each structure derived antithetically from a
TGT then itself becomes a TGT for further analysis. Repetition of this
process eventually produces a tree of intermediates having chemical struc-
tures as nodes and pathways from bottom to top corresponding to possible
synthetic routes to the TGT. Such trees, called EXTGT trees since they grow
out from the TGT, can be quite complex since a high degree of branching is
possible at each node and since the vertical pathways can include many
steps. This central fact implies the need for strategies which control or
guide the generation of EXTGT trees so as to avoid explosive branching and
the proliferation of useless pathways.
   Each retrosynthetic step requires the presence of a target structure of a
keying structural subunit or retron which allows the application of a particu-
lar transform. For example, the retron for the aldol transform consists of
the subunit HO-C-C-C=O, and it is the presence of this subunit which
permits transform function, e.g. as follows:


                                   E.J. Corey                              689




   Transforms vary in terms of their power to simplify a target structure.
The most powerful of simplifying transforms, which reduce molecular
complexity in the retrosynthetic direction, occupy a special position in the
hierarchy of all transforms. Their application, even when the appropriate
retron is absent, may justify the use of a number of non-simplifying trans-
forms to generate that retron. In general, simplifying transforms function
to modify structural elements which contribute to molecular complexity:
molecular size, cyclic connectivity (topology), stereocenter content, element
and functional group content, chemical reactivity, structural instability, and
density of complicating elements.
   Molecular complexity is important to strategy selection. For each type of
molecular complexity there is a collection of general strategies for dealing
with that complexity. For instance, in the case of a complex polycyclic
structure, strategies for the simplification of the molecular network, i.e.
topological strategies, must play an important part in transform selection.
However, the most efficient mode of retrosynthetic analysis lies not in the
separate application of individual strategies, but in the concurrent applica-
tion of as many different independent strategies as possible.
   The major types of strategies7 which are of value in retrosynthetic analysis
may be summarized briefly as follows.8
  1. Transform-based strategies - long range search or look-ahead to apply
     a powerfully simplifying transform (or a tactical combination of sim-
     plifying transforms) to a TGT with certain appropriate keying fea-
     tures. The retron required for application of a powerful transform
     may not be present in a complex TGT and a number of antithetic steps
     (subgoals) may be needed to establish it.
  2. Structure-goal strategies - directed at the structure of a potential
     intermediate or potential starting material. Such a goal greatly nar-
     rows a retrosynthetic search and allows the application of bidirectional
     search techniques.
  3. Topological strategies - the identification of one or more individual
     bond disconnections or correlated bond-pair disconnections as strate-
     gic. Topological strategies may also lead to the recognition of a key
     substructure for disassembly or to the use of rearrangement trans-
     forms.
  4. Stereochemical strategies - general strategies which clear, i.e. remove,
     stereocenters and stereorelationships under stereocontrol. Such
     stereocontrol can arise from transform-mechanism control or sub-
     strate-structure control. In the case of the former the retron for a
     particular transform contains critical stereochemical information (ab-


690                                  Chemistry 1990


      solute or relative) on one or more stereocenters. Stereochemical
      strategies may also dictate the retention of certain stereocenter
      during retrosynthetic processing or the joining of atoms in three-
      dimensional proximity. A major function of stereochemical strategies
      is the achievement of an experimentally valid clearance of stereo-
      centers, including clearance of molecular chirality.
   5. Functional group-based strategies. The retrosynthetic reduction of
      molecular complexity involving functional groups (FG’s) takes various
      forms. Single FG’s or pairs of FG’s (and the interconnecting atom
      path) can key directly the disconnection of a TGT skeleton to form
      simpler molecules or signal the application of transforms which re-
      place functional groups by hydrogen. Functional group interchange
      (FGI) is a commonly used tactic for generating the retrons of simplify-
      ing transforms from a TGT. FG’s may key transforms which stereo-
      selectively remove stereocenters, break topologically strategic bonds
      or join proximate atoms to form rings.
   6. “Other” types of strategies. The recognition of substructural units
      within a TGT which represent major obstacles to synthesis often
      provides major strategic input. Certain other strategies result from
      the requirements of a particular problem, for example a requirement
      that several related target structures be synthesized from a common
      intermediate. A TGT which resists retrosynthetic simplification may
      require the invention of new chemical methodology. The recognition
      of obstacles to synthesis provides a stimulus for the discovery of such
      novel processes. The application of a chain of hypotheses to guide the
      search for an effective line of retrosynthetic analysis is important.
   Other strategies deal with optimization of a synthetic design after a set of
pathways has been generated antithetically, specifically for the ordering of
synthetic steps, the use of protection or activation steps, or the determina-
tion of alternate paths.
   Systematic and rigorous retrosynthetic analysis is the broad principle of
synthetic problem solving under which the individual strategies take their
place. Another overarching idea is the use concurrently of as many indepen-
dent strategies as possible to guide the search for retrosynthetic pathways.
The greater the number of strategies which are used in parallel to develop a line o f
analysis, the easier the analysis and the simpler the emerging synthetic plan is likely
to be. 10
   An abbreviated form of the 1957 retrosynthetic plan for the synthesis of
longifolene (1) is shown in Chart I. Changes in the retrosynthetic direction
are indicated by a double arrow       to distinguish them from the synthetic
direction of chemical reactions        and the number below indicates the
number of transforms required for the retrosynthetic change if greater than
one. The selection of transforms was initially guided by a topological
strategy (disconnection of bond a in 1). The Michael transform, which
simplifies structure 2 to precursor 3, can be found by general transform
selection procedures. 5,9, The starting materials for the synthesis which


                                   E.J. Corey,                             691


emerge from retrosynthetic analysis, 4 and 5, have little resemblance to the
target structure 1.
  A detailed explanation of this example of retrosynthetic analysis has been
given. 6b, 10 During the past 20 years systematic retrosynthetic thinking has
permeated all areas of carbogenic synthesis. It is no longer possible to teach
the subject of carbogenic synthesis effectively without the extensive use of
retrosynthetic concepts and thinking.




                                   Chart I


Computer-Assisted Retrosynthtic Analysis
The use of computers to generate possible pathways for chemical synthesis,
which was first demonstrated in the 1960's, 4,5,9,11 was made possible by the
development of the retrosynthetic methods outlined above and the re-
quired computer methodology. Graphical input of structures by hand draw-
ing using an electrostatic tablet and stylus, in the natural manner of a
chemist, and output to a video terminal4,12 provided an extraordinarily
simple and effective interface between chemist and machine. Chemical
structures were represented in the machine by means of atom and bond
tables, and manipulated by appropriate instructions. Algorithms were de-
vised for perception by machine of structural features, patterns, and sub-
units which are needed for synthetic analysis. Techniques were developed
for storage and retrieval of information on chemical transforms (including
retron recognition and keying) using a higher level “chemical English”
language. The program (LHASA) was designed to be interactive, with any
level of control or input desired by the user, and to emulate the problem-


692



                  I




       Chart II




      Chart III


                                   E. J. Corey                              693


solving approaches of synthetic chemists. The chemical knowledge base,
written so as to be intelligible to a practicing chemist, contains all the types
of information required for generation and evaluation of retrosynthetic
changes, for example, data on individual transforms and their mechanisms,
scope, and limitations. The performance of the program is below that which
should eventually be possible because of the immensity of the task and the
modest size of our research effort. However, despite present limitations,
including a modest knowledge base of about 2000 transforms, LHASA is
capable of providing interesting suggestions of synthetic pathways for chal-
lenging targets. The present level of capability of LHASA can best be
appreciated by its performance on specific problems. Shown in Chart II is
the EXTGT tree generated by LHASA for the antiviral agent aphidicolin,
using just one particular line of analysis. The pathway in this tree from
intermediates 332 and 333 to aphidicolin consists of the structures shown in
Chart III.13 The suggestion by LHASA of such non-obvious pathways is
both stimulating and valuable to a chemist.
   The field of computer assisted synthetic analysis is fascinating in its own
right, and surely one of the most interesting problems in the area of
machine intelligence. Because of the enormous memory and speed of
modern machines and the probability of continuing advances, it seems clear
that computers can play an important role in synthetic design. However,
before that potential can be realized, many difficult computing problems
must be solved. Multistep retrosynthetic look-ahead, even under strategic
guidance, requires complex and powerful software. Vast amounts of infor-
mation - structural, stereochemical, and chemical - must be generated and
analyzed using all available chemical knowledge. A massive undertaking will
be required.

New Synthetic Methodology and Multistep Synthesis of Complex Molecules
The invention of new reactions and reagents has revolutionized the field of
carbogenic synthesis, literally placing an extraordinarily powerful new
chemistry alongside the classical reactions of the pre-1950 period. Without
this methodology, the achievements of modern chemical synthesis would
not have been possible. Two early landmarks in this advance, the discovery
of the Wittig synthesis of olefins and the hydroboration of olefins, were
highlighted by the award of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for 1979 to G.
Wittig and H. C. Brown. More recent developments have provided many
methods which are noteworthy for their great chemical selectivity and
stereochemical control and for their suitability in the construction of com-
plex molecules. Indeed, many new synthetic processes have been discovered
as a result of a perceived need in connection with specific problems involv-
ing novel or complicated structures and a deliberate search for suitable
methodology. The rational design of such methods depends on the use of
mechanistic reaction theory, stereochemical principles, and a wide range of
chemistry involving many elements and ephemeral reactive intermediates.
  A key to the success of many of the multistep chemical syntheses which


694                               Chemistry 1990




                                                                        8




have been demonstrated in our laboratories over the years has been the
invention of new methodology. Since more than fifty such methods have
been developed in our laboratory, it is impossible to summarize this aspect
of synthetic research in a brief article. However, a few examples may serve
to illustrate the effectiveness of these new methods in providing access to
rare and valuable carbogenic compounds and their impact on the whole
field of chemical synthesis.
   The discovery and identification of the insect juvenile hormone of Cecro-
pia, now known as JH-I)14 in 1967 generated immense interest because of
the potential of such nontoxic compounds for insect control.” Chemical
synthesis was essential because of the extreme paucity of material from
natural sources. Despite the apparent simplicity of structure 6, a stereospe-
cific route for the synthesis was not obvious, because no general methods
existed in 1967 for the stereocontrolled generation of the trisubstituted
olefinic units which it contains. The first stereospecific synthesis of 6 16 was
possible using new methodology which was specifically devised for this


                                   E.J. Coy                                695


application. An abbreviated version of the synthesis is shown in Chart IV.
The first olefinic intermediate (7) was synthesized                         in
a way which guarantees the Z-configuration of the stereocenter. Reaction of
8 with LiAlH4 (trans hydroalumination) followed by iodine (replacement of
Al by I) produced 9 stereospecifically by a novel sequence. 16 The replace-
ment of iodine in 9 by ethyl was effected by another new process, cross
coupling of a vinylic iodide with an organocopper reagent, which provided
10 stereospecifically. A completely analogous series of reactions converted
10 to triene 11, from which JH-I (6) was obtained by a novel selective
oxidation sequence. Thus, the synthesis outlined in Chart IV depended on
no less than four new synthetic methods. Three of these methods have come
into very general use. The coupling of carbon groups using organocopper
chemistry is now a major method of chemical synthesis. 17 The related
carbometallation of acetylenes, also developed in connection with the syn-
thesis of 6,16b,18 has been extended in many directions, and this approach
has become commonplace for the stereospecific construction of trisubsti-
tuted double bonds, a frequently occurring type of structural unit in
biologically active natural substances.
   The ready availability of the insect juvenile hormone 6 permitted a wide
range of biological studies and an understanding of the best ways of using
such “third generation” agents for insect control. Inexpensive synthetic
mimics of insect juvenile hormone are now produced commercially as
environmentally safe insect control products.
   Numerous naturally occurring microbial substances, especially antibiot-
ics, are members of the “macrolide” structural family and contain a lactone
functional group as part of a many membered ring. The key to the success-
ful synthesis of complex macrolides such as erythronolide B (12), the
precursor of the erythromycin antibiotics, was the development of new
methodology for macrolactone ring formation (Chart V). Our group devel-
oped a very mild, effective and general method for this synthetic operation,
the double-activation method, 19 which subsequently has been widely used.
Thio-ester 13, produced by total synthesis, 20 was converted to macrolactone
15 simply by heating in toluene solution. Internal proton transfer in 13
generates the internal ion pair 14, which is doubly activated for the internal
carbonyl addition required for ring closure to 15. Erythronolide B was
obtained from 15 by a simple reaction sequence.20 The double-activation
method has been used effectively for the synthesis of a number of other
remarkable natural macrocyclic lactones (Chart V) including brefeldin A
(16), an inhibitor of protein transport and processing in mammalian cells, 21
the microbial iron transporter enterobactin (17),22 and the marine eicosa-
noid, hybridalactone (18).23
   Bilobalide (19) is a complex and unusual molecule produced by the
ginkgo tree, Ginkgo biloba. An effective synthesis of 19 was made possible by
the development of a remarkable reaction for the formation of five-mem-
bered rings (Chart VI).24 The readily available chiral diester 20 was convert-
ed by Claisen acylation to the acetylenic keto diester 21. Treatment of 21


                                  Chemistry 1990


                     OH




               16                     17


                                    Chart V




with base effected a novel ring closure to give the bicyclic ketone 22, which
was then transformed into bilobalide (19) by a multistep sequence. There
are several variants on this cyclization methodology which demonstrate
considerable scope.25


                                   E. J. Corey                              697


   A wide range of reagents and reactants have played a role in the new
methodology developed in our group: transition metals; metal-ion complex-
es; and silico, sulfo, boro, alumino, phospho, and stanno carbogens. The
new general methods which have resulted include processes for ring forma-
tion, chain extension, oxidation, reduction, functional group transforma-
tion, activation, protection, and stereochemical control.




                                  Chart VI

Multistep Synthesis - General
To a synthetic chemist, the complex molecules of nature are as beautiful as
any of her other creations. The perception of that beauty depends on the
understanding of chemical structures and their transformations, and, as
with a treasured work of art, deepens as the subject is studied, perhaps even
to a level approaching romance. It is no wonder that the synthetic chemist
of today is filled with joy by the discovery of a new naturally occurring
structure and the appearance of yet another challenge to synthesis. It makes
no difference that the realization of a difficult synthesis entails long hours
of study, thought and physical effort, since a complex chemical synthesis is
an exciting adventure which leads to a beautiful creation. I believe that the
case for molecular synthesis, as a high intellectual endeavor and as a
scientific art form, can stand on these merits. The chemist who designs and
completes an original and esthetically pleasing multistep synthesis is like the
composer, artist or poet who, with great individuality, fashions new forms
of beauty from the interplay of mind and spirit.
   It is fortunate that molecular synthesis also serves the utilitarian function
of producing quantities of rare or novel substances which satisfy human
needs, especially with regard to health, and the scientific function of stimu-
lating research and education throughout the whole discipline of chemistry.
   Our research group has been responsible for the creation of more than
one hundred new multistep syntheses of interesting molecules, our sonatas
and string quartets. The step-by-step construction of most of these targets
of synthesis is outlined in the “Logic of Chemical Synthesis”7 and is discussed
in detail in the original research papers referred to therein. The structures
of a small, and somewhat random, selection of these synthetic targets are
shown in Charts VII a and VII b. A few comments will be given here on the
syntheses of each of these to provide an overview of this aspect of our
research.


698                               Chemistry 1990


   Maytansine 26a and aplasmomycin, each scarce and therapeutically in-
                                        26b



teresting, were synthesized enantioselectively and with control of stereoche-
mistry using novel methodology for assembling the molecular skeleton and
for forming the macrocyclic unit. These syntheses and that of erythronolide
B provided early demonstrations that such complex, macrocyclic mole-
  19 26c



cules can be made efficiently by multistep total synthesis.
   Gibberellic acid resisted total synthesis, despite studies in several leading
laboratories, for more than two decades because of an unusually forbidding
arrangement of structural subunits. The first successful synthesis, and
subsequent improved versions, required a deep and complex retrosyn-
                                   26d



thetic analysis and a number of new concepts and methods. An entirely
                26e



different strategic approach was utilized for the first synthesis of the biosyn-
thetically related plant regulator antheridic acid26f which confirmed the
proposed gross structure and clarified the stereochemistry. The availability
of synthetic antheridic acid is essential to the further study of this rare and
potent plant hormone.




                  Maytansine                           Aplasmomycin




      Gibberellic Acid              Antheridic Acid             Forskolin

                                     Chart VII a

  Forskolin, the first known activator of the enzyme adenylate cyclase, is a
promising therapeutic agent which is available only in limited quantity from
plant sources. An efficient multistep synthesis of forskolin, which is both
enantio- and stereocontrolled, has been developed26g based on several new
synthetic methods. The synthesis of picrotoxinin, known since 1811 and a
potent inhibitor of the neurotransmitter                    acid, would not
have been possible without retrosynthetic analysis and new methodology.26h
Perhydrohistrionicotoxin, a rare and highly bioactive alkaloid from poison-


                                  E.J. Corey                              699


ous frogs, is a useful tool in neuroscience which was easily produced by total
synthesis. 26i
   Pseudopterosin E,26j a powerful antiinflammatory agent, and venusta-
triol, 26k an antiviral agent, are biosynthesized by marine organisms in only
trace amounts. Both are available in chiral form by efficient enantiocon-
trolled multistep syntheses.
   Last, but no means least, in this brief summary of our studies on the total
synthesis of complex molecules, is the case of ginkgolide B, an unusual
substance for several reasons. Ginkgolide B is biosynthesized in the roots of
the unique and ancient ginkgo tree, Ginkgo biloba, by an extraordinarily
complex biosynthetic process, for reasons that are unknown. It is an active




                                               A

                                                   Venustatriol
                                                                    0




                                                          Ginkgolide B

                                    Chart VII b

 ingredient in the medicinal extract of ginkgo which is now widely used in
 oriental and western medicine. The total synthesis of ginkgolide B posed a
 challenge for synthesis in the 1980’s which was comparable to the most
 difficult problems of earlier eras, for example, steroids in the 1950’s or
 vitamin B-12 and gibberellic acid in the 1970’s. That challenge was met in
just three years of research, thanks again to the power of modern retro-
 synthetic planning and to the invention of new tools for this particular


700                                Chemistry 1990


Multistep Synthesis Exemplified - The Prostaglandins
The prostaglandins, the first of the known eicosanoids, were detected as
bioactive substances more than fifty years ago. However, it was not until the
pioneering work of K. Sune Bergström and his group in Sweden in the
 1950’s and 1960’s that the structures of the various members of the pros-
taglandin family were determined.28 For that research Bergström and Bengt
Samuelsson received (together with John Vane) the Nobel Prize in Medicine
for 1982, and deservedly so since, as has been written of the prostaglandins:
“Their actions and the pharmacologic agents that influence their formation
affect almost every aspect of medical practice.“29 The occurrence of only
trace amounts of prostaglandins (PC’s) in mammalian sources and the
potent effect of these twenty-carbon carboxylic compounds on muscle and
blood vessels indicated the need for an effective synthesis that would make
available all of the PG’s in ample amounts for the study of their physiologic
effects and therapeutic uses. The problem of chemical synthesis was compli-
cated by uncertainties regarding the stability and chemistry of PG’s, and the
existence of three different families                 and         each consisting
of several members. The first total synthesis of the principal PG’s, demon-
strated by 1967,30,31 made available the important members of the first
family (PGA1, PGE1 and             and allowed an evaluation of their chemical
properties which facilitated the design of a general synthetic route to all of
the prostaglandins. This general synthesis of prostaglandins provided access
to all PG’s from a single intermediate, commonly known as the Corey
lactone aldehyde. 32,33 In various forms this flexible synthesis has been used
by laboratories all over the world to prepare not only naturally occurring
PG’s but also countless structural analogs on any scale.34
   The original version of the 1969 general synthesis of PG’s is summarized
briefly in Chart VIII. The bicycloheptenone 23 was synthesized stereospeci-
fically by a novel Cu(II) catalyzed Diels-Alder reaction followed by alkaline
hydrolysis of the resulting adduct. Alkaline peroxide converted 23 to the
hydroxy acid 24 which was readily resolved using (+)-ephedrine. Lactoniza-
tion and functional group interchange operations transformed 24 into the
Corey lactone aldehyde 25, a versatile precursor of all of the PG’s and
analogs thereof. Enone 26 (Am = C5H11), produced stereospecilically from
25 by Horner-Emmons coupling, upon reduction with zinc borohydride
generated the required 15-(S)-alcohol along with the 15-(R)-diastereomer
which was separated and recycled via 26 to the 15-(S)-alcohol. Protection of
the hydroxyl groups at C(11) and C(15) afforded the corresponding biste-
trahydropyranyl (bis THP) ether, 27. Reduction of the lactone function of
27 to lactol (R2AIH) and Wittig coupling produced 28 stereospecifically.
Acidic hydrolysis of 28 afforded                (30), whereas oxidation of 28
followed by hydrolysis gave PGE2(29). Hydrogenation of the 5,6-double
bond in 28 followed by these same final steps produced               and PGE1. A
parallel series of transformations was used to convert 25 to                 and
PGE 3.
   Although the 1969 bicycloheptenone route to PG’s was highly effective


                                 E.J. Corey                             701




                                               23




          27                              26




                                Chart VIII


for the synthesis on a large scale, it was not the ultimate. The Diels-Alder
route to 23 produced racemic material which in turn necessitated the
resolution of hydroxy acid 24. Another problem was the lack of stereospeci-
ficity in the reduction of the C(15) keto group of 26. Both of these
limitations were overcome by the invention of novel methodology which has
simultaneously opened up large new areas of synthetic endeavor.
   The problem of controlling the stereochemistry of reduction of the 15-
keto group in 26 was solved in a number of different ways (Chart IX). First,
 the use of a bulky trialkylborohydride reagent with a suitably chosen “con-
 troller” group at the C(11) oxygen, for example phenylcarbamoyl, resulted


702                              Chemistry 1990




                                  Chart IX

in reduction of C(15) to give the required 15-(S) product with greater than
10:1 diastereoselectivity.
                           33,35
                                 Further, the small amount of 15-(R) by-prod-
uct was easily separated for recycling. Second, using the chiral catalyst 33
(10 mole %) and borane (0.6 mole equivalent) in tetrahydrofuran as solvent
at ambient temperature, the 15-ketone 34 was reduced to the 15-(S) alcohol
35 with 9: 1 diastereoselectivity.33,36
   Oxazaborolidine 33 is a remarkable catalytic reagent. It controls the
absolute stereochemistry of reduction of a large variety of ketones in
addition to accelerating the rate of reduction by borane. The absolute
stereochemistry of the reduction product of an achiral ketone RsCORL,
where RS is smaller than RL, is predictable.37,38 The observed catalysis and
enantioselectivity are in accord with the mechanism outlined in Chart X.
The catalyst 33 has been shown to complex with borane stereospecifically to
give a species which is activated for binding to the ketonic substrate.
Complexation at the sterically more available lone pair of the carbonyl
oxygen and internal hydride transfer then leads to the observed enantio-
merit secondary alcohol. In this mechanism the reagent 33 literally acts like
a molecular robot: It first picks up and holds one of the reactants, BH3, and
becomes activated toward the other. It attaches to the ketone in a precise
three dimensional assembly that facilitates a transfer of hydrogen between
the two reactants to form a specific enantiomer of the reduction product.
The molecular robot finally discharges these products and repeats the
reaction cycle. Such action by the small molecule 33 resembles catalysis by
enzymes, which can also be regarded as molecular robots. Of course, 33
lacks the substrate-shape and size discrimination of enzymes because it is
too small to possess a binding pocket or distal multicontact recognition
sites.
   The action of the molecular robot 33 represents a new direction for
chemical synthesis. In the past, most synthetic constructions have depended


                                    E.J. Corey                                 703




                            Me




                                       Chart X

on pairwise collisions between reactants without the help of a robot-like
assembler. It is likely that synthetic chemistry will produce many new
molecular robots in the future as a part of its advance to greater heights.
   Two solutions were developed for the enantioselective synthesis of bicy-
cloheptenone 23 (Chart VIII) of the correct chirality for the production of
natural prostaglandins. In the first of these, a stereocontrolled aluminium
chloride-catalyzed Diels-Alder reaction between benzyloxymethylcyclopen-
tadiene (37) (Chart XI) and the acrylate ester of S-phenylmenthol (36) was
used with the result that the required adduct 38 was formed with very high
(32: 1) enantioselectivity. Adduct 38 was converted via ketone 23 to iodo
                             39



lactone 39 which was obtained in enantiomerically pure form in high yield
by a single recrystallization and converted to the standard PG intermediate
40. In addition, 8-phenylmenthol was recovered efficiently. The enantiose-
lective formation of 38 can be understood from the geometry shown for the
complex         1 C 1 3 and the steric screening by phenyl of the si (rear) face of
the acrylate                bond. The efficiency of the S-phenylmenthol con-
troller stimulated the development of other controllers (chiral auxiliaries)
for use in enantioselective synthesis.40
   More recently, this achievement has been surpassed by the development
of a molecular robot which assembles the achiral components, as shown in
Chart XII, to give the required Diels-Alder adduct in 94 % yield and almost
 50: 1 enantioselectivity. Conversion to enantiomerically pure iodolac-
                           38,41



tone 39 was accomplished using standard procedures. 42
   The general synthesis of prostaglandins by the 1969 pathway can now be
 carried out efficiently and with total stereochemical control, in a way that
could not have been foreseen twenty years ago. Such progress augurs well


 704                              Chemistry 1990




                 +




                                 Chart XII

for the future of chemical synthesis. It is not unlikely that today’s chemical
synthesis, magnificent as it may now appear, will prove to be rudimentary as
compared to that of the next century.
  The trail of research which originated with the synthesis of prostaglandins
was followed for more than two decades, eventually including the synthesis


                                  E. J. Corey                             705




                 41                                    42




            OH




of many other members of the eicosanoid (twenty-carbon) class of mamma-
lian cell regulators. A few of the highlights of this program deserve men-
tion. The biosynthesis of prostaglandins occurs by the oxidative conversion
of the C20 unsaturated acid arachidonic acid to the bicyclic endoperoxide
PGH 2, which serves as a precursor not only of PGE 2 and         but also of
PGI2 and thromboxane A2. We were able to synthesize a stable, active azo
                           43



analog (41) of the unstable PGH 2 (Chart XIII) and stable, active analogs
                                   4 4



(e.g. 42) of the unstable thromboxane A2,45 as well as PGI2 itself (43).46 In
1977 we suggested the structure of the unstable eicosanoid which is known
as leukotriene A4 (LTA 4) (44) and, by early 1979, had synthesized that
structure in advance of isolation from natural sources. 47 Collaborative
research between our group and the Karolinska team headed by Bengt
Samuelsson established that LTA4 combines with glutathione to form the
primary “slow reacting substance, ” now known as LTC4 (45). The detailed
                                                             47



stereochemistry of the chemotactic leukotriene LTB4 (46) was first estab-
lished by synthesis. The chemical syntheses of these leukotrienes made
                    47,48



these compounds available in quantity for the many hundreds of biological


706                                   Chemistry 1990

studies which ensued. Useful new compounds which are active as antago-
nists of       49
                  thromboxane A2, 50 and LTB4,51 and as inhibitors of leuko-
triene biosynthesis 5 2 have also emerged from our synthetic program.
   It is my hope that our studies in the eicosanoid field 34 will prove to be a
harbinger of future programs in academic synthetic research, since there is
an unparalleled opportunity for the application of chemical synthesis to
biological and medical problems at a fundamental level.

Acknowledgement
It gives me great pleasure to express my indebtedness to many individuals
who deserve credit for the accomplishments summarized herein: my teach-
ers at the Lawrence High School and the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology, my colleagues at the University of Illinois and Harvard University,
my wonderful collaborators in research, and my very dear family. Research
grants from the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of
Health, Pfizer Inc. and numerous other donors have provided the necessary
financial support.


REFERENCES
 1. N. Anand, J. S. Bindra, and S. Ranganathan, Art in Organic Synthesis (Holden-
     Day, Inc., San Francisco, first edition, 1970). This book contains a summary of
     these and other noteworthy syntheses of the period 1940- 1970.
 2. R. B. Woodward, Les Prix Nobel en 1965, (Almquist and Wiksell, Intl., Stock-
     holm, 1966) p. 192.
 3. E. J. Corey, Pure and Applied Chem., 14, 19 (1967).
 4. E. J. Corey and W. T. Wipke, Science, 166, 178 (1969).
 5. E. J. Corey, Quart. Rev. Chem. Soc., 25, 455 (1971).
 6. (a) E. J. Corey, M. Ohno, P. A. Vatakencherry, and R. B. Mitra, ]. Am. Chem.
     Soc., 83, 1251 (1961); (b) idem. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 86, 478 (1964).
 7. E. J. Corey and X.-M. Cheng, The Logic of Chemical Synthesis (John Wiley and
     Sons, Inc., New York, 1989).
 8. This section is essentially taken from ref. 7.
 9. E. J. Corey, R. D. Cramer, III, and W. J. Howe, J. Am. Chem. Soc ., 94, 440
     (1972).
10. Ref. 7, Chapter 6.
11. E. J. Corey, A. K. Long, and S. D. Rubenstein, Science , 228, 408 (1985).
12. E. J. Corey, W. T. Wipke, R. D. Cramer, III, and W. J. Howe, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
     94, 421 (1972).
13. This computer analysis was performed by Mr. John Kappos of our LHASA
     group.
14. H. Roller, K.-H. Dahm, C. C. Sweeley, and B. M. Trost, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
     Engl., 6, 179 (1967).
15. S. S. Tobe and B. Stay, Adv. Insect. Physiol., 18, 305 (1985).
16. (a) E. J. Corey, J. A. Katzenellenbogen, N. W. Gilman, S. A. Roman, and B. W.
     Erickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 90, 5618 (1968); (b) E. J. Corey, Bull. Soc. Ent.
     Suisse, 44, 87 (1971); (c) Ref. 7, p. 146; (d) E. J. Corey and G. H. Posner, J. Am.
     Chem. Soc., 89, 3911 (1967).
17. G. H. Posner, An Introduction to Organic Synthesis Using Organocopper Reagents
     (John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1980).
18. E. J. Corey and J. A. Katzenellenbogen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 91, 1851 (1969).


                                        E.J. Corey                                    707


19. (a) E. J. Corey and K. C. Nicolaou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 96, 5614 (1974); (b) E. J.
     Corey, K. C. Nicolaou, and L. S. Melvin, Jr., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 97, 654 (1975);
      (c) E. J. Corey, D. J. Brunelle, and P. J. Stork, Tetrahedron Lett., 3405 (1976); (d)
      E. J. Corey and D. J. Brunelle, Tetrahedron Lett., 3409 (1976).
20. E. J. Corey, S. Kim, S.-e. Yoo, K. C. Nicolaou, L. S. Melvin, Jr., D.J. Brunelle,
     J. R. Falck, E. J. Trybulski, R. Lett, and P. W. Sheldrake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 100,
     4620 (1978).
21. (a) E. J.Corey and R. H. Wollenberg, Tetrahedron Lett., 4705 (1976); (b) E. J.
     Corey, R. H. Wollenberg, and D. R. Williams, Tetrahedron Lett., 2243 (1977);
      E. J. Corey and P. Carpino, Tetrahedron Lett., 31, 7555, 1990.
22. E. J. Corey and S. Bhattacharyya, Tetrahedron Lett., 3919 (1977).
23. E. J. Corey and B. De, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 106, 2735 (1984).
24. (a) E. J. Corey and W.-g. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 109, 7534 (1987); (b) E. J. Corey
     and W.-g. Su, Tetrahedron Lett., 29, 3423 (1988).
25. (a) E. J. Corey, W.-g. Su, and I. N. Houpis, Tetrahedron Lett., 27, 5951 (1986); (b)
     E. J. Corey and W.-g. Su, Tetrahedron Lett., 28 , 5241 (1987).
26. (a) Ref. 7, pp. 116-123; (b) ref. 7, pp. 128-133; (c) ref. 7, pp. 104-107; (d)
     ref. 7, pp. 205-211; (e) ref. 7, pp. 84-85; (f) ref. 7, pp. 212-214; (g) ref. 7,
     pp. 230-233; (h) ref. 7, pp. 86-87, 178-179; (i) ref. 7, pp. 83-84, 136-
      137; (j) ref. 7, pp. 237-238; (k) ref. 7, pp. 234-236; (1) ref. 7, pp. 89-91;
     221-226.
27. E. J. Corey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 17, 111 (1988).
28. S. Bergstrom, Science, 157, 382 (1967).
29. J. A. Oats, G. A. Fitzgerald, R. A. Branch, E. K. Jackson, H. R. Knapp, and L. J.
      Roberts, II, New Eng. J. Med. , 319, 689 (1988).
30. (a) E. J. Corey, N. H. Andersen, R. M. Carlson, J. Paust, E. Vedejs, I. Vlattas,
     and R. E. K. Winter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 90, 3245 (1968); (b) E. J. Corey, I.
     Vlattas, N. H. Andersen, and K. Harding, J. Am. Chem. SOc, 90,3247 (1968); (c)
      E. J. Corey, I. Vlattas, and K. Harding, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 91, 235 (1969); (d)
      E. J. Corey, Ann. New York Acad. Sci., 180, 24 (1971).
31. Ref. 7, pp. 250-254.
32. (a) E. J. Corey, N. M. Weinshenker, T. K. Schaaf, and W. Huber, J. Am. Chem.
     Soc., 91, 5675 (1969); (b) E. J. Corey, T. K. Schaaf, W. Huber, U. Koelliker, and
      N. M. Weinshenker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 92,397 (1970); (c) E. J. Corey, R. Noyori,
     and T. K. Schaaf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 92, 2586 (1970).
33. Ref. 7, pp. 255-296.
34. For another general account of this project and subsequent studies on eicosan-
     oids, see E. J. Corey, Japan Prize in Science for 1989, Annual Report of the
     Science and Technology Foundation of Japan, pp. 95 - 109, 1989.
35. E. J. Corey, S. M. Albonico, U. Koelliker, T. K. Schaaf, and R. K. Varma, J. Am .
     Chem. Soc. , 93, 1491 (1971).
36. E. J. Corey, R. K. Bakshi, S. Shibata, C.-P. Chen, and V. K. Singh, J. Am. Chem.
     Soc., 109, 7925 (1987).
37. E. J. Corey, R. K. Bakshi, and S. Shibata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 109, 555,       (1987).
38. E. J. Corey, Pure and Appl. Chem., 62, 1209 (1990).
39. E. J. Corey and H. E. Ensley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 97, 6908 (1975).
40. (a) W. Oppolzer, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 23, 876 (1984); (b) G. Helmchen,
     R. Karge, and J. Weetman, Modern Synthetic Methods Vol. 4 (Springer-Verlag,
     Berlin, 1986), R. Scheffold, ed., p. 261.
4 1. E. J. Corey, R. Imwinkelried, S. Pikul, and Y. B. Xiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 111,
     5493 (1989).
42. E. J. Corey and N. Imai, Tetrahedron Lett , in press (1991).
43. N. A. Nelson, R. C. Kelly, and R. A. Johnson, Chem. Eng. News, 60, 30 (1982).
44. (a) E. J. Corey, K. C. Nicolaou, Y. Machida, C. L. Malmsten, and B. Samuelsson,


708                                   Chemistry 1990


     Proc. Nut. Acad. Sci. USA, 72, 3355 (1975); (b) E. J. Corey, K. Narasaka, and M.
     Shibasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 98, 6417 (1976).
45. (a) T. K. Schaaf, D. L. Bussolotti, M. J. Parry, and E. J. Corey, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
     103, 6502 (1981); (b) E. J. Corey and W.-g. Su, Tetrahedron Lett., 31, 2677
     (1990).
46. E. J. Corey, G. E. Keck, and I. Szekely, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 99, 2006 (1977); (b)
     E. J. Corey, H. L. Pearce, I. Szekely, and M. Ishiguro, Tetrahedron Lett., 1023
     (1978).
47. (a) E. J. Corey, Experientia, 38, 1259 (1982); (b) Ref. 7, pp. 312-317; (c) E. J.
     Corey, Y. Arai, and C. Mioskowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 101,6748 (1979); (d) E. J.
     Corey, D. A. Clark, G. Goto, A. Marfat, C. Mioskowski, B. Samuelsson,
     S. Hammarstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 102, 1436, 3663 (1980).
48. (a) E. J. Corey, A. Marfat, G. Goto, and F. Brion, J. Am. Chem. Sac., 102, 7984
     (1980); (b) E. J. Corey, A. Marfat, J. E. Munroe, K. S. Kim, P.B. Hopkins, and
     F. Brion, Tetrahedron Lett., 22, 1077 (1981).
49. R. B. Stinger, T. M. Fitzpatrick, E. J. Corey, P. W. Ramwell, J. C. Rose, and P.
     A. Kot, J. Pharm. Exp. Ther., 220, 521 (1982).
50. E. J. Corey and W.-g. Su, Tetrahedron Lett., 31, 3833 (1990).
51. H. J. Showell, I. G. Otterness, A. Marfat, and E. J. Corey, Biochem. Biophys. Res.
     Commun., 106, 741 (1982).
52. Ref. 7, pp. 345 - 352.
