192

















Innovation by Evolution: Bringing New Chemistry to Life
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2018 by Frances H. Arnold
California Institute of Technology, USA.

Frances H. Arnold  Lecture             193


I  AM  A  CHEMIST  AND  ENGINEER who looks upon the living world with the deepest admiration. 
Nature, herself a brilliant chemist and by far the best engineer of all time, invented life that 
has flourished for billions of years under an astonishing range of conditions. I am among the many 
inspired by the beauty and remarkable capabilities of living systems, the breathtaking  range of 
chemical transformations they have invented, the complexity and myriad roles of the products. I am 
in awe of the exquisite specificity and efficiency with which Nature assembles these products from 
simple, abundant, and renewable starting materials.
Where does this chemistry come from? It derives from enzymes, the DNA-encoded  protein catalysts 
that make life possible, molecular machines that perform chemistry no human has matched or 
mastered.

EVOLUTION,  A GRAND  DIVERSITY-GENERATING MACHINE
Equally awe-inspiring is the process by which Nature created these enzyme catalysts and in fact 
everything else in the biological world. The process is evolution, the grand diversity-generating 
machine that created all life on earth, starting more than three billion years ago. Responsible for 
adapta- tion, optimization, and innovation in the living world, evolution executes  a simple 
algorithm of diversification and natural selection, an algorithm that works at all levels of 
complexity from single protein molecules to whole ecosystems. No comparably powerful design process 
exists in the world of human engineering.
I wanted to engineer Nature's enzymes to make ones tailored to, and uniquely suited for, human 
purposes. For close to five thousand years we have made use of microbial enzymes to brew beer and 
leaven bread. Once the protein catalysts were identified and isolated, many more diverse 
applications were devised. Today, enzymes are used to diagnose and treat disease, reduce farm 
waste, enhance textiles and other materials, synthe- size industrial and pharmaceutical chemicals, 
and empower our laundry detergents. But so much more could be achieved if we understood how to 
build new ones.
Early protein engineers struggled mightily with this goal. In those days (the 1980s), we did not 
know enough about how a DNA sequence encodes enzyme function to design enzymes for human 
applications. Unfortu- nately, this is still true: today we can for all practical purposes read, 
write, and edit any sequence of DNA, but we cannot compose it. The code of life is a symphony, 
guiding intricate and beautiful parts performed by an untold number of players and instruments. 
Maybe we can cut and paste pieces from nature's compositions,  but we do not know how to write the 
bars for a single enzymic passage. However, evolution does.

194           TH E  NOBEL  PRIZES

EXPLORING  TH E  UNIVERSE  OF POSSIBLE  PROTEINS
Some researchers think of the protein universe as the set of all proteins that Nature has devised. 
But these proteins, relevant to biology, are an infinitesimal fraction of the possible proteins. 
The universe of possible pro- teins, my universe, contains solutions to many of humanity's greatest 
needs: there we will find cures for disease, solutions to energy crises and  a warming world, food 
and clean water for a growing population, and ways to arrest the miseries of aging. I wanted to 
explore this universe to find those proteins that will serve humanity.
But how does one discover a useful protein in the infinitude of possible proteins, a set larger by 
many orders of magnitude than all the particles in the universe? In his fascinating short story, 
the Library ofBabel, Jorge Luis Borges describes a collection comprising all possible books assem- 
bled from an alphabet of letters [1]. Most texts in Borges’ library are gib- berish, and his 
despairing librarians, for all their lifelong efforts, cannot locate a single meaningful sentence, 
much less a complete story.
Similarly, most possible protein sequences encode nothing we would recognize as meaningful. Unlike 
Borges’ librarians, however, I am entirely surrounded by proteins with meaningful stories. They are 
everywhere and can literally be scraped from the bottom of my shoe, captured from the air I 
breathe, or extracted from a database. These are the products of billions of years of work 
performed by mutation and natural selection.
And evolution continues to create new ones from these rare functional sequences that were 
themselves discovered by evolution. Thus, I decided to start my exploration by using this gift from 
evolution, the existing functional proteins.
There are thousands of ways to make one change in the amino acid sequence of a protein. There are 
millions of ways to modify it by two changes, and so on — the numbers grow so rapidly that making a 
single copy of each protein altered by only 1% of its sequence would require the weight of the 
world in materials. And the vast majority of these modified sequences are neither usable nor 
useful. The challenge therefore is to dis- cover protein sequences that provide new benefits and 
deliver novel improvements on a thrifty scale of weeks, rather than millennia or eons, and with the 
help of one graduate student rather than that of an army. To outperform  Nature, I needed a 
strategy that sidesteps the despair of the Babel librarians.
John Maynard Smith helped answer this challenge for me in a beautiful paper published in 1970 [2]. 
Consider an ordered space in which any pro- tein sequence is surrounded by neighbors that have a 
single mutation. For evolution to work, he reasoned, there must exist functional proteins adja- 
cent to one another in this space. Although most sequences do not  encode functional proteins, 
evolution will work even ifjust a few mean-

Frances H. Arnold  Lecture           195


ingful proteins lie nearby. Given low levels of random mutation, the filter of natural selection 
can find those sequences that retain function. In fact, many of today's proteins are the products 
of a few billion years of mostly such gradual change. Many of these mutations are neutral and 
change lit- tle, but others can be deleterious. Natural selection picks the wheat from the chaff 
and guides mutating proteins along continuously functional paths through the vast space of 
sequences mostly devoid of function.
But by using evolution I want to make better proteins, proteins that serve my purposes. Thus, 
directed protein evolution becomes a search on a new fitness landscape, where fitness is 
performance and is defined by the artificial selection I impose. This is a landscape whose 
structure we knew very little about in the 1980s. Evolution on a rugged landscape is difficult, as 
mutation propels sequences into crevasses of non-function.
However, latching onto Maynard Smith's argument that proteins evolve on a landscape smooth in at 
least some of its many dimensions, I rea- soned that directed evolution could find and follow 
continuous paths leading to higher fitness [3].

A PROCESS  FOR  EVOLVING  PROTEINS  IN THE  LABORATORY
Science, like all human endeavors, is evolutionary. We progress by adding to and recombining what 
is present. Important developments in the 1980s and 1990s influenced my thinking. Manfred Eigen 
speculated on irt vitro molecular evolution [4], and Gerry Joyce was selecting RNA ‘enzymes’ that 
could cleave DNA from pools of billions, perhaps trillions, of mutated sequences [5]. Error-prone 
PCR (polymerase chain reaction) [5, 6] became a useful tool for random mutagenesis of genes. Jim 
Wells [7] and others demonstrated that beneficial mutations in proteins could be accu- mulated. 
Stuart Kauffman quantified evolutionary trajectories on model fitness landscapes [8], and the 
philosopher Daniel Dennett supplied the conceptual framework that helped me convey the power of 
evolution to others [9].
Protein genotypes and phenotypes do not coexist in one molecule, as they do for RNA, and protein 
fitness landscapes differ fundamentally  from those of RNA. Thus, directed protein evolution would 
require differ- ent strategies and experimental tools. To devise a directed evolution strat- egy 
suitable for enzymes, I started with the fundamental rule: “You get what you screen for.”
We were generating enzymes of interest in recombinant microorgan- isms by inserting genetic 
material that we could mutate in the test tube. We used common microbes like Escherichia coli or 
yeast to produce ‘libraries’ of mutant enzymes to test for desired functions. Since we were making 
enzymes for human applications, we rejected microbial growth or

196           TH E  NOBEL  PRIZES

survival selections favored by microbiologists and geneticists. While those approaches enable a 
straightforward search through thousands and even millions of variants in one experiment, they do 
not meet our criteria of affording function in novel environments, over-expression in a produc- 
tion host, compatibility with new substrates, specific product formation, and so on. Thus, we 
turned to good old-fashioned  analytical chemistry to develop reproducible, reliable screens that 
reported what mattered to us.
To measure what mattered, we were limited to monitoring the few thousand protein variants we could 
express and array in readily available 96-well plates or on a petri dish. Therefore, we could only 
search deeply those sequences one or two mutations away from the starting protein.
Given that such a small change in sequence would be expected to gener- ate only small improvements 
in function, we would have to deploy repro- ducible screening assays capable of finding those rare 
and only slightly improved protein progeny. A desirable mutation might yield only a two- fold 
increase in catalytic activity or a few degrees' step up in melting tem- perature. To achieve 
significant changes, we would have to multiply those benefits over successive generations.
This strategy works well when re-optimizing enzymes for new tasks. While a natural enzyme generally 
performs well in its biological job, it is often less enthusiastic about doing a new job and 
initially works poorly (Figure 1). New demands change the fitness landscape, often knocking a 
protein down from a position that was painstakingly acquired through the work of natural evolution. 
Sequential rounds of random mutation and screening for improved performance, however, can 
accumulate the bene- ficial mutations needed to climb to a new peak.
To illustrate, in the late 1980s my research group started to re-engineer a protease, subtilisin E, 
to perform its hydrolytic reaction under unusual and non-natural conditions. We chose to have the 
enzyme function in high concentrations of a polar organic solvent (dimethylformamide, DMF) that 
causes wild-type subtilisin E to lose most of its activity. We used random mutagenesis and 
screening to recover activity lost by adding low concentrations of DMF, combining the beneficial 
mutations [10].
Emboldened  by these results, Keqin Chen performed iterations of random mutagenesis and screening 
for activity in increasing concentrations of the organic solvent and evolved an enzyme that 
performed as well in 60% DMF as its wild-type parent did in the absence of DMF, a 256-fold increase 
in activity [11].
Strikingly, this enzyme adapted rapidly to a challenge it presumably had not encountered during its 
evolution. Furthermore, the mutations that led to the improved  performance were unexpected. We 
could not explain how mutations located on loops surrounding the enzyme's active site enhanced 
activity in high concentrations of organic solvent, much

Frances H. Arnold Lecture           197


Figure l. An enzyme whose function is opti- mized for its native |ob generally performs poorly in a 
new role. Directed evolution through rounds of mutation and screening can discover changes in 
sequence that improve performance, climbing a new fitness peak.








less plan them in a rational approach to engineering an enzyme with this new capability. But we had 
a process that gave the right result, even if that result would require much more reverse 
engineering to understand fully.
I met Pim Stemmer at a workshop organized  by Stuart Kauffman at the Santa Fe Institute in 1995, 
not long after his landmark “DNA shuffling” paper was published [12]. Pim introduced sex — 
recombination  — as a search strategy for protein evolution and called his method molecular 
breeding, a description I now often use to explain what I do. At Maxygen, the company he started in 
1997 that licensed our technologies, and where I served on the founding Science Advisory Board, 
Pim's vision was grand: he wanted to evolve viruses, metabolic pathways, plant traits, and human 
therapeutics. My focus was entirely on enzymes and getting useful results quickly.
Those results ensued. A few examples of how enzymes could be evolved to accept challenging, 
non-natural substrates [13] or function at high temperatures [14, 15], work of intrepid lab members 
Jeffrey Moore, Huimin Zhao, and Lori Giver, convinced many researchers, especially those in 
industry where deadlines were tight and interest in understand- ing why individual mutations were 
beneficial lagged behind the need for the enzyme. Directed evolution offered a reliable 
optimization algorithm: find a starting enzyme, develop a moderate-throughput assay, and turn the 
crank.
The methods we developed and demonstrated  in the 1990s were adopted rapidly. That decade saw the 
explosive rise of directed evolution in industrial and academic laboratories around the world, 
especially those of Andy Ellington, Manfred Reetz, Uwe Bornscheuer, George Georgiou, Romas 
Kazlauskas, and Don Hilvert, who introduced many novel con- cepts and improvements. In its original 
and in many modified forms, directed evolution produces new gene editing tools, therapeutic 
enzymes,

198     THE NOBEL PRIZES


and enzymes for diagnostics, DNA sequencing and synthesis, imaging, agriculture, textiles, cleaning 
aids, and much more. Some of those devel- opments are detailed in excellent reviews [e.g., 16,17].
What important lessons did we learn about enzymes from the early directed evolution experiments? 
First and foremost, we learned that enzymes can adapt to new challenges. It often takes only a few 
mutations for an enzyme to acquire the targeted trait. We had not known when we started out how 
many generations would be needed to obtain useful changes in function. Nature, after all, takes a 
circuitous route to achieving new properties, combining neutral or even negative mutations with 
bene- ficial ones. Those paths can involve hundreds of changes. Our approach, however, collected 
only adaptive mutations that yield steep changes in function. Useful traits could emerge in less 
than ten, or even five, genera- tions.
We also learned that much remains to be done before we can reliably design good enzymes. Beneficial 
mutations found by directed evolution are often far from the site of catalysis. Even today we 
struggle to explain their effects, and are unable to predict them reliably or easily. Neverthe- 
less, practitioners now enjoy a dependable process for improving enzymes that does not require us 
to understand their structures, folding, or catalytic mechanisms.

EVOLUTION  OF ENZYMES  FOR REACTIONS INVENTED  BY CHEMISTS
What fascinates me today is the evolution of new enzymes. I wish to go beyond optimizing biological 
functions that are already known, and instead bring to life whole new chemistries. But how can one 
create enzymes that catalyze reactions invented by chemists? One cannot go to a biochemical 
database to find enzyme sequences annotated for such trans- formations. For many years, in fact, 
creating new chemistry by directed evolution seemed to me an insurmountable challenge. Enzymes 
position functional groups in exquisite arrangements to bind substrates and stabi- lize reaction 
transition states. For a long time I could not see how my con- servative directed evolution 
strategy of accumulating one or two benefi- cial mutations per generation would create entirely new 
enzyme active sites. Unless, of course, an active site is already largely there...
When innovating, Nature does not invent new active sites de novo. Rather, to support the fight for 
survival or to move into a new niche, emerging enzymes exploit existing catalytic mechanisms and 
machineries [18]. The biological world is replete with proteins whose chemical capa- bilities 
extend well beyond the functions for which they are selected at any given time. These “promiscuous” 
activities can become advanta- geous, such as when a new food source becomes available, and provide

Frances H. Arnold  Lecture              199


the basis for evolution of a new enzyme that gives a fitness advantage to its host [19]. 
Promiscuous functions can also be useful for human appli- cations [20]. If a new catalytic activity 
is already present, even at a low level, our conservative process of accumulating beneficial 
mutations can mold it into a new enzyme. Dan Tawfik, in particular, compellingly demonstrated how 
known promiscuous enzyme activities, sometimes rel- ics of their own ancestral origins, may be 
evolvable in the laboratory [21]. Directed evolution can innovate when the innovation is already 
present. For several years we have capitalized on this realization to create whole fami- lies of 
enzymes that catalyze reactions previously unknown in biology [22].
To explain this process, we turn to the cytochrome P4S0 enzyme fam- ily. Nature draws on P450’s 
highly reactive iron-oxo Compound I (and other intermediates) to perform varied reactions that 
presumably evolved from the promiscuous functions of ancestral P450s (Figure 2). Today, the 
cytochrome P450 family has members that can transfer an oxygen atom to organic molecules to make 
specific hydroxylated compounds or epox- ides, oxidize heteroatoms, nitrate aromatics, and much 
more. The biologi- cal world shaped these enzymes using the diversity-generating machine  of 
evolution, and hundreds of thousands of their sequences are stored in databases.
This magnificent biological diversity now drives laboratory innova- tions. With insights and 
inspiration from chemistry, directed evolution can take us where biology has never gone. For 
instance, if a P450 can














Figure 2. Expanding the scope of P45O chemistry. The cytochrome P45O family, whose members were 
presumably created by gene duplication and natural selection of promis- cuous functions, comprises 
enzymes that use reactive oxygen intermediates to catalyze a wide range of reactions. We reasoned 
that we could expand the scope of P45O chemistry by using synthetic carbene and nitrene precursors 
to drive formation of new reactive intermediates. Directed evolution would be used to mold the 
enzyme, controlling and enhancing new-to-nature activities.

200          TH E  NOBEL  PRIZES

transfer reactive oxygen species to substrates, perhaps it can also be directed to transfer 
reactive nitrogen or carbon species and assemble molecules using efficient strategies hitherto 
unused by biology. To Pedro Coelho and Eric Brustad, members of my lab in 2012, the P450 enzyme's 
reactive Compound I intermediate resembled an iron carbenoid, long used by chemists to transfer 
carbenes to carbon-carbon  double bonds in alkenes, or participate in X-H insertion reactions to 
form new heteroa- tom-carbon bonds (Figure 2). These reactions, unknown in biology, are possible in 
chemistry when humans supply synthetic diazo carbene pre- cursors and transition metal catalysts 
modeled after heme cofactors.
We thought perhaps by offering man-made carbene precursors to heme proteins we could discover 
promiscuous ‘carbene transferase’ activities [23]. If so, we might use directed evolution to draw 
out and improve such biologically irrelevant but synthetically interesting capabilities.
An early achievement for this approach was alkene cyclopropanation, a transformation well known in 
transition metal catalysis but unknown in biology. Inspired by early reports of heme mimics 
catalyzing carbene trans- fer to alkenes in organic solvents, we discovered that iron-heme proteins 
do indeed promote cyclopropanation when provided with diazo carbene pre- cursors and a suitable 
alkene substrate, in water. Furthermore, mutations altered both the activity and the selectivity of 
product formation so that enzymes produced individual cyclopropane stereoisomers [23].
This new reaction has many practical applications. For example, directed evolution resulted in a 
highly efficient enzyme for efficient pro- duction of the chiral cis-cyclopropane precursor to the 
antidepressant medication levomilnacipran [24]. We and Rudi Fasan have since engi- neered a variety 
of heme proteins to synthesize other pharmaceutical pre- cursors [25,26]. Because alkene 
cyclopropanation proceeds in whole Escherichia coli cells that express the evolved enzyme, as well 
as in cell lysate, preparing the catalyst is as simple as growing bacteria.
At the same time, we also discovered that some engineered cytochromes P450 performed nitrene 
chemistry, generating the iron-ni- trenoid from a synthetic azide nitrene precursor and directing 
the nitrene to C-H bonds for C-H amination (Figure 2) [27]. Earlier chemical research stimulated 
these experiments as well. In 1985, Gellman and coworkers reported that supplying an iminoiodane 
nitrene precursor to a rabbit liver cytochrome P450 led to three turnovers of intramolecular C-H 
amination [28]. We and Rudi Fasan re-discovered this promiscuous nitrene transfer activity at more 
or less the same time, almost thirty years later [27, 29].
More enzymes catalyzing abiological nitrene transfer reactions followed, brought about by a 
combination of chemical insight for reaction discovery and directed evolution to improve nascent 
activities [30].
Since a goal of this lecture is to introduce foundational concepts and

Frances H. Arnold Lecture          201


















Figure 5. Enzyme-catalyzed bicyclobutanation through two carbene transfers to an alkyne,catayzed 
byaserine-ligatedvariantofacytochrome P45O[3].Theenzyme must generate the reactive carbene and 
transfer it to the alkyne substrate and then do it a second time to the cyclopropene intermediate 
in order to generate the bicyclobu- tane. Evolved enzymes make a single stereoisomer of these 
highly strained rings, which indicates a well-defined orientation of the substrates in the 
newly-evolved active site.



explain how we came to them, rather than to review research results, I will mention just one recent 
example of making products that chemists find very challenging: highly strained rings. Producing 
bicyclobutanes by two carbene transfers to an alkyne is a transformation not known in biol- ogy. It 
is rare in the world of human chemistry, and was never reported to be catalyzed using iron. Kai 
Chen first evolved an engineered, serine-li- gated cytochrome P450 to transfer a carbene to an 
alkyne with perfect selectivity and make single stereoisomers of cyclopropenes. These carbo- 
cycles, whose ring strain is greater than 50 kcal/mol, are highly challeng- ing to synthesize 
stereoselectively, but the enzyme does it with ease.
Using the appropriate alkyne, Kai Chen also coaxed the enzyme to trans- fer a second carbene, 
cyclopropanating the double bond of the cyclopro- pene in the protected enzyme active site to make 
bicyclobutanes having
»60 kcal/mol of ring strain (Figure 3). Following directed evolution, the enzymes delivered single 
stereoisomers of highly strained cyclopropenes or bicyclobutanes with turnovers in the thousands 
[31].
When supplied with alkynes and carbene precursors, E. coli expressing these new enzymes churn out 
cyclopropenes and bicyclobutanes. For sugar and a few growth-promoting trace elements, these living 
catalysts perform their chemistry in water (buffer), at room temperature. We hope their remarkable 
selectivities, low cost, and ability to use Earth-abundant iron to make strained rings that are 
otherwise difficult to obtain will open new applications for these fascinating products.

202          TH E  NOBEL  PRIZES

BRINGING  NEW BONDS TO BIOLOGY
For a final glimpse into the exciting future chemistry that laborato-
ry-evolved enzymes will enable, I will describe how we can now create biocatalytic machinery to 
make bonds unknown in biology. Silicon is the second most abundant element in the Earth's crust. 
Despite their ubiq- uity, carbon-silicon bonds are non-existent in the biological world. Yet 
laboratories make them, and lots of them. The room in which you are reading contains caulks, 
sealants, earphones, hair gels, and many more products whose carbon-silicon bonds are human-made.
In 2016, Jennifer Kan and her team discovered that heme proteins can catalyze carbene insertion 
into Si-H bonds to make various organosilicon products [32]. We are particularly fond of a 
marvelous little cytochrome c from Rhodothermus marinus, isolated from a hot saltwater pool in 
Iceland and now in the Protein Data Bank. This cytochrome c holds onto its heme through a covalent 
attachment; it is a manageable 124 amino acids long, its three-dimensional structure is known, and 
it is hyper-stable. With a melting temperature above 100° C, it can even be boiled and not lose its 
fold or metal cofactor. Although its biological function is electron transfer, it also happens to 
catalyze Si-H insertion: Uma cyt c inserts the carbene derived from methyl ethyldiazoacetate into 
dimethylphenylsilane with 40 turnovers and 97% enantiomeric excess (ee).
Those who know cytochromes c may find this puzzling. The iron in a cytochrome c is coordinatively 
saturated, i.e., four equatorial nitrogen lig- ands come from the porphyrin ring, while in Uma cyt 
c a methionine and a histidine provide the two axial ligands. Hence it is reasonable to ask where 
the reactive carbene forms, and how this protein binds the silane substrate. In fact, measuring the 
volume of the active site by rolling a computer ball over the crystal structure delivers an answer 
of zero.
Yet nature cares nothing for our calculations. This protein catalyzes its Si-C bond-forming 
reaction almost as effectively as the best human-in- vented catalysts for a similar reaction 
(which, by the way, use precious metals rather than readily-available iron), and it evolves. Just 
three gener- ations of mutations directed to residues in the active site and screening  for higher 
activity generated an enzyme now 15 times more active than human-invented catalysts. The new enzyme 
makes single enantiomers of its products and has a good substrate scope, producing new 
organosilicon compounds from at least 20 different silanes with hundreds to thousands of turnovers 
and »99% ee [32]. Once again, the enzyme is fully genetically encoded, so that bacteria expressing 
the gene form new silicon-carbon bonds, perhaps for the first time ever in a living system. Of 
course, we cannot know for sure that it is the first time, given that so much chemis- try of the 
biological world remains unexplored.
A wonderful feature of engineering by evolution is that solutions come

Frances  H. Arnold  Lecture           203


first; an understanding of the solutions may or may not come later. The evolved protein can be 
studied biochemically in an effort to discern how its new features emerged. In the case of the Si-H 
insertion enzyme derived from Uma cytochrome c, the x-ray crystal structure showed that the three 
activity-enhancing mutations changed the structure of a loop over the iron. What was the methionine 
axial ligand in the wild-type pro- tein became an aspartic acid that no longer ligated the iron and 
instead pointed out to the solvent. A flip in the configuration of the loop created a binding 
pocket and also made the loop more dynamic so that it accom- modates both the carbene and a range 
of silane substrates. Rusty Lewis was even able to trap the reactive carbene in the evolved enzyme 
and observe its orientation in the protein crystal at high resolution. Structural and spectroscopic 
studies combined with computational models allowed us to begin to explain how the new catalytic 
activity arose [33]. That does not mean, however, that we could predict the mutations that produced 
these effects.
Why stop at silicon? Another element of interest is boron, richly repre- sented in the deserts not 
far from my southern California home. As with silicon, a wide range of organoboron compounds have 
been created in lab- oratories, but carbon-boron bonds have never been found in the biological 
world. Biology uses boron in the form of borates incorporated into natural products, most likely 
without the help of specific enzymes. Similarly, sili- cates are widely found in plants and marine 
animals such as diatoms.
To make carbon-boron bonds biologically, we again turned to our favorite cytochrome c. Jennifer Kan 
and Xiongyi Huang uncovered some activity for forming organoboron compounds by carbene insertion in 
the B-H bonds of water-stable borane adducts. Directed evolution created an enzyme that catalyzed 
400 times more turnovers than the best
small-molecule catalysts reported for similar transformations. Again, the enzyme is fully 
genetically encoded and carries out this new function inside living bacteria [34].
Carbon-X bonds known in biology include mostly C-H, C-N, C-O, C-S



C—X bonds known in biology




LI    Be
He
-                     e            Ne

Na   Mg                                                                            AI               
                  Ar

Figure 4. New ’carbene
K    Ca  Sc    TI    V    Cr  Mn            •          Cu   Zn   Ga  GB              -        *’    
        I ransferases‘ made  by
Rb  Sr    Y    Zr   Nb  Mo  Tc   Ru  Rh   Pd  Ag  Cd   In   Sn  Sb  Te         X•          directed 
evolution  have
Ce  Ba   La   Hf   Ta   W   Re  0s    lr    R   Au  Hg   TI   Pb   BI   Po   At   Rn          added 
C-Si and   C- B bonds
to biology‘s DNA-enco-

Fr    Ra   Ac   Rf    Db  Sq    Bh   Hs   Mt   Da   £'Ig   Cn    Nh    FI    Me   Lv   Ts   O
ded synthetic repertoire.

204           TH E  NOBEL  PRIZES

bonds, some bonds to halogens, and a few to P, As, Se, and some metals (Figure 4). This leaves vast 
swaths of the periodic table untouched. With help from directed evolution and inspiration from the 
transition metal catalysis literature, two whole new elements have been added to biology's C-X bond 
repertoire. This ability can be exploited to bring boron and sili- con into life and into products 
that can be manufactured in engineered microorganisms. The enzymes can also be used in synthetic 
chemistry, where their exquisite and tunable selectivities will enable low-cost and easy 
preparation of organoboron and organosilicon products.

FINAL THOUGHTS ABOUT THE  FUTURE OF DIRECTED  EVOLUTION
Life — the biological world — is the greatest chemist, and evolution is her design process. In 
fact, the internet of living things has been crowd-sourc- ing problem solving this way for more 
than three billion years. Evolution can circumvent our profound ignorance of how sequence encodes 
func- tion, and may allow us to find new solutions to human problems. I have described how we are 
now moving into a future of readily-tunable cata- lysts that perform challenging reactions using 
Earth-abundant materials and producing minimal waste. Biological systems are good models for 
sustainable chemistry that uses abundant, renewable resources and recy- cles a good fraction of its 
products. I dream of the day that much of our chemistry becomes genetically encodable, and 
microorganisms and plants are our programmable factories.
I am continually amazed at the ease with which evolution innovates.
With the power of evolution realized for engineering, we can look at diverse products of natural 
evolution in an entirely new way. Instead of asking what enzymes do in the natural world, we can 
now ask, “What might they do?” Enzymes will perform chemistry in more ways than we could have 
imagined, especially when we use evolution to unleash their latent poten- tial. A treasure trove of 
new enzymes awaits discovery for carrying out chemistry that we could not even contemplate just a 
few years ago.
Existing diversity provides the fuel for these innovations; both natural and directed evolution 
uses this diversity to solve challenges, exploit opportunities, and evade catastrophe. As countless 
examples from the natural world attest, the alternative to diversity is extinction.
I thank the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, my family, friends, colleagues, Sabine 
Brinkmann-Chen, Cheryl Nakashima, and especially my current and former students. I am grateful to 
the California Institute of Technology, where I was inspired to explore the unknown for new 
understanding and found the team with which to do it.

Frances H. Arnold  Lecture           205


RE FE RENC E S
1.    Borges, J.L. (1941) The Library of Babel. Editorial Sur.
2.   Maynard-Smith, J. (1970) Natural Selection and the Concept of a Protein
Space. Nature, 225, 563—564.
3.  Arnold, F.H. (2011). The Library of Maynard Smith: My Search for Meaning in the Protein 
Universe. Microbe, ASM News, 6, 316-318.
4.   Eigen, M.,  Gardiner, W. (1984) Evolutionary Molecular Engineering Based on RNA Replication. 
Pure. Appl. Chem., 56, 967—978.
5.    Beaudry, A.A., Joyce, G.F. (1992) Directed Evolution of an RNA Enzyme. Sci- ence, 257, 
635-641.
6. Leung, D.W., Chen, E., Goeddel, D.V. (1989) A Method for Random Mutagenesis of a Defined DNA 
Segment using a Modified Polymerase Chain Reaction. Tech- nique, 1, 11-15.
7.    Wells, J.A. (1990) Additivity of Mutational Effects in Proteins. Biochemistry, 29, 8509—8517.
8. Kauffman, S.A. (1993) The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution. Oxford 
University Press.
9. Dennett, D.C. (1995) Darwin's Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meaning of Life. New York: Simon 
& Schuster.
10.  Chen, K., Arnold, F.H. (1991) Enzyme Engineering for Nonaqueous  Solvents: Random Mutagenesis 
to Enhance Activity of Subtilisin E in Polar Organic Media. Biotechnology  9, 1073—1077.
11.  Chen, K., Arnold, F.H. (1993) Tuning the Activity of an Enzyme for Unusual Environments:  
Sequential Random Mutagenesis of Subtilisin E for Catalysis in Dimethylformamide. Proceedings  of 
the National Academy of Sciences USA, 90, 5618—5622.
12.  Stemmer, W.P.C. (1994) Rapid Evolution of a Protein in vitro by DNA Shuffling.
Nature, 370, 389—391.
13. Moore, J.C., Arnold, F.H. (1996) Directed Evolution of a para-Nitrobenzyl Esterase for 
Aqueous-Organic Solvents. Nature Biotechnology, 14, 458-467.

14.

is
Giver, L.,  Gershenson, A. Freskgard, P.O., Arnold, F.H. (1998) Directed Evolu- tion of a 
Thermostable Esterase. Proceedings  of the National Academy of Sciences  USA 95, 12809—12813.
Zhao, H., Arnold, F.H. (1999) Directed Evolution Converts Subtilisin E into a Functional Equivalent 
of Thermitase. Protein Engineering, 12, 47—53.
16.  Bornscheuer  U.T., Huisman G.W., Kazlauskas, R.J., Lutz, S., Moore, J.C., Rob- ins, K. (2012) 
Engineering  the Third Wave of Bocatalysis. Nature, 485, 185— 194.
17.  Zeymer, C.,  Hilvert, D. (2018) Directed Evolution of Protein Catalysts. Annual Review of 
Biochemistry,  87, 131—157.
18. Babbitt, P.C., Gerlt, J.A. (2000) New Functions from Old Scaffolds: How Nature Reengineers 
Enzymes for New Functions. Advances iit Protein Chemis- try, 55, 1—28.
19.  O'Brien, P.J., Herschlag, D. (1999) Catalytic Promiscuity and the Evolution of New Enzymatic 
Activities. Cell Chernica/  Biology, 6, R91—R105.
20. Kazlauskas, R.J. (2005) Enhancing Catalytic Promiscuity for Biocatalysis.  Cur- rent Opinion in 
Chemical Biology, 9, 195—201.
21.  Khersonsky, 0.,  Tawfik, D.S. (2010) A Mechanistic and Evolutionary Perspec- tive. Annual 
Review of Biochemistry, 79, 471-505.
22. Arnold, F.H. (2018) Directed Evolution: Bringing New Chemistry to Life. Ange- wandte Chemie 
International Edition, 57, 4143-4148.

206            TH E  NOBEL  PRIZES


23.  Coelho, P.S., Brustad, E.M., Kannan, A., Arnold, F.H. (2013) Olefin Cyclopro- panation via 
Carbene Transfer Catalyzed by Engineered Cytochrome P450 Enzymes.  Science, 339, 307—31O.
24.  Wang, Z.J., Renata, H., Peck, N.E., Farwell, C.C., Coelho, P.S., Arnold, F.H. (2014) Improved 
Cyclopropanation Activity of Histidine-Ligated Cytochrome P450 Enables the Enantioselective Formal 
Synthesis of Levomilnacipran. Aug- ewandte C/temie International  Edition 53, 6810—6813.
25.  Hernandez, K.E., Renata, H., Lewis, R.D., Kan, S.B.J., Zhang, C.,  Forte, J., Rozzell, D., 
McIntosh, J.A., Arnold, F.H. (2016) Highly Stereoselective Biocata- lytic Synthesis of Key 
Cyclopropane Intermediate  to Ticagrelor. ACS Catalysis, 6, 7810-7813.
26. Bajaj, P., Sreenilayam, G.,  Tyagi, V., Fasan, R. (2016) Gram-Scale  Synthesis of Chiral 
Cyclopropane-Containing Drugs and Drug Precursors with Engineered Myoglobin Catalysts Featuring 
Complementary  Stereoselectivity. Angewandte Chemie International  Edition, 55, 16110-16114.
27.  McIntosh, J.A., Coelho, P.S., Farwell, C.C., Wang, Z.J., Lewis, J.C., Brown, T.R., Arnold, 
F.H. (2013) Enantioselective Intramolecular C—H Amination Catalyzed by Engineered Cytochrome P450 
Enzymes in vitro and in vivo. Angewandte Chemie International  Edition, 52, 9309-9312.
28. Svastits, E.W., Dawson, J.H., Breslow, R., Gellman, S.H. (1985) Functionalized Nitrogen Atom 
Transfer Catalyzed by Cytochrome P-450.  Journal of the Ameri- can Chemical Societ y, 107, 
6427-6428.
29.  Singh, R., Bordeaux, M., Fasan, R. (2014) P450-Catalyzed Intramolecular sp3 C—H Amination with 
Arylsulfonyl Azide Substrates.  ACS Catalysis, 4, 546—552.
30. Zhang, R.K., Huang, X.,  Arnold, F.H. (2018) Selective C-H  Bond Functionaliza- tion with 
Engineered Heme Proteins: New Tools to Generate Complexity. Cur- rent Opinion in Chemical Biology, 
49, 67—75.
31.  Chen, K., Huang, X.,  Kan, S.B.J., Zhang, R.K., Arnold, F.H. (2018) Enzymatic Construction of 
Highly Strained Carbocyles.  Science, 360, 71-75.
32.  Kan, S.B.J., Lewis, R.D., Chen, K., Arnold, F.H. (2016) Directed Evolution of Cytochrome c for 
Carbon—Silicon Bond Formation: Bringing Silicon to Life. Science, 354, 1048-1051.
33.  Lewis, R.D., Garcia-Borras, M., Chalkley, M.J., Buller, A.R., Houk, K.N., Kan, S.B.J., Arnold, 
F.H. (2018) Catalytic Iron-Carbene Intermediate Revealed in a Cytochrome c Carbene Transferase. 
Proceedings  of the National Academy of Sciences USA. 115, 7308-7313.
34.  Kan, S.B.J., Huang, X.,  Gumulya, Y., Chen, K., Arnold, F.H. (2017) Genetically Programmed 
Chiral Organoborane Synthesis. Nature, 552, 132—136.
