                          F REDERICK S O D D Y

        The origins of the conceptions of isotopes
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1922

                                 Introduction

The work of my students and myself, for which you have so signally hon-
oured me by the award of the Nobel Prize for Chemistry for 1921, is but a
small part of much pioneering work, in many lands and stretching over a
period of nearly twenty years, into the chemistry of radio-elements and the
existence and nature of isotopes. I think I may best fulfil my duty as Nobel
laureate if I try to disentangle the real origins of the conception of isotopes,
in so far at least as I have been connected with it. What is so very simple and
clear to us today at first had a very different and puzzling character, so that
this task of tracing the birth of an idea from its earliest indications is really
both difficult and complicated. I cannot hope to achieve historical complete-
ness or finality. Rather I shall attempt to give the results of my own efforts
to trace to its beginning the idea which today is universally admitted to be of
fundamental interest and significance.
   The interpretation of radioactivity which was published in 1903 by Sir Er-
nest Rutherford and myself ascribed the phenomena to the spontaneous dis-
integration of the atoms of the radio-element, whereby a part of the original
atom was violently ejected as a radiant particle, and the remainder formed a
totally new kind of atom with a distinct chemical and physical character.
These disintegrations proceed successively a large number of times, so
that there results a series of more or less unstable new elements, between the
original parent element and the ultimate unknown final product. This was a
theory sufficiently challenging to the accepted doctrines of chemistry. The
further detailed study of the chemical character of these successive unstable
elements, produced in radioactive changes, introduced an idea which was
even more subversive of the fundamental doctrines of chemistry. That idea
was that the chemical elements are not really homogeneous, but merely
 chemically homogeneous. In some cases they are mixtures of different con-
stituents which. are only identical in their chemical character. Put colloqui-
ally, their atoms have identical outsides but different insides. Chemical
 analysis classifies according to the external systems of electrons which sur-


372                                1921 F.SODDY

round a small massive internal nucleus, whereas radioactive changes, which
are of the character of veritable transmutations, concern the internal consti-
tution of this inner nucleus. They showed that the same exterior may con-
ceal very different interiors in the atomic structure. These elements which
are identical in their whole chemical character and are not separable by any
method of chemical analysis are now called isotopes.
  I may begin with a brief statement of the earlier researches into the nature
of radioactivity. The power of spontaneously emitting rays of a new kind
was discovered in 1896 by Henri Becquerel for the compounds of the ele-
ment uranium. The physicists sorted the rays emitted into three types, the
α−, β− and γ - rays, and their real nature was quickly elucidated. The β -rays
were shown to be due to the expulsion of negative electrons traveling at a far
higher speed than any that can be artificially produced in the vacuum tube
as cathode-rays. The γ-rays were correctly regarded as X-rays, but of a greater
penetrating power. In due course the X-rays were shown to be waves of light
of extraordinary short wavelength and high frequency, whilst the γ-rays are
also of the nature of light, but of even shorter wavelength and higher fre-
quency. The α -rays were first proved to be due to radiant atoms of matter
carrying a positive charge and were identified, after many years of contin-
uous work by Sir Ernest Rutherford, with helium atoms carrying two
atomic charges of positive electricity. Sir William Ramsay and I had shown
in 1903 that helium was being continuously generated from radium in a
spectroscopically detectable quantity, and subsequent work showed that
helium is generated, as α-particles, in all the radioactive changes where α−
rays are expelled.
   The nature of the ionization produced in gases by all these new types of
radiation was quickly elucidated, and as a consequence highly sensitive and
accurate methods of measurement were evolved, which, more than any
other single factor, contributed to the rapid development of the subject.
   On the chemical side, the work of M. and Mme. Curie had shown radio-
activity to be a specific atomic property, definitely restricted to the last two
of the then known elements, uranium and thorium, though the elements po-
tassium and rubidium emit β-rays, exhibiting in this respect evidence of true
radioactivity. Using the new property much as the pioneers with the spec-
troscope used the spectra in the discovery of new elements, they discovered
the powerfully radioactive new elements, polonium and radium, and, M.
Debierne, actinium, in the uranium minerals. Of the many similar new
radio-elements now known radium is still the only one the compounds of


            ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                         373
which have been prepared in a pure state, and for which the spectrum and
atomic weight have been determined. As regards its whole chemical char-
acter radium is absolutely normal and its properties could have been predic-
ted accurately for an element occupying its place in the Periodic Table. It is
the last member of the family of alkaline earths and stands in relation to
thorium as thorium does to uranium in the periodic system. But superimposed
on this normal chemical character it possesses a radioactive character truly as-
tounding. The energy it evolves in the form of the new radiations, measured
as heat, amounts to 133 calories per gram per hour. The theory of atomic
disintegration shows however that the uniqueness of radium is due mainly
to the fact that its average life, 2440 years, is sufficiently long to allow the
element to accumulate in the minerals in which it is formed to a ponderable
quantity, and yet short enough for the rate at which the energy of disinte-
gration is liberated to be truly surprising. In the elucidation of the various
disintegration series of uranium, thorium and actinium, every degree of
atomic instability is encountered. The average life varies from the order of
1010 years, for the primary radio-elements uranium and thorium, down to
periods of the order of a minute, which marks the limit beyond which the
chemical character cannot be investigated. But by physical methods mem-
bers down to a period of 1/350 second have been put in evidence, and two,
of the order of 10-6 and 10-11 second, are indirectly inferred.
   But for all these the theory indicates, as for radium, a perfectly normal
and definite chemical character as well as the superimposed radioactive
character. There is no progressive change in the nature of the atoms. As they
were when produced, by the explosion of the atom from which they origi-
nate, so they remain till they in turn explode. Otherwise the law of change
found to hold could not apply. The chemical and spectroscopic character is
 that of the atom during its normal and uneventful life, whilst its radioactive
 character is that produced by its sudden death. But for this very definite and
 precise implication from the theory of atomic distintegration it might have
 been supposed that the chemical character of such extraordinary substances
 would also be extraordinary.
   Possibly one other introductory remark may be justified, as to the kind of
 evidence upon which the theory of atomic disintegration was originally
 founded. In investigating the radioactivity of thorium compounds, we
 found that a constituent responsible for the greater part of its radio-activity
 could be separated by the use of specific reagents. Thus when thorium is
 precipitated by ammonia, the thorium X remains in the solution, though


374                                1921 F.SODDY

when other precipitating reagents, such as ammonium carbonate, oxalate or
phosphate, are employed no separation is effected. But this thorium X as
fast as it was removed reformed at a perfectly definite rate. Now if a chemist
were to purify, say, lead from silver and found as often as he purified it that
the silver reformed, he would have to conclude that lead was changing into
silver. The fact that this does not happen is at the basis of the belief in the
unchangeability of the elements. So the conclusion that in radioactivity the
elements are changing into others is equally direct. It is not a valid criticism
that the products are usually too small for chemical examination. If the
chemist referred to found that his lead after purification in due course
showed again all the usual analytical reactions for silver he would be per-
fectly satisfied, though anyone else might reasonably ask to be shown a
shilling made by the process and vouched for by the Mint. Radioactive
character provides as fine a criterion for quantitative and qualitative analysis
as any of the chemical and spectroscopic tests depended upon by the chemist.
It is as idle to expect the radio-chemist to produce his materials in quantity
sufficient for chemical examination before forming conclusions, as to expect
an analyst in the course of his work to separate and prepare the various con-
stituents of the materials he analyses in form and quantity capable of satis-
fying a jury with no chemical training.



             The experimental method that first revealed isotopes

The history of isotopes fittingly commences with the discovery of radio-
thorium, a new product in the thorium disintegration series, by Sir William
Ramsay and Otto Hahn in 1905, which is intermediate between thorium and
thorium X and generates the latter in the course of an α -ray change. A
considerable quantity of thorianite, a newly discovered mineral with 60 to
70% of ThO2 and 10 to 20% of U3O 8, was worked up for radium by the
known methods. The new substance was discovered during the fractional
crystallization of the barium-radium chloride and was separated from the
radium along with the inactive barium in the course of the fractionation.
   In 1905 also the discovery by Godlewski of actinium X, an intermediate
product between actinium and its emanation, in every way analogous to
thorium X, was the commencement of the recognition of the general
analogies that existed in the three series. Even so early as 1905 I said*:
*In order as far as possible to avoid the charge of reading into this account of the


             ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                               375
   "The general resemblance in character and relative period of the succeed-
ing members of the various disintegration series on the one hand, and their
distinct individual peculiarities on the other, are most fascinating and mys-
terious. We seem to have here an extension of similar relations expressed
for elementary matter generally by the periodic law, and there is no doubt
that any explanation of the one will have an application to the other."
(1905, p. 308).
    Reverting now to radiothorium, all attempts to separate it from thorium
 compounds either failed completely or seemed successful to only a minute
 extent. In 1906 Elster and Geitel and also G. A. Blanc, after having discover-
 ed radiothorium as a constituent responsible for part of the radioactivity of
 the sediments from certain hot springs, used the experience they had gained
in its separation in attempts to separate radiothorium from thorium com-
 pounds, and were, apparently, to a very slight extent successful. Dadourian,
Boltwood and McCoy and Ross found that commercial thorium salts con-
tained only one-half as much radiothorium as the mineral from which they
extracted and as the thorium they themselves separated from minerals in the
laboratory. This seemed to indicate that the secret operations by which
thorium is commercially extracted were much more effective in separating
radiothorium than the known laboratory methods, but a search of the by-
products of the thorium manufacture failed to locate the missing radiotho-
rium.
   In 1907 Hahn discovered mesothorium, a product intermediate between
thorium and radiothorium and generating the latter. In 1908 he showed that
mesothorium itself consisted of two successive products. The first, meso-
thorium 1, is produced directly from thorium and has an average life of
9.67 years. It is one of the two radio-elements, actinium being the other,
which disintegrates without the expulsion of any detectable radiation,
though in all probability a β -particle is expelled, but its velocity is too low
for it to be detectable. Its product, mesothorium 2, gives powerful β−and
γ-rays and has an average life of 8.9 hours.
   In the meantime it was found that the radioactivity of the thorium com-
pounds prepared in the laboratory from the mineral decayed during two

history of isotopes more in connection with each advance than the state of knowledge
at the time warranted, I shall frequently quote literally my Annual Report on Radio-
activity, which I have contributed, since their commencement in 1904, to the Chemical
Society’s Annual Reports on the Progress of Chemistry, with the date of the Report and
page from which the quotation is taken in brackets at the end of the quotation.


376                             1921 F.SODDY

years from preparation to one-half and became the same as that of the com-
mercial preparations, whereas the latter increased in activity with age and
the older they were the more nearly their activity became equal to that
when freshly prepared from the mineral. In the process of separating the
thorium, mesothorium, but not radiothorium, is separated. The latter, pend-
ing the regeneration of the former, at first decays, and subsequently, as its
parent, mesothorium, begins to reaccumulate, is regenerated until finally
it reaches its original equilibrium value.
    "The effect then had nothing to do with the method of preparation of the
thorium salt, but is purely a question of age." (1907, p. 325).
   It was the first effect to be recognized of many similar ones subsequently.
For example in 1911 Antonoff discovered uranium Y, and atributed his
success in its separation to the particular chemical processes adopted, whereas
it was in reality due to the lapse of a suitable period of time between suc-
cessive separations.
   Boltwood concluded from his experiments that mesothorium must be
removed from thorium along with thorium X when thorium is precipita-
ted by ammonia, the original method by which thorium X was discovered.
   This year, 1907, marks the first definite statement of the doctrine of the
complete chemical non-separability of what are now called isotopes. McCoy
and ROSSI after describing many careful and prolonged attempts, all of them
 completely without success, to separate radiothorium from thorium, said:
  "Our experiments strongly indicate that radiothorium is entirely inseparable
from thorium by chemical processes"; and they drew from this the correct
inference with regard to the radiothorium separated by Ramsay and Hahn
and others: "The isolation of radiothorium from thorianite and from pure
 thorium nitrate... may have been accomplished by the separation of meso-
 thorium, which in time changed spontaneously into radiothorium."
    Thus already in 1907 the experimental method that first revealed the
 existence of isotopes among the successive products of radioactive change
 had been applied and its implications well understood.
    "Although the separation of mesothorium from thorium and of thorium
 X from radiothorium is easily accomplished, there is no known method of
 separating by chemical means either radiothorium from thorium or thorium
 X from mesothorium. But, owing to these last mentioned pairs alternating
 in the disintegration series, each of them can readily be prepared by itself.
 The preparations of radiothorium obtained by Hahn and others are probably
not the radiothorium existing in the original mineral, but regenerated radio-


              ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                              377
thorium subsequently produced, after the separation, from the easily separa-
ted mesothorium." (1907, p. 326).
  The first part of the thorium disintegration series is shown below with
the average life of each member and the rays expelled in its change.


                 Thorium       Mesothorium I      Mesothorium 2
                  2.1010 years    9.67 years          8.9 hours

                  Radiothorium       Thorium X      Emanation, etc.
                     2.9I years       5.25 days       78 seconds


The separation of thorium and radiothorium and of mesothorium I and
thorium X by chemical analysis, now as then, are completely impossible.
But each can be obtained alone by a suitable combination of chemical pro-
cesses at suitable intervals of time. The exact procedure is dictated by the
relative periods of the substances to be separated. In this connection it must
be remembered, since the methods of ascertaining the nature of the products
separated are purely radioactive, that it is the relative intensity of the radio-
activity, or the relative number of α− or β−particles emitted per second, and
not the relative weights, which is of importance. For different radioactive
elements, the radioactivity is proportional to the weight divided by the
period. A rapidly changing substance reforms and attains its equilibrium
value correspondingly quickly, a slowly changing one correspondingly
slowly.*
   The ease with which the mesothorium is separated, and the very long
time required for it to reform in substantial amount, is the reason why it was
not discovered in 1902 when thorium X was discovered. It would normally

* Thorium may be obtained, free from radiothorium, by repeated precipitations with
ammonia over an interval sufficient to allow the original radiothorium present to
decay. Mesothorium 1 is obtained free from thorium X from the first filtrate in the
ammonia precipitation after leaving it for a month for the thorium X to decay. Radio-
thorium is obtained free from thorium, by separating the mesothorium, waiting for it
partly to change into radiothorium, and then separating the radiothorium from the
mesothorium, by adding a trace of aluminium or similar substance to serve as a vehicle
in the filtration, and precipitating it with the radiothorium by ammonia. Lastly
thorium X is obtained free from mesothorium either from radiothorium or from
thorium by the ammonia precipitation, in the latter case from the second and successive
precipitations at monthly intervals, the first filtrate containing the mesothorium.


378                                1921 F.SODDY

be present only in thorium compounds that have remained undisturbed a
long time since preparation, or purification. This fact had later an important
sequel, as we shall see.
   The question, whether these non-separable pairs of radio-elements are
really chemically identical or not, is not of importance in the argument.
What is important is that 15 years ago pairs of radio-elements, actually not
separable by chemical analysis, were in fact separated by successive chemical
analyses at suitable intervals. If these pairs had been consecutive in the series,
instead of being separated by intermediate products of different chemical
character, they must have remained unresolved. Such a case, it seemed, was
known.



                            The isotopes of uranium

In 1908 Boltwood showed that the relative α−ray activities of the various α−
ray giving products of the uranium series, in equilibrium in natural minerals,
conformed to the expulsion of one α-particle per atom disintegrating, ex-
cept in the case of the actinium series (which so was correctly indicated to be
a quite minor branch of the main uranium-radium series), and uranium
itself which gives two α-particles per atom disintegrating. This satisfied the
atomic weight difference of 12 units between uranium and radium, which
corresponds with the expulsion in all of 3 α−particles. Ionium, a long-lived
intermediate product giving α-rays and generating radium, accounts for
the third α-particle. Thus it appeared that the 2 α− particles from uranium
were due to two successive α−ray changes

       Uranium I     Uranium II     Uranium X     Ionium     Radium, etc.

and that uranium I and uranium II were consecutive products, completely
similar in chemical character, analogous to thorium and radiothorium,
except that there was no intermediate product of different chemical character
to serve for their separate recognition.
   The correctness of the inference that the two α-particles are successively
and not simultaneously expelled was established by Marsden and Barret in
1911. They observed the scintillations produced by a uranium compound
on a zinc-suiphide screen, and found no pairs, or any preponderance of
short intervals between scintillations, beyond that required by the theory of


             ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                           379
probability for a purely random distribution of intervals. Although the other
inference, that the two uraniums are consecutive successive products, was
theoretically incorrect, because it was later found necessary to place uranium
X between the two uraniums, the practical consequences are unaffected.
Owing to the relatively short period of uranium X in comparison with its
product uranium II, the latter cannot be put into evidence, as radiothorium
was, by separating its parent and allowing it to change. The quantity of
uranium II so formed (divided by its period) is too small to be detected, even
when the uranium X from 20 kilograms of the element uranium is studied.
 Even if sufficient uranium could be experimented with, the experiment
would still be rendered difficult, if not impossible, because of the ionium in
 the series, which is much shorter-lived than uranium II, and non-separable
 from uranium X, just as thorium X is from mesothorium I. This then is a
 case to which the experimental method of separation does not apply owing
 to the hopelessly unfavourable relation between the periods of the successive
 products.



     The chemical identity of different radio-elements and its implications

Examples of chemically non-separable pairs, or groups, of radio-elements
now began to accumulate very rapidly. Ionium, discovered by Boltwood,
and by Marckwald and Keetman independently, in 1908, which proved to
be the direct parent of radium, was shown to be identical in its chemical
character with thorium. Boltwood separated it from uranium minerals by
adding a little thorium and by separating and purifying the latter. Marck-
wald and Keetman obtained it by precipitating the rare earths in the mineral
with hydrofluoric acid, and found that any of the regular methods for puri-
fying thorium from the rare earths would separate the ionium from the
latter and actinium, but not from thorium. Keetman2 tried twelve good
methods, all well known to be effective in the purification of thorium,
without effecting the least separation of ionium. He found at the same time
that he could not separate uranium X, either, from the ionium-thorium
mixture, though here, of course, just as with thorium X and mesothorium,
the uranium X, being short-lived, speedily disappears of itself.
    Auer von Welsbach also, in 1910, carried out a masterly technical separa-
 tion of the ionium and actinium of the "hydrate" fraction obtained from
 30,000 kilograms of Joachimsthal pitchblende in the manufacture of radium,


380                              1921 F. SODDY

and prepared a very concentrated ionium preparation, upon the spectrum
and atomic weight of which other investigators subsequently worked. He
failed completely to separate the ionium from the thorium, though many
fresh methods were tried.
    Herschfinkel tried numerous methods to concentrate radium D (radio-
lead) from lead and failed completely. Three years later, Paneth and von
Hevesy tried twenty different methods, also completely without result, and
upon this failure they based their valuable and elegant method of using the
radio-elements as indicators. For example, in the present case, the solubility
of very insoluble lead compounds was determined by adding radium D to
the lead, and determining the almost unweighable quantities of lead dis-
solved by radioactive methods. This use has wide applicability in chemical
problems. In this instance, radium D can be obtained free from lead, if re-
quired, by sealing up the radium emanation in a capillary tube and allowing
it to change. After a month, the conversion of the emanation into practically
pure radium D is complete. In this way they were able in 1914 to extend the
chemical identity between radium D and lead to its whole electrochemical
character.
    In contrast with the foregoing cases, the cases of polonium (radium F) and
actinium may be mentioned. Although these radio-elements have never yet
been isolated in the pure state, nor even their spectra yet determined, this is
solely, probably, on account of their relatively short period, and conse-
quently infinitesimal quantity. Thus polonium was shown by Mme. Curie
to resemble bismuth closely, and by Marckwald tellurium. But it may
readily be concentrated by chemical methods from both bismuth and tellu-
rium. Actinium was shown by Giesel to resemble lanthanum most closely of
the rare-earth elements, but he succeeded in effecting a partial concentration
of actinium from lanthanum.
   In 1909, Sweden made a very notable contribution to this subject in the
work of Strömholm and Svedberg, who made use of isomorphism as a
means of ascertaining the chemical character of the radio-elements. They
crystallized in the solutions of the radio-elements different salts and deter-
mined whether or not the radio-element crystallized out with the salt. Thus
they found that thorium X crystallizes with lead and barium salts, but not
with others. They correctly characterized it as an alkaline-earth element, in
contradiction of an earlier and incorrect conclusion that it was monovalent,
arrived at from a study of its diffusion coefficient and ionic mobility. Ac-
tinium X was also characterized as an alkaline-earth element, and they were


             ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                        381
unable to find, by these methods, any differences in the chemical behaviour
of radium, thorium X and actinium X, even in their quantitative aspect.
    Strömholm and Svedberg were probably the first to attempt to fit a part
of the disintegration series into the Periodic Table. They were correct as
regards thorium X and actinium X, but were misled by a faulty charac-
terization of the chemistry of mesothorium I. It is probable that the reason
for this was that already referred to, which prevented mesothorium being
discovered when thorium X was, namely, that it has been unwittingly sep-
arated in the preliminary purification of the material. Nevertheless, in their
conclusion, is to be found the first published statement, that the chemical
non-separability found for the radio-elements may apply also to the non-
radioactive elements in the Periodic Table. Remarking on the fact that, in the
region of the radio-elements, there appear to be three parallel and independ-
ent series, they then say "one may suppose that the genetic series proceed
down through the Periodic Table, but that always the three elements of the
different genetic series, which thus together occupy one place in the Periodic
System, are so alike that they always occur together in Nature and also not
have been able to be appreciably separated in the laboratory. Perhaps, one
can see, as an indication in this direction, the fact that the Mendeleev scheme
is only an approximate rule as concerns the atomic weight, but does not
possess the exactitude of a natural law; this would not be surprising if the
elements of the scheme were mixtures of several homogeneous elements of
similar but not completely identical atomic weight." Thus Strömholm and
Svedberg were the first to suggest a general complexity of the chemical
elements concealed under their chemical identity. Until I read their paper
again, in the preparation for this lecture, I had not realized how explicit this
anticipation of present views is.
    In 1910 a new and, as it proved, very important case of chemical identity
was discovered, that between mesothorium I and radium. This was pub-
lished independently by Marckwald and myself, though it must have pre-
viously been known to Hahn and those engaged in the technical extraction
of mesothorium, who, however, kept it secret. Marckwald made the dis-
covery through being asked to examine a radium preparation prepared
from a thorium-containing uranium mineral, which owed the greater part
 of its activity to mesothorium. I worked it out independently for prepara-
 tions I obtained from thorianite. Contrary-to the impression, which then
prevailed, that barium sulphate precipitated in the solution entrains or adsorbs
mesothorium, as it does uranium X, I found it impossible to separate the


382                               1921 F.SODDY

mesothorium from the radium in the fractional crystallization of chlorides
of mesothorium, radium and barium, which I so obtained. The radioactive
constituents were concentrated from the inactive barium, to an extent of
several hundred times, without the slightest change in the ratio between
them, so far as could be ascertained by the most careful radioactive measure-
ment. Thorium X was also found to be non-separable from mesothorium and
radium in agreement with Strömholm and Svedberg’s conclusion. In the
fractional crystallization Ramsay and Hahn found the radiothorium to be
separated with the barium. Their discovery of this element was entirely due
to the fact that between the separation of the radium with the mesothorium,
a certain, probably considerable, interval of time must have elapsed.
   From this date I was convinced that this non-separability of the radio-
elements was a totally new phenomenon, quite distinct from that of the
most closely related pairs, or groups, of elements, hitherto observed in chem-
istry, and that the relationship was not, as usually supposed, one of close
similarity but of complete chemical identity.
    "When it is considered what a powerful means radioactive methods of
measurement afford for detecting the least change in the concentration of a
pair of active substances, and the completeness and persistence of some of the
attempts at separation, which have been made, the conclusion is scarcely to
be resisted that we have in these examples no mere chemical analogues but
chemical identities." (1910, p. 285).
    The case of the rare-earth elements has often been cited as an example of
mixtures of elements, once thought homogeneous, but with the application
of more refined methods, or more repeated separations, proving to be sep-
arable. But the case is not really comparable. The difficulty in the rare
earths is not so much in the actual separation, but in ascertaining what the
 effect of an attempted separation has been. Every process has to be labori-
 ously repeated a large number of times before a separation detectable by
 the insensitive methods available, such as the determination of the chemical
 equivalent, is apparent. So soon as any difference in properties is detected,
 separation follows. Thus, didymium was resolved owing to the difference in
 colour of the salts of its two constituents, and now the spectra afford a more
 general cxiterion of the same character. But for the radio-elements the sub-
 stances are known severally as individuals from the start, unrivalled methods
 are available for detecting the least beginnings of separation so soon as it
 occurs, and yet the constituents once mixed remain inseparable by chemical
 processes 3. Today, of course, no argument as to the complete chemical iden-


            ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                        383
tity of isotopes is required, since half the common elements examined by the
positive-ray methods have been found to be mixtures of isotopes.
   On broader and quite general philosophic grounds, and without in the
least postulating a continuation of the genetic series of the radio-elements
throughout the Periodic System, I arrived at the conclusion reached by
Strömholm and Svedberg. It was certain that among the groups of chemi-
cally identical radio-elements differences of atomic weight of whole units
must exist. Thus from the atomic weights of the parent elements and the
number of α-particles expelled, the atomic weights of ionium (230) and
radiothorium (228) must differ by two and four units, respectively, from
that of the chemically identical thorium (232). Once one enquired what
evidence the chemist had for the real homogeneity of the elements as dis-
tinct from their chemical homogeneity, the conclusion followed at once
that if all the elements were mixtures in constant proportions of chemical
identities differing step-wise by whole units in atomic mass, the chemist with
his methods must have remained unaware of it.
   "The recognition that elements of different atomic weight may possess
identical chemical properties seems destined to have its most important
application in the region of the inactive elements, where the absence of a
second radioactive nature, totally unconnected with the chemical nature,
makes it impossible for chemical identities to be individually detected.
Chemical homogeneity is no longer a guarantee that any supposed element
is not a mixture of several of different atomic weight or that any atomic
weight is not merely a mean number." (1910, p. 286).



                           The spectrum of ionium

In 1912 Exner and Haschek, using the ionium-thorium preparation of Auer
von Welsbach, already alluded to, and A. S. Russell and Rossi, using an ac-
tive ionium-thorium preparation prepared for the Royal Society, independ-
ently attempted to determine the spectrum of ionium, without, in either
case, succeeding in finding a single new line. The spectra were those of
thorium simply.
   The interpretation of this remarkable result was, at the time, dependent
upon the incompletely known period of ionium. This constant fixes the
proportion of ionium by weight in the materials used. All the evidence was
in favour of ionium having a very long period, so that the proportion of


384                               1921 F.SODDY

ionium by weight in both preparations would be so high that the failure for
it to show any spectrum due to ionium would be offundamental importance.
    The low range of the α-rays from ionium indicated a period for this ele-
ment of the order of from 2 to 5 x 105 years, but this evidence is but slight.
On the other hand I had been engaged continuously since 1905 in an experi-
mental effort to detect the growth of radium in carefully purified uranium.
The failure to detect this after many years led to the minimum estimate for
the average life of ionium of 105 years. This depended on one condition,
that ionium was the only intermediate of long period between uranium and
radium (uranium I and II for this purpose being considered a single element).
This has now been established. Over sufficiently long periods the growth of
radium from uranium has been found to proceed according to the square of
the time. This proves that ionium is the only long-lived intermediate. Also
the actual period of ionium to an accuracy of two per cent has been found to
be 105 years. So that a considerable percentage of the ionium-thorium prep-
arations must have been pure ionium. Exner and Haschek concluded that
the period of ionium must have been much overestimated, and that this ap-
peared from their result to be less than that of radium. But they realized the
impossibility of reconciling this with the other evidence. Russell and Rossi,
after reviewing all possible explanations, remarked: "But the possibility
that they (thorium and ionium) are identical in all physical and chemical
properties, and differ only in atomic weight and radioactive properties,
should not be lost sight of."
    I endorsed this view:
    "The simplest, if somewhat heterodox, view to take is that ionium is a
long-period element, and that its spectrum, as well as its whole chemical
behaviour, is identical with that of thorium. It is clear that the conception of
the chemical elements as necessarily homogeneous is undetermined and that
different elements with different atomic weights are chemically identical
not as an exception but as a consequence of the way in which the known dis-
integration series have been shown to run their course. In non-radioactive
matter this heterogeneity cannot be distinguished, but it is not so in the case
of matter actually in process of evolution." (1912, p. 322).



                   The radio-elements and the periodic law

I now pass on to the second phase of this history, the fitting of the radio-


            ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                           385
elements into the Periodic classification. In 1911 in the first edition of my
Chemistry of the Radio-elements (pp. 29 and 30) I discussed the effect on the
chemical character of the loss of the α-particle, which is a helium atom carry-
ing two atomic charges of positive electricity.
   "The loss of a helium atom or α-particle appears to cause the change of the
radio-element not into the next family but into the next but one... Thus we
have in each series a well-marked sequence from the tetravalent family
(radiothorium, ionium) into the divalent family (radium, etc.) and into the
non-valent family ( emanations). Again the product derived from polonium
is probably not bismuth but lead, in each case the step being from the family
of even valency into the next, the family of odd valency being missed. But
this is not all. The progress is certainly not so straightforward as this. In
several cases the matter appears to alternate in its passage, passing through the
same family not once but twice. The product from thorium (group IV) is
mesothorium (group II). The product of the latter is radiothorium (group
IV), which in turn produces thorium X (group II). Again radium D is chem-
ically non-separable from lead (group IV), its product is polonium (group
VI), while the product of the latter is almost certainly lead (group IV)."
   This α-ray generalization enabled me to see that uranium X must be inter-
mediate between the two uraniums (1912, p. 321) though his conclusion was
published by several others as well as by myself before the Report was issued.
   But I was at fault in one point, in that I thought the "active deposit" prod-
ucts, such as radium A, B and C, were unstable transition links between the
beginning of the period and the end of the last, analogous to the VIIIth
group between gold and tungsten, and not represented in the table.
   In 1912, the chemical character of the post-emanation, or active deposit,
products began to attract more attention. The ease with which these prod-
ucts are separated from all inactive matter from the volatile emanations,
and, after the discovery of recoil methods, partly from one another, without
chemical methods accounted probably for the fact that none of them were
known to resemble known elements. However, von Lerch from as far back
as 1905 had studied their electrochemical deposition. His rule that the suc-
cessive products are successively more electrochemically "noble", i.e. more
easily deposited on metals, and on the cathode during electrolysis, in acid
solution, though true for radium A, and for the B and C members, was
found to fail for thorium D, which is less easily deposited than thorium B.
   Rutherford in his original discovery of the thorium active deposit, had
shown that it volatilized at a bright red heat. Makower in 1909 had found for


386                                             Y 1921                       F.SODD

 three constituents of the radium active deposit, the following volatilization
 points, radium A 900o, radium B 600 and radium C 1200 C. In 1912
                                            o                       o



 Schrader and, after him, A. S. Russell, observed that the volatility of the ac-
 tive deposit is much affected by exposure to various gaseous reagents such
 as chlorine, and by volatilizing in different atmospheres. Thus in hydrogen
 radium C commences to volatilize at 360o and, for the three products to-
 gether, volatilization is complete at 650o. This clearly pointed to definite
 chemical and physico-chemical properties even of these excessively ephem-
 eral elements, which before had been thought to exist in too infinitesimal
 quantities to show such definite reactions. In this year, von Hevesy studied
 the electrochemistry of these products from the standpoint of modern
 theory, and showed that they might be used to test the consequences of this
 theory at degrees of concentration far below anything that can be attempted
 by any other method. He also obtained the important result that in their
 electrochemical behaviour the three B-members are identical among them-
 selves, and also the three C-members.
    In 1912, A.Fleck, commenced to publish the results of a long series of
 systematic studies into the chemistry of such of the radio-elements, with
period over one minute, as remained uncharacterized, from the definite
point of view of finding which known element each most resembled in
 chemical character, and then whether it was separable or not from that ele-
 ment when mixed with it4. He confirmed the characterization of uranium X
as chemically non-separable from thorium, showed that radioactinium,
 which Strömholm and Svedberg had found to be isomorphous with thorium,
 was in fact non-separable from it, and, most important of all, proved that
 thorium B is non-separable from lead. Hitherto from von Lerch’s electro-
 chemical researches it had been supposed that these products were chemically
 allied to the noble metals. In his next communication, Fleck showed that
 mesothorium 2 was non-separable from actinium, that radium B and ac-
tinium B were extremely similar to lead and probably non-separable from
it, that the three C-members are closely allied and probably chemically
similar to bismuth, whilst radium E has properties in all respects identical with
those of bismuth5. These results, as concerns the B- and C-members and
radium E, were at variance with those found at the same time by von Heve-
sy6 from the speed of diffusion, a method that previously had given a fase
result for thorium X. Hevesy classed the B-members as univalent and the C-
members and radium E as divalent, but later showed these conclusions were
in error.


             ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                            387
   From now on, the history of this development is extraordinarily involved,
and brief reference to the actual dates of the various publications is essential
before passing on to the nature of the advance itself. G. von Hevesy and
A. S. Russell were both working in Rutherford’s laboratory in Manchester,
and published within a fortnight papers containing a form, only in part cor-
rect, of the great generalization, which was to clear up, as in a sudden flash,
the whole subject. A fortnight after Russell, K. Fajans working in Karlsruhe,
published this generalization complete and accurate in every detail, A fort-
night after Fajans, in a paper amplifying and amending Russell’s scheme, I
published exactly the same scheme as that of Fajans, whose paper only
reached England after mine was written. His generalization was remarkable,
in that at the dates on his two papers Dec. 31, 1912 and Jan. 15, 1913 only
one of Fleck’s important results, that of thorium B, had been published. But
to me in full knowledge of all Fleck’s experimental results, the complete
generalization was obvious so soon as Russell’s paper directed attention to it.
Till then I had scrupulously avoided even thinking about these results until
they were completed, for fear of giving an unconscious bias to the work in
progress in the laboratory.
   Hevesy 7, from a general examination of the valencies of the radio-ele-
ments, concluded that the effect of the expulsion of the p-particle is to alter
the valency by one in the opposite direction to the effect of the expulsion of
the α-particle, which produces an alteration of two. But for the pre-emana-
tion members, the direction in which the valency was altered was regarded
as the opposite of that for the post-emanation members. He thus supposed
that the valency, having been reduced to zero at the emanations by suc-
cessive a-ray expulsions, then rises to two, making radium A divalent. This
got the tetra-valent elements right, but others (RaCa2 AcD, and ThD) were
wrong. Others again could be wrong or right according as the valency is
taken as the Group Number or 8 minus the Group Number.
   Russell* dealt with the position of the element in the Periodic Table, and
not with its valency, and published the first scheme tracing the whole dis-
integration series through the table. In the pre-emanation part he predicted
the existence of uranium X, in the vacant place between thorium and ura-
nium, and was in general correct, showing the effect of the expulsion of the
β− ray as causing a shift of one place in the direction opposite to the double shift
caused by the expulsion of the a-ray. But he failed to envisage the Periodic
Table as a continuous succession of places, and passed from the emanation or
zero family to the preceding members in the table in the reverse order,


388                                    1921 F.SODDY

placing radium A with mercury. Though he got the C-members correct
to Fleck’s characterization, it was by arbitrarily making the effect of the β−
ray in the same direction as that of the α-ray change*.
   In the correct generalization of Fajans9 and myself10, each a-ray expelled
causes a shift of two places in the direction of diminishing mass and diminish-
ing valency, as I had pointed out two years before, and each β-ray expelled
causes a shift of one place in the opposite direction, consistently throughout
the whole series, including the very complicated branchings that occur at the
C-members**. In the elucidation of these, Fajans had himself been the pio-
neer the year previously.
   The scheme is shown in Fig. I (from the British Association Reports,
Birmingham Meeting, 1913) in substantially the form in which I first pub-
lished it, except that the actinium series has been separated to make it clear-
er. In its present form (1922) it is shown in Fig. 2 (from a recent paper on
Isotopes, contributed to the Brussels Conference of the Institut Internatio-
nale de Chimie Solvay, April 1922), which shows the actinium series linked
up with the uranium series***. In the first (Fig. I), the places in the Periodic
Table are represented as differing by one in the number of electrons in the
atom, a loss of one electron being regarded, purely conventionally, as equiv-
 alent to the gain of a single atomic charge of positive electricity. This was
 shown only in the diagram in the Jahrbuch der Radioaktivität, not in that
* Used as we now are to the idea of Atomic Number, this error may now seem obvi-
ous. Rather it is the great clarification of the nature of the Periodic System, first effected
by this very generalization, which makes the error appear obvious.
** The details are




*** The atomic weights shown for the actinium series are purely provisional(see p. 395).


              ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                               389




Fig. I. Radio-elements and Periodic Law. All elements in the same place in the Periodic
Table are chemically non-separable and (probably) spectroscopically indistinguishable.


in the Chemical News published simultaneously. At the time, in the ab-
sence of any special theory of atomic structure, or of the nature of positive
electricity, this was natural, but now it is more in accord with our theoretical
knowledge to represent the abscissae as units of positive electricity (Fig. 2).
Either represents the fundamental fact that in the expulsion of an α-particle
twopositive charges are lost by the atom, and in the expulsion of a β-particle
one negative.
   "Whenever, by the expulsion of α- or β-rays, two or more elements come
to occupy the same place in the Periodic Table, then, independently of all
other consideration, such as the atomic weight, the disintegration series to
which the element belongs, its radioactive character and the nature of the
radioactive changes, in which it is produced, or by which it is transformed,
these elements occupying the same place, are non-separable from one anoth-
er, and are, so far as is known, identical in chemical character." (1913, p. 263).
   Of the radio-elements still uncharacterized, the generalization shows that


                                 1921 F.SODDY




Fig. 2. Radio-elements and Periodic Law. All elements in the same vertical column
                                   are isotopes.


             ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                         391
the A- and C-members must be non-separable from polonium and radium
C2, thorium D and actinium D from thallium. As regards radium A, thod-
rium D and actinium D these predictions were at once confirmed by
Fleck 11.
   The rules demanded that uranium X must consist of two successive prod-
ucts uranium X, and uranium X2, the latter a new member in the vacant
place in the Periodic Table, between uranium and thorium, and therefore
analogous to tantalum. Fajans and Göhring proved this at once 12. Uranium
X2 is very short-lived product responsible for the more penetrating of the
two types of β-rays given by "uranium".
   Since actinium is in the IIIrd family, its parent must be chemically iden-
tical with radium in the IInd family, if it is produced in a β−ray change, and
in the Vth family, in the place occupied by uranium X2, if it is produced in
an α-ray change.
   Lastly, and most important of all, the generalization showed that the ulti-
 mate products of all three series in all branches must be in the place occupied
by the element lead. The atomic weight of the lead from both branches of
 the thorium series is 208, and that of the lead from uranium, in the main
branch, 206. Common lead with the atomic weights 207.2 might well be a
mixture of both.
   In this same year, 1913, Sir Joseph Thomson and F. W. Aston announced
 the discovery by the positive-ray method of a constituent of atmospheric
neon of atomic mass 22 in addition to the main constituent of atomic mass
 20.
    "The discovery is a most dramatic extenions of what had been found for
 elements at one extreme of the Periodic Table to the case of an element at
 the other extreme, and strengthens the view that the complexity of matter
 in general is greater than the periodic law alone reveals." (1913, p. 266).



                   The theoretical interpretation of isotopes

In 1911 Rutherford put forward, in a somewhat tentative form, his now
well-known "nuclear theory" of atomic structure, to account for the scat-
tering of α− and β−particles in their passage through matter. To account es-
pecially for the large angles through which occasional α−particles are deflec-
ted it was necessary to suppose that these were the result of single encounters
between the α-particle and an atom struck. For this to be possible, there


392                                  1921 F.SODDY

must exist within the atom a much more powerful electric field than, for
example, in the Thomson atom. Rutherford’s supposed that, at the centre
of the atom, there existed a nucleus of very minute dimensions relatively to
the atomic volume, upon which was concentrated a large charge of one
sign, the rest of the atom being occupied by a number of single charges of
the opposite sign which neutralized the central or nuclear charge. At first
nothing was postulated in the theory as to the sign of this central charge,
whether positive or negative, or as to the constitution of the nucleus. But it
was natural to regard the central charge as positive, and the rest of the atom
to be occupied by a system of negative electrons. In the next two years,
much further experimental evidence on scattering accumulated, and the
theory began to assume a more definite form.
   "Single scattering" on this theory should be proportional to the square of
the nuclear charge. The experimental results indicated that it was approx-
imately proportional to the square of the atomic weight of the scattering
atom, and that there must be one unit of nuclear charge for two units of
atomic weight, approximately. In 1911 Barkla14 arrived at the same conclu-
sion, as to the number of electrons in the atom from the scattering of X-rays.
   In 1911, Van den Broek conceived the idea that "to each possible* intra-
atomic charge there corresponds a possible element". This necessitates that
successive elements in the Periodic Table should differ by one unit of nuclear
charge and by one electron in the outer shell, as was subsequently practically
directly established by the periodic law generalization already considered.
   To account for the supposed experimental result that there was one unit
of charge for two units of atomic weight, Van den Broek at first attempted to
revive the old and discarded "cubic" Periodic System of Mendeleeff, because
it accommodated 120 elements. Since the last, uranium, has the atomic
weight 240 it satisfies this requirement of giving on the average two units of
 mass per "place", i.e. per unit of charge. His attempts to fit the radioactive
 elements into this scheme appeared purely fanciful. But he then found that
 the actual experimental results for scattering were in entire accord with his
own idea, on the accepted Periodic Table, which accomodates some 90
 elements. Thus uranium in the last place with an intra-atomic charge of
 about 90, must have between 2 and 3 units of mass per unit of charge. So
 that, if its nucleus be imagined to be composed of 60 α-particles with charge
 120, there must be present is also 30 electrons to give the nuclear charge 90.

* "Possible" here meant "integral"


             ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                         393
   This suggestion of Van den Broek was adopted by Bohr16 in his theoretical
researches on the structure of the atom. Bohr’s views required that the elec-
tronic system is stable, so that to remove an electron involves the expenditure
of energy. Hence it followed that the B-particles expelled in radioactive
change must come from the nucleus and not from the external electronic
system.
   I had arrived at the same conclusion from totally different evidence17. If,
for example, the two electrons that are expelled as B-rays, when uranium X,
changes into uranium II, come from the same region of the atom as the two
that are lost when UIV in uranous salts is oxidized to U VI in uranic salts, then
the latter ought to be chemically non-separable from thorium, just as ura-
nium X1 is. Fleck18, trying this, found that, whereas there is a very close
resemblance between uranium in the uranous salts and thorium, yet the two
may be separated chemically without difficulty.
    The expulsion of two + charges as an α-particle and of two electrons as
β−particles from the nucleus causes the element to come back to the original
place that it occupied in the Periodic Table. It followed therefore that the
place in the Periodic Table is an expression of the nett nuclear charge, i.e. of
the difference between the numbers of positive and negative charges in the
nucleus. Thus the chemically identical elements - or isotopes, as I called them
for the first time in this letter to Nature, because they occupy the same
place in the Periodic Table - are elements with the same algebraic or nett
nuclear charge, but with different numbers of + and - charges in the nuc-
 leus. On the view that the concentrated positive charge is the massive particle
 in the atomic structure, since positive electricity has never been observed
 free possessing less than the mass of an atom, the atomic weight of the iso-
 tope is a function of the total number of positive charges in the nucleus and
 the chemical character a function of the nett number.
    Though the nucleus possesses electrons there can be no in- or out-going
 of electrons between the nucleus and the external electronic system. Thus
 Rutherford’s atom affords for the first time a clear picture of the difference
 between a transmutational (radioactive) change and chemical one. Changes
 of the number of electrons in the external system are chemical in character
 and produce changes in the valency of the element. These are reversible and
 have no effect at all on the central nucleus. Whereas changes of the nucleus
 are transmutational and irreversible, and they instantly impress changes upon
 the external electronic system to make it conform to the new nucleus. So far
 as I was concerned, this interpretation of isotopes, in the light of Van den


394                              1921 F.SODDY

Broek’s conception and Rutherford’s nuclear atom, resulted in a great clari-
fication of my own ideas. It was completely independent of Moseley’s
researches into the spectra of X-rays, which then had not been published.
   Moseley19 determined by the crystal reflection method the wavelengths
of the homogeneous secondary X-rays, characteristic of the chemical ele-
ments, discovered by Barkla. He found that the squares of these wavelengths
are a function of a number, now called atomic number, which alters by one
unit in passing from the X-ray spectrum of any element to that of the next
to it in the Periodic Table. He was thus able to extend the definite determina-
tion of the number of places in the Periodic Table, which had been accom-
plished for the elements from uranium to thallium by radioactive change,
to the rest of the Periodic Table as far as aluminium. Moseley’s atomic
number is the same as Van den Broek’s intra-atomic charge and represents(I)
the nett positive charge on the nucleus, (2) the number of electrons in the
 outer electronic system of the atom, (3) the number of the place in the Period-
 ic Table occupied by the element, counting from hydrogen as unity to
 uranium as 92, as was first definitely determined later by his method.



                            The origin of actinium

In conclusion, I may very briefly deal with the verification of the two chief
predictions from the α−and β−change generalization.
   The possibility that actinium resulted in a β−ray change necessitates that
its parent should be an isotope of radium.This I disproved directly by an exam-
ination of a specimen of Giesel’s radium bromide that had been kept ten
years without any chemical treatment 2 0. There was a total absence of radio-
actinium, after that time, in the preparation. The remaining alternative that
actinium was produced in an α-ray change from "eka-tantalum", a missing
element occupying the place between uranium and thorium, and isotopic
therefore with uranium X2, was finally established by the independent work
of Hahn and Meitner21, and of J. A. Cranston and myself22, in 1918.
    As regards our work, we found that uranium X 2 could be readily vola-
tilized from uranium X1 in a stream of carbon tetrachloride and air at an
incipient red-heat. Thus we used uranium X2 as a radioactive indicator of
 the chemical properties of the unknown substance, something in the same
 manner first employed by Paneth and von Hevesy. When pitchblende was
 treated in the same way, a sublimate was obtained free initially from all the


             ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                        395
known pm-emanation members, but continuously generating actinium, as
shown by its characteristic emanation, with the lapse of time.
   Hahn and Meitner found the missing element in the insoluble residues
from the treatment of uranium minerals for radium, and separated it by
methods designed to remove tantalum, which was added in minute quantity
as required to assist the separation. From their work, the new element, pro-
toactinium as they call it, promises to be of more than ordinary interest.
They have not succeeded in separating it from the tantalum present or added
during the operations. It gives α− ray of low range, generates actinium at a
rate which has enabled the average life of the latter substance at length to be
definitely established, as 28.8 years. The production of protoactinium from
uranium has been demonstrated by the examination of old uranium salts.
From the quantity present, its average life is 17,000 years. (Mr. Mennie
working in my laboratory, with a large quantity of uranium, which I had
very carefully purified in 1909, has confirmed this.) This period corresponds
with a quantity of 72 mg of protoactinium per 1,000 kilograms of uranium,
 or 333 mg of radium, in minerals. So that it appears likely that it will be the
second new radio-element to have its atomic weight, spectrum and chemical
 nature determined, in the same way as Mme. Curie accomplished for radium.
   Protoactinium appears to be produced as a branch product, claiming 3%
 of the total number of atoms disintegrating, from either uranium I or ura-
 nium II through Antonoff’s uranium Y, which is its direct parent. But it has
 also been suggested by Piccard that it may be derived from a totally inde-
 pendent isotope of uranium (actinouranium). The series runs:



               VI     Iv     v    III     IV       II       0

The atomic weight of actinium is thus still indefinite.



             The atomic weight and spectrum of lead and ionium

 The ultimate product:. Immediately after the prediction that the main end
 products of uranium and thorium must be different isotopes of lead with
 atomic weights 206 and 208, determinations were undertaken of the atomic
 weight of lead separated from thorium minerals as free as possible from ura-
 nium, and of that from uranium minerals as free as possible from thorium.


396                               1921 F.SODDY

These resulted in the complete verification of the prediction. The highest
value yet found for "thorium-lead" is 207.9 (Fajans and Hönigschmid) and
the lowest value for "uranium-lead" 206.05, the accepted value for common
lead being 207.20.
   In my own work, 30 kilograms of Ceylon thorite, containing 55% of
thorium, about 1% of uranium and 0.4% of lead, was hand-sorted, and,
from 20 kilograms of selected pieces, 80 grams of metallic lead were sep-
arated.
   The view that isotopes have identical external electronic systems naturally
leads to the deduction that their atomic volumes must be identical and, there-
fore, that the atomic weights must be proportional to their density. The
thorite lead was cast in vacuo and its density compared with that of a simi-
larly purified and treated specimen of common lead. Its density was found
to be 0.246% greater, leading to a calculated value of 207.7 for the atomic
weight. By fractional distillation in vacuo three fractions were obtained and
the atomic weight of the middle one found, from the ratio Pb : PbCl 2 to be
207.69, as compared with 207.20, found in a parallel estimation of ordinary
lead. The war interrupted these researches, but it is of interest to record that,
for another specimen of my thorite lead, Hönigschmid found, by the silver
titration method, 207.77 ± 0.014 23.
   Simultaneously, work on lead from uranium minerals by T. W. Richards
and his students at Harvard, and by Hönigschmid and Mlle. Horovitz, gave
values all below the international figure. In the case of the two most carefully
selected minerals, Morogoro uraninite and Norwegian bröggerite, values
206.46 and 206.063 were found . For these also the atomic volume was
                                   24



found to be the same as for ordinary lead, the density being as much less as
the atomic weight is less than for ordinary lead. For a similar reason, that
the molar solubilities of isotopes must be equal, the actual solubilities of salts
of different isotopes must be proportional to their molecular weights. Two
independent determinations of the melting point of the lead of radioactive
origin failed to reveal any difference from that of ordinary lead. To ordinary
methods the spectrum of the lead prepared from radioactive minerals is
identical with that of common lead.
   Hönigschmid and Horovitz have determined the atomic weight of thori-
um and compared it with that found by the same methods for the ionium-
thorium preparation prepared by Auer von Welsbach. For the first they
 obtained the value 232.12, and for the second 231.51, a difference of atomic
weight of 0.61, corresponding with a percentage of ionium of about 30, if


            ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                        397
230 be the value for the latter. This is in conformity with the period of
ionium and the a-radiation of the preparation. But the spectrum of the
iomum-thorium preparation was in every respect identical with that of
thorium.
   Although no difference in spectrum is observable by ordinary methods,
Harkins and Aronberg25, photographing the strongest line of the lead spec-
trum, 4058, in the sixth order of a 25-cm Rowland grating, found a minute
difference. The wavelength of the line for uranium lead of atomic weight
206.34 is 0.0043 Å greater than that for common lead. This infinitesimal
difference has been confirmed by Merton26, who found also for my thorite
lead a wavelength 0.0022 Å less than that of common lead.



                                  Summary

We may now sum up the various distinct steps in this long and tangled story
of the origins of the conception and discovery of isotopes.
I. Experimental methods are available, uniquely for the radio-elements,
which enable isotopes to be severally recognized, by a suitable combination
of chemical analyses at appropriate intervals of time, whereby, owing to the
successive changes of the constituents, they may be separated, although
chemical analysis alone is quite unable to effect this separation. This dates
from 1905.
2. The complete chemical identity of isotopes, as distinct from close chem-
ical similarity, came gradually to be recognized. McCoy and Ross were
the first to express a definite opinion in this sense (1907).
3. The existence of chemical identities among the radio-elements led to
the deduction that they might exist among the common elements and be
responsible for the exceptions in the Periodic classification, and for the fact
that the atomic weights in some cases depart widely from integral values.
Strömholm and Svedberg first made this deduction (1909).
4. The recognition of the effect of the expulsion of, first, the a- and then,
the β-particle (1911 and 1913) led to the correct placing of all three disinte-
gration series from end to end in the Periodic Table. On the experimental
side the names of A. Fleck, and on the theoretical side that of G. von Hevesy
and A. S. Russell, but pre-eminently that of Kasimir Fajans, are associated
with this advance.
5. The identity of isotopes was extended to include their electrochemistry


398                                 1921 F.SODDY

(Paneth and Hevesy) and their spectra (Russell and Rossi), though here in-
finitesimal differences were subsequently found (Harkins and Aronberg,
Merton).
6. Isotopes, on Rutherford’s theory of atomic structure, are elements with
identical external electronic systems, with identical nett positive charge on
the nucleus, but with nuclei in which the total number of positive and nega-
tive charges and therefore the mass is different. The originator of the view
that the places in the Periodic Table correspond with unit difference of
intra-atomic charge is Van den Broek.
7. Moseley extended this view to the non-radioactive elements, and ulti-
mately for the whole Periodic Table, and the definite determination of the
number and sequence of the places in it became possible.
8. The chemistry of the radioactive elements and the lacunae previously
existing in the radioactive series, especially in connection with the origin of
actinium, have been cleared up, and this led to the discovery of a new ele-
ment, proto-actinium (eka-tantalum) in uranium minerals, occupying the
place between uranium and thorium and existing in sufficient quantity for
the compounds of the element to be prepared in a pure state, and its spec-
trum and atomic weight ultimately to be determined, as Mme. Curie did for
radium. Cranston and I share with Hahn and Meitner the original discovery,
but the subsequent developments are due to the latter.
9. The preparation from radioactive minerals of different isotopes of lead
followed and the determination of their atomic weight, spectrum, density and
other properties, established that the same chemical character and atomic
volume can coexist with differences of atomic weight. The work on the
ionium-thorium mixture from pitchblende is a second example.
 10. The last result, and perhaps the most important of all, is the subject of
 the award of the Nobel Prize for Chemistry for 1922.




 1. H. N. McCoy and W. H. Ross, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 29 (1907) 1709.
 2. B. Keetman, Jahrb. Radioaktiv., 6 (1909) 268.
 3. A. Schuster, Nature, 91 (1913) 30, 57.
 4. A. Fleck, Chem. News, 106 (1912) 128.
 5. A. Fleck, Proc.Ckem. Soc., 29 (Jan. 30, 1913) 7; Trans. Chem. Soc, 103 (1913) 381.
 6. G.v. Hevesy, Physik.Z., 14 (Jan.15, 1913) 49.
 7. G.v. Hevesy, Phys.Z. 14 (Jan. 15, 1913) 60.
 8. A.S. Russell, Chem.News, 107(Jan.31,1913)49.


              ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF ISOTOPES                             399
 9. K. Fajans, Physik.Z., 14 (Feb. 15, 1913) 131.
10. F. Soddy, Chem. News, 107 (Feb. 28, 1913) 97; Jahrb. Radioaktiv., 10(1913) 188.
11. A. Fleck, Trans. Chem. Soc., 103 (1913) 1052, compare also W. Metzener. Ber.,
    46 (1913) 979.
12. K. Fajans and O. Göhring, Physik.Z., 14 (1913) 877.
13. E. Rutherford, Phil. Mag., [6] 21 (1911) 669.
14. C. G. Barkla, Phil. Mag., [6] 21 (1911) 648.
15. A. van den Broek, Nature, 87 (1911) 78; 92 (1913) 372.
16. N. Bohr, Phil Mag., [6] 26 (1913) 476.
17. F. Soddy, Nature, 92 (1913) 400.
18. A. Fleck, Trans. Chem. Soc., 105 (1914) 247.
19. H. G. J. Moseley, Phil. Mag., [6] 26 (1913) 1024; 27 (1914) 703.
20. F. Soddy, Nature, 91 (1913) 634.
21. O. Hahn and L. Meitner, Physik.Z., 19 (1918) 208; 20 (1919) 529; Ber., 52 (1919)
    (B) 1812; 54 (1921) (B) 69.
22. F. Soddy and J. A. Cranston, Proc. Roy. Soc, 94A (1918) 384.
23. F. Soddy and H. Hyman, Trans. Chem. Soc, 105 (1914) 1402; F. Soddy, Nature,
    94(1915)615;Eng.,(May28,1915);(Oct,1,1915); Ann.Rept.Progr.Chem.,(1916)
    247; O. Hönigschmid, Z.Elektrochem., 25 (1919) 91.
24. T. W. Richards and M. E. Lembert,J. Am,. Chem. Soc, 36 (1914) 1329; Compt. Rend.,
     159 (1914) 248; T. W. Richards and C. Wadsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 38 (1916)
    221, 1658,2613; T. W. Richards and W. C. Schlumb, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 40 (1918)
     1403; T. W. Richards and N. F. Hall, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 42 (1920) 1550;
    O.Hönigschmid and S.Horovitz, Compt.Rend., 158 (1914) 1676; Monatsh., 36
    (1915) 353; O. Hönigschmid, Z.Elektrochem., 25 (1919) 91; M. Lembert, Z. Elek-
    trochem., 26 (1920) 59.
25. W.D. Harkins and L. Aronberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 3 (1917) 710; J. Am. Chem.
     Soc., 42 (1920) 1328.
26. T. R. Merton, Proc. Roy. Soc., 96A (1920) 338.
