                           FRIEDRICH B ERGIUS


          Chemical reactions under high pressure
                          Nobel Lecture, May 21, 1932



Since the Royal Swedisch Academy of Sciences has considered my work on
the development of high pressure methods for chemical reactions, and in
particular work on the hydrogenation of heavy hydrocarbons and coal, to
be worthy of the Nobel Prize, I wish to combine my gratitude for the high
honour bestowed upon me with a report on the development of these system-
atic investigations and chemical researches to which my academic and indus-
trial activities have been mainly devoted for almost 20 years.
   The success of the first experiments with the high-pressure hydrogenation
of oil and coal in the years 1912 and 1913 was due to the fact that the laboratory
which I directed at that time in Hannover had already developed a method
which permitted the conduct of a wide range of reactions in relatively easily
operated apparatus at pressures up to about 300 atm and temperatures up to
450 o.
   In 1908 and 1909 I was given an opportunity in the laboratories of Nernst
and Haber to witness the use of the high-pressure methods in investigations
into the ammonia equilibrium and ammonia synthesis, and I tried my hand,
in these laboratories, at that time, at syntheses by high-pressure techniques,
with the then imperfect apparatuses, and with little success.
   When, in 1909, I joined the physical-chemical laboratory of Hanover In-
stitute of Technology led by Bodenstein, I decided to take up work on this
new field which appeared promising to me on a wider scale, and developed,
first in the laboratory of the Institute, and then in my own, relatively well-
equipped private laboratory, assisted by several colleagues, of whom I would
specially mention Hugo Specht, the methods and apparatus for investigating
a number of diverse high-pressure reactions in the course of the years.
   The problems in most of the investigations were mainly of a technical
nature. Purely theoretical research was also done, but, if only for material
reasons, to provide an economical justification for the private research labor-
atory, the principle of practical applicability of the problems studied had to
predominate.
   In our work, high pressure was used as a means for carrying out chemical


            CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                                245
reactions in very different senses of the term. I reported on this in a mono-
graph in 1912 ("The Application of High Pressures to Chemical Processes and
 Simulation of the Genesis of Bituminous Coal")*. Ammonia synthesis had
first availed itself of the possibility to influence the position of the equilibrium of
 a gas reaction in a certain direction by increasing the pressure. In our first de-
tailed study into high-pressure reactions we applied the Le Chatelier princi-
ple to a heterogeneous system, i.e. to the study of the dissociation of calcium
peroxide, whose dissociation pressure curve can, as a result of the slow rate
of disintegration at low temperatures, only be measured in a temperature
range at which the pressure of dissociation is already about 100 atm.
    We made extensive use of the possibility, provided by high pressure meth-
 ods, to conduct reactions between substances that are liquid at normal temper-
atures, i.e. at temperatures at which the vapour pressure of the substances
concerned is very high, in other words to react liquids with one another at
temperatures at which the substances concerned otherwise react only as gases
and even then react very slowly or not at all with one another. This includes
investigations into the reactions of superheated water, its influence on coal and
iron and the saponification of organic chlorides, such as chlorobenzene and ethyl-
ene chloride with aqueous solutions of caustic alkali. In the end, we employed
in the hydrogenation of heavy petroleum and coal, the increase in hydrogen con-
centration made possible by high pressure, and thus enabled acceleration
of the rate of addition of hydrogen to the disintegrating oils and to coal.



                        Study of the dissociation of CaO2

My main reason for mentioning the first series of experiments in 1910, the
measurement of the dissociation equilibrium of calcium peroxide, is that it played
a significant part in the development of our high-pressure work. The econom-
ical and technical starting-point of these researches was the interest which the
production of peroxides and perborates had gained at the time. Production
methods of hydrogen peroxide and its starting materials were anything but
perfect. Engler and Becker had computed the dissociation conditions of cal-
cium peroxide by means of Nernst’s approximate formula and found that
its dissociation pressure reaches 1 atm. at as little as 55 o, and must rise to about

* Die Anwendung hoher Drucke bei chemischen Vorgängen und eine Nachbildung des Ent-
stehungsprozesses der Steinkohle, Verlag Wilhelm Knapp, Halle, Germany.


246                              1931 F.BERGIUS

100 atm at 170o. Our experiments showed that measurement of these disso-
ciation pressures was only possible when the calcium peroxide was examined
not in the solid state, but dissolved in the caustic potash-caustic soda eutectic.
After lengthy efforts, we succeeded in obtaining fairly accurate measurement
of dissociation pressures, starting both from the calcium peroxide decompo-
sition side, and from the formation of oxygen and lime. In the end we also
succeeded in converting lime in suspension in caustic alkali melt practically
completely into CaO2.
   This observation has acquired no industrial significance, but it greatly
assisted in the development of our high-pressure method: our problem was
to keep apparatus, consisting of a decomposition vessel and a precision ma-
nometer, oxygen supply pipes and valves, completely leak-proof for several
weeks at temperatures up to 400o. Since the capacity of the reaction bomb had




                 Fig.1. High-pressure experimental vessel, 1910.


           CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                            247




             Fig.2. Experimental vessel for peroxide equilibria, 1910.


to be restricted to a few hundred cubic centimetres, infinitesimal gas losses
would have resulted in considerable errors of measurement during the weeks
required for establishing equilibrium. Figs. 1 and 2 show the apparatus used.
Pressure vessels of similar design and various sizes were used by us for years
and may well still be suitable for small laboratory tests.
   Even in the investigations into direct production of calcium peroxide in
an alkali melt with highly compressed oxygen it was found to be necessary
to bring the high-pressure gas into contact with the suspension of lime in
caustic alkali melt by agitation or some other means of mixing. At that time,
in 1911, experience was still lacking in the manufacture of pressure-resistant
stuffing boxes suitable for sealing a relatively rapidly rotating agitator shaft.
We built a pressure vessel having a small electromotor in its upper, cooled
part, agitation taking place in the lower, heated part. To avoid the danger of
highly compressed oxygen acting on organic substances, the small electro-
motor was to be fitted with windings of enamelled wire. The mechanic con-
cerned however failed to carry out this instruction, and we had a very un-


248                              1931 F.BERGIUS




                            Fig. 3. Rotary vessel, 1912.


pleasant explosion. The quantity of insulating material in the tiny motor was
infinitesimal, which did not prevent the part of the pressure vessel containing
the motor from exploding on starting up, and the vessel with a wall thickness
of about 30-40 mm was shattered which could have done considerable
damage.
   This experience spoilt our taste for working with highly compressed oxy-
gen, but it furthered our cause in that we realized that such agitators are far
too complicated and dangerous. In 1912 we therefore designed the extremely
simple so-called rotary bomb shown in Fig. 3. A length of Mannesmann tube
was closed at the ends with a high-pressure cone each, to which an extended
shaft was attached. The shaft was supported in bearings and was driven by
a chain wheel drive or a belt pulley. The pressure vessel rotated in an electrical
oven. For temperature measurement, one of the cones had a central drilling,
and a tube terminating in the reaction chamber accommodated a fixed ther-
mocouple introduced from outside. Pressure was read on a manometer
which rotated together with the apparatus. The design of this convenient
apparatus acquired great significance for the further development of our




                            Fig. 4. 5-litre rotary vessel.


            CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                              249
work, and we not only used it in our own studies, but made similar appara-
tus available to other research laboratories. It underwent numerous changes
later; we ourselves used it in sizes from 250 cm3 to 40 litres. Fig. 4 shows the
5 l vessel, which was mainly used at a later date.


                             Production of hydrogen

Work on catalytic hydrogenation and the development of technical hydro-
genation reactions of hardening of fats and of the ammonia synthesis directed
the attention of expert circles at that time to methods for the production of
pure and cheap hydrogen. At that time, the process of the Badische Anilin- &
Soda-Fabrik for the catalytic conversion of carbon monoxide of water gas
into hydrogen and carbon dioxide was still unknown. The best available
method for producing hydrogen seemed to be that according to Linde in
which the carbon monoxide of the water gas was separated from the hydro-
gen by liquefaction at low temperatures.
   In 1911 I conceived the notion that it should be possible to carry out the
water gas reaction, which occurs at a technically satisfactory velocity and then
according to the formula C + H2O = CO + H2 only at temperatures of the
order of 900o, at considerably lower temperatures, at which the position of
the equilibrium is practically such that the reaction corresponds to the for-
mula C + 2H2O = CO2 + 2H2.
   The object therefore was to inhibit the troublesome formation of carbon
monoxide completely. To achieve this aim, it would have been necessary
to work at temperatures below 600o, at which steam practically ceases to act
on coal. The aim was to discover whether, as it were by increasing the steam
concentration, i.e. by using liquid water, the reaction velocity might not be
increased sufficiently to adjust the equilibrium. In following this train of
thought, the attempt had to be made to make liquid water react with coal
in the vicinity of the critical point, i.e. at pressures of about 200 atm. This reac-
tion was studied for a period of time with the apparatus according to Fig. 5,
and we succeeded on a modest scale in oxidizing coal under these conditions
into carbon dioxide and hydrogen, in particular when we dissolved metal
compounds as catalysts in the water, the chlorides of thallium in particular
proving successful. We failed however to achieve oxidation velocities which
would have rendered technical exploitation of this reaction promising. Obser-
vations were however made in these experiments which were of importance


250                           1931 F.BERGIUS




      Fig. 5. Experimental vessel for high-pressure hydrogen from iron, 1911.

for our later high pressure work. When peat was used as coal material be-
cause of its finely distributed form on one occasion, it was observed that excep-
tionally large amounts of carbon dioxide formed, and that carbonaceous resi-
due remained in the vessel whose elementary analysis approximated ex-
traordinarily to the composition of natural flame coals. A closer study of this
phenomenon revealed that what was involved was the coalification reaction,
the reaction of the conversion of plant substance into coal, which became
soon after the subject of prolonged investigations of importance for later
developments, to which I shall revert below.
   On the other hand it was discovered that under certain conditions the water
containing metal salts greatly attacked the iron walls of the vessels with evolu-
tion of hydrogen. The latter phenomenon was investigated and it was dis-
covered that it is possible to convert iron, treated in a suitable form with


            CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                              251
liquid water at temperatures between 300 and 350 o, almost quantitatively
into Fe3O4 with formation of large amounts of hydrogen, and that this reac-
tion progresses extremely rapidly. In these circumstances, the water acts as
it were as an acid and is decomposed by the metallic iron. It was remarkable
that this reaction by contrast with the effect of steam on iron at high temper-
atures is not a pure surface reaction, but that fairly finely distributed iron, e.g.
filings, produces hydrogen with practically quantitative yield. The Fe 3O 4
could be reduced with coal or carbon monoxide gas and used for hydrogen




              Fig. 6. Apparatus for producing high-pressure hydrogen.


252                       1931 F.BERGIUS




      Fig. 7. Apparatus for producing high-pressure hydrogen.




      Fig. 8. Apparatus for producing high-pressure hydrogen.


           CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                              253
production again, but as a result of the formation of iron carbide its effective-
ness gradually declined. The hydrogen produced was exceptionally pure (the
impurities amounted to no more than hundredths of 1% ) and it could be
drawn off from the reaction vessel at pressures of 200-300 atm. In further
work on this reaction we first directed our attention to the development of
apparatuses considerably exceeding the scope of laboratory facilities. In a
small factory in a Hanover suburb we erected a battery of three vessels of 401
capacity each and produced hydrogen continuously, which we drew off into
pressure cylinders at the production pressure of 200 atm. The illustrations that
follow (Figs. 6, 7, 8) give some details of this installation which looks ex-
tremely primitive today, but could only be put together with difficulty at
that time.
   The pressure vessels which were heated from the outside and in which
several charges were processed every day, were sealed at the base by a conical
closure held in position by a heavy screw. A man-sized spanner was used to
disengage this contraption to place a new iron charge in position.
   In this plant, as in our laboratory, the high pressure installation was on prin-
ciple operated in a room separate from the control room. Regulating of
heating, observation of pressures, drawing off of gases, etc., occurred in a
control room separated from the reaction vessels by a stout wall.
   In 1913 we had arrived at a method of working which permitted high pres-
sure reactions to be conducted in apparatuses of 40-50 l capacity.

                 Saponification of organic chlorine compounds

At about the same time I started, together with Kurt H. Meyer, experiments
on the hydrolysis of difficultly saponifiable organic chlorine compounds, in
particular the conversion of chlorobenzene into phenols with caustic soda solution.
This reaction, which cannot be carried out under normal conditions, is suc-
cessful, as we were able to show, if chlorobenzene is heated with caustic soda
solution at temperatures of about 300o; apart from phenol, phenyl ether forms
in the first reaction phase, which can be converted into phenol after prolonged
treatment, so that the chlorobenzene can be converted into phenol practically
completely. The process can be carried out in a few hours and provides a cheap
method for producing phenol from benzene in conjunction with alkali elec-
trolysis. It has been carried out on a large scale in the USA under exploitation
of our patents which were confiscated during the war, and continues to be
used successfully there.


254                             1931 F.BERGIUS

   This reaction of course requires the use of the rotatable autoclave, to achieve
thorough mixing.
   Mention should be made in discussing this work of the conversion of
ethylene chloride into ethylene glycol by treatment of ethylene chloride with
bicarbonate solutions; these investigations were also made in 1913 and 1914.
As was discovered at a later date, this reaction proceeded at a temperature
which corresponded to a pressure of about 15 atm, so that high pressure
methods were not strictly necessary in the later technical operation of glycol
production.



                               Hardening of fats

 As early as 1912 we worked on the problem of the hydrogenation of organic
substances with the aid of highly compressed hydrogen. By virtue of the
increased concentration of hydrogen at high pressure we hoped to achieve
effects similar to those made possible at normal pressure by the action of cata-
lysts. Special interest attached at that time to the hydrogenation of unsaturated
vegetable and animal oils and fats. It was an obvious idea to study the hard-
ening of fats with high pressure hydrogen, in particular with strongly un-
saturated fats, such as the train oils. The results of treating such substances
with high pressure hydrogen at about 300o, a temperature at which these oils
in a reducing atmosphere can still be treated undecomposed, was, as the iodine
numbers showed, a considerable decrease of the unsaturated character. It was
however discovered that this phenomenon also occurred if treatment was
carried out under the same conditions not with compressed hydrogen, but
with compressed nitrogen. What was involved was, as could be established,
a polymerization process. No addition of hydrogen at high pressure without
catalysts to the unsaturated fractions of the fatty substances could be observed.



                               Oil hydrogenation

The action of highly compressed hydrogen in the treatment of heavy mineral
oils was very different.
   As early as 1910, Ludwig Landsberg had suggested that I should examine
the problem of splitting heavy oils and oil residues into benzines. Experts
were able to predict that the development of motor cars would lead to a


           CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                               255
considerable increase in petrol consumption, although no one at that time
had an accurate idea of the extent of this development. The cracking process-
es known at the time were extraordinarily imperfect. The losses that occurred
in the cracking of oils in the form of coke, methane, and unsaturated hydro-
carbons, were very high, and the formation of hard petroleum coke which
separated on the walls of the cracking apparatus rendered the technical opera-
tion of the process difficult and expensive. After spending some time on this
problem, I became convinced that the defects of the cracking processes and
the poor quality of the unsaturated benzines produced could only be finally
remedied by ensuring that the hydrogen discharged during cracking in the form of
 methane was replaced by fresh supplies of hydrogen with the object of inhibiting
the separation of hydrogen-deficient products leading to coking. It was to
be expected that the benzines formed under such circumstances would have
fairly saturated character.
    Having obtained some data on the progress of the cracking reaction, we
investigated the effect of highly compressed hydrogen on petroleum hydro-
carbons under the temperature conditions at which the cracking reaction
 occurred. We attempted as it were to embed the highly-compressed hydrogen in
 the molecular structure, loosened by high temperature, of the high-boiling petroleum
fraction. These experiments which were at first done in a vertical autoclave,
 clearly showed absorption of hydrogen by the cracking oils, non-occurrence
 of coke separation, and less unsaturated character of the lighter oils formed.
    The application for the first patent on the high pressure hydrogenation of oils
 was filed in May 1913, some time after we had obtained experimental evidence
 of the practicability of the reaction. The delay in filing the application caused
 a lot of trouble later.
    It was soon discovered that the temperature range in which the hydrogen
 had to be brought to react was narrowly restricted. It was important to work
 in a temperature range in which the velocity of the hydrogenation reaction
 was not excelled by that of the cracking reaction, and to keep the partial
 pressure of the hydrogen sufficiently high to ensure rapid progress of the
 hydrogenation reaction. At the same time care had to be taken to ensure that
 sufficient hydrogen was available to each splitting oil particle at all times.
 Naturally, this latter requirement could only be satisfied if sufficient mixing
 of oil and hydrogen was assured. It therefore represented a great step forward
 in the practicability of the oil hydrogenation reaction when we carried out this
 experiment in the rotary bomb mentioned above which permitted intimate
 mixing of gas and liquid.


256                            1931 F.BERGIUS




              Fig. 9. Hydrogenation work. Vessel with insert, 1914.

   Special experiments in which contact between the iron wall of the pressure
bomb and the oil to be hydrogenated was prevented, proved that with oils
the hydrogenation effect also occurs if any influence of the iron vessel walls
is excluded, i.e. when metallic contact substances are prevented from parti-
cipating (Fig. 9). The fact was however even then discovered and patented
that addition of metals or metal oxides has a special effect in high pressure
hydrogenation of oils, if the hydrogenation of sulphur-containing raw mate-
rials is involved.
   It was soon discovered that the removal of the light products formed, and
the supply of fresh hydrogen, had a very favourable effect on the process of
the hydrogenation reaction. To put such operating conditions into effect, we
had to use a fixed apparatus with agitator, because the rotary vessel did not
permit continuous discharge of the substance (Fig. 10).


          CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                           257
  Work on the high-pressure hydrogenation of oils, in which Herr Paul Kal-
nin assisted me in a valuable way, had progressed sufficiently at the beginning
of 1914 to enable us to work on a slightly larger scale, i.e. with the 40-litre
reaction vessel which I have already shown you.




            Fig.   IO.   Hydrogenation work. Vessel with agitator, 1914.


258                             1931 F.BERGIUS




                              -7




                Fig. 11. 40-litre vessel with (vertical) agitator, 1914.
      1 = stuffing box                    9 = hydrogen supply pipe
      2 = manometer                      10 = thermocouple
      3 = reflux condenser               11 =manometer
      4 = agitator shaft                 12 =drain valve for unconsumed hydrogen
      5 = decomposition vessel           I3 = cooler
      6 = discharge                      14 = distillate cylinder
      7 = heater                         15 = throttle valve
      8 = discharge valve                16 = drain valve for distillate


   Fig. 11 shows this somewhat more technical experimental apparatus. By
contrast with later work, we used a vertical, externally heated, vessel into
which hydrogen entered from below and bubbled through the liquid which
was at the same time kept in motion by an agitator. The oil vapours flowed
through a reflux condenser, in order to retain the heavy products which were
then condensed under pressure in a conventional cooling system and collected
in a distillation flask; excess hydrogen was discharged through a valve with
small quantities of split gases. This step ensured discharge of the decomposed
light products from the reaction space and renewal of hydrogen. A heavy


          CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                            259
gas oil was processed at that time which was hydrogenated at a temperature
of 430o and a pressure of 120 atm. About half the gas oil was converted into
benzine without any formation of coke.
  The investigations of the years 1913 and 1914 extended to the splitting of
gas oils and distillation residues of crude oils from Galicia and Rumania. It
was found that coke formation was avoided even when processing heavy
residues by proper distribution of hydrogen, that the benzines formed had
practically saturated character, that the sulphur in the oils was substantially
separated as hydrogen sulphide, and that a further fraction of the sulphur was
absorbed by added iron oxide, whereas the distillation products contained
only slight amounts of sulphur.
  The objects of our research were somewhat modified by the war in that
the development of an industrial large-scale plant for the practical operation
of hydrogenation came to the fore. This industrial work included hydro-
genation of oil and coal; it will be discussed in more detail below.



                     Investigations into the origin of coal

I have already mentioned that we observed as early as 1911 in the treatment
of peat in the presence of liquid water at temperatures above 300 o that con-
siderable quantities of carbon dioxide formed in this process, and that the
composition of the powdery residue was close to that of natural fat coals.
This observation prompted us to study this decomposition process of plant
substances more closely because it might be similar to the process of meta-
morphism which these substances undergo in Nature in the course of millions
of years during the gradual transition of vegetable substance into bituminous
coal. Considerations of energy show that the principal constituent of plant
substance, i.e. cellulose, which is formed by the influence of solar energy in
the assimilation process and the subsequent reaction processes in the plant, is,
thermodynamically speaking, an unstable substance whose rate of decay is
however so slow at normal temperatures that the process escapes observation.
Very large quantities of energy are liberated by cellulose decomposition,
which is generally known from the processes of strongly exothermal carbon-
ization of wood.
   Very many researchers have attempted over the years to convert the plant
substance, i.e. cellulose or wood, which contains apart from cellulose mainly
the thermochemically similar lignin, into coal, by heating, i.e. by increasing


260                             1931 F.BERGIUS

the rate of decomposition of cellulose, and when we began to examine the
problem recent, elegant studies had been reported by Klason, Heidenstam,
and Norlin, who had attempted to prevent the superheating of the carbonizing
substance due to the heat of decomposition of cellulose, by introducing steam.
In composition the carbonization products obtained by them approximate
to natural coal, but their hydrogen content is still too low, because it was still
impossible by the methods used to exclude overheating completely which
leads to decomposition of the coal substance as it forms.
   In our experiments, the carbonizing peat was in intimate contact with
liquid water which was unable at the working temperature in the high pres-
sure vessel to change to steam but absorbed and distributed the heat generated
by the decomposition of the molecules, because it is a good conductor of heat.
In the case under discussion, the water under high pressure served not as a reac-
tant, but only as a heat-distributing medium, as it were a thermostat liquid.
   With the same apparatus we carried out extensive and systematic experi-
ments on the decomposition of the cellulose in wood and other plant sub-
stances at temperatures between 290 and 350o, in the presence of liquid water,
i.e. at pressures of up to about 200 atm. The quantities of carbon dioxide and
water formed were measured quantitatively. Per 2 parts cellulose, there were
formed 2 parts carbon dioxide and 5 parts water, and a powdery substance
which corresponded approximately to C10H8O. The hydrogen content fluc-
tuated within narrow limits. If the hydrogen content of the solid substance
was small, the gases contained slightly larger amounts of it. It would be de-
vious to give details here about this reaction on which I worked for many
years, at first with Hugo Specht and John Billwiller, and later with Paul Eras-
mus. In recent times, the reaction has reawakened the interest of chemists and
has been studied in particular by Berl. I would like to mention that both cellu-
lose and lignin, treated in this manner, lead to practically the same carbona-
ceous end products.



                       Coalification of cellulose effluents

The results of studies on the processes that occur during the decomposition
of plant substance on heating in the presence of liquid water prompted Erik
Hägglund and me to study the recovery of the effluents of the sodium and
sulphate cellulose industry from the point of view of the coalification reac-
tion. Nowadays, these effluents which contain lignin and other constituents


          CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                               261

of wood that are soluble in alkaline media, are evaporated with expenditure
of considerable quantities of coal, and the inorganic salts are liberated from
the organic substances by combustion. It is known that highly offensive odours
occur whenever the sulphate process is employed. We attempted to coalify
the lignin dissolved in the effluents, i.e. to conduct separation of the organic
substance from the aqueous solution under avoidance of evaporation by




               Fig. 12. Diagram of cellulose effluent decarbonization.
              a pump                             g control post
              b pre-heater                        h tar separator
              c heat exchanger                       tar receiver
              d lead bath furnace                k cooler for alcohol vapour
              e reaction vessel                         e for coal slurry y
                                                 l scales
              f column                          m screw conveyor


262                             1931 F.BERGIUS

heating the effluents under pressure to about 300 o. At this temperature the
organic substance decomposes substantially into carbon dioxide and a readily
separable coal-tar mixture. A little methyl alcohol also formed, and consider-
able quantities of acetic acid are found in the solution. Application of this
process therefore avoids evaporation of very considerable quantities of water
from the effluents. There is no need to burn the organic substance: it is largely
recovered as coal and tar and there is moreover a fairly considerable yield of
acetic acid.
   The acetic acid obtained need not be isolated after each boiling process,
because storing of acetic acid in the effluents is by no means disadvantageous
for the cellulose boiling process. It is sufficient if after each boiling process
about 5 of the solution is concentrated to produce the acetic acid which is
obtained in the form of sodium acetate. This process is likely to gain im-
portance for the cellulose industry. Fig. 12 shows the experimental apparatus
for the operation of effluent carbonization.



                            Hydrogenation of coal

The investigations into the conversion of cellulose into coal by coalification
in conjunction with our studies on the hydrogenation of heavy oils opened
the way to the discovery of the process for liquefying coal. We had observed that
a product forms from cellulose with splitting of certain quantities of carbon
dioxide and water which we considered to be similar to natural coal, and we
had further observed that the hydrogen in this so-called synthetic coal is un-
stable. The attempt to formulate this process of cellulose decomposition led
me to a hypothetical concept of the constitution of this coal-like substance
formed from cellulose. I assumed that our artificial coal is a compound of
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen - that coal is not carbon, was not obvious at
the time - whose structure must resemble that of certain unsaturated com-
pounds of terpene-like character, and that this compound should be capable
of absorbing not inconsiderable quantities ofhydrogen. By hydrogen absorp-
tion, such a compound would approach the class of heavy petroleum hydro-
carbons. As a consequence of these trains of thought of whose hypothetical
character I have always been aware, it was an obvious step to attempt hydro-
gen addition to coal and to endeavour at the same time to discover whether
the hydrogen-charged coal can be split into medium and light hydrocarbons.
This experiment was done analogously with the oil hydrogenation tests at


           CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                                263
my suggestion by my assistant Hugo Specht in the summer of 1913, and even
the first test showed that 80% of a coal obtained by cellulose coalification passed on
treatment with hydrogen at about 150 atm pressure and at temperatures between
400 and 450o, into gaseous, liquid and benzene-soluble substances.
   On being repeated with natural coal these experiments gave practically the
same results. They became the basis of the process for the production of
liquid and soluble compounds from coal, i.e. of the process which we soon
called "coal liquefaction" and for which I filed a patent applicationin the autumn
of 1913.
   It was soon discovered in the course of the experiments that the addition of
hydrogen to the coal substance resulted in not inconsiderable evolution of
heat. We prevented the noxious, decomposing effect of this heat by hydro-
genating the coal in suspension with a suitable oil which was liquid at the
operating temperature. The added oil had practically the same effect as the
water added during coal&cation. It absorbs the heat occurring at the site of
the reaction, distributes it, and by this means avoids local overheating. Once
again it is mainly a heat distributing liquid, although at the same time it
undergoes splitting at high temperature under the effect of the hydrogen.
   The first experiments with coal hydrogenation were carried out, similarly
as the experiments with oil, in our small vertical experimental pressure vessel;
 further development was carried out in the rotary vessels which made for
good penetration of the reacting material by hydrogen. Soon after the dis-
 covery of this reaction it was found that all so-called younger coals are more
 or less suitable for the process, both brown coals and bituminous coals, and
that wood and lignin could of course also be liquefied, particularly after
 previous coalification. Not amenable to the hydrogenation reaction were the
 hydrogen-deficient and anthracite coals, whose carbon content in the ash-free
 substance exceeds 85%. This observation was in agreement with the view we
 had formed from certain results of earlier coalification experiments. It was
 found that the addition of metal oxides, in particular iron oxides, has a favour-
 able effect on the hydrogenation of coal also. We attributed this effect to the
 prevention of polymerization of the heavy fractions, brought about by the
 sulphur present.
   During hydrogenation, a certain amount of gas forms; a considerable
 amount of carbon dioxide in young brown coals: little of this is formed in
 bituminous coals. Methane and some ethane always form, and about half
 the oxygen present in the bituminous coal is found as water in the reaction
 product. The nitrogen is found in the distillation product in the form of


264                             1931 F.BERGIUS

ammonia and nitrogen bases, most of the sulphur escapes as hydrogen sul-
phide. Most of the carbon is present as light, medium, and heavy oil, a carbon
residue goes to waste as hydrogen- and oxygen-deficient compound with the
ash as non-liquefied substance. This fraction ofnon-liquefied carbon depends
on the nature of the coal used. In brown coals it is extraordinarily small, in
the best case no more than 1%, in coals with a high fusain content it rises to
20% and more.
   Circumstances did not permit us to carry out systematic investigations,
either in oil or coal hydrogenation, into the effect of catalysts on increased
absorption of hydrogen by the cleavage products of the basic substance. Scat-
tered observations had shown as early as 1920 and 1921 that detailed investiga-
tions into this subject would be promising, but we lacked experience, experi-
mental apparatus, and staff for carrying out such investigations effectively.
We had to content ourselves with developing the hydrogenation processes in
the manner in which they can be operated in the direct process without sub-
sequent catalytic treatment.



                      Industrial high-pressure apparatus

Sufficient light had been thrown in 1914 on the hydrogenation reaction of
heavy oils and coal with the assistance of Messrs. Specht, Kalnin, Billwiller,
to permit deliberation as to whether and how industrial apparatus for the
operation of these reactions on a large-scale could be erected. Industrial high-
pressure apparatuses had at that time only been built for gas reactions in the
homogeneous system. It was our task to construct apparatuses in which
liquids, solids, and gases could be introduced, heated, mixed, and made to
react, and from which the reaction products could be continuously discharged.
Industrial apparatus for the hydrogenation of coal and oil was developed
during the years 1915-1925 in our Mannheim-Rheinau factory particularly
with the assistance of Messrs. Tillmann, Debo, Prof. Riedler and Löffler.
   Since temperature and pressure conditions are practically the same for the
hydrogenation of heavy oils and coal, and considering that intimate contact
between the hydrogen and the liquid or suspension to be hydrogenated is
essential in both reactions, it could be assumed from the beginning that an
apparatus suitable for oil hydrogenation could, suitably supplemented, be
applied to the liquefaction of coal. In both processes it was necessary to intro-
duce solid substances into the reaction apparatus - relatively small quantities


           CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                             265
of iron oxide for desulphurization in oil hydrogenation, the entire raw material
in coal hydrogenation. It was obvious from the start that the introduction of
solids into a high-pressure reaction chamber and the discharge of solid residues
would present special difficulties, and it took several years before a suitable
solution of this technical problem was discovered.
   Suitable reaction apparatuses were cylindrical, forged or pressed steel ves-
sels which could at that time, in 1915, be fabricated with a diameter of about
80 cm. Because of this restriction on the diameter, cylinders of considerable
lengths had to be used to get a reaction chamber of significant size. We de-
cided to use a vessel 8 m long. The fundamental question was if these cylin-
ders should be arranged vertically or horizontally. With the vertical arrange-
ment, the reaction had to be conducted in a relatively high column of liquid,
through which the reaction gas flowed and to which it imparted turbulence.
Provided the quantity of flowing gas was sufficient, it appeared feasible to
work without an agitator and to leave the hydrogen to perform the task of
mixing or agitation. In this arrangement it had to be accepted that during
agitation the newly supplied reaction material constantly mixed with the as
yet unprocessed material, and that the residue drawn off always contained
still unprocessed or only partly hydrogenated material. We therefore decided
to use a horizontal vessel with agitation, which the raw material entered at one
end, while the hydrogenated products were drawn off at the opposite end.
Hydrogen and oil were heated before entering the vessel approximately to
the reaction temperature, to make maximum use of the expensive reaction
space. Since, at the operating temperatures, the strength of iron is considerably




                                 Outer vessel      Inner vessel




Fig. 13. Bergin plant Rheinau of the Deutsche Bergin AG für Kohle und Erdölchemie,
                                Mannheim-Rheinau.


266                              1931 F.BERGIUS

below the maximum strength attained at 300o, we decided from the start to
dispense with heating of the pressure vessel from outside, because any external
heating would have meant that the iron was brought to temperatures higher
than the maximum temperatures necessarily required for the reaction. Heating
was effected inside the pressure vessel in that into the pressure vessel there was
built a second relatively thin-walled pipe (Fig. 13). Heating medium practi-
cally at the same pressure as that prevailing in the reaction space was pumped
through the narrow space between the two pipes.
   Originally, the heating medium selected was naphthalene, the only liquid
substance which withstood the temperature required for any length of time.
Difficulties in operation arose because of the position of the melting point of
naphthalene, and we therefore later used a compressed gas (nitrogen or com-
bustion gases) as heat carrier, which method of heating proved highly suc-
cessful.
   The heating gas was pumped by a high-pressure circulating pump in the
manner (Fig. 14) such that it passed from the pump in the cold state first
through a double-coil system in which the vapours issuing from the vessel




                     Fig. 14. Diagram of high-pressure apparatus.
        1= hydrogen cylinder                     7 = reaction vessel
        2 = hydrogen pump                        8 = heating medium pump
        3 = heating system                       9 = heating medium container
        4 =pump                                 10 = condenser
        5 = paste press                         11 = equalizers
        6 =heating furnaces (A and B)           12 = collectors


          CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                             267
condensed. In this manner, it was heated to above 300 o. It was then heated
in a furnace, passed through the jacket space of the vessel into a second heating
furnace and then to a further double-coil system where it generated the heat
for heating the hydrogen and the oil. The cooled heating gas returned to
the pump. In this way good thermal economy and readily controllable
heating was ensured. The temperature in the reaction chamber could be held
constant within a few degrees for weeks at a time. The products discharged
from the condensers were collected in high-pressure vessels.
   The more rapidly the products formed are removed from the reaction
system, the better the cleavage reaction progresses. Hydrogen was therefore
used in excess. It had to be kept in circulation. It left the reaction vessel to-
gether with the vaporous and liquid products, was cooled and separated in
the product-collecting vessels from the condensable oils and from most of




                          Fig. 15. High-pressure vessel.


268                   1931 F.BERGIUS




      Fig. 16. Circulating pump for compressed nitrogen.




                     Fig. 17. Condensers.


CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                 269




    Fig. 18. Collecting tanks for finished products.




                                            --
   Fig. 19. Control post and measuring instruments.


270                     1931 F.BERGIUS




      Fig. 20. Control post and measuring instruments.




                Fig. 21. Paste press for coal feed.
      I= hydraulic cylinder               5 = screw conveyor
      2 = reversing valve for 1           6 = filling funnel
      3 = piston rod                      7 = transport pipe
      4 = cylinder for the paste


CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE
                                                    271




          Fig. 22. Paste press for coal feed.




   Fig. 23. Test rig for small-scale experiments.


272                        1931 F.BERGIUS




      Fig. 24. Reaction vessels of continuous experimental plant.




      Fig.25. Machine-room for continuous experimental plant.


            CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                            273




                                                             Carton dioxide




            Fig. 26. Flow diagram of continuous method of operation.


the methane which is readily soluble in oil, and was returned to the vessel
by a circulating pump. Following various modifications, this arrangement
proved very suitable.
   Construction work began in 1915, and the apparatus had reached its final
form about 1924. Figs. 15-20 show parts of the apparatus.
   The design of reliable stuffing boxes for carrying the agitator shaft into the
vessel presented great difficulty at first. The construction of an agitator 8 m
long was also far from simple. New instruments had to be developed for
measuring the flowing high-pressure gases. The design of durable valves which
regulated the expansion of the reaction products consisting of liquid, solid,
and gaseous substances from 150 atm to 1 atm presented great difficulty, but
was accomplished satisfactorily. To feed solid coal as simply as possible con-
tinuously to the high-pressure space presented particular difficulty. A suitable
method for doing this was found in 1920. The coal was mixed with highly
viscous oil, e.g. tar or the heavy fraction of the product formed in coal lique-
faction, into paste that was stiff at normal temperatures and which could be
circulated by hydraulically-operated pistons with the assistance of a specially
designed pump. (Fig. 21 shows the paste press of the small, Fig. 22 that oft he
large apparatus.)


274                            1931 F.BERGIUS

   In our large experimental apparatus at Mannheim-Pheinau, construction
of which commenced in 1916 and which started experimental operation in
1919, we studied mainly the splitting of oil residues on a large scale. Heavy
sulphur-containing products, such as the residues of Panuco oils, Persian oil
residues, and other products were processed. The maximum daily output was
30 ton. Depending on the starting material, we obtained

                               25-35% benzine,
                               40-50% gas oil,

the remainder being heavy products which could be processed to lubricating
oils. The waste products were a small percentage asphalt and a few percent
methane.
   When the large-scale apparatus had been sufficiently tested with oil, it was
at the end used for a short period for processing coal.
   The study of coal liquefaction was mainly conducted in smaller experi-
mental plants. Preliminary tests, several thousand of them, were carried out
in a rotary vessel apparatus (Fig. 23). About 200 different types of coal were
investigated in this manner, mainly in the years 1922-1925. For more exten-
sive investigations we used apparatus with a continuous throughput of about
1 ton per day which operated on the same principle as the large-scale apparatus,
except that the method of heating it was simpler. Experimental work was
successfully conducted at that time by Messrs. Noack, Hofsäss, Schoenemann,
Rheinfelder. Figs. 24-25 show the experimental rig.
   The diagram, Fig. 26, shows the results of liquefying a normal bituminous
coal: 100 parts coal are mixed with 40 parts oil, taken from the process, with
addition of a little iron oxide, and are introduced into the high-pressure appa-
ratus in the form of a paste with 5 kg hydrogen. About 128 kg liquid and solid
products and 20 kg gas are obtained. About 7 kg water are separated from the
discharge; the water contains about ½ kg ammonia.
   The following are obtained from the oil:

                20 kg products with a boiling point up to 230°
                10 kg products boiling between 230 and 330°, and
                51 kg heavy oils and asphalt,

in which are contained the inorganic constituents of the coal and the non-
liquid or soluble coal substance, amounting, in the case under discussion, to
about 10% of the coal used. These products and about 2 kg benzine which are
recovered from the gas represent the yield from the coal used.


            CHEMICAL REACTIONS UNDER HIGH PRESSURE                          275
    Corresponding to the 40 kg paste oil supplied, an analogous fraction must
 be returned to the process. The experimental apparatus permitted operation
 with a degree of accuracy such that at a daily throughput of 1 ton coal, the
 products introduced were recovered in the end products except for a
 loss of about 1%.
    As a rule, the processing of brown coals or pitch coals presented less diffi-
 culty than did bituminous coal and produced higher yields. I have already
 mentioned that we were able to open up the ash-free substance of such coals
except for a residue of about 1%.
   On average, hydrogen consumption amounted to 5%. of the weight of the
coal. No difficulty arose in causing considerably larger quantities of hydrogen
to be taken up by further pressure treatment of the primary products, which
greatly increased the yield oflow-boiling products at the expense of the high-
boiling oils. Economical considerations will decide the extent to which hy-
drogen consumption may be increased in hydrogenation of coal and its
liquefaction product.
   From the gaseous products, methane and ethane, hydrogen and carbon
dioxide can be produced by splitting at high temperature in the presence of
steam, employing a process to whose industrial development we successfully
applied ourselves for some time. The reaction proceeds in two stages. Methane
and steam are converted into carbon monoxide and hydrogen

                          CH 4 + H2O = CO + 3H2.

Further hydrogen forms by passing the mixture of carbon monoxide and
steam over a catalyst in the presence of excess steam

                           C O + H 2 O = C O2 + H2

so that, according to the formula

                         C H4 + 2H2O = CO2 + 4H2

four molecules hydrogen are formed for each molecule CH4. It is sufficient
to split part of the methane-ethane mixture in this way to obtain the quantity
of hydrogen required for the process. The carbon dioxide mixed with the
hydrogen can easily be separated with water under pressure following the
compression of the gases. As far as I know, this principle ofhydrogen produc-
tion is now being exploited in America for the hydrogenation of oil.
   The separation of the heavy oil fractions from the inorganic substances
presented major problems. Since this point is of essential importance for the


276                             1931 F.BERGIUS

practical operation of coal liquefaction, we examined it in detail and found
separation could satisfactorily be accomplished by filtering the discharges in
filter cells at suitable temperatures. We discovered that the more completely
the product issuing from the apparatus had been subjected to the action of
hydrogen, the more easily separation could be effected. Complete hydro-
genation can be achieved in a horizontal vessel if the agitator is so designed as
to prevent mixing of unprocessed and semi-finished products with the fin-
ished product, which is not possible in vertical hydrogenation apparatus. Oils
with good lubricating characteristics were recovered from the heavy fractions
of the coal oil.
    As already mentioned, we carried out no systematic investigations into the
influence ofcatalysts on the hydrogenation of heavy oils and coal. The elegant
investigations into the effect of various catalysts on these hydrogenation pro-
cesses at the Badische Anilin- & Sodafabrik were carried out when our own
researches were nearing conclusion, and these investigations resulted in the
hydrogenation processes now being operated at the factories of LG. Farben-
industrie.
    My own work on high pressure has now come to an end. Many problems
 which stimulated the urge to research in the course of work on high-pressure
 reactions which lasted for almost two decades, must remain uninvestigated,
 because efforts are now devoted to another field. The need for concentration
 is an important result of many years of practical research.
