THE LONG SEARCH FOR STABLE TRANSITION
METAL ALKYLS
Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1973

by
G EOFFREY W ILKINSON
Imperial College of Science & Technology, London, England



Chemical compounds in which there is a single bond between a saturated car-
bon atom and a transition metal atom are of unusual importance. Quite aside
from the significance and role in Nature of the cobalt to carbon bonds in the
vitamin B 12 system and possible metal to carbon bonds in other biological
systems, we need only consider that during the time taken to deliver this lec-
ture, many thousands, if not tens of thousands of tons of chemical compounds
are being transformed or synthesised industrially in processes which at some
stage involve a transition metal to carbon bond. The nonchemist will pro-
bably be most familiar with polyethylene or polypropylene in the form of do-
mestic utensils, packaging materials, children’s toys and so on. These materials
are made by Ziegler-Natta* or Philipps’ catalysis using titanium and chro-
mium respectively. However, transition metal compounds are used as catalysts
in the synthesis of synthetic rubbers and other polymers, and of a variety of
simple compounds used as industrial solvents or intermediates. For example
alcohols are made from olefins, carbon monoxide and hydrogen by use of
cobalt or rhodium catalysts, acetic acid is made by carbonylation of methanol
using rhodium catalysts and acrylonitrile is dimerised to adiponitrile (for
nylon) by nickel catalysts. We should also not forget that the huge quantities
of petroleum hydrocarbons processed by the oil and petrochemical industry
are re-formed over platinum, platinum-rhenium or platinum-germanium sup-
ported on alumina.
   In all of these processes, every single molecule, at some point in the cataly-
tic cycle, is involved in the formation of a metal to carbon single bond. Of
course, catalytic processes require that the metal to carbon bond be unstable
- or, more accurately, that it be labile and able readily to undergo chemical
reactions such as




  Today however, I am concerned not with catalysis but with the synthesis of
simple, stable metal compounds that have single bonds to saturated carbon.
* Nobel Laureates in Chemistry, 1963.


138                               Chemistry 1973


The synthesis of stable metal alkyls, and indeed, the nature of the transition
metal to carbon bond, is a problem that has been with us for a long time.
   The first attempts to make such compounds were shortly after Frankland’s
epoch-making discovery of diethylzinc. Thus in 1859 Buckton wrote, “a rich
harvest can scarcely fail to be reaped from submitting to the action of diethyl-
zinc the metallic compounds of the other groups” (1). However, he failed
with the transition metals, silver, copper and platinum, as indeed did other
workers in the 1800’s.
   We must not forget however, that a transition metal organo compound,
though of a quite different type had been made much earlier by the Danish
pharmacist Zeise. By the interaction of alchohol and chloroplatinic acid he
had made the salt K[C 2H 4PtCl] known now as Zeise’s salt. There fol-
lowed much discussion of the exact constitution of this substance but it was
to be over 125 years before the structure was determined and the way in
which ethylene is bound to the metal fully understood.
   The first stable metal alkyls to be isolated were those of platinum (2) and
gold (3) by William Pope and his co-workers Peachy and Gibson at the Muni-
cipal School of Technology in Manchester. The structure of the trimethyl-
platinum compound [(CH 3) 3PtCl] 4 was not to be determined by X-ray
diffraction for another 40 years. At the meeting of the Chemical Society in
London on March 21st, 1907, at which the discovery was announced, the
Chairman, Sir Henry Roscoe, complimented the authors on opening out an
entirely new branch of investigation “which might indeed be said to be a
wonderful find”. This promise took a very long time indeed to be fulfilled.
Even in 1955 it could be written (4) “It will be apparant from this overall
picture of alkyls and aryls of the transition metals that the often heard gener-
alization that they are much less stable and accessible than those of non-
transition metals is quite true”.
   The main reason for the failure to isolate stable compounds, despite evi-
dence that alkyls or aryls were present in solution at low temperatures, was
that the interaction of transition metal halides with Grignard reagents or
lithium alkyls usually gave either coupled products or products from decompo-
siton of coupled species. Typically, ferric chloride was used to make coupled
products, e.g., diphenyl.




   It was this coupling that Kealy and Pauson (5) were trying to utilize,
to make dihydrofulvalene, which led to their synthesis of dicyclopentadienyl
iron




It might be interesting to note in passing that my own conclusion about the


                                     G. Wilkinson                            139

structure of this iron compound was based on two points. Firstly, my knowl-
edge of the instability of transition metal alkyls and aryls, secondly my intui-
tion concerning the nature, uncertain at that time, of the binding of ethylene
in Zeise’s salt and of butadiene in Reihlen’s compound, C4H 6Fe (CO) 3. I
was convinced that ethylene was bound “sideways” (I) and that butadiene in
its cis form could act as a chelate (II), both double bonds being bound to the
metal.




“sandwich” structure.




           Fe




  Having read Linus Pauling’s* famous book, The Nature of the Chemi-
cal Bond, and heard about resonance, this meant that I could write various
resonance forms of IV, which directly led to the idea that all the carbon
atoms were equivalent as in V, that is to the well known structure of the
molecule now known as ferrocene*.

* Nobel Laureate in Chemistry 1954.
* This name was coined by Dr. Mark C. Whiting in March or April, 1952.


140                               Chemistry 1973

   During the next few years a number of stable compunds in which alkyl
or aryl groups were present were synthesised. The first was a phenyltitanium
alkoxide C 6H 5T i ( O C3H 7) 3 (6) and others soon followed. However, in es-
sentially all of the compounds a special type of ligand was present. These
ligands were what are referred to as π-acid or π-bonding ligands. Examples
are           CO, PEt 3, etc. Representative types of these alkyls are (VI-
IX).




The compound (VII) turned out to be especially interesting. We observed
only two signals in the proton magnetic resonance spectrum whereas the
         group alone should have had a complex spectrum; the infrared
spectrum however was consistant with (VII). Because of the analogy with
photography where, if one takes a picture of a moving wheel with a short
exposure time (infrared), the picture is sharp, whereas if one uses a longer
time (n.m.r.) it is blurred, I had to draw the conclusion that the
was actually quite slowly rotating via a 1 : 2 shift. This was the first recogni-
tion of what are now known as fluxional molecules, this particular type being
called “ring whizzers”.
   So the view developed that in order to have stable compunds with alkyl or
aryl groups bound to a metal, some “stabilizing” group also had to be present.
As recently as 1968, it was written, (7). “By any criterion, simple transition
metal alkyls are unstable” and “In contrast to the simple alkyls, some metal
complexes bearing other ligands in addition to alkyl or aryl groups are strik-
ingly stable”.


                                   G. Wilkinson                              141

   However, it was not too well recognised that the presence of such “stabiliz-
ing” ligands, is no guarantee of stability because other factors are involved.
Indeed, the activity of many metal complexes with π-bonding ligands pre-
sent in catalytic reactions depends on the lability of the metal of carbon bonds.
   Despite all the intense study of metal-carbon bonds and the arguments
about their stability, it is remarkable that only few bond energies are known.
The available thermodynamic data show that M-C bonds are not exception-
ally weak and the bond energies are quite comparable to those of non-
transition metal to carbon bonds. It could be argued that since the com-
pounds for which bond energies have been determined have “stabilizing”
            ligands present the M-C bond energies are abnormally high, but
this view cannot be sustained. There is no reason to assume this to be so, nor
is there any reason to assume that carbon would differ appreciably in its
capability to bond to transition metals compared to other first row elements
such as oxygen and nitrogen or to the halogens. For both oxygen and nitro-
gen, metal compounds in high oxidation states are well known, e.g., the al-
koxides such as V(OR)4 and dialkylamides such as W (NR 2)6. So, accepting
that there is no thermodynamic reason for the instability of simple alkyls, the
conclusion was that they are kinetically unstable.
   There are several ways by which a metal alkyl can decompose, but for
transition metal compounds one of the best established is the so-called hydride
transfer-alkene elimination reaction. Here, a hydrogen atom is transferred
from the second or β-carbon of the alkyl chain to the metal. The intermediate
hydrido-alkene complex can then lose alkene and the resulting metal hydride
decompose further e.g., to metal and hydrogen.




The reverse reaction, namely the generation of a metal alkyl from a metal
hydride plus alkene is the key reaction in many catalytic cycles involving alke-


142                                   Chemistry 1973


nes, hydrogen and metal species. It is involved for example in homogeneous
hydrogenation of unsaturated organic compounds and in the hydroformyla-
tion reaction in which aldehydes or alcohols are synthesised from alkenes,
carbon monoxide and hydrogen.
   Two relevant studies on this decomposition reaction are illustrative. Firstly,
a comparison (8) of the relative stabilities of dialkylmangenese compounds
made in situ shows that those alkyls, e.g., Mn (CH3)2 or Mn ( CH2C 6H 5)2, that
cannot readily undergo this reaction are most stable. Secondly, a compari-
son (9) of the decomposition products of two similar alkyls, one that has a
β-hydrogen, Bu 3 PCuCH 2C H2C H2C H3, and one that has not, Bu3PCuCH 2C
 (CH 3)2C 6H 5, shows that the former decomposes via H-transfer-alkene elimi-
nation, whereas the second decomposes by homolytic fission and a free radical
pathway.
   It will be observed that the H-transfer scheme involves a change in coor-
dination number of the metal. Thus the alkyl group occupies only one coordi-
nation site, whereas in the intermediate hydrido-alkene, two sites are involved
one for M-H and one for olefin coordination. Thus, one way in which an
alkyl could be stabilized against decomposition is by coordinative saturation
of the metal. If the sites required for the reaction to proceed are occupied
by firmly bound ligands, then there is no possible pathway for decomposition.
The stability of the alkyls with n-bonded ligands referred to above are prime
examples of this situation. Other examples are the alkyls of the substitution-
inert octahedral metal ions, Cr I I I, C oIII and Rh III such as the Werner*-type
complex ion (X).




A different type is on the chelated, coordinatively saturated alkyl (X) which
is thermally stable to 350° C.
   There seemed, to be another way, however, by which stable alkyls could be
obtained, namely by making the H-transfer reaction impossible. Thus if the
β-carbon atom were to be replaced by silicon or some other element that
could not form a double bond to carbon the formation of alkene becomes
impossible, even if there were a hydrogen atom on silicon; alternatively to
have no hydrogen on the        atom. We illustrated this concept (10) by use of
the trimethylsilylmethyl-CH 2Si(CH 3)3 group as the alkyl and were able to

* Nobel Laureate in Chemistry 1913.


                                   G. Wilkinson                               143

isolate for the first time a number of kinetically stable alkyls such as
C r [ C H2 S i ( C H 3 ) 3 ] 4 .
   A number of other groups, including of course the carbon analogue, neo-
p e n t y l - C H 2C ( C H3) 3, fit the required criteria of having no β-hydrogen,
and at the present alkyls are known with the following groups:




                                                                 M




   It may be noted that some of these alkyls, notably those of titanium, have
been recognised as Ziegler-Natta type catalysts for the polymerisation of al-
kenes (II).
   The simplest of all alkyl groups is, of course, the methyl group. Although
tetramethyltitanium has been known for some years, it decomposes above
- 70° very readily. However, by blocking the remaining two vacant coordina-
tion sites of the tetrahedral alkyl, e.g., by dipyridyl, the thermal stability
can be substantially increased. Despite its instability, vibrational spectroscopic
 studies (12) of Ti (CH 3)4 suggest that the Ti-C bond strength, as measured
by its force constant, is quite comparable to those of the tetramethyls of Si,
Ge, Sn and Pb. By contrast, the least stable of these, tetramethyl lead, can
be distilled at its boiling point        without decomposition. The instability
of Ti (CH3) 4 is thus clearly kinetic, there being readily accessible pathways
for decomposition possible because of its coordinative unsaturation. Although
the ch!oride methyls of niobium and tantalum, (CH 3) 3M C l 2, have been
known for some time and are reasonably stable, and we succeeded in charac-
terising a rather unstable tetramethyl of chromium, it appeared that if a
coordinatively saturated methyl could be synthesized, there was good reason
to expect it to be stable. The obvious candidate was tungsten for which the
hexa alkoxides and dialkylamides as well as the halides, are known. We suc-
ceeded in synthesizing hexamethyltungsten by the classical reaction of methyl-


144                               Chemistry 1973


lithium with tungsten hexachloride (13). The reaction sequence is a very
complex one and in order to obtain any W (CH3)6 it is necessary to use only
half of the theoretical quantity of methyllithium, probably to avoid the
formation of a methyl anion of the type known for other metals, e.g.,
L i4M o2 (CH 3)8. The final step probably also involves the disproportionation
of a reduced species :




Once obtained, hexamethyltungsten is reasonably stable and can readily be
characterised spectroscopically. It also has a number of interesting chemical
reactions. It soon became evident that the compound, though octahedral is
not coordination saturated and that some of the reactions are very facile be-
cause coordinative unsaturation allows initial coordination’ of the reagent.
Using tertiary phosphines, we were able to isolate 7-coordinate adducts,
W (CH3)6PR 3. One of the unusual reactions was that with nitric oxide which
quantitatively gives a compound (CH 3) 4 W [ON (CH 3) NO] 2 which con-
tains two N-nitroso-N-methyl hydroxylaminato rings. These are probably gen-
erated by initial coordination of nitric oxide followed by methyl transfer as in
the sequence:




This sequence can happen only twice as the coordination number then
reaches eight, which appears to be the maximum for tungsten in the VI
oxidation state. Although the synthesis of other methyls is in principle pos-
sible, there is more art to it than science. The only other methyl in a very
high oxidation state we have yet made is oxotetramethylrhenium(IV),
ReO (CH3)4, but oxo or similar methyls of tungsten, molybdenum, osmium etc.?
may well be stable if suitable synthetic methods are found.*
   So finally, in conclusion we can say that the effort of well over 100 years to
synthesize stable transition metal alkyls has finally succeeded. The long estab-
lished view that the transition metal to carbon bond is weak is now un-

*Note added in proof. Hexamethylrhenium (K. Mertis and G. Wilkinson) and
pentamethylantalum (R. Schrock, DuPont, Wilmington, private communication) have
recently been synthesized.


                                      G. Wilkinson                                   145


tenable and must be discarded. We can expect other types of transition metal
alkyls to be made in due course and can hope that in addition to their own
intrinsic interest some of them may find uses in catalytic or other syntheses.
The use of titanium and zirconium alkyls in alkene polymerisation and the
use of alumina treated with hexamethyltungsten for alkene metathesis (14)
give good grounds for optimism.


REFERENCES

 1. Buckton, G. B., Proc. Roy. Soc., 1859, 9, 309.
 2. Pope, W. J. and Peachy, S. J., Proc. Chem. Soc., 1907, 23, 86; J. Chem. Soc.,
     1909,371.
 3. Pope, W. J. and Gibson, C. S., Trans. Chem. Soc., 1907, 91, 2061.
 4. Cotton, F. A., Chem. Rev., 1955, 5.5, 551.
 5. Kealy, T. J. and Pauson, P. L., Nature, 1952, 168, 1039; for the independent
     earlier discovery of C10H10Fe see Miller, S. A., Tebboth, J. A. and Tremaine, J. F.,
     J. Chem. Soc., 1952, 632.
 6. Herman, D. F. and Nelson, W. K., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 1953, 75, 3877.
 7. Parshall, G. W. and Mrowca, J. J., Adv. Organometal. Chem., 1968, 7, 157.
 8. Tamura, M. and Kochi, J., J. Organometal. Chem., 1971, 29, 11.
 9. Whitesides, G. M., et al., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 232.
10. Yagupsky, G., Mowat, W., Shortland, A. & Wilkinson, G., Chem. Comm., 1970,
     1369; J. C. S. Dalton, 1972, 533.
Il. see e.g., Ballard, D. G. H., 23rd. Internat. Congress Pure Appl. Chem., Butter-
     worths, 197 1.
12. Eysel, H. H., Siebert, H., Groh, G. and Berthold, H. J. Spectrochim. Acta, 1970,
     26A, 1595.
13. Shortland, A. J. and Wilkinson, G., J, C. S. Dalton, 1973, 872.
14. Mowat, W., Smith, I., and Whan, D. A., Chem. Comm., 1974, 34.
