                                 G   EORGE   PORTER


           Flash photolysis and some of its applications
                           Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1967



    One of the principal activities of man as scientist and technologist has been the
    extension of the very limited senses with which he is endowed so as to enable
    him to observe phenomena with dimensions very different from those he can
    normally experience. In the realm of the very small, microscopes and micro-
    balances have permitted him to observe things which have smaller extension
    or mass than he can see or feel. In the dimension of time, without the aid of
    special techniques, he is limited in his perception to times between about one
    twentieth of a second ( the response time of the eye) and about 2·109 seconds
    (his lifetime). Yet most of the fundamental processes and events, particularly
    those in the molecular world which we call chemistry, occur in milliseconds
    or less and it is therefore natural that the chemist should seek methods for
    the study of events in microtime.
       My own work on "the study of extremely fast chemical reactions effected
    by disturbing the equilibrium by means of very short pulses of energy" was
    begun in Cambridge twenty years ago. In 1947 I attended a discussion of the
    Faraday Society on "The Labile Molecule". Although this meeting was en-
    tirely concerned with studies of short lived chemical substances, the four
    hundred pages of printed discussion contain little or no indication of the im-
    pending change in experimental approach which was to result from the intro-
.   duction, during the next few years, of pulsed techniques and the direct spec-
    troscopic observation of these substances. In his introduction to the meeting
    H. W. Melville referred to the low concentrations of radicals which were
    normally encountered and said "The direct physical methods of measurement
    simply cannot reach these magnitudes, far less make accurate measurements in
    a limited period of time, for example 10-3 sec."
      Work on the flash photolysis technique had just begun at this time and details
    of the method were published two years later1,2. Subsequent developments
    were very rapid, not only in Cambridge but in many other laboratories. By
    1954 it was possible for the Faraday Society to hold a discussion on "The
    study of fast reactions" which was almost entirely devoted to the new techni-
    ques introduced during the previous few years. They included, as well as flash


242                        1967 GEORGE PORTER

photolysis, other new pulse techniques such as the shock wave, the stopped
flow method, and the elegant pressure, electric field density and temperature
pulse methods described by Manfred Eigen. Together with pulse radiolysis,
a sister technique to flash photolysis which was developed around 1960, these
methods have made possible the direct study of nearly all fast reactions and
transient substances which are of interest in chemistry and, to a large extent,
in biology as well.
   The various pulse methods which have been developed are complementary
to each other, each has its advantages and limitations, and the particular power
of the flash photolysis method is the extreme perturbation which is produced,
making possible the preparation of large amounts of the transient intermedi-
ates and their direct observation by relatively insensitive physical methods.
Furthermore, the method is applicable to gases, liquids and solids and to
systems of almost any geometry and size, from path lengths of many metres
to those of microscopically small specimens.
   My original conception of the flash photolysis technique was as follows: the
transient intermediates, which were, in the first place, to be gaseous free
radicals, would be produced by a flash of visible and ultraviolet light resulting
from the discharge of a large condenser bank through an inert gas. The flash
would be of energy sufficient to produce measurable overall change and of
short duration compared with the lifetime of the intermediates. Calculation
showed that an energy of 10 000 J dissipated in a millisecond or less, in lamps
of the type which were being developed commercially at that time, would be
adequate for most systems. The bank of condensers was given by my friends
in the Navy, and, although I am grateful to them for saving us much expense,
it consisted of a motley collection of capacitors which, owing to their high
inductance, gave a flash of rather longer duration than was desirable. The de-
tection system was to consist of a rapid-scanning spectrometer and much time
was wasted in the development of this before I realised that to demand high
spectral resolution, time resolution and sensitivity in a period of a few milli-
seconds was to disregard the principles ofinformation theory. Subsequent ap-
plications of flash photolysis, with a few exceptions, have been content to re-
cord, from a single flash, either a single spectrum at one time or a small wave-
length range at all times. The use of a second flash, operating after a time delay,
to record the absorption spectrum of the transients must now seem a very ob-
vious procedure but it was many months before it became obvious to me. The
double-flash procedure was an important step forward and is still, in principle,
the most soundly based method for the rapid recording of information.


               FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND APPLICATIONS                                    243
   In the first apparatus the delay between the two flashes was introduced by a
rotating sector, with two trigger contacts on its circumference, a photograph
of which is shown in Fig. 1. The reason for using this, in preference to an
electronic delay, was in anticipation of difficulties with scattered light from
the high-energy photolysis flash, which could be eliminated by the shutter
incorporated in the rotating wheel. As flash durations were reduced it became
necessary to resort to purely electronic methods but the apparatus worked
well for several years and provided, for the first time, the absorption spectra
of many transient substances and a means for their kinetic study.




Fig. 1. Part of the original flash-photolysis apparatus showing the rotating sector with
                                shutter and trigger contacts.

There have been many reviews of the flash-photolysis method3-5 and in
this lecture I should like to illustrate our work by describing four rather differ-
ent problems: the first two are simple gas-phase reactions which were the
earliest to be investigated in detail and which illustrate rather clearly the two
principal variations of the flash photolysis technique; the second two ex-
amples are studies of the principal types of transient which appear in photo-
chemical reactions, i.e. radicals and triplet states, with special reference to
aromatic molecules.
   The first free radical to be studied in detail by flash-photolysis methods,


244                      1967 GEORGE PORTER

both spectroscopically and kinetically, was the diatomic radical ClO, and this
study provided a proving exercise for the technique. The spectrum was dis-
covered, somewhat accidentally, in the course of a study of the chlorine-car-
bon monoxide-oxygen system and provided one of the first of many lessons
on the limitation ofpredictions based on conventional studies. This new spec-
trum, which is shown in Fig. 2, was produced by flash photolysis of mixtures
of oxygen and chlorine, in which no photochemical reaction had previously
been suspected. Indeed there is no reaction at all if one speaks of times of
conventional experiments, since the system returns to its original state in a
few milliseconds.




                 Fig. 2. Absorption spectrum of the ClO radical.

When a new transient species is detected in this way two kinds of infor-
mation become available. First, analysis of the spectrum itself leads to struc-
tural and energetic data about the substance6; secondly, studies of the time-
resolved spectra provide a measure of its concentration as a function of time
and therefore provide kinetic data about the physical and chemical changes
which it undergoes7. The information which resulted from the early studies of
ClO is summarised in Table 1, the kinetic data being obtained from analysis
of sequences of spectra of the type shown in Fig. 3.
   Kinetic studies, even in this case, would have been more easily and accurate-
ly carried out by recording one wavelength only, so that a single flash can
provide all the necessary kinetic information. Since flash photolysis of chlo-
rine had already suggested that the amount of decomposition into atoms was
very considerable, Norrish and I decided to study halogen atom recombi-


               FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND APPLICATIONS

                                        Table 1
Structural and kinetic information about the ClO radical obtained from Figs. 2 and 3




Fig. 3. Sequence of spectra of ClO after flash photolysis of a chlorine-oxygen mixture,
                              showing bimolecular decay.


246                        1967 GEORGE PORTER

nation using, for monitoring, a continuous source, a monochromator and
photoelectric detector. Iodine is the most convenient gas for these studies and
the recombination of iodine atoms has been studied, in several laboratories, in
more detail than perhaps any other gaseous reaction.
   It was first necessary to show directly that the recombination of atoms, pro-
duced photolytically, was indeed a third-order reaction, as had been predicted
theoretically for many years. It was satisfying, though not surprising, when
this proved to be the case, at least to a first approximation. Oscilloscope traces
and second-order plots of the decay of iodine atoms in argon are shown in
Figs. 4 and 5, the gradients are proportional to the pressure of argon as they
should be for a third-order reaction involving argon as the third body*.
   Studies in a number of laboratories9-12, revealed interesting complications
and problems. There were complex concentration gradients across the reac-
tion vessel, caused by the essentially adiabatic nature of the reaction. When
these were eliminated, by working with a high excess of inert gas, further
deviations from linearity appeared which were found to be caused by an un-
expected very high efficiency of the iodine molecule as third body. There
were striking differences in efficiency between different third body molecules
and temperature coefficients were negative. Later work 13 showed that the
negative temperature coefficients could be expressed in Arrhenius’ form as
"a negative activation energy" and that the more efficient the third body, the
greater the value of this quantity. This is illustrated by the data in Table 2.
   All these observations can be interpreted in terms of a mechanism involving
intermediate formation of a complex between the iodine atom and a third
body




the observed negative activation energy being nearly equal to the heat of for-
mation of the complex. The nature of this complex is of interest. In extreme
cases, such as that of NO as third body14 the bonding is undoubtedly chemical.
In the more general case of the molecules given in Fig. 2 we have suggested13,15
that complexes are of the charge- transfer type and indeed, in solution, spec-
troscopic evidence for charge- transfer complexes of iodine atoms was ob-
tained directly by flash-photolysis studies16.
   These studies of ClO and iodine atom reactions are representative of most
of the work using flash photolysis which has followed, although there has


                 FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND APPLICATIONS                                       247




Fig.4. Oscillograph traces of I2 absorption after flash photolysis of iodine in excess argon.
                            P(A) is argon pressure in mm Hg.




Fig. 5. Second-order plots of data from Fig.4. P(1) is iodine atom partial pressure.


148                          1967 GEORGE PORTER

                                         Table 2
Termolecular recombination constants (k27) at 27ºC and temperature coefficients ex-
pressed as negative activation energies (Ea) for the recombination of iodine atoms in the
                      presence of various chaperon molecules M




naturally been a trend towards the study of more complex molecules. Some
of the most significant spectroscopic work is that which has been carried out
by Herzberg and his school on polyatomic radicals containing three or four
atoms. When flash photolysis was first introduced, no absorption spectrum of
a gaseous polyatomic radical was known and I think the first to be detected
must have been that which has been assigned2 to HS2. One of our first interests
had been the methylene radical, CH2, and it was with this problem particu-
larly in mind that the flash technique was conceived. It was very gratifying
when, in 1959, Herzberg eventually brought methylene into the fold by
extending flash spectroscopy into the vacuum ultraviolet region17.
   In addition to the increased complexity of the molecules investigated, the
flash-photolysis technique has been increasingly applied. to solutions, solids
and even to biological systems so that these applications are now more ex-
tensive than those in the gas phase. I have been particularly interested, for
over ten years, in the transient species which appear upon excitation of larger
organic molecules, many of them of interest in organic mechanisms and in
biological processes. This will remain an active field for a long time, since it is
as large as organic chemistry itself, and I shall devote the rest of this lecture to a
brief description of two principal classes of these species, namely the aromatic
free radicals and the triplet states of organic molecules.


               FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND APPLICATIONS                               249
                          The Aromatic Free Radicals

The first aromatic free radical, triphenyl methyl, was discovered, quite un-
expectedly, by Gomberg18 in 1900. Many similar resonance-stabilised free
radicals, which are stable enough to exist in observable concentrations at
equilibrium, were subsequently reported but the direct spectroscopic ob-
servation of reactive, shortlived, aromatic free radicals was only achieved
relatively recently.
   The first detection of the absorption spectra of these species was made pos-
sible by the development of low temperature trapping techniques by G.N.
Lewis and his school19 in the early 1940’s. This important work attracted little
attention, and the method was revived and extended by Norman and Porter20
who, in 1954, were able to detect a number of simple aromatic free radicals in
rigid media, radicals such as benzyl and anilino. This led us to search for similar
spectra in flash-photolysis experiments, since the results-of low temperature
trapping studies are very limited; the spectra are diffuse and no kinetic studies
are possible.
   Porter and F.J. Wright 2 1, in 1955, detected a series of aromatic free radicals
in the gas phase by flash photolysis of aromatic vapours. For example, spectra
in the region of 3 000 Å were attributed to benzyl (from toluene), anilino
(from aniline) and phenoxyl (from phenol). These radicals are isoelectronic
with each other, and form a type of seven -electron system which, in aro-
matic free-radical chemistry, is of comparable importance with the six
electron benzene ring in normal molecules. The spectra of radicals of this type,
as has been shown by Dewar, Longuet-Higgins and Pople 22, result from the
interaction of two degenerate configurations and consist of a weak forbidden
transition at longer wavelengths and a strong allowed transition at shorter
wavelengths. The transition observed near 3 000 Å is the strong, allowed one;
the weaker longer wavelength transition has been observed by flash photol-
ysis in the gas phase only relatively recently by Porter and Ward 23 (Fig. 6)
though, being from the lowest excited state, it is relatively easily observed in
emission 24.
   The spectra of benzyl, anilino and phenoxyl in solution are diffuse, but quite
characteristic as will be seen from the phenoxyl radical spectra, in various
media, observed by Porter and Land and shown in Fig.7. An interesting
                                         2 5



complication arises in the anilino radical, where two quite different spectra are
observed26 depending on solvent or, in aqueous solvents, on pH (Fig. 8). The
two spectra correspond to the protonated and unprotonated forms, the radical


350                           1967 GEORGE PORTER




Fig.6. Absorption spectrum of the benzyl radical in the vapour phase after flash photolysis
                          of toluene. Path length = 8 metres.




Fig.7. Absorption spectrum of the phenoxyl radical in the gas phase and in various
                       solvents after flash photolysis of phenol.

ion and the radical, and the equilibrium can be established within the lifetime
of the radical making it possible to determine the equilibrium constant of this
acid-base equilibrium. The pK of the anilino radical is found to be 7.0.
   These seven -electron radicals are the prototype of many of the most im-
portant, resonance-stabilised radicals of organic chemistry. For example, ben-
zyl is the prototype of the Gombergtype radicals such as triphenyl methyl
whilst OH substitution in the position gives ketyl radicals, anilino is the
prototype of Würster radical cations whilst phenoxyls, on substitution by
OH, become semiquinones. The spectra and physico-chemical properties of


                FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND APPLICATIONS                                      251




Fig. 8. Absorption spectrum of a substituted anilino radical showing acidic form in water
                       and deprotonated form in hexane solution.          .

all these radicals are closely similar and provide a large and interesting field of
study, of considerable importance both in chemistry and biology. For ex-
ample the flavins have been shown to behave similarly and to yield semiqui-
none radicals on flash photolysis and the principal transients observed on flash
                                   27



photolysis of proteins such as ovalbumin are phenoxyl-type radicals derived
from tyrosine groups28.
   Flash-photolysis studies carried out more recently by Porter and Ward29,
on aromatic vapours at high resolution have succeeded in detecting many
other aromatic free radicals of interest, which are not of the           -electron
type. The most important of these is phenyl, obtained from benzene and
halogeno benzenes and substituted phenyls derived from disubstituted ben-
zene derivatives (Fig. 9).
   Phenyl nitrene (or imine), an even electron-number radical analogous to
the methylenes, is obtained from flash photolysis of phenyl isocyanate and, by




Fig. 9. Spectrum of the ortho -fluorophenyl radical after flash photolysis of ortho -chloro-
                                      fluorobenzene.


252                                1 9 6 7   G E O R G E   P O R T E R


molecular climination of HCl followed by tautomeric change, from o r t h o -
                    30
c h l o r o a u i l i n e . One of the most surprising transformations of all is the for-
        30,31
mation          o f c y c l o p e n t a d i e u y l ( C5 H 5 ) radicals from flash photolysis of ani-
line, phenol, nitrobenzene and many other substituted benzenes, as well as a
variety of substituted cyclopentadieuyls from disubstituted aromatic com-
pounds (Figs. 10 and 11).




                Fig. 10. Absorption spectrum of the cyclopentadienyl radical.


                F L A S H P H O T O L Y S I S A N D A P P L I C A T I O N S          253

   The assignment of spectra in all these cases is made on the basis of studies of
a series of related substituted compounds, and the method is both convenient
and reliable in the aromatic series, since so many compounds are available with
the possibility of cross checks in most cases. The data on cyclopentadienyl
radical formation, Fig. 12, illustrate the method. Although little or no assis-
tance in the identification is possible from the spectra, apart from general
similarity and positions of electronic transitions in related radicals, none of the
assignments which have been made so far has subsequently had to be revised;
a situation which is not always found in the assignment of spectra, even those
of much simpler compounds.




Fig. 12. Observed fission processes of benzene derivatives to form cyclopentadienyl radi-
                                          cals.


The field of aromatic free-radical spectroscopy is relatively new and what
has been done already is little more than an indication of what will be done by
flash-photolysis techniques in this field in the future. The hundred radicals
so far assigned are prototypes of thousands of others which may be observed
whenever there is a reason for wanting to study them. Many of the spectra


254                       1 9 6 7    G E O R G E   P O R T E R


show fine detail which, with the help ofcomputer programmes, should even-
tually yield information about the radical structures. The chemical problems
are almost untouched, and represent a much more extensive series ofproblems
than mere identification. Extinction coefficients are known in only a few cases,
usually in solution. Finally there are the intriguing photochemical problems
of the primary processes in the excited state by which these often remarkable
transformations take place. At the present time it cannot even be taken for
granted that the vapour phase dissociations are monophotonic and in the case
of cyclopentadienyl it seems probable that a biphotonic process, involving
radicals such as phenosyl anilino as intermediates, may be operative. In the
formation of phenyl, benzyl and similar radicals, biphotonic mechanisms in
                                                                           5
the gas phase appear less probable and I have tentatively suggested that a
mechanism is operative in which radiationless conversion to the ground state
is followed by what is essentially a thermal dissociation of a highly vibration-
ally excited molecule.




                              32
In 1944, Lewis and Kasha            showed that the phosphorescence of organic
molecules which is observed in rigid media is the emission of light from the
lowest excited state of these molecules and that this state is of triplet multi-
plicity. This work opened up a new realm of spectroscopy and physical in-
vestigation which continues with increasing activity today.
  The influence of this discovery on chemistry and photochemistry was, at
first, very slight. The reason for this was that the chemist does little work in
rigid solutions at low temperatures and only under these conditions could the
triplet states be observed. The reasons for the absence of phosphorescence in
gases and fluid solutions were not altogether clear, though-Lewis and Kasha
clearly stated their view that the triplet state was formed under these conditions,
presumably with much shorter lifetime. If this were the case, it should be
possible to detect the triplet state by means of its absorption spectrum in flash-
photolysis experiments provided its lifetime was greater than a few micro-
seconds, a question about which there was little information.
  In 1952, Windsor and I decided to attempt the observation of triplet ab-
sorption spectra of organic molecules by flash photolysis in ordinary fluid
solvents at normal temperatures. The scheme of transitions involved in these
studies is shown in Fig. 13. Almost immediately the experiments were suc-


               F L A S H P H O T O L Y S I S A N D A P P L I C A T I O N S            255




of the order of a millisecond, ideal for studies by flash photolysis, provided
oxygen was excluded. Some of the first flash-photolysis records oftriplet states
of aromatic molecules in solutions3 are shown in Figs. 14 and 15.




                                                                 FLUORESCENCE
                                                                 BEFORE




Fig. 14. Absorption spectra following flash photolysis of a solution of anthracene in hex-
                                       ane solution.


Immediately F. J. Wright and I investigated the possibility of detecting trip-
let states in the gas phase and although the lifetime was shorter the triplet
spectra of a number of aromatic hydrocarbons were successfully recorded in
                              34
1-m paths of the vapour .
  It is these studies, perhaps more than any others, which have brought flash
photolysis into the chemical laboratory as a routine method of investigation.


256                          1 9 6 7   G E O R G E   P O R T E R




Fig. 15. Sequences ofspectra after flash photolysis of four aromatic hydrocarbons in solu-
    tion showing formation and decay of their triplet states. Delays in microseconds.



Any discussion of mechanism in organic photochemistry immediately in-
volves the triplet state and questions about this state are most directly answered
by means of flash photolysis. It is now known that many of the most impor-
tant photochemical reactions in solution, such as those of ketones and qui-
nones, proceed almost exclusively via the triplet state and the properties of
this state therefore become of prime importance. Its relatively long lifetime,
compared with the time of a flash experiment, has made it possible to study
the triplet state almost as readily as the ground state, and in many systems its
physical and physico-chemical properties and its chemical reactions are now
as well characterised as those of the ground state. The spectrum itself, being a
transition between two excited states and usually diffuse, has been of less
interest for structural studies than as a means of identification and quantitative
estimation of triplet concentrations and, therefore, once identified, most ki-
netic studies have been carried out at a single wavelength using photoelectric
methods.
  Studies in our laboratory and others, particularly those oflivingston and of
Linschitz, over the last fifteen years, have established the following properties
of triplet stat& in fluid media:


                F L A S H P H O T O L Y S I S A N D A P P L I C A T I O N S                    257

(1) The radiationless decay processes which occur in solution are principally
first order under normal conditions and due to traces of quenching impurities
which are still largely unknown. This apparently trivial and uninteresting
process has been the most difficult of all to establish and is still the most un-
satisfactory aspect of the work. That the decay in solution is a quite separate
process from the true radiationless and radiative conversion which occurs in
rigid media is most clearly shown by flash experiments carried out over the
                                                    35
whole range of viscosity and temperatures .
( 2 ) At high concentrations of triplet and low quencher concentrations Porter
and M. Wright showed that a second-order process of triplet-triplet annihi-
                         36                                   37
lation is predominant . P a r k e r a n d H a t c h a r d have shown that part of this
process results in the formation of singlet excited states and delayed fluores-
                                               38
cence. In the gas phase Porter and West showed                     that   triplet-triplet   annihi-
lation is the predominant means of decay.
  Physical quenching of the triplet state can be brought about in four principal
ways involving the following species: (a) Heavy atoms which increase spin-
                   39
o r b i t i n t e r a c t i o n . (b) Atoms and molecules with. unpaired electrons which
can interact with the triplet to form a collision complex via which conversion
to the ground state can occur without contravention of the spin selection
      36
r u l e s . (c)Molecules which form charge-transfer complexes with the triplet
(ref.40). (d)     Molecules with lower electronic states (singlet or triplet), to
                                      41
which energy can be transferred .
  The last of these processes is of particular interest in photosensitisation and
biological systems and it was first observed, under conditions of high con-
                                                                   42
centration in rigid media, by Terenin and Ermolae . In solution it is readily
studied by flash photolysis and, in favourable cases, both the decrease in donor
triplet and the increase in acceptor triplet can be followed independently. An
early example of this type of transfer studied by Porter and Wilkinson,
between phenanthrene and naphthalene, is shown in Fig. 16.
  The efficiencies of triplet state formation have recently beenstudied quanti-
                                                         43
tatively and directly by Bowers and Porter                    using an optical arrangement of
flash photolysis which makes it possible to monitor the light absorbed. At
present, in all molecules studied which do not present complexities such as
dimer formation, the sum of fluorescence and triplet yields is unity within the
precision of the combined measurements (Table 3).
  As examples of chemical processes in the triplet state we may mention pro-
ton transfer, and electron or hydrogen atom transfer. It is usually easy to ar-
range, by using buffered solutions, that protonic equilibrium is established


258                           1 9 6 7   G E O R G E   P O R T E R




Fig. 16. Energy transfer from triplet phenanthrene to naphthalene. The flash is filtered
through a strong solution of naphthalene so absorption is by phenanthrene only. In the
bottom sequence, obtained from a solution containing both compounds, the triplet of
      phenanthrene has been completely quenched and replaced by triplet naphthalene.


                                            Table 3
Fluorescence yield     triplet                      directly by flash photolysis insolution,
                and the sum of these yields for several organic compounds


                       F L A S H   P H O T O L Y S I S   A N D   A P P L I C A T I O N S   259




Fig. 17. Optical density plot of triplet anthroic acid versus pH used to derive the triplet-
                         state acidity constant of this compound.
                                                                          .

during the lifetime of the triplet and, in this case, a titration can be carried out
almost as readily as when one determines the pK of the ground state, though
now the "indicator" is the molecule in its triplet state. It is interesting to com-
pare the results not only with the ground-state properties, but with those of
the first excited singlet state which can be determined by fluorescence studies
                                                                          44
using the methods developed by Forster and Weller . Such studies of triplet
states were first carried our in collaboration with Jackson and later with Van
               45,46
der Donckt             . A typical pK plot for the triplet state of anthroic acid is shown
in Fig. 17 and a summary of results on pK’s in the three states of interest for a
variety of molecules is given in Table 4.
  Electron and hydrogen atom transfer, particularly from solvent to triplet
states of ketones, aldehydes and quinones have been the subject of very ex-
tensive investigations in a number of laboratories. My interest in this type of
reaction first arose in a rather practical way when I was consulted about a
technical problem known as phototendering, in which a dyed fabric, such as
cellulose, becomes degraded under illumination in sunlight. The mechanism
of this presented few problems; it was merely abstraction, by the excited dye
molecule, of a hydrogen atom from the cellulose followed by addition of
oxygen to the resulting radicals followed by degradation of the cellulose chain.
What was surprising was that dyes, such as the anthraquinones, fell into two
classes, one very reactive and one almost completely unreactive, the difference
between the two classes being caused by the apparently small effects of sub-
          47
stitution . After a long and interesting series of investigations, mostly carried


260                           1 9 6 7   G E O R G E        P O R T E R


                                                 Table 4
Acidity constants expressed as pK values for the ground state (G), the first excited singlet
           (S ) and the lowest triplet (T ) of a number of aromatic molecules
             1                               1




out on benzophenone derivatives which show exactly the same phenomena,
                                    48 49
the matter became quite clear               . It is always the lowest triplet state which
reacts and the electronic structure of this state is, therefore, the prime con-
sideration. Depending on substituents and solvent, this lowest triplet state
may be           with electrophilic oxygen and therefore reactive or                  with
considerable charge-transfer character in the opposite sense to that of the
      state (CT), and therefore unreactive (Fig.              I   8).




Fig. 18. Energy levels of singlet (S) and triplet (T) states of p-aminobenzophenone in
isopropanol and in cyclohexane. In isopropanol the lowest triplet is of charge transfer
(CT) type and therefore no reaction occurs; in cyclohexane the lowest triplet is the
reactive    * type and hydrogen abstraction occurs from cyclohexane to yield a ketyl
                                     radical.


               FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND APPLICATIONS                                 261

   These studies, both of proton and hydrogen atom transfer illustrate how the
excited electronic state must be treated as a new species, with its own structure,
electron distribution and chemical reactivity and how flash-photolysis tech-
niques make it possible to study these characteristics of the excited triplet al-
most as readily as those of the ground state. Since each molecule has only one
ground state, but several excited states, it is clear that this field of investigation
is, in principle, a bigger subject than the whole ofconventional chemistry.
   At the present time efforts are being made to extend flash photolysis tech-
niques in many ways, but particularly to shorter times. Although gas discharge
lamps are unlikely to be much improved beyond the microsecond region, the
giant pulsed laser promises to bring nanosecond times into the range of in-
vestigation and these, as well as nanosecond sparks coupled with integrating
techniques, are now being developed in our laboratory and several others 5.
The nanosecond region will be particularly valuable for the direct study of
excited singlet states.
   The first flash apparatus resolved times of milliseconds, later ones worked
comfortably in microseconds and nanosecond flash photolysis is now possible.
This is a very short time. If we carry out an experiment every nanosecond then
the results of a few seconds’ work are enough to fill all the books and journals
of the world. Advances of technique, such as the extension of our chemical
experiments into the range of very short times, greatly increases the number of
questions we can ask and the number of experiments to be done. To solve a
problem is to create new problems, new knowledge immediately reveals new
areas of ignorance, and the need for new experiments. At least, in the field of
fast reactions, the experiments do not take very long to perform.

In conclusion, I express my deep gratitude to the collaborators who are re-
ferred to at the end of this paper and to all the other students and colleagues
with whom it has been my good fortune to be associated. I share with them
this great honour.




 1. R.G. W.Norrish and G.Porter, Nature, 164(1949)658.
 2. G.Porter, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser.A 200(1950)254.
 3. G.Porter, in E.Weissberger (Ed.), Technique of Organic Chemistry, Vol. 8, Part 2,
    Interscience, New York, 1963, p.1055.


262                          1967 GEORGE PORTER

  4. G.Porter, in P.G.Ashmore, F.S.Dainton and T.M.Sugden (Eds.), Photochemistry
     and Reaction Kinetics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1967, p.93.
  5. G.Porter, in Claesson (Ed.), Nobel Symposium 5-Fast Reactions and Primary
     Processes in Reaction Kinetics, Interseience, New York, 1967, p. 141.
  6. G.Porter, Discussions Faraday Soc., 9(1950)60.
  7. G.Porter and F. J. Wright, Z.Elektrochem., 56(1952)782; Discussions Faraday Soc., 14
     (1953)23.
  8. M.I.Christie, R.G.W.Norrish and G.Porter, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A 216
     (1952)152.
  9. K.E.Russell and J.Simons, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A, 217(1953)271.
10. R.Marshall and N.Davidson, J.Chem.Phys., 21(1953)659.
11. R.L. Strong, J.C.W.Chien, P.E.Graf and J.E. Willard, J.Chem.Phys., 26(1957)
     1257.
12. M.I.Christie, A.J.Harrison, R.G.W.Norrish and G.Porter, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London),
     Ser. A, 231(1955) 446.
13. G.Porter and J.A. Smith, Nature, 184 (1959)446; Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A,
     261(1961)28.
14. G. Porter, Z. G. Szabo and M. G.Townsend, Proc. Roy.Soc. (London), Ser. A, 270
     (1962)493.
15. G.Porter, Discussions Faraday Soc, 33(1962)198.
16. T.A.Gover and G.Porter, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A 262(1961)476.
17. G.Herzberg and J.Shoosmith, Nature, 183(1959)1801.
18. M.Gomberg, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 22(1900)757; Chem.Ber., 33(1900)3150.
19. G.N.Lewis, D.Lipkin and T.T.Magel, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 66(1944)1579.
20. I.Norman and G.Porter, Nature, 174(1954)508; Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A 230
     (1955)399.
21. G.Porter and F. J. Wright, Trans. Faraday Soc.,, 51(1955)1205.
22. M.J.Dewar and H. C.Longuet-Higgins, Proc.Phys.Soc.(London), 67(1954)795 ;
     H.C.Longuet-Higgins and J.Pople, ibid., 68(1955)591.
23. G.Porter and B.Ward, J.Chim.Phys., 61(1964)1517.
24. H.Schuler and J.Kusjakow, Spectrochim.Acta, 17(1961)356.
25. E.J.Land and G.Porter, Trans.Faraday Soc., 57(1961)1885.
26. E.J.Land and G.Porter, Trans.Faraday Soc., 59(1963)2027.
27. B.Holmström, Arkiv Kemi, 22(1964)281,329.
28. L.Grossweiner, J.Chem.Phys., 24(1956)1255.
29. G.Porter and B. Ward, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London, Ser.A 287(1956)457.
30. G. Porter and B. Ward, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), in the press.
3 1. G.Portcr and B. Ward, Proc.Chem.Soc., (1964)288.
32. G.N.Lewis and M.Kasha, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 66 (1944) 2100.
33. G.Porter and M. W. Windsor, ].Chem.Phys., 21(1953)2085; Discussions Faraday
     Soc., 17(1954)178; Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A 245(1958)238.
34. G.Porter and F.J.Wright, Trans.Faraday Soc., 51(1955)1205.
35. J.W.Hilpern, G.Porter and L.J.Stief, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London),Ser.A, 277(1964)437.
36. G.Porter and M.R. Wright, J.Chim.Phys., 55(1958)705; Discussions Faraday Soc.,
     27(1959)18.


               FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND APPLICATIONS                                   263
37. C.A.Parker and CHatchard, Proc.Roy.Soc. (London), Ser.A, 269 (1962)574.
38. G.Porter and P.West, Proc.Soc.Roy.(London), Ser.A, 279 (1964) 302.
39. A.R.Horrocks, A.Kearvell, K.Tickle and F.Wilkson, Trans.Faraday Soc., 62
    (1966)3393.
40. H.Linschitz and L.Pekkarinen, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 82(1960)2411.
41. G.Porter and F.Wilkson, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A, 264 (1961)1.
42. A.W.Terenb and V.L.Ermolaev, Trans.Faraday Soc., 52(1956)1042.
43. P.G.Bowers and G.Porter, Proc. Roy.Soc. (London), Ser.A, 296 (1967) 435; 299
    (1967) 348.
44. T.Forster, Z.Elektrochem., 54(1950)42,531; A.Weller, Progress in Reaction Kinetics,
    Vol. 1, Pergamon, Oxford, 1961, p. 187.
45. G. Jackson and G. Porter, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser. A, 260 (1961)13.
46. E.van der Donckt and G.Porter, Trans. Faraday Sot., 64 (1968)3215,3218.
47. N.K.Bridge and G.Porter, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A, 244(1958) 259,276.
48. A.Beckett and G.Porter, Trans Faraday Soc., 59 (1963) 2038,2051.
49. G.Porter and P.Suppan, Proc.Chem.Soc., (1964)191; Trans. Faraday Soc., 61(1965)
    1664; 62(1966)3375.
