                         GE O R G E   DE   HE V E S Y


          Some applications of isotopic indicators
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1944



 The method of isotopic indicators had its ultimate origin in the Institute of
 Physics at the University of Manchester, which then was under the inspiring
leadership of that great physicist the late Lord (then Professor) Ernest
 Rutherford.
   The cradle of radium is the Czecho-Slovakian town Joachimstal; it was
from Joachimstal pitchblende ore that Professor and Madame Curie isolated
 that element. The Austrian Government, the owners of these mines, gener-
 ously supplied Professor Rutherford not only with radium, but also with the
 by-products of radium production, equally important for the worker in the
field of radioactivity. One of the most significant by-products is radium D,
which has a half-life period of 20 years and is found associated with the very
substantial amounts of lead present in pitchblende. The Austrian Govern-
ment presented to Professor Rutherford several hundred kilograms of such
"radio-lead". In view of its association with very large amounts of lead,
which absorb the radiation emitted by radium D, this precious radioactive
material nevertheless proved to be almost useless. When I met Professor
Rutherford one day in 1911 in the basement of the laboratory where the
radio-lead was stored, he addressed me in his friendly and informal way,
saying: "My boy if you are worth your salt, you try to separate radium D
from all that lead". In those days, I was an enthusiastic young man and, on
immediately starting to attack the problem suggested to me, I felt quite
convinced that I would succeed. However, although I made numerous at-
tempts to separate radium D from lead and worked for almost two years at
this task, I failed completely. In order to make the best of this depressing
situation, I decided to use radium D as an indicator of lead, thus profiting
from the inseparability of radium D from lead. Suppose that we dissolve 1
g of lead in the form of nitrate in water, add radium D of negligible weight
showing a radioactivity of one million relative units (an electroscope being
used to measure the activity), and proceed to carry out the most intricate
operations with this "labelled" lead. If we then ascertain the presence of one
radioactive unit in a fraction obtained in the course of these operations, we


10                          1943 G.DE HEVESY

must conclude that 1/1000 mg of the lead atoms present in the lead nitrate
we started from, are now present in the fraction.
   Radium D cannot be separated from lead, but it can easily be obtained in
the pure form from lead-free radium salt samples or from radium emanation,
since radium D is formed in the course of the disintegration of these radio-
active bodies and can readily be separated from them. At that time, the
Vienna Institute of Radium Research had more radium and radium emana-
tion at its disposal than any other institution. This fact induced me, late in
1912, to start work at the Vienna Institute in collaboration with Dr. Paneth,
assistant at that Institute, who himself had made very extensive and abortive
trials to separate radium D from lead. The first application of labelled lead1
was the determination of the solubility of some very slightly soluble lead
compounds such as lead chromate. In these experiments, not radium D but
another isotope of lead, thorium B, was applied as an indicator. Labelled
lead chromate was obtained by adding a solution of 100,000 relative units of
thorium B to lead nitrate containing 10 mg of lead and converting the nitrate
thus labelled into chromate.
   After the saturated solution of this compound had been held at the desired
temperature in a thermostat for a sufficient time, its composition was ascer-
tained by evaporating a few cubic centimetres to dryness and measuring the
activity of the almost invisible residue in the electroscope. From the number
of units of thorium B found, the amount of lead was calculated, one unit
corresponding to 10-6 grams of lead; finally, the solubility of the lead
chromate in moles per litre (2· 10-7) was computed.
   The radioactive method is extremely simple, having the advantage that
the presence of foreign ions in no way interferes with the measurements. The
method may be applied without difficulty, for example, in determining the
solubility of lead sulphate in the presence of calcium sulphate.
   Simultaneously with the said experiments, we used labelled lead and la-
belled bismuth (the radioactive bismuth isotope radium E can easily be
 obtained from radium, radium emanation, or radio-lead) in an investigation
 of the manner in which unweighable amounts of metals are precipitated
 during electrolysis 2 . The application of the well-known Nernst formula




was extended to concentrations of 10-8 N and even lower.
  On the basis of Nernst’s theory, we should expect an interchange to take


               APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                            11
place between the metal of the electrodes and the ions in solution. The exist-
ence of such an interchange was demonstrated3. While, in the case of lead
peroxide, the interchange was found to take place between the outermost
layer of molecules of the geometrically calculated electrode surface, in the
case of the lead electrodes numerous layers of molecules were found to
participate in the interchange process. This finding is to be interpreted as a
result of local currents due to variations in the structure of the metallic sur-
face. An interchange between atoms of a lead foil and the lead ions present in
a solution was found to occur very rapidly, while the lead ions adsorbed on
colloidal lead particles were found to interchange at a slow rate only4.
   In contrast to metallic surfaces, Paneth5 found that in the case of salt
crystal surfaces the interchange was restricted to the uppermost molecular
layer of the crystal. On this observation he based an important method for
the determination of the surface areas of crystalline powders6.
   When lead sulphate is shaken with its saturated solutions, a constant kinetic
exchange occurs between the molecules of lead sulphate in the solution and
those on the surface of the solid. If the solution contains marked molecules,
after equilibrium has been attained the numerical ratio of marked molecules
on the surface to those in solution is identical to that of total molecules on
the surface to total molecules in the solution. As the distribution of the la-
belled molecules is determined by means of radioactive measurements, and
as the lead sulphate content of the saturated solution is evaluated by the
usual methods of analytical chemistry, the amount of lead sulphate present
in the uppermost molecular layer can be computed. When the weight is
known of a unimolecular layer of lead sulphate of 1 cm2 area, the surface of
the crystal powder can be calculated from the above data.
   Among the numerous applications of radioactive indicators by Paneth I
wish to emphasize the importance of his discovery of the existence of bis-
                                  8
muth hydride7 and lead hydride . After he gained experience regarding the
best method of preparation and the stability of radioactive bismuth hydride
and lead hydride, he succeeded in preparing these compounds from inactive
bismuth and inactive lead, respectively.



                                 Self-diffusion

The conception of the diffusion of a substance into itself, self-diffusion, was
introduced by Maxwell. No further use was made of this concept until fifty


12                          1943 G . D E H E V E S Y

 years later, when the method of radioactive (isotopic) indicators was in-
 troduced. The possibility of measuring self-diffusion by following the rate of
 penetration of the lead isotopes ThB or RaD into lead soon suggested the
 measurement of the self-diffusion in liquid and solid lead, using ThB or RaD
 as indicators. The measurements of the self-diffusion coefficient in liquid
 lead9 gave the result anticipated from the known diffusion rates of lead in
 mercury and other related elements. The diffusion rate in liquids is pri-
 marily determined by the radius of the diffusing particle and the viscosity
 of the liquid: thus, the replacement of a diffusing metal present in small
 concentration by another related metal will not appreciably influence the
 rate of diffusion. A very different behaviour was revealed, however, when
 the self-diffusion in solid lead10 was measured, using RaD as indicator. In the
 first experiments carried out in collaboration with Gróh, we soldered a piece
 of radio-lead to the bottom of a rod of ordinary lead, whereafter the system
 was kept at 280º for 140 days. After the lapse of that time, we cut the system
 into four equal parts, rolled the four lead pieces into thin plates, and placed
 them in an electroscope. No diffusion of the radio-lead into the ordinary
lead could be ascertained, showing that the self-diffusion rate in lead must
be at least several hundred times smaller than that of gold in lead, as deter-
mined by Roberts-Austin.
    This result necessitated the introduction of special methods of great sensi-
tivity for measuring diffusion. Since the rate of diffusion is inversely propor-
tional to the square of the thickness of the layer, we worked out methods for
 the measurement of the penetration of radioactive lead into ordinary lead
layers to a depth of only a few microns. The α-particles emitted by ThB
 (more correctly, by its disintegration products, ThC and ThC’, which, how-
 ever, attain radioactive equilibrium with the former within a few hours)
produce scintillations on a zinc sulphide screen, the number of which is
ascertained. The infinitesimal layer of ThB, which is in intimate contact with
a lead foil placed below it, is then heated for a few hours to, say, 200º. If a
diffusion of the ThB atoms into the lead foil takes place, the count of the
scintillations will give a smaller value after the experiment than before. The
range of the α-particles in lead being only about 30 a shift of a small
percentage of the ThB atoms to depths less than 30 will suffice to reduce
the counts of scintillations to a noticeable extent. This method, worked out
in collaboration with Mrs. Obrusheva11 was later replaced by a more sen-
sitive and exact procedure applied in diffusion measurements in solid met-
als, and also salts, in collaboration with Seith12. ThB was condensed on a foil


                APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                              13
or a single crystal of the metal, and the ionisation produced by radiation
emitted by the radioactive body was measured. A slight diffusion of the ThB
into the lead after heating sufficed to diminish the ionising effect registered
by an electrometer. Instead of the ionisation produced by the α-rays, the
ionisation produced by recoil particles accompanying the emission of α-rays
was measured in some cases. The range of the recoil particles in lead being
only about 10-5 cm, these measurements made possible the determination of
diffusion coefficients as small as 10-12 cm 2 per day.
   Our measurements led to the result that, while the diffusion coefficient of
gold in lead is found to be 5 · 10 -3 cm 2 day -1 at 165°, the coefficient of self-
diffusion in lead at the same temperature is only 10-6 cm 2day) -1, the dif-
ference rapidly increasing with decreasing temperature. The change of the
value of the coefficient of self-diffusion, D, in lead foils and single crystals is
represented by the equation




Making use of this formula, we can show that, at room temperature, the
atoms will change their places in a piece of lead on the average only once a
day.
   From the change of the coefficient of self-diffusion with temperature, the
heat of activation of the diffusion process, the heat of loosening of the lead
lattice, can be calculated. The value obtained and, for purposes of compar-
ison, other thermal data are given in Table 1.




Roberts-Austin measured the diffusion rate of gold in solid lead. His meas-
urements gave the first quantitative determination of diffusion rates in solids.
The high values he obtained, shown in Fig.113, led his contemporaries to
consider diffusion in solid metals a comparatively rapid process. The in-
troduction of the conception of self-diffusion and the subsequent develop-
ment led to a very different view and also to the elucidation of the remark-


                             1943 G.DE HEVESY




able nature of the gold-lead system investigated by that pioneer metallurgist.
  The methods outlined above were also applied to determine the self-
diffusion rate of Pb++ in solid lead chloride and lead iodide12. The variation
of the self-diffusion rates with temperature can be expressed by the equations




respectively. As first shown by Nernst, the ionic mobilities in an electrolyte
solution, and hence the conductivity of the solution, can be calculated if the
diffusion rates of the ions are known. We can apply the same ideas to solid
electrolytes14 and calculate, for example, the diffusion rate of Pb++ from the
conductivity of lead chloride, on the assumption that the electrolytic
conductivity of the salt is due solely to the transference of charges by the
Pb++. The diffusion rate of Pb++ thus calculated is, however, many thou-
sand times larger than the value found experimentally, showing that the
chloride ions are almost exclusively responsible for the conduction of elec-
tricity in solid lead chloride. The above data permit the calculation of the
transport number of Pb++ in solid lead chloride. Not far from the melting


                APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                             15
point, at 484°, the transport number of Pb++ is found15 to be 10-3, at 273°
1 0-5, and at 900 only 1 0 . By no other method can such small transport
                            -10



numbers be determined in any electrolyte.
   In the case of lead iodide, the diffusion rate of Pb++ calculated from con-
ductivity data, under the assumption that the whole conduction is due to
Pb++, is in good agreement with the measurement of the self-diffusion rate
of Pb++. This shows that, in contrast to the case of PbCl 2, the conductivity
in PbI2 at high temperatures is due almost exclusively to the transference of
charges by Pb++. With decreasing temperature the role of Pb++ decreases
and the transport number of I- increases accordingly. At 260°, only 40% of
                                                           -
the conductivity is due to Pb++ and 60 percent to the I ; at 155° the share of
the former is only 0.4 percent. In the case of lead iodide, Tubandt’s beautiful
method for the determination of transport numbers could also be applied.
The values obtained agreed well with those found by the measurement of
self-diffusion.
   Formerly, the self-diffusion rates of only lead, bismuth and a few other
elements could be determined. These elements have natural radioactive iso-
topes. The discovery of artificial radioactivity greatly enlarged the possibil-
ities for the determination of self-diffusion rates. By making use of the radio-
                                                                               -
active bromine isotope, we can determine the self-diffusion rate of Br in
AgBr just as we determined that of Pb++ in PbCl2. Working at the Institute
for Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen, H. A. C. McKay
determined the self-diffusion in gold. By the action of neutrons on gold a
radioactive gold isotope, having the atomic number 198, can be produced.
Neutrons having an energy of about 4 V are strongly absorbed in gold. A
thin gold sheet exposed to the action of such neutrons will be more strongly
 activated on the side first struck by the neutron beam than on the opposite
 side. When the activated film is heated, the difference in the concentrations
 of the active gold atoms will decrease and, from the decrease of the activity
 difference shown by the two faces of the foil, the rate of self-diffusion in gold
 can be calculated16.



              Svante Arrhenius’ theory of electrolytic dissociation

If we dissolve sodium chloride and the equivalent amount of sodium bro-
mide in water and then separate the two salts by crystallisation, it would
have been expected in the time prior to Arrhenius that the chloride ions


16                            1943 G. DE HEVESY

 would retain their original partners, the same applying to the bromide ions.
 According to Arrhenius, however, each chloride ion has the same chance of
 associating with a sodium atom originally bound to chlorine as with one
 initially associated with bromine. The correctness of the much debated views
 of Arrhenius was shown in different ways; the most direct proof, however,
 was provided through the application of isotopic indicators17. When equi-
 valent amounts of PbCl2 and labelled Pb(NO3)2 (or vice versa) were dissolved
 and the two compounds were separated by crystallisation, the labelled lead
 ions were found to be equally distributed between chloride and nitrate ions.
    Very different results were obtained in all cases in which the lead atom was
joined to carbon. Between lead chloride and lead tetraphenyl in pyridine,
 between lead acetate and lead tetraphenyl in amyl alcohol, and between lead
 nitrate and diphenyl lead nitrate in aqueous ethyl alcohol, no change in the
 places of lead atoms could be detected, although in every combination in-
 vestigated one of the molecular types was capable of electrolytic disso-
 ciation.
    The lack of interchange of atoms present in organic binding (hydrogen
 atoms bound to oxygen or nitrogen being an exception, as shown by
 Bonhoeffer 81), such as that of carbon atoms in glycogen or phosphorus
 atoms in lecithin with other carbon and phosphorus atoms respectively, was
 found to be of great significance for the application of isotopic indicators in
 biochemical research. Owing to the absence of such an interchange, the pres-
 ence of labelled carbon atoms in glycogen molecules, or of labelled phos-
 phorus atoms in lecithin molecules, extracted from the organs, proved that a
 synthesis of these molecules took place after the labelled atoms were admin-
 istered. This principle enables us to distinguish between "old" and "new"
 molecules and to determine the rates at which molecules of the different
 compounds are built up and carried to the different organs.
    A prompt interchange of the electrical charges between Pb++ and Pb++++
 ions was found to take place in experiments where plumbous acetate and la-
 belled plumbic acetate (or vice versa) were dissolved in glacial acetic acid and
 then separated by crystallisation 1 8. The same holds for Tl+ and Tl+++ ion19.
 An interchange of lead atoms takes place between fused lead and fused lead
 chloride, lead oxide or lead sulphide20.
    After artificially radioactive isotopes became available as indicators, inter-
 change processes were studied in numerous cases. A rapid interchange of
 charges was found to take place between Fe++ and Fe+++, Cu+ and Cu++,
 etc. 21 .


               APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                          17

                            Analytical chemistry

Analytical chemistry proved to be a fruitful field for the application of iso-
topic indicators. A knowledge of the total lead content of the earth’s crust,
for example, is of considerable chemical interest. In view of the small lead
content of the average rock sample, the quantitative determination of its
lead content involves some difficulties. These have been eliminated by mak-
ing use of an isotopic indicator 2 2. An amount of radium D, known in relative
radioactive units, is added to the solution of the rock sample; the radium D
is then recovered by electrolysis as peroxide. If 100 per cent of the added
radium D is recovered, we may expect 100 percent of the lead present in the
sample to have been recovered as well. If only 50 percent is recovered, for
example, we have to multiply the amount of lead recovered by 2 in order to
arrive at a correct analytical figure. The indicator method thus allows a
correction for the shortcomings of the analysis. Such corrected analytical
figures are seen in Table 2.
   Instead of adding radium D to the solution to be analysed, we may add lead
labelled by the presence of some radium D, for example 100 mg of lead
having an activity of 1,000 units. If we subsequently isolate 10 mg of lead
from the solution, this lead should show an activity of 100 units, under the
 assumption that the original sample does not contain lead. If the activity of
the isolated 10 mg of lead is, for example, found to be 83 only, we have to
 conclude that the sample contains lead amounting to 20 mg.
   In recent years, isotopic indicators have found an extended application in


18                            1943 G.DE HEVESY

biochemical analyses. Schoenheimer and his colleagues82 determined the leu-
cine content in the protein of the rat by adding to the hydrolysate a known
amount of leucine containing heavy nitrogen. This tracer was also used83 in
the investigation of the occurrence of the amino acids of the d series in cancer
proteins; while Chargaff, Ziff and Rittenberg25 used bases containing a
known amount of 15N in the analysis of the nitrogenous constituents of
tissue phosphatides. Amino acids containing deuterium as indicator were
used by Ussing and the same tracer was applied by Rittenberg and Foster24
                2 3



in their determination of the palmitic acid content of rats’ fat.



                          Early biological application

In contradistinction to the animal body, the uptake of mineral constituents
 by the plant is not followed by a loss of such constituents, and it was formerly
considered that the ions taken up by the roots of the plant did not migrate
in the opposite direction at all. The application of isotopic indicators, how-
ever, has shown that this is not the case. Ions taken up by the plant can be
removed by an exchange process under the action of other ions present in the
soil or in the nutrient solution. It was already found in 1923 that minute
amounts of lead, labelled by the admixture of the lead isotope thorium B,
when taken up by the roots of Vicia faba, could to a large extent be removed
by an excess of non-labelled lead added to the nutrient solution 26. Most other
ions were found to be much less effective in removing the labelled lead ions
from the plant.
   In recent years, the behaviour of essential constituents of plants has been
investigated, making use of artificial, radioactive ions as indicators; similar
results were obtained. Mullins and Brooks27 placed cells of Nitella coronata
first in a solution containing radioactive potassium and later in solutions of
different chlorides. Sodium and lithium were found to be much less effective
in removing labelled potassium than potassium itself, whereas rubidium was
more effective. Jenny and Overstreet28 and Broyer and Overstreet29 found
that ionic exchange could take place during periods of, and under conditions
favourable for, active solute uptake. It was also observed30 that for each six
phosphate ions taken up by the roots of growing wheat seedlings, one phos-
phate ion migrated from the roots into the nutritive solution.
   Early in the twentieth century, the application of bismuth compounds in
syphilis therapy came to the fore. This induced Christiansen, Lomholt and


               APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                            19
de Hevesy31 to investigate the absorption, circulation and excretion of la-
belled bismuth preparations. Lomholt32 succeeded in showing that, of all the
preparations investigated, bismuth hydroxide suspended in oil was most suit-
able for therapeutic application.
   Successes achieved by Blair-Bell in cancer therapy, using lead compounds,
induced the investigation of the partition of labelled lead compounds be-
tween normal and tumorous tissue . Though this work gave a negative
                                       33



result, it nevertheless proved to be of great importance in the future develop-
ment of isotopic indicators. It was in the course of these investigations that
Schoenheimer became familiar with the method of isotopic indicators, which
he applied several years later with such great success in the study of fat and
protein metabolism and of numerous related problems. Never were more
beautiful investigations carried out with isotopic indicators than those of the
late Professor Schoenheimer, whose untimely and tragic death is much to be
deplored. The discussion of the numerous important results obtained by
Schoenheimer and Rittenberg and their collaborator34 lies, however, beyond
the scope of this lecture.



                                 Heavy water

In 1931, Urey discovered deuterium, an isotope of hydrogen 35. This im-
portant discovery made possible the labelling of hydrogen. Deuterium is not
an ideal indicator, its properties differing appreciably from those of hydrogen.
The latter has a unique position: it is the sole element met with, though
only transitorily, as a naked nucleus in chemical reactions. Chemical forces
do not suffice to remove all electrons from any other element. Differences in
the structure of the nucleus will therefore make themselves more noticeable
in the chemical behaviour of hydrogen isotopes than in the case of any other
element. Furthermore, the difference between the mass of the hydrogen
atom and that of the deuterium atom amounts to as much as 100 percent,
while, for example, the corresponding difference between a 31P and a 32P
atom is only 3 percent. The very small difference in the chemical properties
of 3lP and 32P remains at the present time within the errors of our experi-
ments, whereas between hydrogen and deuterium the difference is quite ap-
preciable. The same applies to H2O and D2O. Dilute "heavy" water, how-
ever, contains mostly DOH molecules which exhibit in their chemical
behaviour a very great resemblance to HOH.


20                              1943 G.DE HEVESY




Fig. 2. Percentage distribution ratio of labelled sodium, potassium and deuterium oxide
               between plasma water and muscle water of equal weight.


In the study of the circulation of water in the organism, dilute heavy water
can therefore safely be used as an indicator. In the determination of the life
period of water molecules in the human organism, water containing ½ per
cent heavy water was used . While a small percentage (0.1) of the water
                             3 6



was found to be excreted in so short a time as 26 minutes, the average life of
the water molecules in the organism was found to be 13.5 days. In the ex-
creted water, molecules were thus found which were taken in both a few
minutes and several months before the investigation. By extrapolation, how-
ever, we arrive at the result that, though the number of water molecules
present in an adult organism amounts to as much as ca. 10 27, the adult or-
ganism no longer contains a single water molecule taken up at birth.
   The rate of admixture of administered water with the water present in the
body was investigated in experiments on rabbits37 and guinea pigs38. While
the water reaching the circulation was found to enter into exchange equilib-
rium with the extracellular water (about ¼ of the weight of the rabbit) in the
course of a few minutes, the penetration of the water molecules into the cells
took some time. As is seen in Fig. 2, about 30 min passes before the exchange
equilibrium is reached between the water administered and extracellular
and intracellular water present in the muscles of the rabbit. In the guinea pig,
73 per cent of the water in the blood is exchanged for extracellular water
every minute.


                APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                          21

  Time does not permit me to discuss the extended application of heavy
hydrogen, heavy carbon and heavy nitrogen, and to treat the numerous
important results obtained by the use of these isotopes as indicators.



                Application of artificially radioactive isotopes

During the lengthy operations preceding the early experiments of self-diffu-
sion in lead, we often discussed the great progress which might be expected
if radioactive indicators of the common elements were made available to
chemical and biological research. This wish, which seemed utopian in those
remote days, was fulfilled by Frederic Joliot and Iréne Joliot-Curie’s 39 funda-
mental discovery of artificial radioactivity, followed by Fermi’s 39work lead-
ing to the discovery of many more artificially radioactive isotopes. Soon after
the announcement of these discoveries, we prepared the radioactive phos-
phorus isotope P by neutron bombardment of carbon disulphide and used
                 32



this isotope in collaboration with Chiewitz40 in the study of phosphorus
metabolism. In these experiments, 10 litres of carbon disulphide were used to
absorb most of the neutrons emitted by a mixture of radium and beryllium
kindly put at our disposal by Professor Niels Bohr. The 32P formed was
extracted by treatment with diluted nitric acid or with water, the carbon
disulphide being immediately available after the extraction for further neu-
tron-irradiation.
   A few other radioactive isotopes, such as the radio-halogens can also be
prepared by similar simple and convenient procedures. This is, however, not
the case with the majority of radioactive isotopes. These were prepared in
amounts sufficient to be utilized in indicator work only after the invention of
the cyclotron41. Lawrence’s highly significant invention also made available
radio-phosphorus preparations of very much greater activity than could be
obtained from neutron-sources containing as much as several grams of ra-
dium. The number of neutrons produced by the Berkeley cyclotron was
stated by Birge41 in 1939 to correspond to the ionisation produced by 100 kg
of radium; since that date, a still more powerful cyclotron has been brought
into use. In our later investigations, radio-phosphorus generously put at our
disposal by Professors Niels Bohr, Lawrence and Siegbahn was used.
   The preparations of radioactive isotopes of numerous elements prepared in
the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley and in other laboratories found an ex-
tended application as indicators. Radioactive iron prepared at Berkeley, for


22                            1943 G.DE HEVESY

example, was used by Hahn, Whipple and their colleagues42 in extended
studies of iron metabolism.
   The application of cyclotron-prepared radio-carbon43 revolutionized our
views of the fundamental process of photosynthesis.
   Radio-iodine44 found an extended application in the study of the forma-
tion of thyroxine and diiodotyrosine; it led, inter alia, to the important find-
ing that some thyroxine is formed in the organism even after total extirpa-
tion of the thyroidea45.
   Radio-phosphorus found, however , the most extensive application. This
                                       4 6



was due not only to the convenient mode of production and period of decay
of this material, together with the low absorbability of the rays emitted by it,
but mainly to the important part which phosphorus plays in a very great
number of metabolic processes. These include skeleton formation, metab-
olism of carbohydrates and fats, cell division, and many other processes. The
discussion of the role of phosphorus in metabolic processes is therefore well
suited to demonstrate different applications of isotopic indicators in bio-
logical research. We shall therefore now describe some applications of radio-
phosphorus. These examples represent only a small percentage of the investi-
gations in which radio-phosphorus has been used as an indicator; many of
the results to be discussed were obtained in Copenhagen.



                              Radio-phosphorus

Owing to the great sensitivity of the Geiger-Müller counter, which registers
 P with an activity of only 10-6 microcurie, some of the radio-phosphorus
32



administered can soon be located in all organs. Table 3 shows the distribu-
tion of 32P in the organs of the rat 4 hours after subcutaneous injection of
labelled sodium phosphate47.
    While 4 hours after the administration most 32P is found in the skeleton,
muscles, liver and the digestive tract, with increasing time more and more
32
   p becomes incorporated with the skeleton; 98 days after the start of the ex-
periment, 92 percent of all 32P present in the rat, which corresponds to about
one half of the total amount administered, is found in the skeleton. This re-
sult may be seen in Table 4. Most phosphorus taken up with the food, in so
far as it is not excreted, ultimately finds its way into the skeleton, where it
replaces "old" phosphorus which interchanges with the phosphorus present
in other organs or is excreted.


               APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                                  23
     Table 3. Distribution of P between different organs in a rat, 4 hours after
                             32


     subcutaneous injection of labelled phosphate (Weight of the rat: 188 g)




            Table 4.   Percentage total 32P found in some organs of rats




From these results, however, no conclusions can be drawn concerning the
extent of renewal of the skeleton, as the labelled phosphorus, i.e. phosphorus
administered throughout the experiment, may be incorporated wholly or
principally in the upper molecular layers of the apatite-like crystals which
form the mineral constituents of the skeleton. We can determine the extent
of renewal of the bone mineral phosphorus by comparing the 32P content, i.e.
the radioactivity of 1 mg bone mineral P, with the radioactivity of 1 mg free
plasma P. Were the bone phosphorus entirely renewed in the course of the
experiment, the 32P would be distributed equally between the free P atoms
of the apatite-like bone crystallites and the free P atoms of the plasma, the lat-
ter being the direct or indirect source of the bone phosphorus. If only 1 per
cent of the bone apatite P were renewed in the course of the experiment, the
specific activity of the bone apatite P would be only 1/100 of that of the free
plasma P.
   The determination of the degree of renewal based on the said administra-
tion is made difficult by the fact that the specific activity of the free plasma


24                               1943 G. DE HEVESY




Fig. 3. Change in the specific activity of the plasma inorganic P after subcutaneous in-
                      jection of labelled phosphate into a rabbit.

phosphorus varies throughout the experiment. After administration by the
mouth or by subcutaneous injection, the specific activity first increases and
subsequently decreases with time, while after administration by intravenous
injection it first decreases very rapidly, and later at a moderate rate, as seen
in Figs. 3 and 4 4 8. The determination of the extent of renewal of the mineral
P in the skeleton is much facilitated by keeping the free plasma P activity at
a constant or almost constant level. This can be attained by repeated injec-
tions of varying amounts of labelled phosphate throughout the experiment.
Making use of this technique, the data given in Table 5 were obtained for

Table 5. Extent of renewal of the mineral constituents of the bone in the course of




the extent of renewal of the different parts of the skeleton of the adult rabbit
in the course of 50 days 49. It appeared that 72 per cent of the epiphysis and
93 percent of the diaphysis remained unchanged after this period, while 29


                 APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                                 25




Fig. 4. Change with time in the logarithm of the labelled P content of the plasma after
              intravenous injection of labelled phosphate into a rabbit.


and 7 percent respectively were renewed not once, but, at least to some
extent, repeatedly.
   The restricted extent of renewal of the skeleton is due to the fact that while
the P atoms of the uppermost molecular layer of the bone apatite crystals can
promptly interchange with the free P atoms of the plasma (actually not the
P atoms, but the phosphate ions interchange), a renewal of the main part of
the apatite P can take place only when the crystal is dissolved and when
crystals are formed from the plasma; from a labelled plasma, labelled crystals
are formed. This "biological" recrystallization of the skeleton crystallites is a
slow process. Moreover, we have to consider that if only the outer part of
the crystal is renewed, this process can often be repeated without affecting
deeper molecular layers of the crystal.
   No data are available concerning the extent of renewal of the human skel-
eton; the relative rates of renewal of different parts of the skeleton were,
however, determined by Erf50.
   The problem as to whether and to what extent the P atoms of the dental
enamel are renewed has been a subject of extensive investigations51 which led
to the result that, though some 32P is found to be present in the enamel after
administration of labelled phosphate, the extent of renewal of the enamel
phosphate is almost negligible. Regarding the extent of replacement of the
phosphorus present in the constituents of the dentine, about one millionth
part of the food phosphorus was found to be located in the mineral constit-
uents of the dentine of each tooth.


26                                1943 G.DE HEVESY

  The bone tissue growing in a labelled organism is bound to become la-
belled. Of the labelled phosphate administered by mouth, after the lapse of 3
days, 2 percent was found to be present in the rapidly growing incisors of
the rat52. As seen in Fig. 5, these phosphate ions are mostly found in the




Fig. 5. Distribution of labelled phosphorus in the incisor of a rat killed 3 days after the
administration of the phosphorus. The figures below give the relative amounts of
labelled phosphorus present in 1 mg of fresh tissue in the section in question. The
                   figures above give the length of the section in mm.


incisal part of the incisor, though a minor part are located at the apical end
remote from the pulpa.



                             Permeability investigations

The above-mentioned rapid decrease in the plasma activity following intra-
venous administration of 32P is to a large extent due to the interchange of plas-
ma phosphate with the phosphate of the extracellular fluid. From this fact it
follows that the capillary wall is readily permeable to phosphate; similar results
were obtained for the other labelled ions investigated. Sodium ions, which
are mainly confined to the extracellular space, enter into exchange equilib-
rium with the plasma sodium within 20 minutes 53,84,85 . This may clearly be
seen from Fig.6 . For potassium and for phosphorus, elements mainly
                   53



located in the tissue cells, a longer time is required for the attainment of such
equilibrium 54. The low rate at which exchange equilibrium between the
cellular and extracellular phosphorus is reached in the animal organism is
mainly due to a very low rate of renewal of large parts of the skeleton.
   As seen from the above examples, the method of isotopic indicators can be
utilized with advantage in permeability investigations. It is with the aid of
isotopic indicators that we best can measure the permeability of phase bound-
aries, since other methods do not indicate solely the resistance of the phase
boundary to the penetration of ions, but a more complex phenomenon. Prior
to the application of isotopic indicators, the high potassium content of the


               APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                              27




      Fig.6. Rate of disappearance of various labelled ions from the plasma.


erythrocytes of most species and their low sodium content were interpreted
as being due to the impermeability of the erythrocyte membrane to potas-
sium and sodium ions. The application of isotopic indicators, however, has
disclosed the fact that potassium ions in the erythrocyte interchange quite
easily55 with those present in the plasma, and the same applies to the sodium
ions. The high concentration of potassium and low concentration of sodium
found in the erythrocytes of most animals can thus not be explained as being
due to an impermeability of the corpuscle membrane to these ions.
   Not only the resistance of phase boundaries to labelled ions, but also that
to molecules of different kinds, can be measured with the aid of isotopic in-
dicators. The rates of interchange of phosphatides present in the plasma and
in different organs were determined in the following way56. Labelled phos-
phate was administered to a rabbit. After the lapse of 2 days, when the plasma
contained an appreciable amount of labelled phosphatides, part of the plasma
of another rabbit (rabbit II) was replaced by the labelled plasma. On fol-
lowing the decrease with time in the activity of the phosphatides extracted
from the plasma of rabbit II, it was found that half of the plasma phosphatide
 molecules had interchanged in the course of few hours with phosphatide
 molecules present in the organs of the rabbit. An investigation of the activity
of the phosphatides isolated from the organs led to the result that a very


28                            1943 G.DE HEVESY

substantial part of the labelled phosphatide molecules injected was found in
the liver.

                               Rate of formation

The rate of formation of labelled organic phosphorus compounds differs
much for various compounds and varies greatly with the organ in which
they are located. The labile P of adenosine triphosphate, for example, is
renewed at a very remarkable rate 5 7 , 8 6, the second P atom being renewed
somewhat more slowly than the terminal atom58. Hexose monophosphate,
present in the red corpuscles, was found to be largely renewed within a few
minutes 57. The formation of labelled phosphatides takes place in the liver
and in the intestinal mucosa of the rabbit at a much more rapid rate than in
the brain and more quickly than in any other organ59. Desoxyribose nucleic
acid, on the other hand, shows a behaviour opposite to that of the phos-
phatides. Its extent of renewal in the liver of adult rats is very low 60,61,87 ,
amounting to only about 0.1 percent in the course of 2 hours. In the spleen
and in the intestinal mucosa, the renewal of the desoxyribose nucleic acid is
20 and 30 times, respectively, more rapid than in the liver. High figures for
the rate of formation were found in rapidly growing tissue.
   X-rays were found to obstruct the formation of labelled desoxyribose nu-
cleic acid molecules61. Following irradiation with 300 r or more both in the
sarcoma and in the organs of the rat formation figures were obtained a-
mounting only to about half of the value observed in the controls. In the
study of the reduction in labelled nucleic acid formation under the action of
X-rays, a new line of attack was opened in the study of the action of such
radiation on cell division.
   We calculate the extent of renewal of the compound in question, for
example creatine phosphoric acid, by comparing the specific activity of the
creatine phosphorus at the end of the experiment with the average specific
activity of the free phosphorus present in the tissue cells during the exper-
iment. This calculation is based on the assumption that the labelled free
phosphate, or the phosphate of a donor whose P enters rapidly into exchange
equilibrium with the free P present in the cells, is incorporated in the crea-
tine phosphate molecule present in the cells of the organ investigated. In the
case of phosphatides, the possibility cannot be entirely excluded45,46 that a
precursor of the phosphatides containing labelled phosphate is transferred
from another organ into the organ investigated. In such a case, the calcula-


               APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                            29
tion of the extent of the renewal of the phosphatide molecules would neces-
sitate knowledge of the specific activity of the precursor P. The renewal
figures obtained must therefore be interpreted with caution. Another more
pertinent reason for the cautious interpretation of the results obtained is that
the molecules of some organic compounds may possibly be built up within
the phase boundary, where the specific activity of the free P may appreciably
differ from that of the intracellular free P.
   While we measure the rate of renewal of phosphatide molecules with
respect to their phosphate content by employing 32P as an indicator, the rate
of renewal of the fatty acid constituents is determined by the use of deute-
rium62 as indicator, and the new-formation of the choline content by apply-
ing N as a tracer . A molecule can clearly be renewed in various ways.
    15             63




         Site of formation of phosphorus compounds in the organism

                          Origin of yolk phosphatides

We shall first consider the site of formation of some constituents of the hen’s
egg. Where in the organism are the phosphatides found in the yolk synthe-
sized? This question can be answered by comparing the specific activity of
phosphatide P extracted from the yolk and from the different organs a few
hours after administration of labelled sodium phosphate64.
   The results of an experiment in which the hen was killed 5 hours after sub-
cutaneous injection of labelled P are seen in Table 6. The specific activities of
the yolk phosphatide and the ovary phosphatide P were very low, showing
that only a small part of the phosphatide molecules present in the said phos-
phatides had been formed within the last 5 hours. The plasma phosphatide P
had a much higher specific activity than those extracted from the ovary and
the yolk, while the liver phosphatide P had a higher specific activity than the
plasma phosphatide P. The gradient indicating the presence of phosphatide
molecules formed within the last 5 hours, thus falls off in the direction from
the liver, through the plasma, into the ovary.
The conclusion that the formation of the phosphatide molecules of the plas-
                                59,64,65
ma mainly occurs in the liver            is strongly supported by the results ob-
tained in the study of fat phosphorylation in the hepatectomized dog by
Chaikoff and his colleagues66. These authors injected labelled sodium phos-
phate intravenously immediately after removal of the liver. Practically no


30                               1943 G.DE HEVESY

     Table 6. Specific activity of phosphatides extracted from the organs of a hen




               32
phosphatide P was recovered in the plasma as late as 3-6 hours after ex-
tirpation of the liver; at these times 0.4 percent of the injected 32P had been
incorporated into phosphatides of both kidneys and about an equal amount
into the whole small intestine.
   Considerations similar to those applied to the origin of the phosphorus
compounds of the yolk were used in an investigation of the phosphorus com-
pounds of milk67. As seen in Table 7, the milk phosphatides were found to
have a much higher specific activity than the plasma phosphatides, indicat-
ing that the phosphatides must enter the milk from a source other than the
plasma and must thus have been synthesized to a large extent in the mam-
mary gland. The determination of the specific activity of the mammary
gland phosphatides revealed a very high value, even higher than those found
for the kidney and liver phosphatide P.
   One often encounters the view that the milk fat originates from the phos-
phatides of the blood, which are decomposed into fatty acid and inorganic P
in the mammary gland. The inorganic P present in the milk should, according


Table 7. Specific activity of the phosphatide P extracted from the organs of a goat
             4½ hours after administration of labelled sodium phosphate


               APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                              31
to this view, originate from phosphatide P. The fat content of goat’s milk
amounts to about 3 percent. Taking the ratio of fatty acid to phosphorus to
be 20 : 1 in plasma phosphatides, the production of 3 percent fatty acid from
phosphatides would set free 0.15 percent of inorganic phosphorus. This being
about the inorganic P content of the milk, almost all inorganic P of the milk
should originate from plasma phosphatide. A few hours after the administra-
tion of labelled phosphate, the milk phosphatides are only slightly active,
while the milk inorganic P shows a strong activity. This is a decisive ar-
gument against the above view. The high activity already found for the milk
inorganic P in the early stages of the experiment, is only compatible with the
assumption that the milk inorganic P is derived from the plasma inorganic
P. The latter acquires a high activity soon after subcutaneous injection of la-
belled sodium phosphate.
    As a further example we may mention the origin of the phosphorus com-
pounds in the chick embryo . Physiological sodium chloride solution (0.1
                               6 8



ml) containing traces of labelled sodium phosphate was injected into fer-
 tilized eggs. Several days after incubation, the phosphatides and other phos-
phorus compounds were isolated in turn from the embryo and the yolk, their
 activity and their phosphorus content being determined. As seen in Table 8,

Table 8. Specific activity of P extracted from the hen’s egg incubated for 18 days




the specific activity of the embryo phosphatide P is very different from that
of the yolk phosphatide P.
   While the phosphatides of the yolk are scarcely active, the phosphatides
extracted from the embryo are found to have a very strong activity. The
phosphatide molecules present in the embryo must obviously have been
newly synthesized. Similar considerations apply to the protein phosphorus
present in the embryo.


32                            1943 G. DE HEVESY

                                 Reaction path

The path taken by organically bound phosphate radicals in glycolytic pro-
cesses was investigated by using labelled compounds prepared under the ac-
tion of enzymes present in muscle juice or yeast. When labelled adenyl phos-
phate was added to fresh muscle pulp in which glycolysis occurred, no forma-
tion of active inorganic phosphate was found to take place, but active phos-
phate was detected in the Harden-Young ester formed during alcoholic
fermentation.
   In a study of the interaction of labelled adenosine triphosphoric acid with
non-labelled hexose monophosphoric acid ester, which leads to the forma-
tion of fructose 1,6-diphosphoric acid ester, the labelled phosphate given off
by the adenosine triphosphoric acid was found to be exclusively present in
the fructose 1,6-diphosphoric ester. The fact that the free phosphate formed
according to the equation:
     adenosine triphosphoric acid + hexose 6-monophosphoric ester + H2O
     → fructose 1,6-diphosphoric ester + adenylic acid + phosphate

was found to be inactive, indicates that the free phosphate originated ex-
clusively from the hexose 6-monophosphoric ester69.
   When both hydrogen and labelled phosphate were transferred, neither of
the two stable radicals of the cozymase molecule was found to be replaced by
active phosphate. A similar negative result was obtained for the reaction

               3-phosphoglyceric acid → 2-phosphoglyceric acid

in the presence of active phosphate and also for the conversion of glucose
monophosphoric acid into glucose hexaphosphoric acid in the presence of
active phosphate. The ester fractions were found70 not to have taken up 32P.
   Does a less pronounced formation of new molecules take place simul-
taneously with the autolysis observed in tissue slices? By the employment of
isotopic indicators this question can be answered. On shaking liver, kidney
or brain slices for a few hours with a Ringer solution containing 32P at 37°C,
Chaikoff and his colleagues7 1 found that the phosphatides isolated from the
tissue slices contained 32P; hence, side by side with an autolysis of the phos-
phatides in the tissue slices, an appreciable formation of labelled phosphatides
also takes place.
   The formation of labelled nucleic acid in slices of Jensen’s rat sarcoma was
likewise obtained72 in the investigation of the formation of desoxyribose nu-


               APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                            33
cleic acid in vitro, when these slices were shaken with labelled blood or la-
belled Ringer solution. About 0.1 percent of the desoxyribose nucleic acid
molecules present in the tissue slices were found to be labelled after the lapse
of 4 hours; these molecules had accordingly been formed during the experi-
ment. The presence of hydrogen sulphide, azide or carbon monoxide in-
hibits the formation of labelled phosphatides. Addition of cyanide, fluoride
or monoiodoacetate to labelled blood or labelled Ringer solution is also
found to inhibit the formation of labelled nucleic acid.



                      Dynamic state of body constituents

The most remarkable result obtained in the study of the application of iso-
topic indicators is perhaps the discovery of the dynamic state of the body
constituents. The molecules building up the plant or animal organism are
incessantly renewed. In the course of this renewal, not only the atoms and
molecules taken up with the food participate, but atoms and molecules
located in one organ or in one type of molecule will soon be found in anoth-
er organ or in another type of molecule present in the same or in another
organ. A phosphate radical taken up with the food may first participate in
the phosphorylation of glucose in the intestinal mucosa, soon afterwards pass
into the circulation as free phosphate, enter a red corpuscle, become incor-
porated with an adenosine triphosphoric acid molecule, participate in a gly-
colytic process going on in the corpuscle, return to the circulation, penetrate
into the liver cells, participate in the formation of a phosphatide molecule,
after a short interval enter the circulation in this form, penetrate into the
spleen, and leave this organ after some time as a constituent of a lymphocyte.
We may meet the phosphate radical again as a constituent of the plasma,
from which it may find its way into the skeleton. Being incorporated in the
uppermost molecular layer of the skeleton, it will have a good chance of
being replaced by other phosphate radicals of the plasma or the lymph, but it
 may also have the good fortune to find a more or less lasting abode in the
skeleton. This will be the case when it becomes embedded in a newly form-
 ed apatite-like bone crystallite.
    There are indications that, in the growing organism, the rate of new forma-
 tion of the molecules is still greater than in a fully grown organism. It was
 found, for example, by making use of heavy nitrogen, kindly put at our
 disposal by Professor Urey, as an indicator, that in "old" leaves of the sun-


34                            1943 G.DEHEVESY

flower, which did not develop further during the experiment, 12 percent of
the protein molecules present were renewed within 12 days. In growing
leaves, the replacement of old protein molecules was found to take place at
a higher rate73.
   Schoenheimer and Rittenberg 34 have shown, by applying labelled ni-
trogen, that the peptide linkages in the proteins of the animal tissue are
opened and reclosed with great ease. They found that the protein molecules
in the living body continually change and renew their structures. This dis-
covery is one of the most surprising and outstanding results arrived at with
isotopic indicators.



                               Excretion studies

Chemical analyses of the food and of the excreta permit the determination
of the extent to which the organism is in balance. Chemical methods, how-
ever, cannot determine to what degree the substances found in the faeces
originate from undigested food and to what extent they have been carried
into the digestive tract, coming from the body proper in the form of diges-
tive juices. This problem can be solved under strictly physiological condi-
tions with the aid of isotopic indicators.
   The simplest procedure is the following74. At a suitable time after admi-
nistration of labelled sodium phosphate, we determine the specific activity of
the urine P and that of the faeces P. Both originate from the blood plasma
and, provided that we wait for a sufficient time, the specific activity of the P
compounds carried into the digestive tract from the body will be about
equal to that of the urine P. If the faeces P were entirely of endogenous ori-
gin, it should show a specific activity equal to that of the urine P. If we find
the faeces P to be less active than the urine P, the active faeces P of endoge-
nous origin must have been diluted by non-active P. Since the sole source of
non-active P is the diet, the ratio of the specific activities of the faeces P and
urine P tells us to what extent the endogenous faeces P has been diluted by
food P.
   The ratio 100 x specific activity of faeces P/specific activity of urine P
gives the percentage of P in the faeces which originates from the body proper.
In the case of human subjects, to of the P present in the faeces was found
to originate from non-absorbed P.


               APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                              35
                            Labelled red corpuscles

As seen in Fig. 7 , labelled phosphate penetrates at a fairly slow rate into the
                 75



red corpuscles. On entering the corpuscles, however, the newly arrived
phosphate ions participate rapidly in the formation of acid-soluble organic
phosphorus compounds which occur in a comparatively high concentration
in the corpuscles. The formation of new acid-soluble phosphorus compounds
in the corpuscles is largely associated with glycolytic processes occurring
there and is attended by the destruction of an equal or almost equal number
of "old" molecules. As a result of these processes, the specific activity of the
labile P atoms of adenosine triphosphoric acid and that of the P of some
other compounds will soon acquire a specific activity almost as high as that
shown by the free P of the corpuscles, but much lower than that of the free
P of the plasma. This fact and the fairly slow rate of penetration of phos-
phate through the corpuscle wall explain the low rate of loss of 32P by la-
belled corpuscles when brought into contact with unlabelled plasma, and
make possible the application of such labelled corpuscles in the determination
of the total circulating red corpuscle content of the organism76,77. A detailed
investigation of the erythrocyte content of human subjects, making use of
labelled corpuscles, was carried out by Nylin78,88 . He estimated, further-
more, the rate at which injected blood and the circulating blood are homoge-
neously mixed. Fig. 8 shows the result obtained by Nylin in an experiment




Fig.7. Distribution of labelled ions between corpuscles and plasma of equal weight
                                        at 37°.


36                              1943 G.DE H E V E S Y




Fig. 8. Change of activity of the arterial corpuscles with time following intravenous
                      injection of labelled corpuscles (G. Nylin).

where homogeneous distribution of the injected blood took only 60 seconds.
   Corpuscles can also be labelled by introduction of radio-iron into the cor-
puscle haemoglobin. Such corpuscles were used by Hahn and his colleagues79
in the determination of the red-corpuscle content of the dog. Radio-iron has
a much longer half-life period than has radio-phosphorus; such "iron-la-
belled" corpuscles remain labelled for a much longer time than "phosphorus-
labelled" corpuscles. While, however, the latter can easily be obtained by
shaking blood with labelled phosphate, the former can be made only in the
living organism, a fact which, together with the relatively great difficulty of
obtaining radio-iron, restricts the applicability of iron-labelled corpuscles in
the determination of the erythrocyte volume.
   The determination of the total corpuscle volume of the organism demands
only that the labelled corpuscles retain their labelling for some minutes; the
determination of the life cycle of the corpuscles requires, however, the use of
marked corpuscles which conserve their labelling for weeks. No worker has
yet succeeded in achieving a labelling of mammalian red corpuscles that
fulfils this condition. Iron-labelled corpuscles, although remaining labelled
for a sufficient time, were found by Hahn and his colleagues89 not to be
suited to the purpose in hand. The life of the red corpuscles of the hen, how-
ever, was determined80, making use of phosphorus-labelled corpuscles. In
contradistinction to mammalian corpuscles, avian corpuscles contain large
amounts of desoxyribose nucleic acid, and the nucleic acid molecules were
found to remain unchanged throughout the life of the corpuscles. The newly
formed corpuscles of a hen to which labelled phosphate is administered con-
tain labelled desoxyribose nucleic acid.
   By daily injection of labelled phosphate, the activity of the plasma phos-


                APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                             37




                 Fig. 9. Life cycle of the red corpuscles of the hen.

phate is kept at a constant level, and at suitable intervals the specific activity
of the nucleic acid P extracted from the corpuscles is determined. Fig.9 il-
lustrates the results obtained, including the fact that, after the lapse of about
33 days, the specific activity of the nucleic acid P became constant. This in-
dicates that all corpuscles present in the circulation of the hen were formed
during the experiment. In the corpuscle samples taken in the course of the
first four days, only minute amounts of labelled nucleic acid were found to be
present. This may be interpreted by supposing that the formation of the cor-
puscles in the marrow, up to the point of their release into the circulation,
requires four days; 3.5 percent of the corpuscle content of the hen is thus
built up daily.
   I have attempted to give a short review of the earliest applications of iso-
topic indicators and to discuss a few examples of their earlier and more re-
cent employment. Their use may be much extended in the time to come.



 1. G. de Hevesy and F. Paneth, Z. Anorg. Chem., 82 (1913) 322.
    G. de Hevesy and E. Róna, Z. Physik. Chem. Leipzig, 89 (1915) 294, 303.
 2. F. Paneth and G. de Hevesy, Monatsh, 36 (1915) 75.
 3. G. de Hevesy, Phys. Z., 16 (1915) 59. Comp. also O. Erbacher, Z. Physik. Chem.
    Leipzig, A 163 (1933) 196.
 4. G. de Hevesy and M. Biltz, Z. Physik. Chem. Leipzig, B 3 (1929) 271.
 5. F. Paneth, Z. Elektrochem., 28 (1922) 113.
 6. F. Paneth, Radio Elements as Indicators, New York, 1928.
 7. F. Paneth and E. Winternitz, Ber., 51 (1918) 1728.
 8. F. Paneth and O. Nörring, Ber., 53 (1920) 1693.


38                               1943 G.DE HEVESY

 9. J. Gróh and G. de Hevesy, Ann. Physik, 63 (1920) 85.
10. Ann. Physik, 65 (1921) 216.
11. G. de Hevesy and A. Obrusheva, Nature, 115 ( 1925) 674.
12. G. de Hevesy and W. Seith, Z. Physik, 56 (1929) 791.
13. G. de Hevesy and W. Seith, Metallwirtschaft, 13 (1934) 479.
     G. de Hevesy and W. Seith, Z. Physik, 57 (1929) 869.
     G. de Hevesy, W. Seith and A. Keil, Z. Physik, 79 (1932) 197.
14. G. de Hevesy, Sitzber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 129 (1920)1.
     C. Wagner, Z. Physik. Chem. Leipzig, B 15 (1932) 147.
15. W. Seith, Ber. Naturforsch. Ges. Freiburg, 30 (1930) 1.
16. H. A. C. McKay, Trans. Faraday Soc., 34 (1938) 845; O. Frisch, G. de Hevesy and
     H. A. C. McKay, Nature , 137 (1936) 149. Comp. also A. Sagrubskij, Physik. Z.
     Sowjet-union, 12 (1937) 118.
17. G. de Hevesy and L. Zechmeister, Ber., 53 (1920) 410.
18. G. de Hevesy and L. Zechmeister, Z. Elektrochem., 26 (1920) 151.
19. V. Majer, Z. Physik. Chem. Leipzig , A I79 (1937) 51.
20. G. de Hevesy, Math.-Phys. Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 3 (1921) 12.
21. Comp. G. T. Seaborg, Chem. Rev., 27 (1940) 199.
22. G. de Hevesy and R. Hobie, Nature, 128 (1931) 1038; Z. Anal. Chem;, 88 (1932)1.
23. H. Ussing, Nature, 144 (1939) 977.
24. D. Rittenberg and G. L. Foster, J. Biol. Chem., 133 (1940) 737.
25. E. Chargaff, M. Ziff and D. Rittenberg, J. Biol. Chem., 144 (1942) 343.
26. G. de Hevesy, Biochem. J ., 17 (1923) 439.
27. L. J. Mullins and S. C. Brooks, Science, 90 (1939) 256.
     Comp. also S. C. Brooks, Trans. Faraday Soc., 33 (1937) 1002; Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol.
     Med., 38 (1938) 856.
28. H. Jenny and R. Overstreet, J. Phys. Chem., 43 (1939) 1185.
29. T. C. Broyer and R. Overstreet, Am. J. Botany, 27 (1940) 425.
30. G. de Hevesy, Botan. Commun., Stockholm Acad. Sci., Arkiv Bot., 33 A, Nr. 2 (1946).
31. J. A. Christiansen, G. de Hevesy and Sv. Lomholt, Compt. Rend., 178 (1924) 1324;
     179 (1924) 241. Comp. also B. Behrens, Arch. Exptl. Pathol. Pharmakol., 109 (1925)
     332.
 32. Sv. Lomholt, Brit. J. Venereal Diseases , Jan. 1925.
 33. G. de Hevesy and O. H. Wagner, Arch. Exptl. Pathol. Pharmakol., 149 (1930) 336.
 34. R. Schoenheimer, The Dynamic State of Body Constituents, Cambridge, Mass., 1942.
 35. H. Urey, Les Prix Nobel, 1934.
 36. G. de Hevesy and E. Hofer, Klin. Wochschr., 13 (1934) 1524; Nature, 134 (1934) 879.
 37. G. de Hevesy and C. F. Jacobsen, Acta Physiol. Scand., I (1940) II.
     L. Hahn and G. de Hevesy, ibid., I (1941) 347.
 38. L. B. Flexner, A. Gellhorn and M. Merrell, J. Biol. Chem., 144 (1942) 35.
 39. F. Joliot, Les Prix Nobel, 1935 ; I. Joliot-Curie, Les Prix Nobel, 1935; E. Fermi, Les
      Prix Nobel, 1938.
 40. O. Chiewitz and G. de Hevesy, Nature , 136 (1935) 754; Biol. Commun., Copenhagen
      Acad. Sci., 13 (1937) 9.
 41. E. O. Lawrence, Les Prix Nobel, 1939.


                 APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                                  39
42. P. F. Hahn, W. F. Bale, E. O. Lawrence and G. H. Whipple, J. Am. Med. Assoc.
    III (1938) 2285; J. Exptl. Med., 69 (1939) 739; 71 (1940) 731; W.M. Balfour, P.F.
    Hahn, W. F. Bale, W. T. Pommerenke and G. H. Whipple, J. Exptl. Med., 76
    (1942) 15; P. F. Hahn, W. F. Bale, J. F. Ross, W. M. Balfour and G. H. Whipple,
    J. Exptl. Med., 78 (1943) 169; W. B. Hawkins and P. F. Hahn, J. Exptl. Med., 80
    (1944) 31. Comp. also M. E. Antoni and D. M. Greenberg, J. Biol. Chem., 134
    (1940) 27.
43. S. Ruben, W. Z. Hassid and M. D. Kamen, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 61 (1939) 661; 62
    (1940) 3443. I. H. C. Smith and D. B. Cowie, Plant Physiol., 16 (1941) 257. A. W.
    Frenkel, Plant Physiol., 16 (1941) 654.
44. S. Hertz, A. Robert and E. D. Evans, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 38 (1938) 510.
    J. G. Hamilton and M. H. Soley, Am. J. Physiol., 126 (1939) 521. C. P. Leblond,
    P. Sue and A. Chamorro, Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., 133 (1940) 540. C. P. Leblond and
    P. Sue, Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., 133 (1940) 540. I. Perlman, I. L. Chaikoff and M. E.
    Morton, J. Biol. Chem., I39 (1941) 433. M. E. Morton, I. Perlman and I. L. Chai-
    koff, ibid., 140 (1941) 603. S. Hertz and A. Roberts, J. Clin. Invest., 21 (1942) 31.
    S. Hertz, A. Roberts and W. Salter, J. Clin. Invest., 21 (1942) 25. W. Mann, Ch. P.
    Leblonet and S. L. Warren, J. Biol. Chem., 142 (1942) 905. A. S. Keston, R. P. Ball,
    V. K. Frantz and W. W. Palmer, Science, 95 (1942) 362. M. E. Morton and I. L.
    Chaikoff, J. Biol. Chem., 147 (1943) 719. C. P. Leblond, J. Gross, W. Peacock and
    R. D. Evans, Am. J. Physiol., 140 (1943/1944) 671. A. L. Franklin, I. L. Chaikoff and
     S. R. Levner, J. Biol. Chem., 153 (1944) 151.
45. M. E. Morton, I. L. Chaikoff, W. O. Reinhardt and E. Anderson, J. Biol. Chem.,
     I47 (1943) 757.
46. The survey by G. de Hevesy in Ann. Rev. Biochem., 9 (1940) 641 includes papers on
    the application of 32P as an indicator published prior to November 1, 1939. A sum-
    mary of the application of 32P and other labelling agents to the study of phosphatide
    metabolism is given by I. L. Chaikoff, Physiol. Rev., 22 (1942) 291. Comp. also
    J. G. Hamilton, J. Appl. Phys., 12 (1941) 440.
47. G. de Hevesy, J. Chem. Soc., (1939) 1213.
48. G. de Hevesy and L. Hahn, Biol. Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 15 (1940) 5.
49. G. de Hevesy, H. Levi and O. Rebbe, Biochem. J., 34 (1940) 532. Comp. also R. S.
    Manly, H. C. Hoodge and M. L. Manly, J. Biol. Chem., 134 (1940) 293.
50. L. A. Erf, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 47 (1941) 287.
51. A survey of these investigations is given by W. D. Armstrong, Ann. Rev. Biochem.,
     (1942). Comp. also P. O. Pedersen and B. Schmidt-Nielsen, Schweiz. Monatsschr.
    Zahnheilk., 51 (1941) 647; Acta Odontol. Scand., 4 (1942)I.
52. G. de Hevesy, J. J. Holst and A. Krogh, Biol. Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 13
     (1937)I.
53. L. Hahn and G. de Hevesy, Acta Physiol. Scand., I(1941) 347.
     J. Ariel, W. F. Bale, V. Downing, H. C. Hodge, S. van Voorhis, S. L. Warren and
     H. J. Wilson, Am. J. Physiol., 132 (1941) 346. D. M. Greenberg, R. B. And, M. D.
     O. Boelter, W. Wesley Campbell, W. E. Cohn and M. M. Murayama, Am. J.
    Physiol., 149 (1943/1944) 147.
54. M. Joseph, W. E. Cohn and D. M. Greenberg, J. Biol. Chem., 128 (1939) 673. T. R.


40                                 1943 G.DE HEVESY

    Noonan, W. O. Fenn and L. Haege, Am. J. Physiol., 129(1940) 432. G. de Hevesy
    and L. Hahn, Biol. Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci, 16 (1941) I. G. de Hevesy, Acta
    Physiol. Scand., 3 (1941) 123. W. E. Cohn, Am. J. Physiol., 133 (1941) 242. R. B.
    Dean, L. Haege and W. O. Fenn, J. Gen. Physiol., 24 (1941) 3 13.
55. W. E. Cohn and T. E. Cohn, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 41 (1939) 455. L. Hahn,
    G. de Hevesy and O. Rebbe, Biochem. J., 33 (1939) 1540. L. I. Mullins, T. R. Noo-
    nan, L.F. Haegeand W.O. Fenn, Am. J. Physiol., 133 (1941) 394; 135 (1941/1942)93.
    A. Krogh, Acta Physiol. Scand., 6 (1944) 203. A. Krogh, A. L. Lindberg and B.
    Schmidt-Nielsen, ibid ., 7 (1944) 221.
56. G. de Hevesy and L. Hahn, Biol. Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 15 ( 1940) 6. D. B.
    Zilversmit, C. Entenman, M. L. Montgomery and I. L. Chaikoff, J. Gen. Physiol.,
     26 (1943) 3 3 3. Comp. also F. L. Haven and W. F. Bale, J. Biol. Chem., 129 (1939) 23.
57. L. Hahn and G. de Hevesy, Mem. Carlsberg, 22 (1938) 188. O. Meyerhof, P. Ohl-
     meyer, W. Genmer and H. Maier-Leibnitz, Biochem. Z., 298 (1938) 396. E. Lunds-
     gaard, Scand. Arch. Physiol., 80 (1938) 291. G. de Hevesy and A. H. W. Aten, Biol.
     Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 14 (1939)5. G. de Hevesy and L. Hahn, Biol. Com-
     mun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 15 (1940) 7.
58. R. F. Furchgott and E. Shore, J. Biol. Chem., 151 (1943) 65. E. V. Flock and I. L.
     Bollman, ibid., 152 (1944) 371. H. M. Kalckar, J. Biol. Chem., 154 (1944) 267.
59. C. Artom, C. Perrier, M. Santangelo, G. Sarzana and E. Segrè, Nature, 139 (1937)
     836; Arch. Intern. Physiol., 45 (1937) 43 and 47 (1938) 245. L. Hahn and G. de
     Hevesy, Scand. Arch. Physiol., 77 (1937) 148. C. Entenman, S. Ruben, I. Perlman,
     F. W. Lorenz and I. L. Chaikoff, J. Biol. Chem ., 126 (1938) 493. B. A. Fries, I. Ru-
     ben, I. Perlman and I. L. Chaikoff, ibid., 123 (1938) 587. G. W. Changus, I. L. Chai-
     koff and S. Ruben, ibid., 126 (1938) 493. E. Chargaff, ibid., 128 (1939) 587. E. Char-
     gaff, K. B. Olson and P. F. Partington, ibid., 134 (1940) 505. G. de Hevesy and L.
     Hahn, Biol. Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 15 (1940) 5. B. A. Fries, G. W. Changus
     and I. L. Chaikoff, ibid., 132 (1940) 23. B. A. Fries and I. L. Chaikoff, ibid., 141 (1941)
     479. B. A. Fries, H. Schachner and I. L. Chaikoff, ibid., 144 (1942) 59.
60. G. de Hevesy and J. Ottesen, Acta Physiol. Scand., 5 (1943) 237. E. Andreasen and
     J. Ottesen, Acta Microbiol. Scand., Suppl. LIV, (1944) 26.
 61. H. v. Euler and G. de Hevesy, Biol. Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 17 (1942) 8.
     Chem. Commun., Stockholm Acad. Sci., 17 A, Nr. 30 (1944). L. Ahlström, H. v. Euler
     and G. de Hevesy, Chem. Comm., Stockholm Acad. Sci., 18 B, Nr. 13 (1944); 19 A,
     Nr.9 (1944); 19A,Nr.13 (1945).
 62. H. M. Barrett, C. H. Best and J. H. Ridout, J. Physiol., 93 (1938) 367. B. Cavenagh
       and H. S. Raper, Biochem. J., 33 (1939) 17. W. M. Sperry, H. Waelsch and V. A.
      Stryanoff, J. Biol. Chem., 135 (1940) 28. A. Waelsch, W. M. Sperry and V. A.
      Stryanoff, ibid., 135 (1940) 291; 140 (1940) 885.
 63. D. Stetten jr., J. Biol. Chem., 138 (1941) 437; 140 (1941) 143; 142 (1942) 629.
 64. G. de Hevesy and L. Hahn, Biol. Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 14 (1938) 2. A.
      H. W. Aten, Diss. Utrecht, 1939. F. W. Lorenz, I. Perlman and I. L. Chaikoff, Am .
      J. Physiol., 138 (1943) 318.
 65. G. de Hevesy and E. Lundsgaard, Nature, 140 (1937) 275. L. Hahn and G. de Heve-
      sy, Biochem. J., 32 (1938) 342.


                 APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE INDICATORS                                   41
66. D. B. Zilversmit, C. Entenman, M. C. Fishler and I. L. Chaikoff, J. Gen. Physiol., 26
    (1943) 3 3 3. M. C. Fishler, C. Entenman, M. L. Montgomery and I. L. Chaikoff, J.
    Biol. Chem., 150 ( 1943 ) 47.
67. A. H. W. Aten and G. de Hevesy, Nature, 142 (1938) III. A. H. W. Aten, Diss.
     Utrecht, 1939.
68. G. de Hevesy, H. Levi and O. Rebbe, Biochem. J., 32 (1938) 2147.
69. J. K. Parnas, Enzymologia, 5 (1938-1939) 166. G. de Hevesy, T. Baranowski, A. J.
    Gutke, P. Ostern and J. K. Parnas, Acta Biol. Exptl. Warsaw, 12 (1938) 34. J. K.
    Parnas, Bull. Soc. Chim. Biol., 21 (1939) 1059. T. Korzybski and J. K. Parnas, ibid., 21
    (1939)713.
70. O. Meyerhof, P. Ohlmeyer, W. Gentner and H. Meyer-Leibnitz, Biochem. Z., 298
    (1938)396.
71. A. Robinson, I. Perlman, S. Ruben and I. L. Chaikoff, Nature, 144 (1938) 119. H.
    Bulliard, J. Grundland and A. Moussa, Compt. Rend., 207 (1938) 745; 208 (1939)843.
    S. A. Fries, H. Schachner and I. L. Chaikoff, J. Biol. Chem., 144 (1942) 59. A. Tau-
    rog, I. L. Chaikoff and I. Perlman, ibid., 145 (1942) 281.
72. L. Ahlström, H. v. Euler and G. de Hevesy, Chem. Commun., Stockholm Acad. Sci.,
    21 A, Nr. 6 (1945).
73. G. de Hevesy, K. Linderström-Lang, A. S. Keston and C. Olsen, Mem. Carlsberg, 23
    (1940)213.
74. G. de Hevesy, L. Hahn and O. Rebbe, Biol. Commun., Copenhagen Acad. Sci., 14
    (1939) 3. K. Kjerulf-Jensen, Acta Physiol. Scand., 3 (1942) 193.
75. L. Hahn and G. de Hevesy, Acta Physiol. Scand., 3 (1942) 193.
76. L. Hahn and G. de Hevesy, Acta Physiol. Scand., 1 (1940) 1. G. de Hevesy and K.
    Zerahn, ibid., 4 (1942) 376.
77. G. de Hevesy, K. H. Köster, G. Sorensen, E. Warburg and K. Zerahn, Acta Med.
     Scand ., 116 (1944) 561.
78. G. Nylin and M. Malm, Cardiologia, 7 (1943) 153.
79. P. F. Hahn, W. M. Balfour, J. F. Ross, W. F. Bale and G. H. Whipple, Science, 93
     (1940) 87.
80. G. de Hevesy and J. Ottesen, Nature, 156 (1945) 534.
81. K. Bonhoeffer, Z. Elektrochem., 40(1934) 469.
82. R. Schoenheimer, S. Rattner and D. Rittenberg, J. Biol. Chem., 130 (1939) 703.
83. S. Graff, D. Rittenberg and G. L. Foster, J. Biol. Chem., 133 (1940) 745.
84. J. F. Manery and W. F. Bale, Am. J. Physiol., 126 (1939) 578; 132 (1941) 215.
85. J. H. E. Griffiths and B. G. Maegraith, Nature, 143 (1939) 159.
86. G. de Hevesy and O. Rebbe, Nature, 141 (1938) 1907.
87. A. M. Brues, M. M. Tracy and W. E. Cohn, J. Biol. Chem., 155 (1944) 619.
88. G. Nylin, Chem. Commun., Stockholm Acad. Sci., 20 A, Nr. 17 (1945).
89. P. F. Hahn, W. F. Bale and W. M. Balfour, Am. J. Physiol., 135 (1941-1942) 800.
