                          G   LENN   T. S EABORG


       The transuranium elements: present status
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1951



Mina Damer och Herrar.
  Jag är inte van vid kemiska ord       svenska, och det är för att mina föräl-
drar aldrig talade kemi i hemmet. Jag skulle gärna ända velat       hela denna
föreläsning      svenska. Men - om jag talade svenska     skulle mina vänner
McMillan och Lawrence inte förstå mer än hälften av vad jag säger. Jag ska
därför tala engelska, och jag vet att ni alla förstår det       mycket bra.

As I continue, speaking in English, I want to assure my British and Ameri-
can colleagues here, Sir John Cockcroft and Professors Walton, Lawrence,
and McMillan, that they haven’t missed anything yet. I want to begin by
saying that I am fortunate in being a member of a Chemistry Department
which has a long standing tradition of great breadth of research interests,
leading to an early program in nuclear chemistry under the active leadership
of men like G. N. Lewis and W. M. Latimer. The work on the transuranium
elements which I am about to describe was made possible by this circum-
stance and because of the unusual and excellent spirit of cooperation which
exists at the Radiation Laboratory, under the direction of Professor E. O.
Lawrence, where the cyclotron bombardments so crucial to the final results
were made. I shall try in the course of my lecture to point out the contribu-
tions to this work of my many colleagues but unfortunately it will not be
possible to do this adequately in the time available.
   Beginning at essentially the point where Professor McMillan left off in his
lecture, I shall first describe our work on plutonium. The beginning of this
can be considered to have taken place in the fall of 1940 when I asked a
graduate student, Arthur C. Wahl, to consider the possibility of studying the
tracer chemical properties of element 93 as a thesis problem, a suggestion
which he was happy to accept. This, and related work on element 94, was
carried on in collaboration with Dr. Joseph W. Kennedy who, like myself,
was at that time an instructor in the Department of Chemistry at the Univer-
sity of California. After Dr. McMillan’s departure from Berkeley in Novem-
ber, 1940, and his gracious assent to our continuation of the search for, and


326                                G.T.SEABORG

possible identification of element 94, our group turned its major efforts to
this problem.
   A bombardment of uranium oxide with the 16-MeV deuterons from the
60-inch cyclotron was performed in December, 1940. Alpha radioactivity
was found to grow into the chemically separated element 93 fraction, and
this alpha-activity was chemically separated from the neighboring elements,
especially elements 90 to 93 inclusive, in experiments performed during the
following months. These experiments, which constituted the positive iden-
tification1,2 of element 94, showed that this element has at least two oxidation
states, distinguishable by their precipitation chemistry, and that it requires
stronger oxidizing agents to oxidize element 94 to the upper state than is the
case for element 93. The particular isotope identified has been shown to be of
mass number 238 and the reactions for its preparation are shown in the first
slide (Fig. 1).




The chemical properties of elements 93 and 94 were studied by the tracer
method at the University of California for the next year and a half. These
first two transuranium elements were referred to by our group simply as
"element 93" and "element 94" until the spring of 1942, at which time the
first detailed reports concerning these elements were written3,4,5. In order to
write the report4 on the chemical properties, it became necessary to have
chemical symbols for the two elements. It was remembered that McMillan
had suggested the name "neptunium" (symbol Np) for element 93 after
Neptune, the planet immediately beyond Uranus, which gives its name to
uranium, and, therefore, it was thought proper that element 94 should
assume the name "plutonium" (symbol Pu) after the next planet Pluto. These
names and symbols have been adopted officially by the International Union
of Chemistry and will be used here.
   The isotope of plutonium which is of major importance is the one with
mass number 239. The search for this isotope, as a decay product of 239Np,
was going on almost simultaneously, and these experiments were being
carried on by the same group with the added collaboration of Dr. E. Segrè.
The isotope 239Pu was identified and its possibilities as a nuclear energy


            TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                          327
source were established during the spring of 1941 using a sample prepared
                        6

by the decay of cyclotron-produced 239 Np and later purified by taking
advantage of the then known chemistry of plutonium.
   Once the value of the isotope 239Pu was thus established, the paramount
problem was that of producing it on a large scale and isolating it after pro-
duction. The production problem was solved through the development of
the chain reacting units, or piles, utilizing the neutron-induced fission reac-
tion on 235U in natural uranium, in which the extra neutrons beyond those
needed to perpetuate the chain reaction are absorbed by 238U to form the
desired isotope 239Pu. These well-known reactions are summarized in the
following slide (Fig. 2).




                                    Fig. 2.

The isolation of the plutonium was to be done by chemical means, and in the
spring of 1942, I and a number of my colleagues moved to the Metallurgical
Laboratory at the University of Chicago to work on this problem. Among
the people who made outstanding contributions to this separation program,
both at Chicago and at other sites, was Dr. I. Perlman, who, it is interesting
to note, before this time had made an outstanding reputation in another field,
the application of radioactive tracers to physiology and biochemistry. Inves-
tigations continued at the University of California under the direction of
W. M. Latimer and A. C. Wahl, leading to further discoveries of importance
to the program.
   During the first months at the Metallurgical Laboratory, intensive effort
was directed toward defining the process which was to be used in the produc-
tion plants which were then being planned. Although it was felt that the
separation process would depend on the use of the two oxidation states of
plutonium which had been discovered during the early work at the Univer-
sity of California, the actual details, such as the best carrier compounds and
best oxidizing and reducing agents, had not yet been discovered. Dr. S. G.
Thompson is largely responsible for the conception and early development
of the process which was finally chosen. I cannot, of course, give recognition
individually to the large group of scientists who participated so successfully
in the diverse phases of this over-all problem. In addition, although this


328                                  G.T.SEABORG




Fig. 3. First laboratory for the study of pure plutonium, Metallurgical Laboratory,
                                    Chicago, 1942.

lecture is concerned primarily with the basic chemistry and physics of the
transuranium elements, mention should be made of the outstanding contribu-
tion of the chemists and engineers of the du Pont Company in the adaptation
of the plutonium process for industrial operation and in the plant design,
construction and operation.
   The laboratory investigations were conducted on the tracer scale, and it
soon became apparent that tests would be necessary under conditions where
the plutonium concentration would be the same as that anticipated in the
production plant. This proved a great difficulty since no one had actually


            TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                               329




Fig. 4. This highly magnified plutonium compound is the first to be weighed by man
and is here shown on a platinum shovel held by forceps. (Magnified approximately 13-
                           fold.) (Courtesy of Life Magazine.)

seen any plutonium up to this time, and the design of the separation plants
had to begin immediately so that the construction of these plants could take
place at the same time as the construction of the chain reacting units. This
problem was solved by producing an actually weighable amount of pluto-
nium by bombarding large amounts of uranium with neutrons from the cy-
clotron, the first time a weighable amount of any transmutation product had
been produced with a particle acceleration machine, and by working with
this material in such extremely small volumes that ordinary concentrations
would prevail. The field which embraces the study of chemical material on
this, the microgram scale of operation, has been given the name of "ultra-
microchemistry" by P. L. Kirk, a pioneer investigator in the field of quan-
titative chemistry on the microgram scale.
   This work was carried on chiefly by Dr. B.B. Cunningham and L. B.
Werner, who had previously been working in the biochemical field, and the


330                                    G.T.SEABORG




Fig. 5. Twenty micrograms of pure plutonium hydroxide in capillary tube (magnified
about 13-fold) isolated in September, 1942. The plutonium is the cloud-like mass at the
                           bottom of the capillary "test tube".

next slide (Fig. 3) s h ows a photograph of the room at the Metallurgical
Laboratory where they worked. The small amount of space in which they
worked, apparent from the photograph, is all the more remarkable when
one considers that Werner is a man who is more than two meters tall. The
first pure chemical compound7 of plutonium free from carrier material and
all other foreign matter was prepared by Cunningham and Werner on Au-
gust 18, 1942, and the first weighing of such a compound occurred on Sep-
tember 10, 1942 when 2.77 micrograms of the oxide was weighed. A pic-
ture of this oxide is shown on the following slide (Fig. 4). Not only was it
possible to test the separation processes at the actual concentrations which
were going to be used in the plant, tests which were of inestimable impor-
tance, but a great number of pure chemical compounds of plutonium were
produced and its chemical properties were well studied by a number of
investigators working on the ultramicrochemical scale. The next slide shows


           TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                          331
an early photograph of a compound of plutonium (Fig. 5). Since plutonium
has become available on a production scale from the chain reacting units the
chemical properties have been thoroughly investigated until they are as well-
known as those of numerous elements that have been studied for a great
many years. A contribution of importance was made by W. H. Zachariasen
of the University of Chicago, who was able to use his X-ray technique to
identify or help identify a number of the compounds which were syn-
thesized, and in many cases, thus to identify their structure.
     Before proceeding with a discussion of the other transuranium elements,
 I should like to say a few more words about neptunium. Another isotope,
    Np, was discovered early in 1942 in collaboration with Wahl . This isotope
237                                                             8



is the decay product of the previously known approximately 7-day beta
                                        9,10



particle emitting U which is formed as the result of an n, 2n reaction on
                   237


238
    U. The reactions for its production are shown in the next slide (Fig. 6).




                                    Fig. 6.

This isotope is of particular importance because it has a very long half-life
and because it is available in weighable amounts. The first pure neptunium
in the form of compounds of the isotope 237Np was isolated by L. B. Mag-
nusson and T. J. La Chapelle 11 at the wartime Metallurgical Laboratory in
October, 1944, and a picture is shown in the following slide (Fig. 7). It is
fortunately produced as a by-product in the chain reacting piles which has
led to the isolation of gram amounts for research purposes. The chemical
properties of neptunium in the macroscopic state have been studied with
such material, and this has led to a thorough knowledge of the chemistry of
this element.
   After the completion of the most essential part of the investigations con-
cerned with the chemical processes involved in the production of plutonium
at the wartime Metallurgical Laboratory, our attention turned to the prob-
lem of synthesizing and identifying the next transuranium elements. As
collaborators in this endeavor, I turned to Albert Ghiorso, trained in elec-
trical engineering, who played a dominant role in the development of the
electronic instruments which were used in our radioactivity investigations,
and to two young chemists, R. A. James and L. O. Morgan, who had been


332                              1951 G.T.SEABORG




Fig. 7. Ten micrograms of pure neptunium oxide at bottom of capillary tube (magnifi-
cation about 10-fold) isolated in 1944. Above the sample is a U.S. ten-cent piece (dime)
                             and below is a millimeter scale.


especially proficient in the investigations involving the chemistry of the
transuranium elements. These investigations, supplemented by later work at
the University of California, served as the thesis material for James and Mor-
gan in connection with the graduate work which they undertook at the
University a couple of years later.
   There followed quite a period during which the attempts to synthesize
and identify elements 95 and 96 bore no fruit. These unsuccessful experi-
ments were based on the premise that these elements should be much like
plutonium in that it should be possible to oxidize them to the (VI) oxidation
state and utilize this in the chemical isolation procedures. It was not until the
middle of the summer of 1944, upon the first recognition that these elements
were part of an actinide transition series, about which I will say more later,
that any advance was made, and then progress came quickly.
   As soon as it was recognized that these elements should be oxidized above
the (III) state only with extreme difficulty, if at all, the identification of an


            TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                          333
isotope of element 96 followed immediately. Thus the isotope Cm was 242



identified 12 in the summer of 1944 as a result of the bombardment of 239Pu
with 32 MeV helium ions in the Berkeley 60-inch cyclotron. The reaction
involved was 239Pu (α, n)242Cm, and the bombardment took place in the
Berkeley 60-inch cyclotron after which the material was shipped to the
Metallurgical Laboratory for chemical identification. I should like to digress
for a moment here to point out that our research program owes much to the
efforts of Dr. J. G. Hamilton, T. M. Putnam, Jr., G. B. Rossi, and their col-
laborators who have operated the 60-inch cyclotron and made the bom-
bardments which led to the discoveries of elements 96, and elements 97 and
98 to be mentioned later. In fact, I should like to pause further and recall at
this time that five of the six presently known transuranium elements were
first identified as a result of their initial production through the use of the
Berkeley 60-inch cyclotron.
   The identification13,14 of element 95 followed soon thereafter. This came
in the very late fall of 1944 as a result of the bombardment of 239Pu with pile
neutrons, the production reactions being as shown in the following slide
(Fig. 8).




At the same time the isotope Cm is formed as shown in the following slide
                            242



(Fig. 9), and this is presently the best method for its production.




                                    Fig. 9.


There are a couple of comments which should be made here concerning the
rare-earthlike properties of these two elements. Our hypothesis that they
should have a stable (III) oxidation state and greatly resemble the rare earth
elements in their chemical properties proved to be so true that for a time it


334                             1951 G.T.SEABORG




Fig. 10. First americium compound (hydroxide) in bottom of tube (centre). Isolated in
the fall of 1945. Eye of sewing needle below indicates magnification of about 10-fold.

appeared to be most unfortunate. The better part of a year was spent in
trying to separate chemically the two elements from each other and from the
rare earth elements but without success, and although we felt entirely con-
fident, on the basis of their radioactive properties and the methods of produc-
tion, that isotopes of elements 95 and 96 had been produced, the chemical
proof remained to be demonstrated. The elements remained unnamed dur-
ing this period of futile attempts at separation, although one of our group
insisted in referring to them by the names "pandemonium" and "delirium"
in recognition of our difficulties. However, they were finally separated and
completely identified chemically, and, in fact, their present names were
eventually proposed on the basis of their chemical properties but with a more
serious basis. The name "americium" (symbol Am) was suggested for el-
ement 95, thus naming it after the Americas by analogy with the naming of
its rare-earth homologue europium after Europe, and the name "curium"
(symbol Cm) was suggested for element 96 after Pierre and Marie Curie


            TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                             335




Fig. 11. Photograph of curium hydroxide in bottom of microcentrifuge cone. (Magni-
                                fied about 2-fold.)

by analogy with the naming of its homologue gadolinium after Gadolin.
These names and symbols will be used here and were used in the preceding
slides.
     Americium was first isolated by Cunningham15 in the form of a pure com-
pound in the fall of 1945 at the wartime Metallurgical Laboratory, and a
photograph is shown on the next slide (Fig. 10). It can be prepared in milli-
gram amounts by the neutron bombardment of plutonium according to
reactions shown on a foregoing slide (Fig. 8), and thus it has been possible to
investigate its chemical properties extensively through the use of macro-
scopic quantities.
     Curium was first isolated in the form of a pure compound of 242Cm by
L. B. Werner and I. Perlman16 at the University of California during the fall
of 1947. A photograph is shown in the following slide (Fig. 11). The isotope
242
    Cm is so highly radioactive, due to its short half-life, that chemical investi-
gations with it in macroscopic concentrations are very difficult. Nevertheless


336                           1951 G.T.SEABORG

a large number of such investigations have been carried on and much has
been learned about its chemical properties.
   More recent work has led to the identification of a number of heavier iso-
topes of americium, curium, and plutonium which present interesting pos-
sibilities for the further nuclear and chemical investigation of these elements.
The nuclide 242m Am formed by the neutron bombardment12,13,17 of 241 A m
decays partially by electron capture18 to the isotope of plutonium, 242Pu. The
latter nuclide19 is an alpha emitter with the comparatively long half-life of
5 x 105 years and, therefore, may be important in future investigations of
the chemical properties of plutonium since it has a specific activity some
twenty times lower than that of 239Pu. This material can be transmuted by
neutron bombardment20,21 to the comparatively long-lived 243Am (about
10 4 years) and, therefore, following chemical separation this latter isotope
can be made available comparatively free of other isotopes of americium.
Similarly, such 243Am can be transmuted by neutron bombardment22,23 to
the comparatively long-lived 244 Cm (about 10 years) which can thus be
made available in a comparatively pure state following chemical separation.
These reactions are summarized on the following slide (Fig. 12).


                             EC




Thus the isotope 243Am, with a specific activity some twenty times lower
than that of 241Am, may supplant Am for use in the chemical studies of the
                                    241



future; it is not yet known whether Am is beta stable, but if it is not, its
                                        243


                                                                 4
partial half-life for beta emission appears to be longer than 10 years so that
these considerations would not be altered. Due to the difficulties in studying
the chemical properties of curium through the use of the isotope 242Cm, the
isotope 244Cm with twenty times lower specific activity produced as just
indicated, offers great hope for the simplification of future chemical studies
of curium.


              TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                         337
   After the return at the conclusion of the war of a number of us to the
University of California late in 1945 and early 1946, a part of the effort was
put into the problem of the possible production and identification of further
transuranium elements. S. G. Thompson, who had done so much in connec-
tion with the development of the separation processes for plutonium during
the war, undertook to collaborate on the search for element 97 as the basis
for his thesis research problem, and the further collaboration of Albert Ghior-
so was also sought. Many problems had to be solved, mostly in connection
with the small amounts of material available for irradiation and the intense
radioactivity of this material. To help counterbalance the many difficulties
were the advances which had been made in the possibility of predicting the
radioactive properties of the expected isotopes and especially the exact pre-
dictions of the chemical properties made possible on the basis of the actinide
concept. According to this view, the elution positions of the transcurium el-
ements should be analogous to those of the transgadolinium elements in the
ion-exchange column separation method. This knowledge proved of ines-
timable benefit in planning the ultimately successful experiments. Two ap-
proaches to the problem were undertaken: namely, that of neutron irradia-
tion in the chain reacting piles and that of charged particle bombardment in
the 60-inch cyclotron. The difficulties attending the neutron irradiation are
illustrated in the following slide (Fig. 13).




The prediction that curium must have a mass number as high as 249 before
a negative beta particle emitter is reached is based on considerations involving
the nuclear energy surface and the systematics of radioactivity which cannot
be described here because of the lack of time. These considerations are, of
course, not exact and it is quite possible that negative beta particle emission
will be reached as early as Cm. The considerations are negated if there
                                247



should exist a pronounced closed subshell at 148 neutrons in which case the
isotopes of curium above Cm might be quite short-lived.
                            244



   Whatever the reason for it may be, the neutron irradiations did not yield


338                           1951 G.T.SEABORG

positive results, and, therefore, I will go on to describe the cyclotron irradia-
tions by which it was finally possible in December, 1949 to identify24 an iso-
tope of the element with atomic number 97 as a result of the irradiation of
241
    Am with 35 MeV helium ions. This was followed within a month by the
              25
identification of an isotope of element 98 through the irradiation of 242Cm
with 35 MeV helium ions, in a research carried on by the same investigators
with the addition of a young colleague, K. Street, Jr., who had already con-
tributed very much to our knowledge of the chemical properties of the
transuranium elements. The first identification experiment in the case of el-
 ement 98 involved the production and separation of only a few thousand
atoms. The reactions involved are summarized in the following slide (see
 Fig. 14).




It should be mentioned that the successful handling in a safe manner of
the huge amounts of radioactivity in the target material was made pos-
sible through the use of the excellent protective equipment provided by
Nelson Garden and the members of his Health Chemistry Group at our
Laboratory.
   The name "berkelium" (symbol Bk) was suggested for element 97 after
the city where the work was done, in analogy with the naming of its chem-
ical homologue terbium, which was named after the village of Ytterby here
in Sweden where the rare earth minerals were first found. The name "cali-
fornium" (symbol Cf) was suggested for element 98 in honor of the univer-
sity and state where the work was done; thus the name does not reflect its
strong homology to dysprosium. These names are used in the present talk
including the various slides.
   Soon following this work, it became possible on the basis of the interesting
pioneer carbon-ion bombardment experiments of Miller, Hamilton, Put-
nam, Haymond, and Rossi 26 in the 60-inch cyclotron to produce isotopes of
californium in better yield by this method. These experiments, in which
uranium is bombarded with carbon ions, led to the production27 of califor-


            TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                              339
nium isotopes according to the reactions given in the following slide (see
Fig. 15).




There are, of course, many more transuranium nuclides known that I have
not been able to describe in the time available. For the sake of completeness
these are summarized in the following slide (Fig. 16).
   It should be emphasized that these nuclides are the product of the investiga-
tions of a number of laboratory groups besides our own. I should like to
mention especially the work of W. M. Manning, M. H. Studier and co-
workers of the Argonne National Laboratory in Chicago, Illinois, as well as
the work of the United States Atomic Energy Commission’s Los Alamos
Laboratory, and the Chalk River Laboratory of the Canadian National Re-
search Council. I feel that I should especially single out the contributions of
my colleague Albert Ghiorso whose name, as you may have noticed, has
come up time after time as I have gone through my description here of the
work on the transuranium elements. Ghiorso has been a key man throughout
and is one of those individuals without whom a laboratory such as ours
simply could not run.

I suppose that I should say a few words with respect to the possibility for
future production and identification of additional transuranium elements,
especially in view of the possibility of their production by heavy-ion bom-
bardment of transuranium elements. As an aid to such a program the radio-
active properties can be estimated, as I have already indicated, on the assump-
tion of a smooth nuclear energy surface and the systematics of radioactivity.
Again, I must emphasize that such considerations are negated in the event
that a stable subshell of 148 neutrons should be found to exist, and this must
be regarded as a definite possibility. It is interesting to note that our considera-
tions on the systematics of spontaneous fission28 indicate that this method of
decay will not compete seriously with radioactive decay until the region just
beyond element 100. The following slide (Fig. 17) shows a number of
predicted half-lives for radioactive decay.


340              1951 G.T.SEABORG




      Fig. 16. Summary of transuranium nuclides.


           TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                              341
                              Predicted Half-Lives




These considerations illustrate clearly that one of the problems is that of con-
ceiving means for producing nuclides of sufficiently high mass numbers with
half-lives long enough for chemical identification. Thus, the serious prob-
lem is again the paucity of starting materials.
   A hopeful aspect to the problem of the production and the identification
of transcalifornium elements is the feeling that the chemical properties can be
predicted with confidence. Thus it is expected that the (III) oxidation state
will predominate for the next few elements. Of especial importance in plan-
ning experiments is the confidence that the elution sequence will continue to
follow that of the analogous rare earths as will be described in a few minutes.
   Unfortunately, there is not sufficient time to say as much as I would like
about the interesting chemical properties of the transuranium group of el-
ements. As I have already mentioned, the chemical evidence indicates that it
is the tripositive oxidation state which is important here and points to a
beginning with actinium of an "actinide" transition series in the same sense
that the rare earth "lanthanide" series begins with lanthanum29,30. There is,
however, the important difference that the first elements in the heavy series
exhibit the property of oxidation to higher states with much greater ease
than is the case for the corresponding elements in the rare earth series. The
most important criterion for this classification is the probable presence of
seven 5f electrons (analogous to the stable gadolinium structure) in tripos-
itive curium (element 96) rather than the presence of the first 5f electron in
thorium. In fact, there might not be any such electrons in thorium with, for
example, their first appearance in protactinium (two 5f electrons) or in ura-
nium (three 5f electrons). An important aspect of these considerations is the
fact that the 5f and 6d shells of the elements in this heaviest region lie so close


342                            1951 G.T.SEABORG

together that the energy necessary for the shift from one shell to the other is
in some cases within the range of chemical binding energies.
   The earliest element in this series which clearly exhibits the characteristic
oxidation state of (III) is uranium, the third element in the series. In going up
the series from uranium, each of the successive elements exhibits a more
stable (III) oxidation state than the preceding element. When the elements
americium (atomic number 95) and curium (atomic number 96) are
reached, the (III) state is the predominant one, and, in fact, seems to be the
only state of these latter elements which is thermodynamically stable in acidic
aqueous solution. In the cases of berkelium (atomic number 97) and califor-
nium (atomic number 98) only tracer experiments have been done and,
therefore, the information is less certain. These experiments show that berke-
lium exhibits stable (III) and (IV) oxidation states31 and indicate that califor-
nium exists solely in the (III) state32, which behavior is in entire conformity
with their expected analogy with their rare earth homologues, terbium and
dysprosium, respectively.
   Perhaps the most striking chemical evidence as to the course taken in the
filling of the 5f electron shell in this region is that offered by the work on
the separation of the tripositive actinides and lanthanides by the ion-exchange
column method. The use of a cation exchange resin with an eluting agent
such as ammonium citrate solution, as developed on the Plutonium Proj-
ect33, has led to a satisfactory solution of the difficult problem of separating in
pure form the rare earth elements from each other. The tripositive actinide
elements are equally difficult to separate from each other and from the rare
earths because of their great similarity to the latter. However, the analogy in
behavior of the actinide and lanthanide elements here is much greater than
results from a similarity in the difficulty of separation, as can be seen from
the following slide (Fig. 18). The simplicity of the apparatus used is illus-
trated in the next slide (Fig. 19).
   A remarkable analogy in the spacing can be seen between the group cali-
fornium-berkelium-curium-americium and their rare earth homologues
dysprosium-terbium-gadolinium-europium. The spacings here reflect the
relative changes in ionic radii which determine the relative separations in the
ion-exchange adsorption method. It can be seen that the same sequence of
changes in the ionic radius is encountered on filling in the 5f electrons as
occurs on filling the 4f shell, and, therefore, it seems quite clear that curium
represents the midway point in the actinide transition series of elements in
view of its position analogous to gadolinium.


             TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                                 343




Fig. 18. Relative elution of homologous actinides and lanthanides. The data for the
actinides shown here are those of K. Street, Jr., S. G. Thompson, and G. T. Seaborg 32
in which the cation exchange resin Dowex-50 was used and the elution performed at
87° C with ammonium citrate buffered with citric acid to a pH of 3.5 (total citrate con-
centration 0.2 M). The data on the lanthanide elements are those of B. H. Ketelle and
G. E. Boyd34 in which the same resin was used in a somewhat longer column and the
elution performed at 100°C using a similar citrate buffer solution (pH 3.28). (The dot-
        ted lines show the predicted elution positions for elements 99 and 100.)

   Magnetic susceptibility measurements on compounds of the heaviest el-
ements ideally should lead to the resultant magnetic moments in fundamental
units and in this way give information on the quantum states of the respon-
sible electrons. Actually, as encountered with the rare earth elements, the
situation is rather complex and the exact behavior expected for the heaviest
elements, on the basis of the presence of either 5f or 6d electrons, cannot be,
or at least has not been, predicted. Nevertheless, such measurements should
give, and have given, some information on this point.


344                            1951 G.T.SEABORG




Fig. 19. Ion-exchange column with elution apparatus and automatic sample collection
             mechanism for separation of actinide and lanthanide elements.


   The following slide (Fig. 20) shows a plot comparing the room tem-
perature experimental magnetic susceptibilities of the lanthanide and actinide
cations in such a way as to show their remarkable analogy in this property.
This plot is admittedly rough because data are used from both aqueous solu-
tions and solid compounds; these are not strictly comparable and even data
from different solid compounds of the same oxidation state of an element
differ somewhat due to the effects of the crystal fields and exchange effects.
Nevertheless, the comparison is sufficiently reliable to show that the magnet-
ic measurements point toward the filling of the 5f shell in the manner ex-
pected.
   The next slide (Fig. 21) shows in an extremely rough and qualitative way
a pictorial representation of the binding energy of the most easily removable
 5f and 6d electron (of those present) for each of the heaviest elements.
   The best method of presenting the actinide elements in the Periodic Table
seems to be in a manner similar to that illustrated in the following slide (Fig.
22). Here are shown the fourteen elements of atomic numbers 90 to 103


             TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                                345




Fig. 20. Plot of molar magnetic susceptibilities of some actinide and lanthanide ions.




Fig. 21. Qualitative representation of electronic binding energies in the heaviest ele-
                                        ments.




           TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                               347
inclusive, with actinium (element 89) as the prototype, listed as a series below,
and in a manner similar to, the common listing of the fourteen rare earth el-
ements of atomic numbers 58 to 71 inclusive, for which lanthanum (element
57) is the prototype. It is not proposed that this particular form of the Period-
ic Table has any more merit than any of a number of others which place
these elements in positions homologous to the rare earth elements, since it is
obvious that they can be analogously placed in a number of other types of
tables or charts.
    The elements 90 to 96 inclusive or the first few of them could, in addition,
be listed separately below the 5d transition elements in recognition of the
resemblance of the first few of these to 5d elements. This appears to be un-
desirable, however, since the last members of this group bear no such resem-
blance and it is probably impossible to draw a line as to just where the resem-
blance ends. It should be noted that cerium, terbium, europium, etc., could
be put in two places in the Periodic Table in recognition of their two oxida-
 tion states, but this practice is not usually followed.
    The group probably could have been just as well described by some other
term rather than "actinide", which is derived from straight analogy with the
term "lanthanide". Irrespective of the name which usage will finally assign
to this group of elements, however, it seems that the outstanding char-
acteristics of the group, namely the "eka-gadolinium" character of curium
 (and the presumed "eka-lutetium" character of element 103), together with
 the regularly increasing trend toward actinium-like character in going from
thorium to curium, are best represented by listing these elements in cor-
responding positions under the rare earth elements if it is desirable to give
each element only one place in the Periodic Table.



 1. G. T. Seaborg, E. M. McMillan, J. W. Kennedy, and A. C. Wahl, Radioactive
    element 94 from deuterons on uranium, Phys. Rev., 69 (1946) 366 (submitted Janu-
    ary 28,1941); A new element; Radioactive element 94 from deuterons on uranium,
    NNES PPR (National Nuclear Energy Series, Plutonium Project Record), Vol. 14B,
    The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper 1.1 a, McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
    Inc., New York, 1949.
 2. G. T. Seaborg, A. C. Wahl, and J. W. Kennedy, Radioactive element 94 from deu-
    terons on uranium, Phys. Rev., 69 (1946) 367 (submitted March 7, 1941); A new
    element: Radioactive element 94 from deuterons on uranium, NNES PPR, Vol.
    14B The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper No. 1.1 b, McGraw-Hill
    Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.


348                              1951 G.T.SEABORG

 3. G. T. Seaborg, A. C. Wahl, and J. W. Kennedy, Nuclear properties of as 23894 and
    238
        93, NNES PPR, Vol. 14B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper No.
    1.4, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949 (report submitted March 21,
    1942).
 4. G. T. Seaborg and A. C. Wahl, The chemical properties of elements 94 and 93, J.
    Am. Chem. Soc., 70 (1948) 1128 (report submitted March 21,1942); NNES PPR,
    Vol. 14B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper No. 1.6, McGraw-
    Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
 5. G. T. Seaborg and M. L. Perlman, Search for elements 94 and 93 in nature. Presence
    of 23994 in pitchblende, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 70 (1948) 1571 (report submitted April
    13,1942); NNES PPR, Vol. I4B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper
    No. 1.3, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
 6. J. W. Kennedy, G. T. Seaborg, E. Segrè, and A. C. Wahl, Properties of 23994, Phys.
     Rev., 70 (1946) 555 (submitted May 29,1941); Fissionable isotope of a new element
    239
        94, NNES PPR, Vol. 14B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper
    No. 1.2, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
 7. B. B. Cunningham and L. B. Werner, The first isolation of plutonium, J. Am. Chem.
     Soc., 71 (1949) 1521; The first isolation of a synthetic element: 94239Pu, NNES PPR,
    Vol. 14B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper No. 1.8, McGraw-
     Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
 8. A. C. Wahl and G. T. Seaborg, Nuclear properties of 23793, Phys. Rev., 73 (1948)
    940 (report submitted April 14, 1942); NNES PPR, Vol. 1433, The Transuranium
    Elements: Research Papers, Paper No. 1.5, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York,
     1949.
 9. E. M. McMillan, Phys. Rev., 58 (1940) 178.
10. Y. Nishina, T. Yasaki, H. Ezoe, K. Kimura, and M. Ikawa, Phys. Rev., 57 (1943)
     1182.
11. L. B. Magnusson and T. J. LaChapelle, The first isolation of element 93 in pure
     compounds and a determination of the half-life of 93 237Np, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 70
     (1948) 3534; NNES PPR, Vol. 14B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers,
     Paper No. 1.7, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
12. G. T. Seaborg, R. A. James, and A. Ghiorso, The new element curium (atomic
     number 96), NNES PPR, Vol. 14B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers,
     Paper No.22.2, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
13. G. T. Seaborg, R. A. James, and L. O. Morgan, The new element americium (atom-
     ic number 95), NNES PPR, Vol. 14B The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers,
     Paper No. 22.1, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
14. A. Ghiorso, R. A. James, L. O. Morgan, and G. T. Seaborg, Preparation of trans-
     plutonium isotopes by neutron irradiation, Phys. Rev., 78 (1950) 472.
15. B. B. Cunningham, The first isolation of americium in the form of pure com-
     pounds; microgram-scale observations on the chemistry of americium, NNES PPR,
     Vol. 14B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper No. 19.2, McGraw-
     Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
16. L. B. Werner and I. Perlman, First isolation of curium, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 73 (1951)
     5215; The preparation and isolation of curium, NNES PPR, Vol. 14B, The Trans-


             TRANSURANIUM ELEMENTS: PRESENT STATUS                                   349
    uranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper No. 22.5, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc. ,
    New York, 1949.
17. W. M. Manning and L. B. Asprey, Preparation and radioactive properties of 242Am,
    NNES PPR, Vol. 14B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper No. 22.
    7, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
18. G. D. O’Kelley, G. W. Barton, Jr., W. W. T. Crane, and I. Perlman, The radio-
    activity of 242Am. Phys. Rev., 80 (1950) 293.
19. S. G. Thompson, K. Street, Jr., A. Ghiorso, and F. L. Reynolds, The new isotope
    242
        Pu and additional information on other plutonium isotopes, Phys. Rev., 80 (1950)
     1108.
20. J. C. Sullivan, G. L. Pyle, M. H. Studier, P. R. Fields, and W.M. Manning, Proper-
    ties of plutonium-243, Phys. Rev., 83 (1951) 1267.
21. S. G. Thompson, K. Street, Jr., A. Ghiorso, and F. L. Reynolds, Properties of the
    isotope 243Pu, Phys. Rev., 84 (1951) 165.
22. K. Street, Jr., A. Ghiorso, and G. T. Seaborg, The isotopes of americium, Phys. Rev.,
     79 (1950) 530.
23. F. L. Reynolds, E. K. Hulet, and K. Street, Jr., Mass-spectrographic identification of
     243
         Cm and 244Cm, Phys. Rev., 80 (1950) 467.
24. S. G. Thompson, A. Ghiorso, and G. T. Seaborg, Phys. Rev., 77 (1950) 83 8; 80
     (1950) 781.
25. S. G. Thompson, K. Street, Jr., A. Ghiorso, and G. T. Seaborg, Phys. Rev., 78 (1950)
     298; 80 (1950) 790.
26. J. F. Miller, J. G. Hamilton, T. M. Putnam, H.R. Haymond, and G. B. Rossi, Phys.
     Rev., 80 (1950) 486.
27. A. Ghiorso, S. G. Thompson, K. Street, Jr., and G. T. Seaborg, Phys. Rev., 81(1951)
      1.54.
28. G. T. Seaborg, Some comments on the mechanism of fission, Phys. Rev., 85 (1952)
      157.
29. G. T. Seaborg, The chemical and radioactive properties of the heavy elements,
     Chem. Eng. News, 23 (1945) 2190.
30. G. T. Seaborg, Place in Periodic System and electronic structure of the heaviest
     elements, Nucleonics Vol. 5, No. 5 (1949) 16; Electronic structure of the heaviest
     elements, NNES PPR, Vol. 14B, The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper
      No. 21.1, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949.
31. S. G. Thompson, B. B. Cunningham, and G. T. Seaborg, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 72
     (1950) 2798.
32. K. Street, Jr., S. G. Thompson, and G. T. Seaborg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 72 (1950)
     4832.
 33. See W. C. Johnson, L. L. Quill, and F. Daniels, Chem. Eng. News, 25 (1947) 2494,
      (for references).
 34. B. H. Ketelle and G. E. Boyd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 73 (1951) 1862.
