                             H ANS   VON   EULER


  Fermentation of sugars and fermentative enzymes
                         Nobel Lecture, May 23, 1930



It is my object to give a report of my work in connection with The Fermen-
tation of Sugars and the Enzymes Active in Such Fermentation. In performing this
 duty and expressing my sincere and warm thanks to my colleagues for their
 very valuable assistance, I will try to give an idea of the aims of our work,
 point out the details of our methods and the results obtained, and clarify their
 relationship to central problems in biology and to what extent our work can
contribute to a solution thereof.
    Any scientific problem must be attacked by research into detail; the natural
scientist did not win his victories until he left meditation on the great riddles
of the world and began a careful study of special problems; our knowledge
- of more general associations and of far-reaching laws has grown out of the
 results of such research. Thus the study of alcoholic fermentation led men like
 Lavoisier, Pasteur and Liebig beyond the immediate results to experience of
 the greatest scope.
    The fermentation of sugars forms a special reaction complex and each of
 the reactions co-operating therein constitutes a still more limited field of
study, but it is precisely this combination of reaction phases within the cell
 that is in many respects typical of the processes of life.
    We also know that the decomposition of sugar during fermentation is iden-
tical with the reactions by which sugar begins to burn during respiration, and
 there is therefore no organism whose life is not dependent on the sugar reac-
tions under discussion.
    What I shall deal with mainly in this lecture relates to the means by which
 the living cell decomposes its sugar and thus produces energy for its life and
growth. By these means the reactions of the living cell differ from other chem-
ical processes.
    Within the living organism, the majority of reactions are brought about
 by special substances already active in minimum quantities, such substances
 being known as enzymes or ferments. Every group of substances, and in fact
practically every substance, requires its specific enzyme for its reaction. Only
a few enzyme types were known in the early days, such as pepsin in the gastric


                  SUGAR FERMENTATION AND ENZYMES                               145
juice, which splits proteins, or amylase in saliva and in malt, which converts
 starch into sugar, but in more recent times the number of enzymes whose
 existence has been proved or substantiated has risen to over 100.
    A study of the kinetics of the enzyme reactions confirmed Berzelius’ bril-
 liant intuition to the effect that in respect of their activity the enzymes are
 analogous with the other, non-enzymatic catalysts. For example, we can split
 sucrose into glucose and fructose either by means of a strong acid, such as
 sulphuric acid, or by an enzyme obtained from yeast, namely saccharase. The
 difference is principally that we require much fewer molecules of enzyme
 (about 1 millionth) than molecules of sulphuric acid to achieve the same effect,
 and this is due to the fact that sucrose has a much greater affinity for the enzyme
 than for sulphuric acid; thus it binds its special enzyme more completely than
 the acid and holds it within the reaction sphere.
    All earlier hypotheses to the effect that the enzymatic activity was associated
 with a special state of matter have been refuted; enzymes are fundamentally
 not different from other substances.
    Enzyme research is now advancing in two complementary directions: a
purely chemical and a biological.
    With regard to the former, the problem is to unravel the chemical nature of
 the enzymes; we cannot reach any definitive conclusions if we do not know
 the atom combinations governing the properties of enzymes. The problem
 in this case therefore is to concentrate these substances, which are enormously
 diluted in animals and plants, then eliminate the accompanying substances
 from their solutions, obtain them in the pure state, and finally analyse them
 and unravel their molecular structure.
    At the beginning of this century the work on enzymes had still been pre-
 dominantly qualitative; it has become necessary for us to introduce exactly
 defined and rational units for the activity of enzymes if we are to be able to
 follow the course of purification.
    Concentration and purification, which have frequently resulted in isolation
 of the required substance in biochemistry, come up against particular difficul-
 ties as far as enzymes are concerned. Enzyme molecules are large, unstable and
 are easily destroyed by acids and alkalies; with regard to their sensitivity to
 elevated temperature, they behave like proteins and are rapidly denatured or
 inactivated at temperatures above 60o. Thus it is not possible to use sharp
 chemical agents for their study.
    Substances of high activity are obtained under mild conditions, by precipi-
 tation with alcohol and acetone, by diffusion and by adsorption methods - the


146                            1929 H.VON EULER

latter specially devised by Willstätter - and the unremitting work done in this
respect both here and by other schools has certainly not been in vain. This pre-
parative method, however, has hitherto had only limited success.
   It was obvious to try to break through by indirect methods. I shall discuss
these briefly for they constituted a quite important part of our research, and I
also think that their continued use will give valuable results.
   As I have already stated, an enzyme is active according to its combination
with its substrate by a particular affinity. This combination is produced by
certain atom groups, and inter alia it is these which have to be clarified.
   I will take an example: when proteins are digested, the long chain of
amino acids of which the protein consists becomes smaller and smaller, and
the final intermediate product containing two such amino acids is known as a
dipeptide.
   The dipeptides also have their special enzymes, the dipeptidases. Like all
such substrates, the dipeptides are bound to the enzyme before the latter acts,
and the first question is by whatgroup in the dipeptide does this take place. It is a
general fact that the decomposition products arising in an enzyme reaction have
an inhibiting effect, and the amino acids are the inhibitors here. We have to
ascertain which group such a decomposition product must contain to inhibit
the reaction, and by Josephson’s work concerning a special dipeptidase it
could be shown that it is the amino group that is involved here.
   The study of the circumstances in which this inhibition occurs and in which
the enzyme binds the dipeptide has subsequently shown that it is probably a
carbonyl group in the enzyme that binds the substrate; and thus for the first
time a combination between an enzyme and a substrate was traced back to
                       1
certain atom groups.
   Other researchers, particularly Waldschmidt-Leitz and Grassmann, con-
tinued with this method of determining active atom groups in an enzyme
molecule, firstly for the examination of peptidases from yeast and subsequent-
ly for the examination of other protein-splitting enzymes. Two defined en-
zyme types were discovered, amino-peptidases and carboxyl-peptidases, and
confirmation was obtained for a working hypothesis devised by us, the so-
called 2-affinity theory. This means that two different reaction centres co-
operate in the splitting of the substrate, namely one which binds the substrate
with a measurable specific affinity and one of a shorter life which should be
localized at that zone of the substrate where the splitting takes place.
   Another way adopted by us to discover something of the chemical nature
of the enzyme is as follows:


                 SUGAR FERMENTATION AND ENZYMES                               147
   It was known that certain chemical substances even in very small doses are
able to inactivate dissolved enzymes. Phenols, amines, mercury salts and hy-
drocyanic acid are among them, i.e., substances which even the layman knows
as poisons. Their fatal effect on the organism consists precisely in that they
inactivate the enzymes necessary to life. Systematic examination has shown
that such poisoning of isolated enzymes is of a purely chemical nature, i.e., the
poison binds the enzyme, which is thus inactivated. By studying this effect
quantitatively, we determined enzyme equivalents by known quantities of
poison.
   Such poisoning can readily be shown with various yeast enzymes; I will
take catalase and poison it with hydrocyanic acid (experiment).
   The poisoning of the typical complex of alcoholic fermentation with fluo-
ride can be proved and at the same time the co-operation of this enzyme with
the activator cozymase can be proved by another experiment: the reaction
can be followed in the apparatus in which we conventionally determine the
course of fermentation (Myrbäck’s microfermentation apparatus). Demon
stration experiment: three pairs of flasks are filled as follows.

           1 and 2 with the enzyme (apozymase) without cozymase,
           3 and 4 with the enzyme with cozymase,
           5 and 6 with apozymase, cozymase, and fluoride.

The experiment showed evolution of CO2 only in flasks 3 and 4, namely 5
c.c. per I0 minutes.
   The case best examined is the poisoning of the yeast enzyme which splits
sucrose into its components, glucose and fructose. The degree of poisoning
depends enormously on the acidity of the solution. Myrbäck’s test showed
that the saccharase is inactivated by silver salts to the same degree as the enzyme
reacts with the free silver base formed from the silver salt, to form a silver
compound, and similar poisoning occurs with certain other toxic metal salts,
Hg, Cu, and Pb.
   From the quantity of metal salt added and from the degree of poisoning,
i.e., the degree to which the enzyme has been inactivated, it is possible, on
certain assumptions, to determine how many mg of enzyme correspond to
1 mg of silver. Other measurements by Myrbäck have shown that the poi-
soning due to phosphotungstic acid, picric acid, etc., depends among other
things on the formation of slightly dissociated salts between these acids and a
slightly basic group in the enzyme molecule. Other series of tests have given


148                           1929 H.VON EULER

information concerning which important constituents within the saccharase
molecule co-determine the affinity of the enzyme for its substrate.
    Thus for each enzyme of the saccharase type it is possible to determine an
equivalent corresponding to each poisonous metal atom. Somewhat com-
plicated calculations are required to arrive at the said final results from the
experimentally determined degrees of poisoning. Without going into these,
I will simply state that on this basis we now understand how quantities of
one millionth of a gram and less of a poison may be sufficient to paralyse or
annihilate an organism; the quantity of the catalysts required to be inactivated
in the poisoning of an organ is not greater than the quantity of poison used.
There is therefore nothing mystical in the homeopathic doses.
    Poisons have also been used in other ways in work on enzymes. As I stated,
fermentation from sugar to alcohol and carbon dioxide passes through a con-
siderable number of intermediate stages, amongst which each has its own
enzyme. These partial reactions are so interwoven that it is difficult to separate
them directly. It has now proved possible to poison the long series of reactions
partially, so as to separate one or other partial reaction so as to cleanse the
others as it were. Something along these lines has been possible with fermen-
tations by the addition of fluoride. To clarify this I must give a brief idea of
the view previously held concerning the various phases of fermentation.
    I must first recall A. Harden’s important result, namely that fermentation
not only requires a catalyst of enzyme nature but also a more stable substance
which was called cozymase.
    Examination by Myrbäck in 1924 had the result that the fermentation reac-
 tion phase requiring the cooperation of the cozymase is a very early one,
namely one preceding the combination with phosphoric acid.
    According to Harden, the splitting of sugar is associated as follows with the
 formation of a phosphoric acid ester, known as phosphorylation:

 I.            +                      +                     +

II.                               =

Thus a compound, zymo-diphosphute, is formed simultaneously with alcohol
and carbon dioxide.
  After the sugar has undergone conversion by its reaction with phosphate,
the actual splitting takes place. The chain of 6 carbon atoms is split in the
middle and amongst the possible splitting products, dioxyacetone, glycer-
aldehyde and methyl glyoxal it is precisely methylglyoxul which really does


                  SUGAR FERMENTATION AND ENZYMES                                  149
occur according to C. Neuberg. Fermentation and respiration differ only
after this stage. In the case of the former, a number of oxidation-reductions
result in alcohol and CO2 while in the case of respiration the atmospheric
oxygen oxidizes that part of the resultant intermediate products which is not
involved in the synthesis, to form CO2.
   I will leave the later fermentation stages and intermediate products, amongst
which is pyruvic acid, and I will turn to the processes which occur when the
sugar supplied to the yeast cell or the blood is involved in metabolism.
   In unravelling these very complicated affairs, the thermostable activator
cozymuse, to which I shall shortly return, has given valuable guidance. The
three main forms of biological sugar decomposition, fermentation, respira-
tion and glycolysis, have a common partial reaction of the oxidation-reduc-
tion type, and a co-enzyme is active in this.
   The character of this reaction is illustrated by the fact that the Cannizzaro
reaction of acetaldehyde in liver is dependent on the same co-enzyme; this co-
enzyme has also proved to be identical with cozymase.
   This fact led to the conclusion that an oxidation-reduction, or a mutation,
combined with energy equalization, is the fermentation phase requiring the pres-
ence of the cozymase.
   In recent years this fact has been valuably supplemented by the very
thorough research by R. Nilson. According to Nilsson’s result, that part of
the fermentation reaction in which the cozymase co-operates is inactivated by fluoride.
A hexose monophosphoric acid, known as the Robison ester, is formed as an
intermediate product in this.
   From the enzymatic aspect it was important that a phosphorylation could
be demonstrated in these circumstances both in yeast and in muscle without
the co-operation of cozymase and without the simultaneous evolution of CO 2.
This proved the existence of an independent phosphorylating enzyme (H. von
Euler, H. Ohlsén and S. Kullberg, 1911), a phosphatase.
   Another important finding was that fluoride prevents the reaction: hexose
monophosphoric acid → hexose diphosphoric acid.
   Finally, I should mention the result that glucose in its isolated and stable
form behaves in all biological decompositions differently from the form in
which this hexose immediately arises out of the higher carbohydrates, gly-
cogen and starch, by means of which animal and plant organisms store their
sugar reserves; in other words : the form of sugar which is formed enzymati-
tally from glycogen and from zymophosphates, behaves as blood sugar.
   Time does not allow me here to go into the medically interesting question


150                            1929 H.VON EULER

of the effect of insulin on the blood sugar balance and the enzymatic changes
occurring in diabetes mellitus.
  Returning to my main subject, I will go back to the previously mentioned
Harden equations. This formulation, which has played such a great part in
modern fermentation chemistry, says nothing about the type of the assumed
association between the two reactions. By a modification of Harden’s form-
ulae (H. von Euler and K. Myrbäck, 1924), the connection between the two
reaction stages becomes clear.
   Our first formulation was that one molecule of zymohexose undergoes the
reaction:

                         +           =


This formulation shows that the molecule which undergoes fermentation
is split into two partial molecules each having three C atoms, one of which is
richer in energy and the other poorer in energy than half the substrate, and that the
zymophosphate synthesis is obtained at the expense of the fermenting hexose
half which is poorer in energy. It is of course a further improvement to adopt
Meyerhof’s assumption of monophosphate instead of glucose as starting-
material (cf. H. von Euler and K. Myrbäck, 19292). The main thing, how-
ever, is the principle that phosphorylation introduces an energy dismutation
within the hexose residue.
   I mention this contribution because it touches on a general and biologically
not unimportant question: it has long been clear that many organisms recover
the greater part of their energy from anaerobic or aerobic sugar decomposi-
tion which, as is well known, generates heat. However, how the energy devel-
oped by reaction can be transferred to other processes within a cell has rarely
been discussed by physiologists, as Kluyver recently pointed out. It is however
clear that that part of the fermentation or respiration energy which really is
developed in the form of heat within the cell is of secondary importance to the
organism; the main function is played by that part which is transferred to
other forms of chemical energy forms within the cell; only that part can be
utilized for the synthesis and hence for reproduction, growth, and regener-
ation.
   Generally, an energy-rich decomposition product occurring in the energy-
yielding reaction must be involved in the energy-absorbing reaction.
   Apart from the enzymatic couplings which we take as a basis for the phos-
phorylation process, we find another coupled reaction within carbohydrate


                SUGAR FERMENTATION AND ENZYMES                                          151

metabolism biochemistry, and this is linked up with a problem no less impor-
tant to enzyme research, namely the relationship between anaerobic and aero-
bic sugar metabolism. Meyerhof has shown that the relationship between
anaerobic and oxidative decomposition is the same in muscle and in yeast. On
the assumption that sugar decomposition in the animal organism and in yeast
takes place by way of glycogen, and on the assumption of an introductory
dismutation between two different sugar residues, we have acquired an idea
of the fate of sugar during oxidation 3. The decomposition does not take place
as was previously assumed in such a manner that a sugar molecule is oxidized
to 6 CO2 - this would be burning of little use to the organism - but in such
manner that each hexose molecule produces one molecule CO2 one molecule
having 2 C-atoms, and the residue having 3 C-atoms. Thus in the decompo-
sition of 6 molecules of zymohexose 6 CO2 are formed, and from 6 C 3H6O3
residues there are again formed 3 molecules of a hexose which come into the
carbohydrate reserve, and also 6 molecules of acetaldehyde disappear which
provide the C-material and the energy for the cell syntheses. The follow-
ing diagrammatic representation does not take into account the by-reactions
owing to which the CO2 /C6H12O6 ratio frequently differs considerably from
the value 1.

                 co,      co,       co*         co,      co,          co,
                  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I...... . . . . . .

                                                                      acetaldehyde
                        I     I
                  .................             ...... ......


                                                                             residues


                     I                   I                   I
                   hexose              hexose              hexose
                                glycogen residue


It remains for me to mention briefly our chemical researches in connection
with cozymase.
   The reason for our doing so much work on the purification and determina-
tion of the constitution of this substance is that cozymase is one of the most


152                           1929 H.VON EULER

 widespread and biologically most important activators within the plant and
 animal world.
    It is only in a few microorganisms that no cozymase has been found. Its
 presence in lactic-acid bacteria, as found by A. Virtanen, is particularly inter-
 esting. In a recent examination, Dr. Ernst Sym and Assistant Professor Ragnar
 Nilsson have found that the majority of tissues and organs with high carbo-
 hydrate metabolism are particularly rich in cozymase, e.g., in addition to the
 working muscle, the retina and cerebral grey matter.
    The difficulty in isolating cozymase is above all due to its considerable dilu-
tion. Yeast has proved the most suitable starting material despite the fact that
in the most favourable cases I kg of yeast did not yield more than 2 cg.
    By a long series of purification processes a preparation was obtained with
a maximum activity - expressed in rational units - of ACo = 85,000, the
starting material being characterized by ACo = 200. It was possible to convert
this preparation into salts - salts of the alkaloids and of the alkaline-earth
metals were used for the isolation - and cozymase can be recovered there-
from with practically unchanged activity4. The composition of the most
highly purified product corresponds approximately to a so-called nucleotide,
for it contains a sugar residue, a purine residue and phosphoric acid, and
everything points to a close relationship with a substance occurring in muscle
in small quantities, adenylic acid. In a preparation with an activity ACo=
70,000 recently prepared by Associate Professor K. Myrbäck, the ratio of
adenine: reducing sugar group : phosphoric acid was found to be very close
to I. The relative molecule concentrations were, in facts:
                                     adenine 0.208
                              reducing sugar 0.204
                                        PO4 0.212
The relationship between adenylic acid and cozymase offers special interest
since G. Embden in new interesting work has shown that the ammonia liber-
ated in the muscle originates - at least largely - from adenylic acid. Attempts
to prove a connection between the state of the muscle and the co-enzyme
content have not given clear result yet 6 , but are to be repeated with special
reference to the oxygen supply whereby cozymase possibly acts as a link be-
tween the energy-producing glycolysis and the energy-absorbing synthesis.
   The coenzymes, of which cozymase is the most important representative,
constitute one type of the large group of biocatalysts which include not only
enzymes but also certain hormones, growth factors, and vitamins. Of no less
interest is the fact that the chemical results hitherto available point to a rela-


                 SUGAR FERMENTATION AND ENZYMES                                 153
tionship between cozymase and many other factors essential for life, viz., the
vitamins B1 and B2 which have been thoroughly studied particularly in Eng-
land by Miss Harriette Chick and R. A. Peters, and in America by Levene,
and also Wildier’s "bios" and finally our factor Z.
   Another group of biocatalysts distributed throughout all organisms and
even in yeast fungi is the group which effects the actual oxidation, hence the
final stage of respiration (C.A. MacMunn; D. Keilin; O. Warburg). Substan-
ces very closely related to haemin, the characteristic blood-pigment constitu-
ent, are found in aerobically living cells of the plant and animal world. The
porphyrin residue, combined with the iron atom in these substances, belongs
to a group to a knowledge of which a very progressive contribution has been
made in recent years by Hans Fischer. It is interesting that an enzyme which
undoubtedly participates in the respiration process, viz. catalase, also contains
a haemin residue7.
   In addition to this chemical method, enzyme research is also advancing in
another direction towards biology. The first problem here is the relationship
of the enzyme to plasma and to the living cell.
   Twenty-three years ago E. Buchner was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chem-
istry for the discovery that fermentation occurs in a practically cell-free "Press-
saft"*. The question frequently raised since then is to what extent the enzyme
complex present in Buchner’s extract participates in the activity of the living
cell. In more recent work in this direction use has been made mainly of so-
called dried yeast.
   It was principally important to determine as exactly as possible a difference
between such a dried-yeast and fresh-yeast cells, particularly with reference to
its power of fermentation and to its reproduction potency. In an examination
carried out together with Professor Chr. Barthel8, it was found that after
treatment with alcohol and ether a dried yeast contains less than 0.1% cells
capable of reproduction, but had practically the same fermentation power as
the fresh yeast; the fermentation enzymes were therefore retained in the dry
cells freed of lipoids but a catalyst participating in the reproduction process
was destroyed. The fact that such a dry yeast - in opposition to the fresh
yeast - is completely insensitive to toluene can hardly be explained other-
wise than by the assumption that the enzyme system in the living cell is com-
bined with the protoplasm and dependent on the structure thereof. In connec-
tion with these structural changes there arises a problem of even more general

* Juice extracted by Buchner from yeast cells by compression with a hydraulic press.


I54                             1929 H.VON EULER

 scope, viz., the existence of transitions between enzymes and living matter.
    In addition to certain facts found in the study of dry yeast, the properties of
 bacteriophages and particularly of plant virus as it occurs in certain chlorophyll
 diseases, point to the existence of enzyme-like substances, enzymoids, which
 are distinguished from the actual enzymes by their power of reproduction.
    In many fields ofbiology which were hitherto treated mainly descriptively,
new and exact questions can be put by enzymochemical thought processes
 and methods.
    As a first example I will take the science of adaptation.
   When the individual adapts himself to changes in nutritional conditions,
 changes in temperature, and so on, the first measure of the organism is to
develop the enzyme system necessary and appropriate to the new conditions.
 Under normal conditions - as we have been able to show in the case of yeast -
this is surprisingly constant, but under certain culture conditions enzymes, for
example saccharase, may develop to ten times the normal amount.
   I think that the sciences of immunity and heredity are in particular the fields
in which we may expect new discoveries by the application of enzyme
chemistry.
   With regard to immunity research, the analogies found between the en-
zyme activator-substrate system on the one hand and the complement-
amboceptor-substrate system on the other hand are all the more obvious.
Since purification and characterization of the enzymes and activators have
provided the preconditions to more detailed study of enzymatic processes,
there is even reason to begin the study of antigens and antibodies by purifica-
tion and concentration.
   Heretofore it has not been possible to bring into contact with chemical facts
the extremely interesting results of genetics, which have led to a very exact
but purely formal determination of hereditary units (genes). Although many
years of work in many fields will be required to obtain a link between genetics
and biochemistry, no geneticist will have any doubts concerning the need for
such work. Our researches are aimed at finding the lines of development of
chemical substances in mutants subject to Mendel’s law. Independently of
current hypotheses (R. Goldschmidt inter alia), a search should be made into
the origin of such lines of development in substances of an enzymoid nature.
   Investigation of the enzymes and biocatalysts means a step forward to an
understanding of Life on the chemical and physical basis. But although an
accurate knowledge of the chemical processes of life is a precondition to an
understanding of life phenomena, and although the laws discovered for in-


                   SUGAR FERMENTATION AND ENZYMES                                155
animate matter must apply fully and strictly to living matter as well, I never-
theless think that it is rash to assert that our laws concerning transmutation of
matter and the conversion of energy are sufficient to describe the life phe-
nomena.
   The more we are able to follow and see through the chemical and physical
phenomena whereby organisms maintain their individual life in the face of
external influences and preserve the race by reproduction, the more we can
hope to advance to the knowledge of the great principle which together with
the laws of conservation of matter and energy, and of the decrease in free
energy, govern organic life. The knowledge of this principle and its clear for-
mulation is one of the highest scientific purposes of natural science, biology
and biochemistry in the first instance.
   I must express my sincere and respectful thanks to the Royal Academy of
Sciences of Sweden for the extended possibilities afforded to myself by the
Nobel Prize to continue my biochemical research.



1. H. von Euler, Hoppe-Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem., 162 (1927).
2. H. von Euler and K. Myrbäck, Hoppe-Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem., 181 (1929).
3. H. von Euler, Arkiv Kemi, 9, No. 44 (1927).
4. H. von Euler and K. Myrbäck, Hoppe-Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem, 184 (1929).
5. H. von Euler and K. Myrbäck, Hoppe-Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem., 189 (1930).
6. E. Sym, R. Nilsson, and H. von Euler, Hoppe-Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem., 189 (1930).
7. H. von Euler, K. Zeile, and H. Hellström, Svensk Kem. Tidskr., 42 (1930).
8. H. von Euler and C. Barthel, Hoppe-Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem., 159 (1926); 183
   (1929).
