                              H   ANS   FISCHER


  On haemin and the relationships between haemin
                 and chlorophyll
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1930


The Swedish Academy of Sciences has awarded to me the Nobel Prize for
my investigations into blood and leaf pigments and for the synthetic prepa-
ration of haemin, and I therefore wish to report my results, in so far as this
can be done in a brief lecture.
   The blood pigment haemoglobin is a compound which can be split by
diverse methods into its constituents, pigment and protein. Teichmann was
the first to observe this cleavage under the microscope when he subjected
blood to the effect of glacial acetic acid - common salt; Schalfejeff, Nencki,
Piloty, Willstätter and others have used the method on a large scale, so that
Teichmann’s crystals are available by the kg. The Swedish scientist Mörner
has also developed a method for effecting separation with the aid of alcohol -
sulphuric acid, by means of which esters of haemin are obtained.
   Haemin has the formula C34H 32O 4N 4FeCl. Countless variations of this
atomic arrangement are possible. By analytical methods of Nencki, Küster,
Piloty, Willstätter, H. Fischer and their pupils, the pyrrole nature of the hae-
min was demonstrated, and much information was obtained about its con-
stitution. When haemin is deprived of its iron, porphyrins are formed, which
are substances having a sensitizing effect, as Hausmann has shown.
   These porphyrins are widely distributed in Nature, and it was possible to
assume as a working hypothesis from the start that there existed a relationship
with the porphyrins of blood pigment; it was moreover to be expected that
the determination of their constitution would also provide information about
the constitution of haemin itself, just as the results of distintegration of bili-
rubin which is formed from blood pigment by biological means had stimul-
ated determination of the constitution of blood pigment itself. This was the
reason why I tackled systematically the investigation of natural porphyrins,
and the biological degradation of blood pigment itself.
   In cases of porphyria, a minor disease, the patient excretes large quantities
of porphyrins. Previously, it was assumed that haematoporphyrin was in-
volved; this view could be refuted. At least two porphyrins are excreted, uro-


166                            1930 H.FISCHER

and coproporphyrin, both of which occur in the urine - one of the two, prob-
ably coproporphyrin, had been observed already by Hammarsten in a case
of sulfonal poisoning -, although, quantitatively, most of the coproporphyrin
occurs in the faeces. It is not always the same coproporphyrin that is present
in the urine. Hijmans van den Bergh observed an isomeric coproporphyrin,
admittedly only in a case of porphyria as yet. It is interesting to note that
uroporphyrin also occurs in the pinions of African birds, in species of Turacus,
in the form of a complex copper salt.
   Closely related to uroporphyrin is conchoporphyrin which is present in
seashells, probably in the form of calcium salt.
   Coproporphyrin in particular is widespread; traces are present in normal
urine, and also in yeast. In special cultures, yeast can be made to produce
considerable quantities of coproporphyrin. The yeast is then brought to a
condition which can be compared with porphyria in humans.
   A porphyrin (ooporphyrin) is also contained in the spots on the eggs of
birds incubating out of doors. Putrefaction of blood pigment produces a por-
phyrin identical with the above, Kämmerer’s porphyrin; protracted putre-
faction produces deuteroporphyrin.
   In turning to a discussion of the determination of the constitution of haemin
itself, I can of course only give a brief report of the most important results
obtained in these investigations which extended over decades. The starting
point was W. Küster’s observation of the oxidative formation of haematinic
acid ( 1 ) which, on decarboxylation, yielded methylethylmaleinimide (2) :




Reductive cleavage of the haemin yielded the following pyrrole derivatives
of basic and acid nature:


         HAEMIN AND ITS RELATION WITH CHLOROPHYLL                           167




During oxidation, the acid components yield Küster’s haematinic acid, the
basic constituents, methylethylmaleinimide. This established the principal
features of their constitution ; exact proof is provided by syntheses which we
shall not discuss in detail. These syntheses rendered these products available
in any desired quantities. The yield of bases and acids from haemin is so sub-
stantial as to suggest that there are four pyrrole nuclei in the molecule, which
agrees with molecular weight determination.
   As early as 1912, W. Küster derived a constitutional formula for haemin
which on the whole presents an accurate picture of haemin. We reproduce
the formula as it has now been proved by synthesis; in reviewing the ana-
lytical results, we shall trace the logical, not the historical development.




Four pyrrole nuclei (more accurately : 1 pyrrole-, 1 maleinimide-, and 2 pyr-
rolenine-rings) are linked by four methin groups. The consecutive sequence


168                             1930 H.FISCHER

of simple and double bonds dictates the colour. The FeCl group has entered
the molecule complex, substituting two NH groups.
  By reductive cleavage at the methin groups, a methyl residue and a free
methin group are formed,




resulting in the mixture of pyrroles 3-10.
   The methin groups are oxidized out by oxidative cleavage, and haematinic
acid is obtained in a yield which corresponds to two pyrrole nuclei (III and
IV). The base fraction (I and II) is evidently totally destroyed, which is ex-
plained by the vinyl groups at which oxidation is initiated.
   If haemin is subjected to mild reduction with hydrogen iodide according
to Nencki, we obtain mesoporphyrin (12). To simplify the extensive for-
mula (see above) we omit the four methin groups and the lower half of the
four pyrrole nuclei, indicate only the upper half of the pyrrole nucleus by
a square bracket with the associated   substituents; the propionic acids residue
CH2·CH2·COOH we abbreviate by the Latin letter <<S>>.




   If we reduce haemin catalytically, we obtain mesohaemin, and in both cases
the unsaturated side chains, i.e. the vinyl groups, are converted into ethyl
residues, because, during oxidation, there is now formed methylethylmale-
inimide, which we missed before, two molecules methylethylmaleinimidc (2)
and two molecules haematinic acid (I) being formed.
   If haemin is deprived of its complexly bound iron, preferably with ferric
formate we obtain proto- of Kimmerer’s porphyrin:


          HAEMIN AND ITS RELATION WITH CHLOROPHYLL                        169




Only the complexly bound iron is removed, because, conversely, this por-
phyrin can again be converted into haemin. If, for iron separation according
to Nencki, we use acetic acid - hydrogen bromide, hydrogen bromide will
at first be added to the unsaturated side chains of haemin, as Willstätter ob-
served, and hydrolysis occurs subsequently, so that haematoporphyrin is
formed:



                                                               (14)




In this, two molecules water are added to the two vinyl groups (nucleus I
and II) of the protoporphyrin, so that hydroxyethyl residues have formed.
Again, on oxidation, haematoporphyrin only yields haematinic acid, because
the basic fraction is destroyed, starting with the hydroxyethyl residues. If
these hydroxyethyl residues are however stabilized by etherification, as Küster
did in the case of tetramethylhaematoporphyrin, there are obtained, by oxi-
dation, apart from two mol haematinic acid, two mol of the imide having
the following constitution:




If we decarboxylate mesoporphyrin, we obtain, under evolution of carbon
dioxide, the oxygen-free aetioporphyrin:


170                           1930 H.FISCHER




Chlorophyll can in the end be broken down into two aetioporphyrins, pyrro-
porphyrin (C30H 34N 4) and phylloaetioporphyrin (C31H 36N 4) which cannot
be obtained from blood pigment, but both of which represent secondary con-
version products of chlorophyll.


                   On the constitution of natural porphyrins

Ooporphyrin is identical with protoporphyrin or Kimmerer’s porphyrin.
If we introduce iron complexly into ooporphyrin, we obtain haemin. If
we reduce ooporphyrin ester with hydrogen iodide, we obtain mesopor-
phyrin, and the ester mentioned can also be converted into tetramethylhae-
matoporphyrin and haematoporphyrin. The following diagram illustrates
these conversions which are in part reversible:

                              mesoporphyrin


 tetramethylhaematoporphyrin * ooporphyrin ester           haematoporphyrin


                                haemin ester

Ooporphyrin therefore is haemin without the iron.
   These reactions with ooporphyrin from egg-shells constituted partial syn-
thesis of haemin and provided much information about its constitution. The
haemin synthesis which was later carried out was based on these observations.
   In short-term haemoglobin putrefaction, it is only the complexly bound
iron which is separated apart from globin, and Kammerer’s porphyrin forms,
which can be reconverted into haemin. In protracted putrefaction of haemo-
globin for several months with sodium carbonate, the unsaturated side chains
of haemin are separated, and deuterohaemin forms. The complexly bound
iron is therefore substantially preserved. From deuterohaemin, we obtain the
iron-free deuteroporphyrin by splitting off the iron.


         HAEMIN AND ITS RELATION WITH CHLOROPHYLL                       171




                                                             (17)




This is proved by isolation of citraconimide ( I 8)




by oxidation apart from haematinic acid, further by bromination, which
yields dibromodeuteroporphyrin, and by oxidation of dibromodeuteropor-
phyrin which leads to the formation of bromocitraconimide (I9) apart from
haematinic acid:




On oxidation, uroporphyrin yields carboxylated haematinic acid (20), co-
proporphyrin yields haematinic acid (I).




On reduction, coproporphyrin yields exclusively haemopyrrolecarboxylic
acid (7).
   The base fraction is absent, so that coproporphyrin most probably repre-
sents a mesoporphyrin containing propionic acid residues in the place of the
two ethyl residues, whereas uroporphyrin would then represent the corre-
sponding "malonic acid". The following formulae correspond to these rela-
tionships:


172                             1930 H.FISCHER




This is in harmony with the decarboxylation of the two pigments which leads
to aetioporphyrin; from this we can draw conclusions as to the presence of
four methyl and four ethyl groups in aetioporphyrin. The decarboxylation
reaction in the natural porphyrins was exceptionally smooth; for the first time
we obtained an aetioporphyrin in the characteristic butterfly crystal shapes,
which determined the establishment of the relationships between the syn-
thetic aetioporphyrins, to be described later, and the analytical aetioporphyrin.
   In mother-of-pearl shells, conchoporphyrin was discovered, which is a mo-
nocarboxylated coproporphyrin which yields a pentamethylester, and which
probably has the      following constitutional formula:




This formula contains a succinic acid residue as a side chain. Recent synthetic
results suggest that uroporphyrin also contains two succinic acid residues, be-
cause a synthetically prepared porphin-octacarboxylic acid was found to be
non-identical with uroporphyrin.


          HAEMIN AND ITS RELATION WITH CHLOROPHYLL                          173

                                Synthetic results

Different views have been put forward about the constitution of haemin and
aetioporphyrin. Apart from Küster’s view, it was above all the constitution
of a tetrapyrrylethylene, as put forward by Willstätter (see Willstätter’s
Nobel Lecture on June 3, 1920, p. 9: Les Prix Nobel en 1914--1918), and the
possibility of combining the two formulae, which were under discussion.
The methods of synthesis had to be applied systematically in this field; this
was however opposed by the relatively slight development of pyrrole chem-
istry, only cryptopyrrole having been prepared synthetically among the re-
ductive cleavage products of blood pigment and bile pigment, and the yields
were so small that the systematic development of pyrrole pigments was out
of the question. One after another, all the cleavage products of blood pigment
were however prepared synthetically, and the methods were perfected so that
these pyrroles are now available for synthetic purposes in any desired quantity.
   Inter alia, the action of bromine on cryptopyrrole leads to a magnificent
brominated methene which possesses the following constitutional formula:




This formula has been established by synthesis, and it has become fairly
common to convert tri-substituted pyrroles into methenes of this type by
means of bromine. (Frequently, bromine also enters in the α' −methyl group.
These methenes are distinguished by exceptionally easy conversion into por-
phyrins.)
  On being treated with acids, in particular on boiling with formic acid, the
above methene yielded aetioporphyrin. The reaction is due to the combination
of two molecules of the methene, separation of hydrogen bromide, and dehy-
drogenation according to the following formula :




                                                                        \


             H


I74                            1930 H.FISCHER

From the point of view of preparation, particular significance attaches to the
synthesis from dinuclear-brominated dipyrrylmethenes and methylbromin-
ated dipyrrylmethenes, which synthesis is represented by the following dia-
gram:




which also supports the view of the constitution of aetioporphyrin and of the
porphyrins in general in accordance with Küster’s old formula.
  Porphyrin synthesis from mononuclear-brominated methenes by conden-
sation of two molecules can also be applied to diverse methenes, and, in one
of the two methenes, a free α-methin group may take the place of nuclear
bromine. This synthesis has proved itself in particular for porphinmonopro-
pionic acids. With a good yield, porphyrin synthesis can also be effected from
methane dicarboxylic acids, preferably by heating with formid acid, when
the leuco compound will first form at 40o with vigorous carbon dioxide evo-
lution, and will then be converted into porphyrin.


         HAEMIN AND ITS RELATION WITH CHLOROPHYLL                           175




The blood pigment cleavage products opsopyrrole 6 and opsopyrrole carbox-
ylic acid 10, which possess two free methin groups were converted into por-
phyrins under the effect of formic acid and formaldehyde (methyl chloride
in ether is also very suitable), and this synthesis again proves the presence of
four methin groups in the porphyrins and consequently in haemin.
   These syntheses prove the correctness of Küster’s formula; there are four
methin groups which link four pyrrole nuclei, and aetioporphyrin is expressed
by the following formula:




If, in this formula, we imagine the methyl and ethyl residues to be replaced
by hydrogen, we obtain porphin on which all porphyrins are based. If we in-
troduce four methyl and four ethyl residues into this system, we obtain, con-
versely, "aetioporphyrin", but it is evident that the introduction of the four
methyl and four ethyl residues can be effected in four different ways, or in
other words that four different isomers are possible depending on the relative
position of the methyl and ethyl residues, as follows:


176                             1930 H.FISCHER




These four aetioporphyrins have been synthetized by different methods and
have been found to differ. Mixed crystallization of1 and II produced the typical
butterfly crystal shape of aetio-uroporphyrin (see p. 172), so that a prepara-
tion identical with "natural aetioporphyrin" was obtained for the first time.
The identification of the aetioporphyrins is however difficult, because they all
possess high melting points. With the coproporphyrins, the situation is sim-
pler. If we replace the ethyl residues in the aetioporphyrin by propionic acid
residues, four tetramethyl-tetrapropionic acid porphins are formed, theoreti-
cally, which represent the four theoretically possible coproporphyrins:




All four coproporphyrins, which are spectroscopically identical, were in fact
produced synthetically; but whereas the four aetioporphyrins melt at about
400o, the esters of the coproporphyrins are characterized by sharp melting
points, so that difference or identity can easily be established. Coproporphyrin
I was found to be identical with the coproporphyrin from cases ofporphyria,
with the coproporphyrin from yeast, and the coproporphyrin from uro- and
conchoporphyrin. This proves formula No. 21 on p. 172.
   On the other hand, the coproporphyrinof Hijmans van den Bergh (p. 166)
was identical with coproporphyrin III (see above).
   The dualism of the porphyrins which had first been recognized biologically
from a study of porphyria, in particular that of yeast, had therefore been
exactly demonstrated. Nature works on two different systems of reactions.


           HAEMIN AND ITS RELATION WITH CHLOROPHYLL                             177
It is important to effect identification of coproporphyrin (and of course of
uroporphyrin where necessary) in every case ofporphyria by isolation as ester
and by melting point. Whether the coproporphyrin of normal urine is III or I,
remains undecided. II and IV are highly improbable.
   The most important problem now was the determination of the sequence
for haemin. Since haemin contains two unsaturated side chains, elucidation
was exceptionally difficult, and we therefore turned to the synthesis of the
mesoporphyrins, where conditions were much simpler, in particular because
mesoporphyrin is a very stable substance. Analysis showed that mesopor-
phyrin is a tetramethyldiethyl-dipropionic acid-porphin, and the synthesis
of such porphyrins presented no difficulties; theoretically, there were how-
ever a large number of possible isomers, which are derived from the 4 aetio-
porphyrins in that propionic acid residues (S) replace two ethyl residues. It
will be seen that two variations are possible at I, three at II, six at III, and four
at IV, 15 isomers in all, which are shown in the following table


Of these fifteen mesoporphyrins, 12 were synthesized. Their dimethyl ester
melting points are stated in the formulae. Mesoporphyrin 9 (see above) was
found to be identical with mesoporphyrin from haemin. Since mesoporphy-
rin 9 is derived from aetioporphyrin III (see table), the structure of blood pig-
ment corresponds to aetioporphyrin III. This proved the mode of arrangement
of the side chains in haemin, and it became possible to embark upon system-
atic synthesis.
   Haemin synthesis was carried out as follows. In protracted putrefaction of
haemoglobin, we have repeatedly mentioned deuterohaemin or deuteropor-
phyrin, which lacks the unsaturated side chains of haemin. Since the unsatu-
rated side chains of haemin are converted into ethyl residues on transition to
mesoporphyrin, we obtain the formula of deuteroporphyrin if we replace
the two ethyl residues in mesoporphyrin 9 by hydrogen. Deuteroporphyrin
has therefore the following formula


          HAEMIN AND ITS RELATION WITH CHLOROPHYLL                             I79
The synthesis of this substance was carried out and it was proved to be iden-
tical with deuteroporphyrin. Into its iron salt, deuterohaemin, we succeeded
in introducing two acetyl residues, to form diacetyl-deuterohaemin or dia-
cetyldeuteroporphyrin:




which on partial reduction yielded haematoporphyrin, which therefore had
the following formula:




Two molecules of water could be removed from the haematoporphyrin;
protoporphyrin was thus formed, which was converted into haemin by in-
troducing iron:




According to the crystallographic investigation by Prof. Steinmetz, this hae-
min was shown to be wholly identical with haemin.

Proof of constitution was further complemented by synthesis of tetramethyl-
haematoporphyrin which on oxidation yielded imide 15 (see p. 169) with a
melting point of 64o.
    Once the constitution of haemin had been elucidated and it had been iden-
tified as a derivative of aetioporphyrin III, considerable interest attached to the


180                            1930 H.FISCHER

determination of the arrangement of the substituents in chlorophyll, to dis-
cover whether relationships existed with aetioporphyrin I as in the majority
of the natural porphyrins, or to aetioporphyrin III, or whether an entirely
different parent substance was involved. I can only mention in passing the
fundamental investigations by Willstätter (cf. his Nobel Lecture and the book
on chlorophyll by Willstätter and Stoll, Verlag W. Springer, Berlin 1913); I
shall select from Willstätter’s important results only those which contributed
to the solution of the problems mentioned above or which made such a solu-
tion possible. During energetic degradation of chlorophyll with alkali, phyl-
lo-, pyrro-, and rhodo-porphyrin are formed, from which Willstätter ob-
tained, by pyro-reaction, an aetioporphyrin which he considered to be iden-
tical with the aetioporphyrin from blood pigment. We resumed investigation
and were able to isolate from rhodo- and pyrro-porphyrin a common aetio-
porphyrin, which had one ethyl residue less than the aetioporphyrin from
mesoporphyrin. Phylloporphyrin yielded an aetioporphyrin which differed
from the above spectroscopically, also carried a free methin group and could
be converted into pyrro-aetioporphyrin by alcoholate degradation, under
loss of one C-atom. The constitution of the latter compound, and of the three
porphyrins mentioned, was subsequently practically completely clarified by
synthetic means.
    Pyrroporphyrin is a tetramethyl-diethyl-monopropionic acid-porphin.
 Closely related to it is rhodoporphyrin, which has a carboxyl group at the
 free methin group of the pyrroporphyrin.
    The isomer problem was particularly complicated in the case of these por-
phyrins, because 24 in all exist for each of the porphyrins.
    The principle of constitution determination was as follows: there are 8 iso-
mers of tetramethyl-triethyl-monopropionic acid-porphins: all 8 were syn-
 thesized. If we remove from these triethylporphins one ethyl residue, we ob-
 tained the pyrroporphyrin type, of which 24 isomers exist, because one ethyl
 group each can be removed from the 8 isomeric triethylporphins. By indirect
 means, we reintroduced the ethyl residue into the natural pyrroporphyrin, and
 obtain 1,3,5,8-tetramethyl-2,4,6-triethylporphin-7-propionic acid, which is
 derived from aetioporphyrin III. This proved the derivation of pyrroporphy-
 rin from aetioporphyrin III, but not the position of the free methin group,
 which could be present in 2-, 4-, or 6-position. The 6-position was proved by
 synthesis of 1,3,5,8-tetramethyl-2,4-diethyl-7-propionic acid-6-carboxylic
 acid-porphin, which thus carries the carboxyl group at 6, and was proved to
 be identical with the natural rhodoporphyrin. At the same time, the synthesis


         HAEMIN AND ITS RELATION WITH CHLOROPHYLL                              181

was effected of 1,3,5,8-tetramethyl-2,4-diethyl-7-propionic acid-porphin,
which was found to be identical with the "natural pyrroporphyrin". This
proved the o-position of the characteristic groups of the principal chlorophyll-
porphyrins and also that of phylloporphyrin, because phylloporphyrin can
be converted into pyrroporphyrin with the assistance of alcoholate. Pyrro-
and rhodoporphyrin therefore have the following constitutional formulae:




Phylloporphyrin is represented by one of the following diagrams:




as was proved by synthesis; the position of the bonds, as different from the
blood pigment porphyrin, has not been clearly established as yet.
   What has however been established is the relative position of the substituents of
rhodo-, pyrro-, and phyllo-porphyrin, which agrees in principle with those of the
blood pigment, a proof which has recently been confirmed by conversion of chloro-
phyll-pyrroporphyrin into mesoporphyrin IX.
   The chlorophyllporphyrins mentioned are isolated by energetic degrada-
tion with alcoholate, and the question that remained to be solved was whether
chlorophyll is in fact based on the porphin nucleus.
   Mild degradation of chlorophyll derivatives with hydrogen iodide, formic
acid, and other reagents led to numerous porphyrins, which we shall not dis-
cuss in detail.


182                              1930 H.FISCHER

    If we consider further that the phylloerythrin isolated by Lobisch and
  Fischler, and also by Marchlewski, must be considered to be a porphyrin on
 the strength of spectroscopic analysis, and that this substance has recently
been produced by purely chemical means from phaeoporphyrin a6 and a5 by
 exposure to glacial acetic acid - hydrogen bromide at 45 , there can hardly be
                                                             o



 any doubt that chlorophyll is not based on the porphin nucleus itself, but on a
 system closely related to it. It should be noted that substances spectroscopically
 analogous with chlorophyllchlorines and -rhodines are relatively easily ob-
tained also by synthesis.
    Dehydration of porphinpropionic acids leads to rhodines; reduction of
 porphyrins with alcoholates, in particular of iron salt, to chlorines; as does
 oxidation of the porphyrins with sulphuric acid and hydrogen peroxide. The
 chlorine spectrum can however also be produced by mere heating of the
porphyrins in inert solvents, and exposure of coproporphyrin to light leads
 to chlorine.
    Phylloerythrin is produced biologically from chlorophyll in the gastro-
 intestinal tract of ruminants, where fermentation processes above all take
place, so that we can assume at least as a working hypothesis that phylloery-
thrin in principle is close to chlorophyll in structure. The constitution of
phylloerythrin has recently been determined with some probability, but, as
in the case of phylloporphyrin, the mode of linkage of two pyrrole nuclei
has not been definitely established. The following two formulae for phyllo-
erythrin are therefore under discussion:


         HAEMIN AND ITS RELATION WITH CHLOROPHYLL                           183




According to this, the relationships between chlorophyll and blood pigment
are closer than has been assumed hitherto, if, as is most probable, the first of
these formulae for phylloerythrin is the correct one, because phylloerythrin
will then be relatively closely related to mesoporphyrin. If we imagine oxida-
tion in this in the β-position at a propionic acid residue, as has been demon-
strated by Knoop and others for the oxidative degradation of fatty acid, we
arrive at a porphin-ketopropionic acid having the following formula:




If we assume dehydrating combination of the reactive methylene group in the
keto side chain with a methin group in the α−position, we obtain the following
formula :


184                            1930 H.FISCHER

whose close relationships to phylloerythrin are evident, and whose carboxyl
group marked with an asterisk* must have the instability which characterises
a carboxyl group in chlorophyll itself and in derivatives close to it. Under
energetic alkali action, the carboxyl group is separated and the intermediate
phylloerythrin is converted into phyllo- and rhodo-porphyrin by hydrolytic
or reductive oxidative disruption of the CH2-CO link, as has been established
by experiment. Evidence of the above relationships still remains to be pro-
duced, as indeed the chlorophyll molecule still presents many riddles whose
solution will present difficulties considering the instability of the molecule,
in connection with which we must stress in particular the spectroscopic
difference of the derivatives closest to chlorophyll and of the porphyrins. This
difficulty has however largely been overcome by analytical and synthetic
experiments. Mild reduction leads to porphyrins, and Nature herself brings
about porphyrin formation by phylloerythrin formation in the organism of
ruminants. Thus difference in constitution between the porphyrins and chlo-
rophyll cannot be very great, as is also proved by the synthetic production of
chlorines. Chlorines can be produced by reductive and by oxidative means
from porphyrins; the chlorine spectrum even occurs under mere heating of
the porphyrins in inert solvents, and on exposure of porphyrins to light.
Numerous methods are available for porphyrin syntheses. Those close to
chlorophyll must therefore also be amenable to synthesis. Further work is
required on reconversion of chlorophyll porphyrins obtained analytically
into chlorines, and on their biological behaviour, but an even larger number
ofinvestigations will be needed for clarifying the constitution of chlorophyll.
   Since the sequence of the substituents in chlorophyll is known, the way is
open on principle for systematic synthetic research, and because porphyrins
occur in plants, we would seem to be justified in assuming a common evolu-
tionary origin of the two pigments necessary for the life of animals and plants,
a hypothesis which well merits experimental treatment.
