                        H   EINRICH    O . WI E L A N D


                The chemistry of the bile acids
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1928


Scientific chemistry occupied itself with the constituent substances of the bile
at an early stage. L. Gmelin, Thénard and also Berzelius already did work on
the acids present in bile, and several publications of the Liebig Laboratory in
Giessen dealt with this subject. But it was only in 1848 that A. Strecker suc-
ceeded in isolating from ox-gall, the two most wide-spread acids, taurocholic
acid and glycocholic acid, two conjugated substances of cholic acid C24H400 5,
condensed amide-like with taurine and glycine at the carboxyl group.
   In 1886 Mylius discovered desoxycholic acid C24H 40O 4 as a further con-
stituent of hydrolysed bile; this second acid was isolated in the laboratory of
Hammarsten in its natural form conjugated with taurine and glycine, from
non-saponified bile. To this prominent Swedish investigator also goes the
 credit for the biologically important finding that it is cholic acid which pre-
dominates in the biles of numerous vertebrate animals investigated; this find-
ing characterized the general physiological importance of cholic acid.
   A third monocarboxylic acid C24H 400 3, lithocholic acid, poorer in oxy-
gen, was discovered in 1911 by Hans Fischer in ox-gall stones, and afterwards
proved to be an integral constituent of ox and human bile.
   A year before Mylius, in 1885, Latschinoff had isolated an acid very similar
in composition to desoxycholic acid which he called "choleic acid". Later
investigators took this as being an acid which is isomeric with desoxycholic
acid, until in 1916 it could be shown that it consists of a remarkable addition
product of desoxycholic acid and higher fatty acids (stearic acid, palmitic
acid, oleic acid). This choleic acid contains 1 molecule of bound fatty acid
per 8 molecules of desoxycholic acid, the fatty acid being bound so firmly
that no dissociation into the constituents takes place during either salt forma-
tion or dissolution.
   This observation prompted a comparison of the additive capacities of des-
oxycholic acid towards other substances, and the behaviour towards the
series of fatty acids can be summarized by stating that these acids, right down
to acetic acid, can unite in secondary-valence compounds of this type. Formic
acid does not form "choleic acid", thus indicating that the chemical forces


                         CHEMISTRY OF BILE ACIDS                               95
producing cohesion are to be found, not in the COOH groups, but in the
saturated part of the fatty-acid molecule. H. Reinboldt has recently indicated
that the choleic acids of the series being considered can be conceived as com-
plex intercalation compounds of desoxycholic acid in the part of the fatty-
acid molecule which has combining capacity. The fact that this capacity de-
creases with the number of carbon atoms in the fatty-acid molecule, indicates
that one molecule of desoxycholic acid is held fast by the unit of each group
- C H2 · C H2 - o r - C H 2 · C H3 .
   This intercalation capacity of desoxycholic acid is not restricted to the fatty
acids. It is found in connection with all possible substances. Hydrocarbons,
alcohols, esters, ethers, phenols, all unite with desoxycholic acid to form well-
defined compounds containing as a rule only 2 molecules of desoxycholic
acid. This generality of the addition capacity of desoxycholic acid has led to
the use of the name "choleic acid" as a collective term.
   The choleic acids containing neutral components insoluble in water, are
absorbed by alkalies without decomposition taking place. On the other hand,
the alkali salts of desoxycholic acid - and also those of cholic acid and of the
conjugated cholic acid - will to a greater or a smaller extent absorb neutral
substances insoluble in water. This applies, for example, in the case of fat,
cholesterol, naphthalene, camphor, alkaloids such as strychnine, quinine, etc.
 A conclusion was drawn from this observation which is of importance with
respect to the physiological function of the bile. It can be assumed that in the
case of substances which areinsoluble in water, transitioninto soluble cholein-
ates enables diffusion through the cells of the intestinal wall. This would
apply in particular to the fats and to cholesterol during the course of normal
metabolism, but this "choleic acid principle" has been confirmed in medicine
in other cases also. Its therapeutic use has led to the technical production of
camphorcholeic acid, "cadechol"; I mention this in particular here, because
but for this practical aspect of the discovery in question the tests to determine
the constitution of the bile acids would have soon reached an impasse. For it
would have been impossible to master, simply with the technical resources
of a scientific laboratory, the quantity of initial material then required.
   Turning now to a discussion of the problem of the chemical structure of
bile acids, I should say first that in view of the time at my disposal it will be
impossible to give an exact account of the various stages of the decomposition
which was used as the main means of determining the constitution. I will try
to describe in rough outline the chemical methods by means of which we
got some insight into the constitution of the large and in many ways monot-


96                             1927 H.O.WIELAND

onous molecule. The problem is not very attractive from the experimental
viewpoint. There is no nitrogen, which adds interest and variety to the treat-
ment of alkaloids. Only carbon, hydrogen and a little oxygen, all in the tra-
ditional combination, which does not lead us to expect any surprising results.
The task would appear to be a long and unspeakably wearisome trek through
an arid desert of structure. True, the wanderer in this apparently so unattrac-
tive region, finds friendly landscapes at all stages of his journey, and the large
quantity of substances bringing him nearer his goal, accumulates around him
like dear companions, although, clothed in the plain garment of colourless-
ness, they do not stand out either in their appearance or in their properties.




But the driving force, which steels the perseverance, lies in the problem
itself. In order to get a comprehensive picture of the biological relationships
in the wide field of chemically related natural substances which, in addition
to the bile acids, includes the sterols, and very likely also the vegetable cardiac
poisons from the group of saponins, the poisons from the skin secretions of
toads, and probably also other important substances such as certain vita-
mins, we must above all be clear as to the fundamentals of their chemical
structure.
   My object, of briefly describing the extent to which the chemical nature
of the bile-acid molecule has been determined, can best be achieved by basing
my account on the formulae which so far appear to us to be the most likely
ones. Formula (I) shows a saturated structure made up of four condensed


                        CHEMISTRY OF BILE ACIDS                             97
carbon rings and equipped with three branches. In a side chain is the carboxyl
group determining the acid nature of the group. The three other oxygen
atoms of the cholic acid are distributed in the molecule as alcoholic hydroxyl
groups, in cholic acid they are located at the C-atoms 3, 7 and 12. In desoxy-
cholic acid Ca4H 40O 4 the OH-group at C12 is missing, and the single OH-
group of lithocholic acid is bound at C3. Windaus and I isolated a bile acid
isomeric with desoxycholic acid C24H 40O 4, at one and the same time, from
the biles of various organisms, i.e. from that of the goose, of man and of the
ox. This bile acid is called both chenodesoxycholic acid and anthropodesoxy-
cholic acid. Though the two discoverers get on very well for the rest so far
no agreement has been reached concerning a uniform nomenclature. In this
acid the two alcoholic hydroxyl groups are at C7 and C12. Thus, it will be




seen that the four most important bile acids are very closely related to each
other, not only with respect to their fundamental structure, but also with
respect to the distribution of their OH-groups.
   Hammarsten was the first to show that the three OH-groups of cholic acid
are of secondary-alcoholic nature, and already in 1881 he succeeded in con-
verting cholic acid into dehydrocholic acid which contains six H-atoms less,
through oxidation with chromium trioxide. All other bile acids behave analo-
gously.
   The first break-through into the molecule was achieved proceeding from
desoxycholic acid, which can be opened up at the first ring by nitric acid via
the stage of diketo acid. Here the two isomeric desoxybilianic acids form
(Formulae (II) and (III)). T he size of the ring was determined on the basis of
Blanc’s principle, according to which on thermal decomposition dicarboxylic


98                             1927 H.O.WIELAND

acids with 1,5-arrangement of the two CO2H-groups turn into cyclic anhy-
drides, while those with 1,6- or 1,7-arrangement losing CO2 and H2O turn
into cyclic ketones. The cyclic ketone produced in this way from desoxy-
bilianic acid, was opened up into a hexacarboxylic acid via various intermedi-
ate products, in which only a single ring was retained and which was thus
called solanellic acid (Formula (IV)). Through the thermal decomposition
of this acid a new pentanone ring was produced from the split-up third ring,
the further splitting-up of which led to biloidanic acid (V) C 22H 32O 12.
   In this acid the paths of the decomposition from desoxycholic acid and
cholic acid converged. Bilianic acid, the oxidation product of cholic acid
corresponding to the desoxybilianic acid mentioned, can also be decomposed
to form biloidanic acid via various intermediate products such as cilianic acid,




ciloidanic acid, which were explained with the help of the chemists M.
Schenck and W. Borsche. But all attempts to penetrate into the last ring of
the molecule proceeding from biloidanic acid, were unsuccessful.
   As seen above, in the two experiments described only two carbon atoms
were clearly removed from the large molecule. The principle followed up
till then, that of proceeding step by step, had to be abandoned for the object
of the investigation to be attained within a reasonable time. This measure
was justified by the fact that the structure of the molecule this side of the
unknown fourth ring was known in all its details.
   On oxidation of the pyrodesoxybilianic acid with permanganate, a diketo-
dicarboxylic acid (VI) had been isolated as an intermediate product; this was
turned into a tetracarboxylic acid C16H 24O 8 by means of nitric-sulphuric
acid in a smooth reaction. Here seven carbon atoms are broken off, including,
for reasons to do with the closed part of the molecule, two from the side


                       CHEMISTRY OF BILE ACIDS                               99




chain, which is thus shortened by two C-atoms. Formula (VII) is proved for
this tetracarboxylic acid, because on thermal decomposition, it turns into a
                                             f
 keto-dicarboxylic acid C 15H 22O 5 (VIII) unfortunately the yield is very low) ,
and this can then be turned into a tricarboxylic acid C13H 20O 6 (IX).
   Since week-long operations yield only 5 g of this acid from 1 kg of desoxy-
cholic acid, in determining the constitution the attack was transferred to
another point of the molecule, viz., the side chain, about which some know-
ledge was already available from the work of Windaus on cholesterol. We
were able to assume that a methylated C-atom is located in the γ -arrangement
to the COOH group. This side of the molecule had also to be opened by the
oxidation decomposition method. Proceeding from the ester of cholanic acid,
C24H40O2, the parent substance of the whole group, we turned this by means
of the Grignard reaction into diphenylated carbinol, which was then sub-
mitted to oxidation by chromic acid. In this way one C-atom after another
was split off. The fourth split away with the third, indicating that it was
replaced by a CH3-group. Proceeding from the acid C20H 32O 2, the monot-


100                           1927 H.O.WIELAND

ony of this procedure underwent a welcome change. On oxidizing the cor-
responding tertiary carbinol, we came across a dicarboxylic acid CIOH30O4,
etiobilianic acid (X). Thus the opening of the fourth ring was achieved and
the number of links in it was found by thermal decomposition according to
Blanc, which gave an anhydride and not a cyclic ketone. The fourth ring was
thus recognized to be a fifthring, and from the formation of the etiobilianic
acid it could be concluded that in addition to the C-atom carrying the side
chain, there is a methylene group. The relationships between the side chain
and ring II (lactone formation with the OH-group at C7, condensation with
the CO-group of the dehydro acids) indicate that the position of the side
chain is as shown in the formulae.




If we assume that the third ring is attached to the two C-atoms 10 and 11 of
ring IV, then only three C-atoms are now unaffected by the structural in-
vestigation. We can make a positive statement about one of these C-atoms.
On oxidation of the diketo-dicarboxylic acid C23H 340 6 mentioned above, in
addition to the tetracarboxylic acid C16H 240 8 a small amount of a malonic
acid was isolated, which is closely related to α -methylglutaric acid. It has the
Formula (XI). The methyl group found here cannot be identical with that
which we encountered in the side chain; it must be attached to CII, which
is the only way of explaining the occurrence of a malonic acid. But we are
still unable to decide whether the other three C-atoms of the tricarboxylic
acid C7H 10O 6 come from ring III or ring IV. Thus, the formula for bile acid
corresponding to the present status of our knowledge is still hypothetical, in
so far as the location of the last two carbon atoms has not been determined
very precisely. At present there are simply indications that the proposed ar-


                        CHEMISTRY OF BILE ACIDS                           101
rangement with an ethyl group at CIO, has advantages over one with an ethyl
group at C18 or a division into two methyl groups at the points mentioned.
   But the most recent investigations, which I cannot go into in detail here,
introduce Formula (XII) into the range of the discussion.
   This, then, characterizes in rough terms the status of our knowledge of the
chemical constitution of the bile-acid molecule. Despite the unsuccessful at-
tempts of physiologists at producing experimentally the transformation of
cholesterol into cholic acid in the animal organism, it must be assumed that
the vegetable sterols provided by food are transformed by the cell according




to the system of the decomposition reaction carried out by Windaus on pseu-
docholestane. When we attempt to get a picture of the mechanism by which
the plant cell builds up the sterols, reference to the formula of cholesterol
(XIII) shows that its molecule consists of three isoprene groups and a residue
of twelve rectilinearly-bound carbon atoms. Since the plant can easily convert
carbohydrates into fats, it may perhaps be assumed that an intermediate stage
of this transformation is employed for condensation with the terpene-type
component. The rings are formed either through intramolecular dehydra-
tions or through splitting off water.
   Relationships with natural amino acids are found in the existence of the
bile acids conjugated with glycine and taurine. They are even more pro-
nounced in the poison of native toads, which is without doubt clearly related


102                            1927 H.O.WIELAND

to the bile acids. In this, the so-called bufotoxin, we find a molecule of suberic
acid esterified by an OH-group of the fundamental structure C24H34O5; the
other carboxyl of the suberic acid is bound like an amide with arginine. A
second hydroxyl carries the acetyl group. If the chain of the suberylarginine
is split-off hydrolytically, the strong cardiac poison bufotalin remains, the
acetic ester of a trioxy-lactone C24H 34O 5. It can be assumed that here the
typical carboxyl group of the bile-acid molecule has been lactonized to give
the tertiary y-arrangement. No accurate check has yet been carried out on
the structural association between bile acids and toad poison. Here the diffi-
culties of preparing the material are particularly great.
   When the last puzzles of our constitution problems have been solved, we
can expect as usual the synthesis of the compounds. In cholanic acid there are
seven asymmetric carbon atoms, and in cholic acid there are ten; as yet no
procedure has been developed for the experimental production of the peculiar
bonding of the numerous rings. While I acknowledge that it is the duty of
the organic analyst to carry out syntheses such as have been carried out so
excellently in the investigation of the coloured components of the colouring
matter of blood, I must decidedly repudiate this in the field being discussed.
I am fully conscious, however, of the duty to follow the course that has been
embarked upon right to the end.
