ELECTRON TRANSFER BETWEEN METAL
COMPLEXES - RETROSPECTIVE
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1983

by
HENRY TAUBE
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305




This will be an account in historical perspective of the development of part of
the field of chemistry that I have been active in for most of my professional life,
the field that is loosely described by the phrase “electron transfer in chemical
reactions”. In the short time available to me for the preparation of this paper, I
can’t hope to provide anything significant in the way of original thought. But I
can add some detail to the historical record, especially on just how some of the
contributions which my co-workers and I have made came about. This kind of
information may have some human interest and may even have scientific
interest of a kind which cannot easily be gathered from the scientific journals.
For publication there, the course of discovery as it actually took place may be
rewritten to invest it with a logic that it did not fully acquire until after the
event.
   Simple electron transfer is realized only in systems such as Ne + Ne + . The
physics already becomes more complicated when we move to N 2 + N2 + for
example, and with the metal ion complexes which I shall deal with, where a
typical reagent is Ru(NH 3) 62 + , and where charge trapping by the solvent, as
well as within the molecule, must be taken into account, the complexity is
much greater. Still, a great deal of progress has been made by a productive
interplay of experiment, qualitative ideas, and more sophisticated theory,
involving many workers. Because of space limitations, I will be unable to trace
all the ramifications of the field today, and will emphasize the earlier history of
the subject, when some of the ideas basic to the field were being formulated.
This choice of emphasis is justified because, by an accident of history, I was a
graduate student at the University of California, Berkeley, about the time the
first natal stirrings of the subject of this article occurred, and at a place where
these stirrings were most active. As a result, I may be in a unique position to
deal knowledgeably and fairly with the early history of the subject. The
emphasis on the early history is all the more justified because most of the topics
touched on in this article, and also closely related topics, are brought up to date
in a very recent volume of the series, Progress in Inorganic Chemistry (1).
   Chemical reactions are commonly classified into two categories: substitution
or oxidation-reduction. The latter can always be viewed as involving electron


                                     H. Taube                                  121


transfer, though it is agreed that when we consider the mechanisms in solution,
electron transfer is not as simple as it is in the Ne + Ne + case. Rearrangement
of atoms always attend the changes in electron count at each center, and these
must be allowed for. I will, however, simplify the subject by considering only
processes of simple chemistry: those in which electron transfer leaves each of
the reaction partners in a stable oxidation state. While substitution reactions
can be discussed without concern for oxidation-reduction reactions, the reverse
is not true. The changes that take place at each center when the electron count
is changed is an essential part of the “electron transfer” process, and may be
the dominating influence in fixing the rate of the reaction. Moreover, most of
the early definitive experiments have depended on exploiting the substitution
characteristics of the reactants, and of the products. Thus, the attention which
will be devoted to the substitution properties of the metal ions is not a
digression but is an integral part of the subject.
   An appropriate place to begin this account is with the advent of artificial
radioactivity. This enormously increased the scope of isotopic tracer methods
applied to chemistry, and made it possible to measure the rates of a large
number of oxidation reduction reactions such as:



Hevesy and coworkers (2) who used naturally occurring isotopes to follow
Pb(IV)/Pb(II) exchange in acetic acid.) Because chemists were there involved
in the discovery of many of the new isotopes (3) an early interest in this kind
of possibility developed in the chemistry community at the University of
California, Berkeley, and was already evident when I was a graduate student there
(1937-40). Mention is made in a review article by Seaborg (3) devoted to
artificial radioactivity, of an attempt (4) to measure the rate of the Fe 3+/2+
exchange in aqueous chloride media, the result of this early attempt being that
the exchange was found to be complete by the time the separation of Fe(III)
from Fe (II) was made. It was appreciated by many that the separation procedure,
in this case extraction of the Fe(III)-Cl- complex into ether, might have induced
exchange. It was also appreciated that Cl- might have affected the reaction rate,
possibly increasing it, and that quite different results might be obtained were the
experiment done with Cl- being replaced by an indifferent anion.
   There were several reasons for the interest, among many physical-inorganic
chemists, in a reaction such as (1). That the interest in chemical applications of
the new isotopes was keen in Berkeley may be traced in part to the involvement
of much of the research body in teaching in the introductory chemistry course.
We all had a background of qualitative observations on oxidation-reduction
reactions of simple chemistry - as an example, on the reaction of Ce(IV)(aq)
with Fe2+(aq), - from experience in qualitative or quantitative analysis. Still, to
my knowledge, at the time I was a graduate student, not a single measurement
had been made of the rate of this kind of reaction. That a field of research,
which has since grown enormously, was started by studying “self-exchange
reactions” (5) such as (1), rather than net chemical changes (descriptor,
“cross-reaction”) (5), may reflect the intervention of a human factor. Measur-


122                                     Chemistry 1983


ing the rate of a virtual process such as (1), today made commonplace for many
systems by the introduction of new spectroscopic methods, seemed more gla-
morous than measuring the rate of oxidation of V 2 + (aq) by Fe 2 + (aq), for
example. But I also recall from informal discussions that it was felt that driving
force would affect the rate of reaction, and thus there would be special interest
in determining the rates for reactions for which                   (except for the entropic
contributions to the driving force) is zero.
    The interest in the measurement of the rates of self-exchange reactions which
 I witnessed as a graduate student, is not reflected in the literature of the years
immediately following. Many of those who might have had plans to do the
experiments were engaged in war related activities. Post war, at least live
different studies on the rate of reaction (1), all carried out in non-complexing
media, were reported, with conflicting results, some indicating a half-life for
exchange on the order of days at concentration levels of 10 -2M. The discrepan-
cies led to considerable controversy, and in informal discussions, strong opin-
ions were expressed on just what the true rate of self-exchange might be. The
basis for this kind of judgment, exercized in the absence of any body of
quantitative measurements, is worth thinking about. I believe it reflected an
intuitive feeling that there would be a relation between the rates of self-
exchange and of the related cross-reactions, and of course each of us had at
 least some qualitative information on redox rates for the Fe3+/2+ couple. The
definitive measurements on the rate of reaction (1) in non-complexing media
 were made by Dodson (6). These measurements were soon extended (7) to
 reveal the effect of [H+] and of complexing anions on the rate and yielded rate
 functions such as [Fe 3 + ] [X-] [Fe2 + ] (because substitution is rapid compared to
 electron transfer, this is kinetically equivalent to [FeX 2 + ] [ F e2 + ] and to
 [ F e3 + ][FeX + ]), in addition to [Fe 3 + ][Fe 2 + ], none specifying a unique struc-
 ture for an activated complex. Particularly the terms involving the anions
 provided scope for speculation about mechanism. The coefficient for the simple
 second order function was found (7) to be 4                       at     µ=0.5, and those
 who had argued for “fast” exchange won out.
   Another important experimental advance during the same period, important
for several reasons, was the measurement (8) of the rate of self-exchange for
Coen 3                   5.2                     at     µ = 0.98). This is, I believe, the first
quantitative measurement of a rate for a self-exchange reaction and it may also
be the first time that the oxidizing capability of a cobalt (III) ammine complex
was deliberately exploited. In the article of ref. 8, the rate of the reaction of
C o ( N H3 ) 6 3+ w i t h C o e n3 2 + is also reported; this is, I believe, the first deliberate
measurement of the rate of an electron transfer cross reaction. In contrast to the
F e3+/2+ system, where both reactants are labile to substitution, Coen33+ is very
slow to undergo substitution and thus an important feature of the structure of
the activated complex for the Coen3+/2+ self exchange appeared to be settled.
In considering the observations, the tacit assumption was made that the
coordination sphere of Coen3
                                          3+
                                             does not open up on the time scale of electron
transfer, so that it was concluded that the activated complex for the reaction
does not involve interpenetration of the coordination spheres of the two reac-


                                     H. Taube                                 123


tants. We were thus obliged to think about a mechanism for electron transfer
through two separate coordination spheres (descriptor “outer-sphere” mecha-
nism) (9).
   In 1951, an important symposium on Electron Transfer Processes was held
at the University of Notre Dame, and the proceedings are reported in J. Phys.
Chem., Vol. 56, (1952). Though the meeting was organized mainly for the
benefit of the chemists, the organizers had the perspicacity to include physicists
in the program. Thus, the gamut of interests was covered, ranging from
electron transfer in the gas phase in the simplest kind of systems, for example
Ne + Ne + , to the kind of system that the chemist ordinarily deals with. Much
of the program was devoted to experimental work, the chemistry segment of
which included reports on the rates of self-exchange reactions as well as of
reactions involving net chemical change - but none on cross reactions. Two
papers devoted to theory merit special mention: that by Holstein (10) whose
contributions to the basic physics are now being applied in the chemistry
community, and the paper by Libby, (11) in which he stressed the relevance of
the Franck-Condon restriction (12) to the electron transfer process, and ap-
plied the principle in a qualitative way to some observations. It is clear from
the discussion which several of the papers evoked that many of the participants
had already appreciated the point which Libby made in this talk. Thus, in the
course of the discussion, the slowness of the self-exchange in the cobaltammines
was attributed (13) to the large change in the Co-N distances with change in
oxidation state, then believed to be much larger than it actually is. During the
meeting too) the distinction between outer- and inner-sphere activated com-
plexes was drawn, and the suggestion was made that the role of Cl- in affecting
the rate of the Fe 3 + / 2 + self-exchange might be that it bridges the two metal
centers. (14) But of course, because of the lability of the high spin Fe(II) and
Fe(III) complexes, no unique specification of the geometry of the activated
complex can be made on the basis of the rate laws alone. During the discussion
of Libby’s paper, a third kind of mechanism was proposed (15), involving
“hydrogen atom” transfer from reductant to oxidant.


PREPARATION

My own interest in basic aspects of electron transfer between metal complexes
became active only after I came to the University of Chicago in 1946. During
my time at Cornell University (1941 - 1946) I had been engaged in the study of
oxidation-reduction reactions, and I was attempting to develop criteria to
distinguish between 1e - and 2e - redox changes, and as an outgrowth of this
interest, using le- reducing agents to generate atomic halogen, X, and studying
the ensuing chain reactions of X2 with organic molecules. My eventual involve-
ment in research on electron transfer between metal complexes owes much to
the fact that I knew many of the protagonists personally (A. C. Wahl, C. N.
Rice, C. D. Coryell, C. S. Garner; the first two were fellow graduate students at
Berkeley), and to the fact that I had W. F. Libby, with whom I had many
provocative discussions, and J. Franck as well as F. H. Westheimer as col-


124                                Chemistry 1983


leagues at the University of Chicago. By the time of the meeting, at the
University of Notre Dame, a meeting I did not participate in, I appreciated in a
general way the special advantages which the Cr 3+/2+ couple offered in the
investigation of the mechanism of electron transfer, and outlined my ideas to N.
Davidson when he visited me en route to the meeting, but the experimental
work which led to the first two papers (16, 17) was not done until 1953. In the
interim, I had failed to interest any of my graduate students in the work,
because, of course, no one foresaw what it might lead to, and because it seemed
less exciting than other work in progress in my laboratories, much of it
concerned with isotopic effects, tracer and kinetic. The bulk of the work
reported in the two papers just cited was done by my own hands; I shall now
outline the background for those early experiments.
   My interest in coordination chemistry did not develop until I elected it as a
topic for an advanced course given soon after coming to the University of
Chicago. Instead of using the standard textbook material, I used as major
source the relevant volume of the reference series by Gmelin in which the
chemistry of the cobaltammines is described. At this time I already had a good
background in the literature devoted to substitution at carbon and understood
the issues raised in that context, and I soon became interested in raising the
same issues for substitution at metal centers. Furthermore, it was evident that
the complexes based on metal ions which undergo substitution slowly were
readily amenable to experimental study. I became curious as well about the
reasons underlying the enormous difference in rates of substitution for metal
ions of the same charge and (approximately) the same radii. The ideas that
resulted were presented in my course the next time it was given, but the
extensive literature study that led to the paper published in February, 1952
(18) was not done until 1949 when I was on leave from the University of
Chicago as a Guggenheim Fellow.
   In this paper, a correlation with electronic structure was made of observa-
tions, mainly qualitative (“labile” complexes arbitrarily defined as those whose
reactions appear to be complete on mixing and “inert” as those for which
continuing reaction can be observed), for complexes of coordination no. 6. To
make the correlation, it was necessary to break away from the practice which
was common in the USA of classifying complexes as “ionic” and “covalent”
according to electronic structure. Thus, for example, the comparison of the
affinities of Cr(III) and Fe(III), the latter high spin and thus “ionic”, con-
vinced me that in the Fe(III) complexes, the bonds to the ligands might
actually be somewhat more covalent than in the Cr(III) complexes. Further-
more, it appeared to me that in earlier discussions of relative rates of substitu-
tion, where attempts were made to understand the observations in terms of the
existing classification, there was a failure to distinguish between thermodynam-
ic stability, and inertia, the latter being understood as referring solely to rate.
The affinity of Cl- for Cr3+(aq) is considerably less than it is for Fe3+ (aq), yet
the aquation rate of CrCl2+ (aq) is much less than it is for FeCl2+ (aq). Rates, of
course, cannot be accounted for by considering ground state properties alone,
but the stability of the activated complex relative to the ground state must be


                                      H. Taube                                  125


taken into account. When the effect of electronic structure on the relative
stabilities is allowed for, a general correlation of rates with electronic structure
emerges. (In the language of ligand field theory, for complexes of coordination
number 6, substitution tends to be slow when the metal ions have each of the
                     orbitals, but none of the    (anti-bonding) orbitals occupied.
The specific rates of exchange of water between solvent and the hexaaquo ions
of                            and                 are                          and
 1X1          respectively ( 19)).
    A shortcoming of this early effort is that such rationalizations of the correla-
tion as were offered were given in the language of the valence bond approach to
chemical binding, because, at the time I wrote the paper, I did not understand
the principles of ligand field theory even in a qualitative way. The valence bond
approach provides no simple rationale of the difference in rates of substitution
for labile complexes, and these have been found to cover a very wide range,
thanks to a pioneering study by Bjerrum and Poulsen (20), in which they used
methanol as a solvent to make possible measurements at low temperature, and
 those of Eigen (21), in which he introduced relaxation methods to determine
 the rates of complex formation for labile systems.
    Activated complexes have compositions and structures, and it is necessary to
know what these are if rates are to be understood. It is hardly likely that these
features can be established for the activated complexes if they are not even
known for the reactants, and in 1950 we were not certain of the formula for any
aquo cation in water. It seemed to me important, therefore, to try to determine
 the hydration numbers for aquo cations. Hydration number as I use it here
does not mean the average number of water molecules affected by a metal ion
as this is manifested in some property such as mobility, but has a structural
connotation: how many water molecules occupy the first sphere of coordina-
 tion? Because the rates of substitution for Cr3+(aq) were known to be slow (22),
J. P. Hunt and I undertook to determine the formula for Cr 3+ (aq) in water
 (23), with some confidence that we would be successful even with the slow
 method we applied, isotopic dilution using 18O enriched water. That the
formula turned out to be Cr(H2O )63+ was no great surprise - although I must
admit that at one point in our studies, before we had taken proper account of
 isotopic fractionation effects, Cr(H 2O )73+ was indicated and, faced with the
 apparent necessity, I was quite prepared to give up my preconceived notions. It
 was also no great surprise that the exchange is slow (t1/2 at      ca. 40 hr). Even
 so, the experiments were worth doing. They were the first of their kind, and
 they attracted the attention also of physical chemists, many of whom were
 astonished that aquo complexes could be as kinetically stable as our measure-
 ments indicated, and were impressed by the enormous difference in the resi-
 dence time of a water molecule in contact with a cation, compared with water
 molecules just outside. That we dealt with hydration in terms of detailed
 structure rather than in terms of averaged effects may have encouraged the
 introduction into the field of other methods, such as nmr, to make the distinc-
 tion between cation-bound and free water (19). As I will now detail, it also led
directly to the experiments described in the papers of references 16 and 17.


126                                Chemistry 1983


THE INNER SPHERE ACTIVATED COMPLEX

R. A. Plane undertook to measure the rate of self-exchange for Cr(H 2O )63+ -
C r2+ (aq) by using Cr2+ (aq) as a catalyst for the exchange of water between
C r ( H 2 O )6 3 + and solvent. The expected catalysis was found, but owing to our
inexperience in handling the air sensitive catalyst, the data were too irreprodu-
cible to lead to a value for the self-exchange rate. Catalysis on electron transfer
was expected because the aquo complex of Cr2+ (aq) was known to be much
more labile than Cr(H 2O )63 + - the lability is now known (24) to decrease by a
factor of at least 1014 when Cr 2 + (aq) is oxidized to Cr(aq)3+ (note that Cr 2 + ,
but not Cr3+ , has an anti- bonding electron). It occurred to me in the course of
Plane’s work that it would be worthwhile to test the potential of the Cr(III)/
Cr(II) couple for diagnosis of mechanism using a non-metal oxidant. Following
up on the idea, I did a simple test tube experiment, adding solid I 2 to a solution
of Cr2+(aq) which Plane had prepared for his own experiments. I observed that
reaction occurs on mixing, that the product solution is green, and that the
green color fades slowly, to produce a color characteristic of                    The
fading is important because it demonstrates that                        which is re-
sponsible for the green color, is unstable with respect to                  + I-, and
thus we could conclude that the Cr(II)-I bond is established before Cr(II) is
oxidized.
   The principle having been demonstrated with a non-metal oxidant, I turned
to the problem of finding a suitable metal complex as oxidant. What was
needed was a reducible robust metal complex, having as ligand a potential
bridging group, and the idea of using (NH3)5CoCl 2+ surfaced during a discus-
sion of possibilities with another of my then graduate students, R. L. Rich.
Because at that time virtually nothing was known about the rates of reduction
of Co(III) ammines, and because they were not thought about as useful
oxidants, I was by no means sanguine about the outcome of the first experi-
ment, which again was done in a test tube. I was delighted by the outcome.
Reaction was observed to be rapid (the specific rate has since been measured
(25) as                      at 25º) and the green color of the product solution
indicated that (H2O )5 CrCl 2+ is formed. Further work (16,17) showed that this
species is formed quantitatively, and that in being formed it picks up almost no
radioactivity when labelled Cl- is present in the reaction solution, thus demon-
strating that transfer is direct, i. e., Cl- bridges the two metal centers, and this
occurs before Cr2+ is oxidized.




  These early results were presented at a Gordon Conference on inorganic
chemistry, which was held only a short time after they had been obtained, and
they were received with much interest. E. L. King was present at the meeting,


                                    H. Taube                                 127


and together we planned the experiment in which self-exchange by an “atom”
transfer mechanism was first demonstrated (26).



Cr(III) center, but the auxiliary ligands about the original Cr(III) center will
be exchanged or replaced because of the high lability of Cr(II).
   (Several years later, King and co-workers (27) extended the self-exchange
work to include other halides as bridging ligands, and still later (28) encoun-
tered the first example of “double bridging.”




   There is a brief hiatus in my work after the early experiments on inner-
sphere mechanisms, caused by my taking leave from the University of Chicago
in 1956. But before leaving, I hurriedly did some experiments (29), which,
though semi-quantitative at best, showed that not only atoms but groups such
a s N3 -, NCS , and carboxylates transfer to chromium when the corresponding
               -



pentaamminecobalt(III) complexes are reduced by Cr(aq) , and that there
                                                                2+



are large differences in rate for different dicarboxylate complexes (maleate
much more rapid than succinate). Moreover, it was shown that Cr(II) in being
oxidized can incorporate other ligands such as H2P 2O 72- which are present in
solution. In this paper the possibility of electron transfer through an extended
bond system of a bridging group was raised, but was by no means demonstrat-
ed by the results. While I was away, Ogard (30) began his studies on the rates
of aquation of (NH 3) 5C r X 2+ (X=Cl, Br, I) catalyzed by Cr 2 + . By following
the arguments made in connection with reaction (2), it can be seen that if an
inner sphere mechanism operates, (H 2O )5C r X2+ a n d N H4+ (acid solution)
will be products. The contrast with uncatalyzed aquation is worth noting,
                                      -
w h e r e ( N H 3) 5C r H 2O 3 + and X are the products.


GENERAL PROGRESS

The hiatus referred to above provides me with a suitable opportunity to outline
some of the advances that were being or were soon to be made on other fronts.
An important one is that the rates of numerous self-exchange reactions were
being measured. Here I want especially to acknowledge the contributions from
the laboratories of A. C. Wahl and C. S. Garner. Some of the experiments by
Wahl and co-workers made use of rapid mixing techniques - see for example,
the measurement (31) of the rate of self-exchange for MnO 41-/2- . An impor-
tant experimental contribution was also made by N. Sutin who introduced the
rapid flow method (32), and later other rapid reaction techniques, into this
field of study, and who helped others, including myself, to get started with the
rapid flow technique. A spate of activity on the measurements of the rates of
cross reactions followed, motivated in large part by the desire to test the
validity of the cross reaction correlation (5).


128                                Chemistry 1983


   At the quantitative theoretical level, attempts were being made to account
for the barrier to reaction attending encounter and separation and that contri-
buted by charge trapping within the metal complex and by the surrounding
medium. The papers which most influenced the experimentalists, at least
during the formative period in question, are those by Marcus (33) and Hush
(34), dealing with adiabatic (35) electron transfer. Other theoretical ap-
proaches were being advanced during this period, and in some, attempts were
made to account for non-adiabaticity, and the various theories are compared
and evaluated in reference (33). (The current state of theory can be gathered
from a recent article by Sutin (36)). Because this very important aspect of
electron transfer reactions is not dealt with in this paper, it is essential to
mention that the processes as they occur at electrodes were not being over-
looked.
   The correlation of the rates of cross reactions with the rates of the component
self-exchange reactions (5), has been widely applied, especially to outer-sphere
reactions. The limits of its validity were clearly set down by the author:
allowance must be made for the work of bringing the reaction partners together
and separating the products, electron delocalization must be great enough to
ensure adiabatic behavior, but not so great as materially to reduce the activa-
tion energy. (The last condition, it should be noted, does not necessarily limit
the applicability of the Marcus equation to outer sphere processes.) Hush’s
treatment (34) also leads to a correlation of rates of self-exchange and cross
reactions. It also takes into account the contribution by driving force, and in
fact the first calculation of the rate of a cross reaction, in this instance:

from those of the self exchange processes and the equilibrium constant appears
in reference 34.
   Theory of another kind has profoundly influenced the development of the
field, even though it is qualitative. It responds to the question of how the choice
of mechanism, and relative rates, are to be understood in terms of the electronic
structures of the reactants. As is true also of rates of substitution, the observa-
tions are so sensitive to electronic structure that even qualitative ideas are
useful in correlating observations, and in pointing the way to new experiments.
Orgel (37) early applied qualitative ligand field theory in discussing the inner-
sphere mechanisms for the reduction of Cr(III) and low spin Co(III) complex-
es. When electron transfer takes place through a bridging group, it is important
to distinguish a chemical or “hopping” mechanism - here a low lying orbital of
the ligand is populated by the reductant, or a hole is generated by the oxidant
in an occupied orbital - from resonance transfer, that is, electron tunneling
through the barrier separating the two metal centers. This distinction was
drawn rather early by George and Griffith (38) who moreover proposed alter-
native mechanisms for resonance transfer. Shortly thereafter, Halpern and
Orgel (39) gave a more formal treatment of resonance transfer through bridg-
ing ligands. Concerns about the relation between electronic structure and the
observations on electron transfer strongly influenced my own work, but before
tracing this theme, I want to report on the progress made, mainly by others, in
extending the descriptive chemistry of electron transfer reactions.


                                      H. Taube                                  129


   The unambiguous demonstration of an inner sphere mechanism in a sense
introduced a second dimension to the field of electron transfer mechanisms.
That in certain systems reaction perforce took place by an outer sphere mecha-
nism had long been known, but until the experiments of references 16 and 17
were done, the inner sphere mechanism was only conjecture, and, as frequently
happens in research in chemistry, only after conjecture, however reasonable, is
upgraded by proof, is it accepted as a base for further development. That the
distinction between the two reaction classes is meaningful, not only in terms of
chemistry but also in rates, will be illustrated by a single comparison: the
specific rates of reaction of Cr2+ (aq) with (NH3)5CoCl 2+ is ca. 108 greater than
it is with CO(NH 3) 63 + (40) (the latter can only react by an outer sphere
mechanism). The classification of reaction paths as inner sphere or outer
sphere, on the basis of rate comparisons, involving effects (such as those
exerted by non-bridging ligands) established with reactions of known mecha-
nism, became the focus of experiment and discussion when direct proof based
on product or intermediate identification was lacking.
   Early in the 1960s new metal centers were added to the roster of those
proven to react by inner sphere mechanisms. For Co(CN)53- as reducing agent
(41), the demonstration of an inner sphere path again depended on the charac-
terization of product complexes by orthodox means. Sutin and co-workers have
been particularly resourceful in using flow techniques to provide direct proof of
mechanism for oxidizing centers ordinarily considered as labile to substitution:
thus note t h e p r o o f o f i n n e r sphere mechanism f o r F e C l2 + ( a q )
 +                               +           (43), even the much studied
exchange (44). It was early appreciated (17) that atom or group transfer is not
a necessary concomitant of an inner sphere process. Whether the bridging
group transfers to reductant, remains with the oxidant, or transfers from
reductant to oxidant depends on the substitution labilities of reactants and
products. Early qualitative observations (17) on the Cr2+(aq) +             system
had apparently exposed an example of reaction by an inner sphere mechanism,
but leading to no net transfer of the bridging atom. Here                         is
formed as an intermediate, but this then aquates to
(later work (45) has shown the inner sphere path to be minor compared to the
outer sphere, and that                  is the lesser product of the former path).
Experiments (46, 47) with                   as reducing agent provided numerous
examples of systems in which substitution on the reducing complex is rate
determining for the net redox process (note that                     because of its
electronic structure          is expected (18) to undergo substitution relatively
slowly). Unstable forms of linkage isomers were prepared by taking advantage
of the chemistry of the inner sphere mechanism:                              by the
reaction               with             49)                       by the reaction of
           with                    Oxygen atom transfer was shown to be com-
plete (51) in the reaction of                     with           (The path involv-
ing direct attack on the aquo complex was later (52) shown to be unobservable
compared to attack on the hydroxo. Bridging by H 2O has to date not been
demonstrated.) The inner sphere path was demonstrated (53) also for net 2e -


130                               Chemistry 1983


processes in an elegant series of studies involving the reactions of Pt(IV)
complexes with those of Pt( II). I n an important departure, Anet (54) showed
that the “capture” property of Cr2+ (aq) in being oxidized can be exploited to
produce complexes in which an organic radical is ligated to Cr(III). An entire
chapter of the volume of reference 1 is devoted to the chemistry of similar
organochromium complexes(55).


ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE AND MECHANISM

A major theme in my own research, on returning from leave, was to try to
understand the large differences in rate, noted qualitatively in my early work
(29), and later made more quantitative, for the reactions Cr2+(aq) with carbox-
ylate complexes of (NH 3) 5Co(III). Many of the ligands were dicarboxylic
acids, and to explain the observation that when a conjugated bond system
connects the two carboxylates, reaction is usually more rapid than it is for the
saturated analog, it seemed reasonable then to assume that in the case of
conjugated ligands, the reducing agent attacks the exo carboxyl (remote at-
tack), the conjugated bond system serving as a “conduit” for electron transfer.
In adopting this view the tacit assumption was made that the reactions are
non-adiabatic so that the extent of electronic coupling would be reflected in the
rate. In retrospect, this assumption is naive, because the effect of conjugation
would be exerted even if the reducing agent attacked at the endo carboxyl.
   A false start was made in demonstrating remote attack defined as above.
Activation effects accompanying electron transfer were reported (56), which if
true, would have constituted proof of remote attack for these systems. These
effects could not be reproduced (57) in later work (I had by now moved from
University of Chicago to Stanford University). Remote attack for the large
organic ligands was finally demonstrated (58) in the reaction of




a measurement of the rate of reaction of Cr2+ (aq) with the analogous Cr(III)
species, provided the clue to understanding, at least in a qualitative way, the
rate differences observed for different conjugated ligands. The astonishing
result was that the rate of reduction of the Co(III) complex is only about 10-
fold greater than that of the Cr(III) complex. When the bridging group is a
non-reducible species such as acetate, the ratio is > 104. The insensitivity of
rate to the nature of the oxidant suggested that the electron does not transfer
directly from Cr(II) to the oxidizing center but that the mechanism rather
involves the le- reduction (59) of the ligand by the strong reducing agent Cr2+,
followed by reduction of the oxidizing center by the organic radical - i.e., a
“hopping” mechanism obtains. This view provided satisfactory rationaliza-
tions of most of the observations of rates made with organic ligands. For
example, the fact that the rate is considerably greater for HO 2C - C H = C H -
C O2- (fumarate) than for CH 3C O2- as ligand on Co(III), may have little to do
with the opportunity that Cr(II) has to attack the remote carboxyl in the


                                      H. Taube                                  131


former case, and only reflects the fact that fumarate can be reduced by
Cr 2+ (aq). Moreover, the otherwise puzzling observation that the rate for the
fumarate complex is increased (60) by H+ is now easily understood; positive
charge added to the ligand makes it easier to reduce. That many reactions of
the class under consideration proceed by a stepwise mechanism has been
convincingly demonstrated and amply illustrated in subsequent work, most of
it done by Gould and co-workers (61).
   The rationalization offered for the operation of the stepwise mechanism in
the Co(III)-Cr(II) systems is that the carrier orbital on the ligand has π
symmetry, while the donor and acceptor orbitals have σ symmetry. This
renders as highly improbable an event in which the four conditions: Franck-
Condon restrictions at each center, and the symmetry restrictions at each
center, are simultaneously met. Whether or not this is the correct explanation,
it led me to search for an oxidizing center of the ammine class in which the
acceptor orbital has π symmetry.
   When the important condition that the complexes undergo substitution
slowly was added, only one couple within the entire periodic table, Ru 3+/2+
             then qualified (62). In principle, the Os 3 + / 2 + couple is also a
candidate, but unless some strong π acid ligands are present, the couple is too
strongly reducing to be useful. The ruthenium species had the added advantage
that much more in the way of preparative work was known (63), and further
that the redox potentials are close to those of the much studied cobalt couples.
Since the π orbital on Ru(III) can overlap with the π∗ orbital on the ligand, we
expected that the “hopping” mechanism would no longer obtain. Reaction
with Cr2+ (aq) is in fact much more rapid (2 x 104) than it is in the case of the
Co(III) isonicotinamide complex, and moreover, the rates are now quite
sensitive to changes in the redox potential of the oxidizing center (64). The
chemistry also differs in an interesting way from the Co(III)-Cr(II) case. The
bond between Ru and the ligand is not severed when Ru(III) is reduced to
Ru(II), and a kinetically stable binuclear intermediate is formed, as is expected
(18) from the electronic structures of the products,        for Ru(II) and      for
Cr(III).
   Though the main intent of this paper is to provide historical background
rather than the develop the subject itself in detail, because the reaction proper-
ties are so sensitive to electronic structure, it may be appropriate in concluding
this section to illustrate the connection with a few examples. Effects arising
from differences in electronic structure are manifested in several different ways:
by affecting the rates of substitution, they can affect the choice of mechanism,
and, for an inner sphere reaction path, can determine whether binuclear
intermediates are easily observable, and whether there is net transfer of a group
from one center to another; even after the precursor complex is assembled,
orbital symmetry can affect the mechanism itself, as in the example offered in
an earlier paragraph, and can profoundly affect the rate of conversion of the
precursor to the successor complex.
   The Cr(III)/Cr(II)                     and                             couples
offer perhaps the greatest contrasts in behavior. It should be noted that the


132                                      Chemistry 1983


electron in Cr(II) is antibonding, thus accounting for the tetragonal distortion
in Cr(II) complexes, and their enormous lability compared to those of Cr(III).
By contrast, the complexes of both oxidation states of ruthenium undergo
substitution slowly, with the useful exception of water as a ligand, where the
residence time on Ru(II) is a fraction of a second.
   The reducing agent Cr(II) shows preference for an inner sphere mechanism,
and this is especially marked if the acceptor orbital has symmetry. There is a
great economy of motion for electron transfer by an inner sphere path for the
donor - σ acceptor cases which arises from the reciprocity, at the two centers, of
the events which are required in overcoming the inner sphere Franck-Condon
barrier. This point is illustrated for the                       +              self
exchange reaction in Fig. 1 where the electronic levels are shown for the
precursor complex, for the activated complex, and for the successor complex.
Motion of the bridging Cl - from Cr(III) to Cr(II) lowers the energy of a
acceptor orbital on Cr(III), and at the same time raises that of the donor
orbital on Cr(II), and although other nuclear motions are also required, there
is some correlation of the events required for activation to electron transfer, a
correlation which is absent in the case of an outer sphere mechanism. The high
substitution lability of Cr(II) of course means that the precursor complex can
be formed rapidly.
   The comparison of the rates of self exchange for
vs.                                        and how these respond when the
higher oxidation state for each couple is converted to the hydroxo complex
is quite instructive. The upper limit for the specific rate of self-exchange for
 the Cr(III)/Cr(II) couple is 2 x 10 -5 M -1 s -1 (65, 55); although it has not
been directly measured for the ruthenium couple, the specific rate can
reasonably be taken to be close to that (67) for Ru(NH 3)63+/2+, namely ~




   1. Electronic structure
Fig.                         and “atom” transfer in the self-exchange reaction:   ( H2O )5C r C 12+ +
Cr(H 2O)62+.


                                          H. Taube                                      133


1 × 10 3M -1 s -1 . Because the redox change for the ruthenium couple in-
volves a π electron, it causes only a small change in the dimensions of the
complex (68). Thus the Franck-Condon barrier to electron transfer arising
from inner sphere reorganization is small, and facile transfer by an outer
sphere mechanism is observed. By contrast, because Cr(III) has no anti-
bonding electrons, and the electron added on reduction is anti-bonding,
there is a large change in dimensions and shape attending the reduction,
and the slowness of the selfexchange can be attributed in part at least to
the inner sphere barrier (69). Why the water molecule, which as a ligand
on the oxidizing agent still has available an electron pair for sharing with
the reducing agent, is such a poor bridging group, remains to be under-
stood.
   On deprotonation of a water molecule in each oxidant, the inner sphere path
for the Cr(III)/Cr(II) system opens up, and a marked increase in rate is
o b s e r v e d ( 6 5 ) ( k = 0 . 6 6 M - 1 s -1 at 25º) - the increase may be as large as a
factor (66) of 10 9 . The self-exchange rate for (NH 3 ) 5 R u O H 2+ + ( N H3 ) 5-
RuOH 22+ has not been measured, but it can be asserted with confidence that
the rate by either an inner sphere path or an orthodox outer sphere path will be
much less than it is for the aquo couple. The rate by the inner sphere path will
be limited by the rate of bridge formation, and thus will be no greater than
1 × 1 0-2 M -1 s -1 (neutral ligands in substituting on (NH 3 ) 5 R u O H 2 2+ s h o w
specific rates (70) of the order of 0.1 M -1s -1). The orthodox outer sphere path
now has a composition barrier, as well as a Franck-Condon barrier to overcome
       for the production of                             and                    from
                        and (NH 3) 5R ~ O H z 2+ is ca. 10-9). Reaction by “hydrogen
atom” transfer (15) is a reasonable possibility, that is, electron transfer con-
comitant with proton transfer from the Ru(II) complex to the Ru(III), and
some evidence in support of this kind of mechanism has been advanced to
explain observations (71)made in the oxidation by Fe a n d F e O H o f
                                                                      3+           2+



                         Reaction by such a path might be quite facile and a specific
rate in excess of 1              would be strong evidence in its favor.

APPLICATIONS OF THE RU(III)/RU(II) COUPLE

Some unexpected benefits have accrued from introducing Ru(III)-Ru(II) am-
mine couples into this field of research. Ruthenium(II) engages in back
bonding interactions to a degree unprecedented among the dipositive ions
of the first transition series. A discovery (72) which forcefully brought this
message home, is that (NH3) 5RuN22+ is formed in aqueous solution by the
direct reaction of                      with N 2 . When the heteroligand in
                is pyridine or a derivative, the complexes of both oxidation
states are slow to undergo substitution, and by changing the number of π
acid ligands, a versatile series of outer-sphere redox couples is made
available, spanning a range in redox potential of over 1 volt. When
derivatives of the Os(III)-Os(II) ammines are included, the useful range in
aqueous solution is extended by approximately 0.5 V. These reagents are
finding wide application in research on redox processes.


134                                   Chemistry 1983


1. Intramolecular Electron Transfer
It has occurred to many that in trying to arrive at a basic understanding of
electron transfer processes, it would be a great advantage if the reactions could
be studied in an intramolecular mode rather than, as is commonly done, in the
bimolecular or (intermolecular) mode, particularly if the geometrical relation
between the two metal centers were unambiguosly defined. Such systems had
been encountered in studies of “induced” electron transfer: (73) when a
powerful



ing coordinated organic radical can undergo intramolecular electron transfer,
the oxidation of the ligand to the carboxylic acid being completed by Co(III).
In some cases, intramolecular electron transfer can be intercepted by reaction
of the radical with the external oxidant, but at best, only relative rates were
obtained for these systems. In an elaboration of this kind of approach, in which
pulse radiolysis is used to convert the organic ligand to a radical - usually by
reduction - intramolecular transfer rates can be measured (74). These results
are important in their own right, but they do not substitute for experiments
in which metal-to-metal transfer is studied.
   A strategy for dealing with the metal-to-metal case was devised (75a), which
depends on the special properties of the Co(III)/Co(II) and Ru(III)/Ru(II)
 couples. The principle is the following: when a molecule (76) such as




which has both metal centers in the oxidized state, is treated with an external
reducing agent, Ru(III) is reduced more rapidly than Co(III). This is a direct
result of the differences in electronic structure, πd6 and        for Co(III) and
Ru(III) respectively, the former requiring much more in the way of reorga-
nization energy because the incoming electron is anti-bonding. In a subsequent
step, Ru(II) reduces Co(II) by an intramolecular process, at least if the solution
of the binuclear complex is sufficiently dilute.
   The first method (75a) devised to produce the [ III,III ] molecule is rather
ingenious, but it involves many steps, and it has the disadvantage that SO 42-
rather than NH 3 is trans to the pyridine on Ru(III). Schiffer (77) has greatly
simplified the preparative procedure by taking advantage of chemistry deve-
loped by Sargeson and co-workers (78) and has studied intramolecular electron




cules with the ortho and meta isomers as the bridging ligands. Quite indepen-
dently of our work, Haim et al. (79) h ave done experiments similar to those
described, but with Fe(CN) 5H 2O 3- as the reducing agent. Substitution on
F e ( C N ) 5H 2O 3- takes place readily so that the simple mixing procedure
attempted by Roberts (75b) often can be used with this particular kind of
reducing agent.


                                       H. Taube                                   135


   A point of interest in all of these studies is to learn how the rate of reaction
responds to changes in the structure of the bridging group. In the bipyridine
case, the coupling between the pyridine rings has been variously modified (76);
since the immediate environment about each metal is left unaltered, the driving
force for the reaction is but little affected, and changes in rate can then be
attributed to changes in electronic coupling. The results obtained in studies of
this kind are outlined in a recent review article by Haim (80). Here I will only
mention an extension of this kind of strategy to a system of biochemical
interest. Gray et al (81) and Isied et al (82) have succeeded in placing
(NH 3)5Ru on cytochrome C at a position remote from the porphyrin (Ru(III)-
Fe(III) separation 15Å). Different pulse methods were used by the two groups
to reduce Ru(III) preferentially over Fe(III), and though the results of the two
studies differ somewhat                                respectively), it is clear that
the general strategy is effective.

2. Robust Mixed Valence Molecules
The resurgence of interest (83) in the properties of mixed valence compounds
can be traced to review articles (84, 85, 86) which appeared in 1967, and to the
first deliberate synthesis of a robust mixed valence molecule, the species shown
below, which is commonly referred to as the Creutz-Taube (87) ion




   (Quite independently of our work, Cowan and Kaufman (88) prepared a
molecule based on the ferricinium/ferrocene couple.) Peter Ford and I first
produced the Creutz-Taube ion in 1967. In undertaking its preparation, we
were motivated by simple curiosity rather than by questions which might arise
from a deep understanding of the issues raised by the properties of the mixed
valence compounds. The fully reduced ([II,II]) state is readily prepared by
direct substitution using pyrazine and (NH3)5RuOH 22+ , and in undertaking
the project, we were taking advantage of our knowledge of affinities and rates of
substitution for both oxidation states of ruthenium. Complexes with Ru(II)
attached to heterocyclic nitrogen show very strong absorption in the visible
region of the spectrum             (89) and on observing that the quality of the
color was not significantly altered when the [II,II] species is half oxidized, we
did not pursue the matter further. Fortunately Carol Creutz took up the subject
again. The electrochemical results which she obtained about June 1968 showed
that the mixed valence state is very stable relative to the isovalent, and this
suggested to us that electronic coupling in the mixed valence species is strong.
By now, the review papers by Hush (85) and Robin & Day (86) had appeared,
and taking their content to heart, we felt certain that an intervalence band must
exist, which Carol Creutz then located in the near infra red region         = 1570
nm) where it does not affect the color (heretofore this region of the spectrum
had been little investigated by chemists). Intervalence absorption corresponds
to using the energy of a photon to transfer an electron from the reduced to the
oxidized metal center, subject to the Franck-Condon restriction. Intervalence


136                                 Chemistry 1983


absorption confers on Prussian Blue its characteristic blue color. The interva-
lence absorption is at longer wave length for species I than for Prussian Blue
because the two iron sites in the latter are not substitutionally equivalent. This
leads to a ground state energy difference which is then added to that associated
with the Franck-Condon barrier when the process is induced by a quantum of
light.
   One of my main interests in the field of mixed valence molecules has been to
explore and to try to understand the energetics of the systems. I will illustrate
by a single example the kind of conclusion which we have reached in pursuing
these interests and where we have relied on theory introduced into the field by
Hush (85), by Mulliken (90), and for the correlation of extent of electron
delocalization with electronic structure, Mayoh and Day (91), and choose for
illustration the localized mixed valence molecule (92)




The stability conferred on the ground state of the molecule by charge delocali-
zation is only of the order of 50 cal, far below the upper limit of 5 × 10 2 cal set by
the electrochemical results, which measure the total stabilization of the mixed
valent compared to the isovalent state. When the nuclear coordinates about
each center are adjusted so that the Franck-Condon condition is met, the
energy separating the bonding and anti-bonding states which arise from elec-
tron delocalization is calculated as 2.2 kcal (93). This is taken to be sufficient to
ensure adiabatic transfer (94) in agreement with the conclusion reached in the
course of studying intramolecular electron transfer in Co(III)-Ru(II) systems
with 4,4’-bipyridine and related molecules as bridging ligands (76). If electron
transfer is assumed to be adiabatic, the specific rate for intramolecular electron
transfer is calculated as 3 × 108s-1, in reasonable agreement with an estimate
( l . 6 × 1 0 8 s - 1) reached from measurements of intermolecular electron transfer
rates for pyrinedinepentaammineruthenium species (95).
    Mixed valence molecules have been prepared (96) which are delocalized
even though the bridging group is so large that direct metal-to-metal orbital
overlap cannot be responsible for the delocalization. These have remarkably
interesting properties in their own right, and are the subject of current studies
(97).


CONCLUDING REMARKS

In this paper I have focussed rather narrowly on electron transfer reactions
between metal complexes. The separation of this subclass from other possible
ones which can be assembled from the reactant categories: metal complexes,
organic molecules (98) molecules derived from other non-metallic elements,
any of the above in excited states (99, 100), electrodes, is not totally arbitrary as
it might be were it dictated solely by limitations of space. Admittedly, all the
possible electron transfer processes are governed by the same principles, at
least when these are stated in a general enough way. But as these principles


                                      H. Taube                                  137


manifest themselves in the different subclasses, the descriptive chemistry can
be quite different, and these differences are the fabric of chemistry. The
subclass which has been treated has perhaps been the most thoroughly studied,
yet, as the article by Sutin shows (36), our understanding at a basic level is far
from complete. Even for the much studied Fe3+ /Fe 2+ self exchange reaction,
which served to introduce this subject, the important question of whether the
reaction is adiabatic or not has not been settled to everyone’s satisfaction. Still
a great deal of progress has been made. The descriptive matter has increased
enormously since 1940, and our understanding of it, both in scope and depth,
has more than kept pace with observations. A great deal of progress has also
been made in many of the other subclasses - for example in the study of
electrode processes, and in “atom transfer” reactions (as a specific case the use
of transition metal species to carry the oxidizing capacity of O 2 to a substrate
such as an organic molecule).
   Both are of the greatest importance in industrial applications, and the latter
also in reaching an understanding of the chemistry of living cells. Because the
subclasses are interrelated, progress in one leads to progress in another.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Many of the co-workers who have contributed to progress in the subject of this
article are cited in the references, and this is an implicit acknowledgment of
their contributions. Because this account is incomplete, others who have contri-
buted directly to this work have not been cited, nor still others who have had
interests that are not reflected in the account I have given. I am grateful to
them all for the help they have given, and for what I have learned in the course
of working with them. The nature of the contributions made by my co-workers
is not evident either from the acknowledgment I have made, nor from my
expression of gratitude. I need to add that I have always relied on the
independence of my co-workers and to a large extent my contribution to the
effort has been that of maintaining continuity.
   I also wish to acknowledge financial support of my research by the agencies
of the U. S. Government, beginning with the Office of Naval Research in about
1950. Later, I derived partial support from the U. S. Atomic Energy Commis-
sion, and still later from the National Science Foundation and the National
Institutes of Health (General Medical Sciences). The Petroleum Research
Fund of the American Chemical Society has also been a source of research
support.


138                                          Chemistry 1983


REFERENCES




      with the specific rates of the component “self exchange” reactions Fe
      Allowance is made in the equation for the effect of driving force on the rate.
 (6) Dodson, R. W., J. Am Chem. Soc. (1950) 72, 3315.
 (7) Silverman, J.; Dodson, R. W., J. Phys, Chem. (1952) 56, 846.
 (8) Lewis, W. B.; Coryell, C. D.; Irvine, S. W., Jr. J. Chem. Soc. (1949) S386.
 (9) The descriptor “inner sphere ” is used for a reaction in which oxidant and reductant metal
      centers are linked through primary bonds to a bridging group. In the early work it was
      assumed that the bridging group would play a special role in the electron transfer reaction. In
      more recent work on intramolecular transfer (vida infra) examples have been found ofsystems
      in which the bridging group seems to serve only to hold the two partners together. “Inner
      sphere” or “outer sphere”?
(10) Holstein, T., J. Phys, Chem. (1956) 56, 832.
(11) Libby, W. F., J. Phys. Chem. (1956) 56, 863.
(12) As a historical note, I wish to add that James Franck was very much interested in electron
      transfer in chemical reactions and fully appreciated the importance of keeping the Franck-
      Condon restriction in mind in trying to understand the observations
(13) Brown, H. C., discussion of the paper of ref. 11, p 868.
(14) Libby, W. F., discussion following the paper of ref. 11, p 866. See also Brown, H. C.,
      discussion following paper of ref. 7, p 852.
(15) Dodson, R. W.; Davidson, N., discussion following the paper of ref. 11, p 866.
(16) Taube, H.; Myers, H.; Rich, R. L., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1953) 7.5, 4118.
(17) Taube, H.; Myers, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1954) 26, 2103.
(18) Taube, H., Chem. Rev. (1952) 50, 69.
(19) The subject of ionic hydration is brought up to date in an article by J. P. Hunt and H. L.
      Friedman, p 359, ref 1.
(20) Bjerrum, J.; Paulsen, K., Nature (1952) 169, 463.
(21) Eigen, M., Faraday Soc. Discussions, (1954) No. 17, p 1.
(22) Bjerrum, J., Z. Physik. Chem. (1907) 59, 336, 581; Z. Anorg. Allgem. Chem. (1921) 119, 179.
(23) Hunt, J. P.; Taube, H., J. Chem, Phys. (1950) 18, 757; ibid (1951) 19, 602.
(24) Meredith, C. W., U. S. Atomic Energy Rept. UCRL-11704 (1965) Berkeley. Work done
      under supervision of R. E. Connick.
(25) Candlin, J. P.; Halpern, J., Inorg. Chem. (1965) 4, 766
(26) Taube, H.; King, E. L., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1954) 76, 4053.
(27) Ball, D. L.; King E. L., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1958) 80, 1091.
(28) Snellgrove, R.; King, E. L., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1962) 84; 8609
(29) Taube, H., J. Am. Soc. (1955) 77, 4481.
(30) Ogard, A. E.; Taube, H. J., Am. Chem. Soc. (1958) 80, 1084.
(31) Gjertsen, L.; Wahl, A. C., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1959) 81, 1572; Sheppard, J. C.; Wahl, A. C.,
      J, Am. Chem. Soc. (1957) 79, 1020.
(32) Sutin, N.; Gordon, B. M., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1961) 83, 70.
(33) Marcus, R. A., Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. (1964), 15, 155; also earlier papers.
(34) Hush, N. S., Trans. Faraday Soc. (1961) 57, 557.
(35) Consider the process:
                                I       II


                                                    H. Taube                                                      139


     State I is the precursor complex; in state II the energy is independent of whether the electron
     is on atom A or B, i. e., the Franck-Condon condition has been met. In adiabatic transfer,
     electron delocalozation is great enough so that whenever state II is reached, electron transfer
     can take place, and the rate of the chemical reaction is determined solely by the rate at which
     state II is reached. In non adiabatic transfer, the system passes through state II a number of
     times before electron transfer occurs, and both the Franck-Condon barrier, and the rate of
     electron transfer in state II are rate determining.
(36) Sutin, N., p 441 of ref. 1.
(37) Orgel, L. E., Rept X e Conseil Inst. Intern, Chem. Solvay (1956) 289.
(38) George, P.; Griffith, J., Enzymes (1959) 1, 347.
(39) Halpern, J.; Orgel, L. E., Discussions Faraday Soc. (1960) 29, 32.
(40) Zwickel, A. M.; Taube. H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1959) 81, 2915.
(41) Halpern, J.; Nakamura, S., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1965) 87, 3002.
(42) Dulz, G.; Sutin, N., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1964) 86, 829.
(43) Connochioli T. J.; Nancolles, G. H.; Sutin, N., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1969) 86, 1453.
(44) Connochioli T. J.; Nancolles, G. H.; Sutin, N., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1964) 86, 459.
(45) Sykes, A. G.; Thorneley, R. N. V., J. Chem. Soc. (1970) A232.
(46) Espenson, J. H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1967) 89, 1276.
(47) Price, H. J.; Taube, H., Inorg. Chem. (1968) 7, 1
(48) Haim, A.; Sutin, N., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1965) 87, 4210.
(49) Fronaeus, S.; Larsson, R., Acta Chem. Scand. (1962) 16, 1447.
(50) Espenson, J. H.; Birk. J. P., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1965) 87, 3280; ibid, (1968) 90, 1153.
(51) Kruse, W.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1960) 82, 526
(52) Toppen, D. L.; Linck, R. G., Inorg. Chem. (1971) 10, 2635.
(53) Basolo, F.; Morris, M. L.; Pearson, R. G., Disc. Faraday Soc. (1960) 29, 80.
(54) Anet, F. A. L.; Leblanc, E., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1957) 79, 2649.
(55) Espenson, J. H.; p. 189 of the volume of ref. 1.
(56) Last in the series. Fraser, R. T. M. and Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1961) 83, 2239
(57) I owe my associates during my first years at Stanford an enormous debt of gratitude for
     helping to set the record straight. Special thanks are due to E. S. Gould, who first uncovered
     discrepancies, and to J. K. Hurst who repeated much of the dubious earlier work.
(58) Nordmeyer, F. R.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1966) 88,4295; ibid (1968) 90, 1162.
(59) The relation between reducibility of the ligands, and their effectiveness in mediating electron
     transfer was developed in an earlier paper. Gould, E. S.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1964)
     86, 1318.
(60) Sebera, D. K.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1961) 83, 1785.
(61) See, for example: Gould E. S., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1972) 94, 4360.
(62) Endicott, J. F.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1962) 84, 4989; ibid (1964) 86, 1686; Inorg.
     Chem. (1965) 4, 437.
(63) Gleu, K.; Breuel, K., Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. (1938) 237, 335.
(64) Gaunder, R.; Taube, H., Inorg. Chem. (1970) 9, 2627.
(65) Anderson, A.; Bonner, N. A., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1954) 76, 3826.
(66) Indirect evidence, which is quite convincing, suggests the outer sphere self exchange rate for
                                   to be ~ 5 x 1 0 M s . M e l v i n , W . S . ; H a i m . A . , I n o r g . C h e m .
                                                  -10 -1 -1



     (1977) 16, 2016.
(67) Meyer, T. J.; Taube, H., Inorg. Chem. (1968) 7, 2369.
(68) Stynes, H. D.; Ibers, J. A., inorg. Chem. (1971) 10, 2304.
(69) Calculations of the barrier associated with inner sphere electron reorganization leave room for
     a non-adiabaticity factor of a few orders of magnitude. See Endicott, J. F.; Krishan, K.;
     Ramasami, T; Rotzinger, F. P., p 141 of ref. 1.
(70) Isied, S. S.; Taube, H., Inorg. Chem. (1976) 15, 3070.
(71) Meyer, T. J.; Taube, H., Inorg. Chem. (1968) 7, 2361.
(72) Harrison, D. E.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1967) 89, 5706.
(73) Robson, R.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1967) 89,6487; French, J.; Taube, H., J. Am.
     Chem. Soc. (1969) 91, 6951, earliest example: Saffir, P., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1960) 82, 13.


140                                        Chemistry 1983


(74) Hoffman, M. Z.; Simic, M., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1972) 94, 1957.
(75) (a) Isied, S. S., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1973) 95, 8198.
      (b) In an earlier effort, Kirk Roberts tried the simple procedure of mixing the Co(III)
      complex with (NH 3) 5R u O H22+ Substitution is too slow relative to intramolecular transfer for
                                     2+
                                             .
      the method to work in these systems.
(76) Fischer, H.; Tom, G. M.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1976) 98, 5512.
(77) Schäffer, L. - work in progress.
(78) Dixon, N. E.; Lawrance, G. A.; Lay, P. A.; Sargeson, A. M., Inorg. Chem. (1983) 22, 846.
(79) Gaswick, D. G.; Haim. A., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1974) 96, 7845.
(80) Haim, A. see p 273 of ref. 1.
(81) Winkler, J. R.; Nocera, D. G.; Yocom, K. M.; Bordignon, E.; Gray, H. B., J. Am. Chem. Soc.
      (1982) 104, 5798.
(82) Isied, S. S.; Worosila, G.; Atherton, S. J., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1982) 104, 7659.
(83) The level of current activity in the field can be gauged by the recent review of the subject of
      mixed valence molecules based on              couples by C. Creutz: see ref. 1, p 1.
(84) Allen, G. C.; Hush, N. S., Prog. Inorg. Chem. (1967) 8, 357.
(85) Hush, N. S., Prog. Inorg. Chem. (1967) 8, 391.
(86) Robin, M. B.; Day, P., Ad. Inorg. Chem. Radiochem (1967) 10, 247.
(87) Creutz, C.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1969) 91, 3988; ibid (1973) 95, 1086.
(88) Cowan, D. 0.; Kaufman, F., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1970) 92, 219.
(89) Ford, P.; Rudd, de F. P.; Gander, R.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1968) 90, 1187.
(90) Mulliken, R. S.; Person, W. B., Molecular Complexes; Wiley, New York (1969) Chapter 2.
(91) Mayoh, B.; Day, P., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1972) 94, 2885; Inorg. Chem. (1974) 13, 2273.
(92) Tom, G. M.; Creutz, C.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1974) 96, 7828.
(93) Sutton, J, E.; Sutton, P. M.; Taube, H., Inorg. Chem. (1979) 18, 1017. Sutton, J. E.; Taube,
     H., Inorg. Chem. (1981) 20, 3125.
(94) Sutin, N., Inorganic Diochemistry, Vol. 2, G. L. Eichhorn, Ed., American Elsevier, N. Y.
     (1973), p611.
(95) Brown, G. M.; Krentzien, H. J.: Abe, M.; Taube, H., Inorg. Chem. (1979) 18, 3374.
(96) Lay, P. A.; Magnuson, R. H.; Taube, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1983) 105, 2507.
(97) Spectroscopic studies by J. Ferguson and co-workers (Australia National University) are in
     progress.
(98) Sheldon, R. A.; Kochi. J., Metal Catalyzed Oxidations of Organic Compounds. Academic
      Press, New York, 1981.
(99) Ford, P.; Wink, D.; Dibenedetto, J., p 213 ofref. 1.
(100) Meyer, T. J., p 389 of ref. 1.
