                              EMIL FISCHER
         Syntheses in the purine and sugar group
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1902


Although I am pleased to accept the honouring invitation of the Royal Swed-
ish Academy of Sciences to report on my work to such a select audience, yet
I cannot suppress certain misgivings as to the form and theme of my lec-
ture; in its practical achievements my science, chemistry, is indubitably very
popular, but is anything but popular in its methods, abstractions and language.
I must therefore ask you to accept what I have to offer with the kind for-
bearance which this hospitable country willingly grants every foreigner.
   The abundance of substances of which animals and plants are composed,
the remarkable processes whereby they are formed and then broken down
again have claimed the attention of mankind of old, and hence from the
early days they also persistently captivated the interest of chemists. Yet note-
worthy successes were not achieved by science in this most difficult field un-
til the 18th century when men like Sigismund Marggraf in Berlin, Lavoisier
in Paris and this country’s great son, Carl Wilhelm Scheele studied it. But
even then the study of those substances seemed so difficult and necessitated
such unusual methods that it was resolved at the beginning of the 19th
century to separate it altogether from mineral chemistry and carry it on as a
special branch of our science.
   Strange to relate, organic chemistry, as the new discipline was termed, did
not remain for long within its original terms of reference. It found the ex-
ploration of new avenues more worthwhile. It replaced the animal and vege-
table substances by many artificial products such as the hydrocarbons and
cyano compounds, wood tar and coal tar, wood alcohol, etc. and by pressing
into its service the synthetic methods of inorganic chemistry it appropriated
the fundamental problems of our science at the same time.
   Wöhler’s famous synthesis of urea in 1828 was the starting-point for the
glorious evolution which for many decennia gave organic chemistry a
leading part in the development of chemical theories.
   But this era seems to be drawing to a close. The almost obvious view that
the one-sided study of carbon compounds cannot suffice to elucidate the na-
ture of chemical processes in all its aspects has again won some measure of ac-


22                              1902 E.FISCHER

ceptance, and general chemistry, in closer association with physics, has been
diverted back into the paths which it was following at the beginning of the
19th century under the guidance of Berzelius, Gay-Lussac and Davy.
   A necessary consequence of this reorientation must be the reversion of
organic chemistry to the great problems of biology.
   I shall attempt to explain to you with the aid of two examples, the purines
and the carbohydrates, what organic chemistry is capable of as the loyal ally
of physiology with refined methods of analysis and synthesis.
   Currently the name "purines" is a generic term for a large class of nitro-
genous organic compounds, some being certain animal excretions and others
the active constituents of important stimulating beverages.
   The oldest member of the group is known by the rather unattractive name
of uric acid and was discovered in this country 126 years ago simultaneously
by Scheele and his famous friend Torbern Bergman as a constituent of uri-
nary calculus and urine. To the physician it is familiar as the cause of painful
afflictions, e.g. gout. It appeals to zoologists as the main excrement of snakes
and as the reservematerial of insects. And finally the enlightened farmer knows
it to be a valuable constituent of guano.
    Its chemical history is particularly rich because it was involved in the
famous studies by Liebig and Wöhler, by A. Strecker and by A. von Baeyer
without its chemical nature being ultimately determined.
    Rather closely related to uric acid in composition and external characteris-
tics are four other substances occurring in the bodies of animals, xanthine,
hypoxanthine, adenine and guanine, the first three of which were discovered
in the muscular substance and the last in guano. Thanks to the progress of
physiological chemistry we now know that these four substances are impor-
tant constituents of the cell nucleus and therefore have great biological signif-
 icance.
    These animal products are joined by three substances from the vegetable
 kingdom, caffeine, theobromine and theophylline. As the name immediately
 suggests, the first is contained in coffee but occurs also and even in larger
 amounts in tea and constitutes the pleasant stimulating principle of these two
 staple stimulating beverages. Theobromine has the same effect in cocoa.
 Both substances are also valuable medicines because they promote heart ac-
 tion and diuresis. They are hence factory-produced in appreciable quantities
 by the extraction of tea and cocoa.
     It was long suspected that all these substances were chemically related to
 each other and also to uric acid but it could not be proved prior to the syste-


         SYNTHESES IN THE PURINE AND SUGAR GROUP                           23




matic, i.e. synthetic, treatment of the entire group which we shall now con-
sider.
   To this end I would ask you to glance at the accompanying set of formulae,
structural formulae as they are termed which may be elucidated as follows:
   All theoretical considerations of chemistry are nowadays based on the
concept of atoms which aggregate to form smaller or larger complexes, so-
called molecules. Molecules are imagined to be constructed rather like a
building with the atoms acting as bricks. This molecular building is referred
to as its structure and the individual cases are depicted by such formulae. In
the formulae the atoms are designated by the letters C for carbon, H for


24                               1902 E-FISCHER

hydrogen, N for nitrogen and O for oxygen. The lines between them are
intended to show how these atoms are interlinked to form the complete
molecule.
   It will readily be seen on comparing these formulae that they contain a
common atomic group, a nucleus as it is called and which I have termed the
purine nucleus. It consists of five carbon atoms and four nitrogen atoms so ar-
ranged that two cyclic groups with two common atoms are formed as
shown by the following diagram:




The simplest combination of this skeleton is the hydrogen compound
purine, which is therefore considered to be the fundamental form of the class
and is as it were the parent from which all the other members can be derived.
The addition of an oxygen atom to purine yields hypoxanthine, a second
oxygen atom gives xanthine, and a third produces uric acid which is conse-
quently also known by the rational name of trioxypurine.
   Replacing a hydrogen atom in purine by the amide NH, forms adenine,
and if a further oxygen atom is added, the result is guanine. Lastly, the ni-
trogen atoms in vegetable products are also linked with the CH 3 or methyl
group.
   To determine the structure of the molecule the chemist proceeds in a
similar way to the anatomist. By chemical actions he breaks the system down
into its components and continues with this division until familiar substances
emerge. Where this decomposition has taken different directions, the struc-
ture of the original system can be inferred from the decomposition products.
 Usually, however, the structure will only be finally elucidated by the reverse
method, by building up the molecule from the decomposition products or
similar substances, i.e. by what is termed synthesis. The most varied analyses
and syntheses have been carried out on the members of the purine group.
Consequently transitions abound between all these compounds and in par-
ticular it has become possible to synthesize them all from the inexpensive
uric acid.
   In the focus of these syntheses is trichloropurine. It is formed from uric
acid by the action of phosphorus chloride which detaches the three oxygen


           SYNTHESES IN THE PURINE AND SUGAR GROUP                             25
atoms by means of three hydrogen atoms and replaces them by chlorine.
The three chlorine atoms which it contains are very mobile and can hence be
replaced in the most versatile ways by hydrogen, oxygen, and groups con-
taining nitrogen or sulphur, thus forming not only the natural compounds
referred to here but a far greater number of related synthetic substances. Such
is the privilege of organic synthesis; where it is successful in penetrating such
a field it far surpasses narrowly restricted Nature, a fact strikingly exemplified
by the purine group. So far twelve naturally occurring members are known
and perhaps this number will increase as a result of the progressive study of
vegetable and animal substances. Nevertheless it is very unlikely that more
than double that number will ever be found in Nature. In contrast, synthesis
has so far produced no less than 146 members of this group and the methods
applied would readily enable twice or three times that number to be syn-
thesized.
   For the moment, however, such mere multiplication of the forms would
only be of secondary importance. It is more worth while at any rate to utilize
for other higher purposes the results available so far.
   Among the purine substances there are two valued drugs, caffeine and
theobromine, which so far had to be prepared by extraction from tea and
cocoa. Their production is not altogether insignificant for their value may be
estimated at more than one million marks a year. Now that these drugs can
be made synthetically from inexpensive uric acid the mind readily turns to
exploiting the synthesis on an industrial scale: it is no secret that several fac-
tories in Germany are seriously tackling the problem. Synthetic theophylline
has already appeared on the market and I have no doubt that synthetic
theobromine and caffeine will very soon follow. But further discussion
 would scarcely be worthwhile if all that mattered were to lower the price
 of certain drugs. When it is considered that caffeine is the most active constit-
 uent of the two most widespread stimulants, coffee and tea, the matter
 takes on quite a different complexion. It is common knowledge that for a
long time efforts have been made to replace those still rather costly substan-
 ces by cheaper ones. The clearest proof is the large number of coffee substi-
 tutes which appear on the market. Nevertheless all these substitutes lack the
 best feature of coffee and tea, i.e. the pleasant stimulating effect that origi-
 nates from the caffeine content. This shortcoming could readily be overcome
 by the addition of synthetic caffeine as soon as it has become cheap enough,
 and when once this step has been taken, an improvement in the taste and
 aroma of those substitutes will not fail to follow. It is even possible to pro-


26                              1902 E. FISCHER

 duce the true aroma of coffee or tea artificially, too, by synthesis; with the
 exercise of a little imagination the day can be foreseen when beans will no
longer be required to make good coffee: a small amount of powder from a
 chemical works together with water will provide a savoury, refreshing
drink surprisingly cheaply. The layman usually receives with scepticism such
prophecies by the chemist and in this specific instance his scepticism will not
be weakened by the knowledge that a constituent of guano would be used
to prepare the synthetic drink.
   In our age, however, such prejudices on the part of the public do not nor-
mally persist for very long. Who, nowadays, still considers that the magnifi-
cent dyes colouring our garments and furnishings are derived from un-
sightly coal tar, or that sweet-tasting saccharin is prepared from the same
material ? The point is that chemical transformations are so thorough that
the end-product retains nothing at all of the properties of the original sub-
stance. The manufacture of caffeine from uric acid is therefore nothing worse
than the processes which occur when manure used to nourish plants is con-
verted into appetizing fruits or into wonderfully scented flowers.
   Physiology has been ahead of industry in exploiting the chemical elucida-
tion of the purine group. As mentioned earlier, xanthine, hypoxanthine,
adenine and guanine are constituents of the cell nucleus which, in the morph-
ological sense, is undoubtedly the most important part of the living cell.
Consequently they belong to that group of chemical substances with which
the vital functions are directly associated. The knowledge of their chemical
constitution and of their transformation into one another will make it easier
for physiological research to follow their creation and utilization in the cell
and even now it has been possible to demonstrate experimentally that they
are an important source for the formation of uric acid in the organism. In
addition this immediately provides a fresh viewpoint for practical medicine
in that where patients with a tendency to uric acid diathesis have to be cured
by an appropriate diet, substances rich in purines will in future have to be
avoided in the choice of foods. Many further and similar conclusions can be
inferred from the chemical elucidation of the purines and in all probability
will greatly benefit biological research.
   Although for the chemical economy of the cell the purines are qualitatively
very valuable, they are quantitatively not very important. In this respect they
come far behind the second class of organic compounds which I intend dis-
cussing today, i.e. the carbohydrates. Not only are these the first organic
products formed in plants from the carbon dioxide in the air but in abund-


         SYNTHESES IN THE PURINE AND SUGAR GROUP                            27
ance, too, they surpass all substances that are current in the living world.
Their study also dates back to the early beginnings of organic chemistry and
has persistently been conducted with such lively enthusiasm that the present
state of knowledge in this group may even be used as a yardstick for the disci-
pline as a whole. Nevertheless more than a century elapsed from the elucida-
tion of their elementary composition by Lavoisier before science prepared
them by artificial means. The reason for this slow progress lies firstly in the
peculiar difficulties which those substances pose for experimental treatment,
and secondly in their great profusion of forms which also necessitates a rather
complex systematology. A distinction is made between two classes of carbo-
hydrates in particular, the monosaccharides and the polysaccharides. Grape
sugar, found in grapes and in other sweet-tasting fruit, may serve as an in-
stance of the former. Starch, the main constituent of all vegetable nutriment,
and cellulose, the main constituent of wood or of the other solid frame-
works of plants, can be quoted as polysaccharides.
   By a process termed hydrolysis all polysaccharides can be converted into
the simpler monosaccharides. Both starch and cellulose hydrolyse to form
grape sugar. With starch, for example, hydrolysis comes about under the
action of the gastric and intestinal juices when vegetable food is consumed.
A more potent chemical treatment is required to effect the same conversion
with cellulose. This substance is best hydrolysed by strong sulphuric acid and
yields the reputed wood sugar which, it is not infrequently claimed inpop-
ular lectures, would one day solve the subsistence problem.
   Conversely monosaccharides can be transformed into the more complex
poly-compounds by a process termed dehydratation.
   Some 50 monosaccharides are at present known, ten of them occurring in
Nature. The others, as you will soon see, were prepared artificially and the
methods applied would be sufficient to produce hundreds more such sub-
stances. Since all these products are able to combine in bewildering variety
and varying quantitative ratios to form polysaccharides, it will readily be
appreciated what a plethora of forms there are.
   Before the synthesis of this class of substances had been mastered, six
monosaccharides, commonly termed sugars, had been found in the animal
and vegetable kingdoms and their structure, too, had been elucidated with a
sufficient degree of accuracy by decomposition of the molecule. The first in
practical importance and in chronological sequence was grape sugar which
has already been referred to and which is known by the scientific name of
glucose. The insider will at once appreciate from the structural formula that


28                             1902 E. FISCHER

in addition to a chain of six carbon atoms it contains five alcohol groups and
one aldehyde group, and that hence it is the aldehyde of a hexavalent alco-
hol. Surprisingly the same structural formula is also valid for various other




sugars, e.g. galactose. This phenomenon will be explained later. While
these two important sugars contain six carbon atoms, two others are found in
Nature which contain only five carbon atoms, i.e. arabinose and xylose.
   Their structure is quite similar to that of grape sugar except that the car-
bon atom at the bottom with its attached hydrogen and oxygen atoms is
missing.
   As is reasonable to expect in view of the importance of the problem there
has in the past been no lack of attempts to synthesize these compounds. But
success remained extremely scant, for only a single one of the many artificial
products reported in the older chemical literature and regarded as sugar-like
substances has stood the critical test of modern methods of examination.
And that is the sweet syrup which the Russian chemist Butlerov obtained 40
years ago from formaldehyde − nowadays more widely known as a disinfec-
tant − by the action of lime water. Yet, as shown by more detailed study, this
product, too, is a complex mixture and contains only a tiny amount of a
substance, closely related to grape sugar, which will shortly be discussed. The
route chosen by Butlerov thus did not lead directly to its ultimate goal : suc-
cess had to be sought under simpler conditions, and those I found in the rela-
tionships of grape sugar to glycerol. Outwardly the similarity is already ap-
parent from the sweet taste which they have in common. Chemically the
relationship is not quite so great, as glycerol has only three carbon atoms,
i.e. half as many as sugar. Neither does it contain an aldehyde group, but it
is a polyvalent alcohol. Consequently, by reason of analogy, there were
grounds to expect that it would be converted, by gentle oxidation, into an


         SYNTHESES IN THE PURINE AND SUGAR GROUP                               29
aldehyde, which should correspond in some way to natural sugar. Experi-
ment bore out this expectation. Under the action of dilute nitric acid, glyc-
erol does indeed change into a product exhibiting the typical properties of
the sugars. To indicate this similarity as well as the origin of the substance, it
was called glycerose.
   Here you will realize, ladies and gentlemen, the central position occupied
by glycerol in organic chemistry. Discovered by your countryman, Scheele,
140 years ago as a constituent of fat, glycerol, as you will soon see has be-
come the gate through which synthesis gained access to the natural sugars.
And how wonderful are the changes of this sweet liquid! Under the action
of strong nitric acid it yields the terrible explosive nitroglycerin which,
through Dr. Nobel’s brilliant technical utilization of it, has become the pow-
erful aid to human work. Conversely, under the action of dilute nitric acid it
changes into the new sugar-like substance just mentioned.
   However, glycerose still differs strongly in its composition from the nat-
ural sugars, for it contains only half as much carbon and many conservative
chemists therefore had their misgivings at first about assigning it to the sugar
group. But this expulsion was short-lived, for glycerose soon provided a
new, and this time unassailable, proof for its close relationship with the old
sugars, i.e. under the action of dilute alkali it undergoes a change which we
term polymerization in conformity with Berzelius’ proposition. Two mole-
cules combine to form a single system and the new product, which has been
given the name acrose, is a sugar with six carbon atoms and maximum simi-
larity to the natural substances. It lacks only one property of the latter, i.e.
the capacity to rotate polarized light, but a small modification was sufficient
to add even this quality and convert the synthetic product freely into grape
sugar or the related natural substances.
   The total synthesis of the latter has thus been achieved although at first
only in a roundabout way via glycerol. Nevertheless it was not long before
the process was shortened, for acrose was also found in the above-mentioned
sweet syrup formed from formaldehyde in accordance with Butlerov’s ob-
servation, and now, starting from the simplest materials of organic chemistry
or even from inorganic carbon dioxide, it is possible to form the most im-
portant natural sugars via readily comprehensible operations.
   On the basis thus acquired, synthesis proceeds further still to synthetic
sugars with a higher carbon content in the following manner:
   As demonstrated by Kiliani, natural sugars are capable, via their aldehyde
group, of fixing hydrocyanic acid which was discovered by Scheele, and -


30                                               R                                   1902   E.FISCHE

oh, wonder of wonders ! − from the sweet substance and the violent poison a
new, harmless substance is formed which has the property of the fruit acids,
e.g. tartaric acid. On further treatment with suitable reducing agents it loses
oxygen and changes into a new sugar containing one carbon atom more
than the starting material. The same procedure can then be repeated and
again leads to a new, still higher member of the group. In this way I have
already successfully synthesized sugars with up to nine carbon atoms, and
with time, trouble and money to spare it will be possible for someone to
climb a further few rungs up this ladder.
   The upward expansion of the group inevitably awakened the desire to
find the simplest members too. According to the new hypothesis there
should exist below glycerose a further sugar with two carbon atoms, the
aldehyde of glycol. This product, too, could be prepared by simple, syn-
thetic processes, and its properties leave no doubt that it is the simplest of the
monosaccharides. In particular it is polymerized by dilute alkali in the same
way as glycerose, when it yields the last missing sugar with four carbon
atoms.
   The series is now complete from the simplest to the ninth member, and
chemical parlance must adapt itself to the expanded factual knowledge.
   In conformity with a proven principle of our nomenclature the sugars are
now described according to their carbon content by the Greek numerals to
which is added the conventional sufffix "ose". Pentose, heptose, and nonose,
which are now part of the accepted word stock, were formed in this way and
the old sugars appear in modern nomenclature as hexoses.
   Earlier only fleeting attention was paid to the observation that grape sugar
and galactose, which differ considerably from one another in their external
characteristics, have the same structure. The older theory had no explanation
for this type of isomerism. The chemists of the day contented themselves
with calling such substances physically isomeric, and this discrepancy was
not accounted for until the molecule was studied in spatial terms. As a result,
the further study of the sugars is linked very closely to the development of
so-called stereochemistry, a branch of chemistry originating particularly
from the study of those substances which, like the sugars, rotate the plane of
polarized light. Its first beginnings are to be found in L. Pasteur’s celebrated
studies of tartaric acids. Natural tartaric acid is contained in wine and rotates
polarized light to the right. Pasteur found its optical opposite, i.e. laevo-tar-
taric acid, and his speculative mind successfully attributed the cause of this
rotation to the asymmetrical structure of the molecule. He compared the two


         SYNTHESES IN THE PURINE AND SUGAR GROUP                              31
acids with the right and the left hands or, tantamount to the same analogy,
with an object and its mirror image.
   It was only after organic chemistry had made the important advance con-
stituted by the structural theory that this geometrical concept yielded results
for our science when in 1874, simultaneously and independently of each
other, Le Bel and Van’t Hoff attributed the asymmetry of the molecule to the
individual carbon atom.
   Nowadays numerous observations from the most varied fields of organic
chemistry, but most especially the experimental knowledge of the sugar
group, testify to the correctness of their hypothesis.
   In the sugar molecule several such asymmetrical carbon atoms, i.e. linked
with four different substances, are present in quite large numbers. The hex-
oses, to which grape sugar belongs, contain not less than four, and here the
conclusions of the theory relating to the number of isomers are particularly
interesting. Since each individual asymmetric carbon atom gives rise to a
dextro and a laevo form, calculation shows that not less than sixteen geomet-
rically different substances with the structure of grape sugar must exist. This
hence afforded an excellent opportunity to compare broadly the results of
speculation with reality. The outcome has been a complete triumph for the
theory. Of the sixteen predicted forms no less than twelve are nowadays
known, constituting six optical pairs, and the four still missing members will
indubitably be obtained by means of the same experimental methods.
   In the light of the theory it has also been possible to derive from the actual
observations the geometrical structure or, as it is commonly termed, the
configuration, of the molecule for the individual members of this group, and
a small modification of the customary structural formulae has been found a
convenient form of representing these results of stereochemical research.
   Below are shown the modern formulae for the configurations of the
twelve known hexoses and of the four isomers still to be found. The four
asymmetrical carbon atoms have been left out and are only intimated in the
points of intersection between the vertical line and the four horizontal lines.
The position of the letters H and OH which signify hydrogen and hydroxyl,
then gives an idea of the geometrical arrangement at each asymmetrical
carbon atom. To the insider these formulae reveal with the conciseness and,
one may say, with the precision of a mathematical expression, the actually
examined relationships between the substances, and furthermore they allow
him to foresee a long series of modifications which in all probability are
confirmed by later observations. As similar formlae are known for the pen-


32                           1902 E. FISCHER

                                    Aldohexoses
                                 (a) Mannitol series :
      COH              COH                                 COH          COH




      CH2OH            CH2OH                                 CH2OH      CH,OH
 l-Mannose         d-Mannose                             l-Glucose   d-Glucose


      COH              COH                                 COH          COH




        CH2OH            CH2OH                               CH2OH      CH2OH
     l-Idose         d-Idose                             l-Gulose    d-Gulose

                                 (b) Ddcitol series :
      COH              COH                                 COH          COH




      CH2OH             CH2OH                                CH2OH       CH2OH
 l-Galactose       d-Galactose                           l-Talose    d-Talose

      COH              COH                                 COH          COH




      CH2OH            CH2OH                                CH2OH       CH2OH



toses and tetroses, it may be claimed that for the time being the systematol-
ogy of the monosaccharides has been concluded with these results.
   In the meantime synthesis in this field has turned to new problems. Of the
simple derivatives of grape sugar the physiologist is best acquainted with
glucuronic acid since the animal organism uses it to neutralize poisonous sub-
stances, such as phenol, chloral and turpentine. Its configuration, its rela-
tionship to grape sugar and its conjectural formation in the animal stomach
can readily be elucidated synthetically. Glucosamine, a peculiar nitrogenous


         SYNTHESES IN THE PURINE AND SUGAR GROUP                              33
substance first derived from lobster shells but which is now known to be
widespread throughout the animal kingdom, proved more difficult. Its
synthesis, which I successfully accomplished only in recent weeks, showed it
to be an intermediate between grape sugar and the cc-amino acids, so provid-
ing one of the longest sought-for bridges between the carbohydrates and
the proteins.
   Of more general interest are also the results relating to the glucosides, sub-
stances which occur widely in the vegetable kingdom and which may be
regarded as compounds of the sugars with various other substances. Suitable
examples are amygdalin, a constituent of bitter almonds, or salicin, formerly
used medicinally as an antipyretic. Until 1879 its preparation was also one
of Nature’s privileges. In that year the American chemist, Michael, success-
fully synthesized a few of them but his process was restricted to a small
number and moreover was so laborious that it has since only rarely been
used.
   These difficulties have now fortunately been overcome by a new process
of synthesis in which sugar is combined with alcohol or similar substances
by the simple action of dilute hydrochloric acid. Since then glucosides of
alcohol, of wood alcohol, of glycerol, and of lactic acid have become known
in abundance and their study led to the surprising realization that there is no
fundamental difference between the glucosides and the polysaccharides, the
latter being nothing other than the glucosides of the sugars themselves. This
fact is indicated not only by their behaviour on hydrolysis by acids or fer-
ments, but even more strongly by the result of synthesis: by applying the
same methods which yield glucosides it has also been possible to prepare
dextrin-type substances, and recently in particular a series of synthetic di-
saccharides, one of which appears to be identical with natural melibiose. How-
ever scanty these achievements may appear compared with the profusion of
polysaccharides, they are nevertheless adequate to prove in principle the
possibility of synthesis. For all that there is still a long way to go before the
most important polysaccharides, starch and cellulose, can be synthetically
prepared; easier, more perfect methods will have to be sought to accomplish
those syntheses. But even now we can be perfectly confident that the
problem is not an impossibility.
   The extreme limits of synthesis have been reached and it only remains for
me to illustrate with the aid of a few examples how the knowledge that has
been accumulated can be applied to solving biological problems.
   Of the chemical aids in the living organism the ferments - mostly referred


34                              1902 E.FISCHER

 to nowadays as enzymes - are so pre-eminent that they may justifiably be
 claimed to be involved in most of the chemical transformations in the living
 cell. The examination of the synthetic glucosides has shown that the action
 of the enzymes depends to a large extent on the geometrical structure of the
 molecule to be attacked, that the two must match like lock and key. Conse-
 quently, with their aid, the organism is capable of performing highly specific
 chemical transformations which can never be accomplished with the cus-
 tomary agents. To equal Nature here, the same means have to be applied,
 and I therefore foresee the day when physiological chemistry will not only
 make extensive use of the natural enzymes as agents, but when it will also
 prepare synthetic ferments for its purposes.
    The application of the new knowledge to the superb natural process
 without which the living world could not exist, i.e. the assimilation of
 carbon dioxide from the atmosphere by plants, seems even more interesting.
 This leads as we know to the formation of sugar, Nature’s first organo-
 chemical product, from which all other constituents of the plant and animal
 body are formed. As mentioned earlier this transformation can also be ac-
 complished with purely chemical resources, although only in a very round-
about way. But there still remains one distinction between the natural and
the artificial synthesis. Above all, the latter invariably yields a mixture of
dextro- and laevo-rotatory sugars which must first be separated by special
operations. Nature, in contrast, produces exclusively the dextro sugar. For-
merly this contrast seemed so wonderful that the direct preparation of op-
tically active substances was regarded quite simply as the privilege of the
living organism. The experimental knowledge gained with the sugar group
has provided a simple explanation for that biological phenomenon, how-
ever, and in the light of the new conception it does not appear at all impos-
sible to reproduce that asymmetrical synthesis artificially in the same way as
it occurs in the natural formation of sugars.
   And so, progressively, the veil behind which Nature has so carefully con-
cealed her secrets is being lifted where the carbohydrates are concerned.
Nevertheless, the chemical enigma of Life will not be solved until organic
chemistry has mastered another, even more difficult subject, the proteins, in
the same way as it has mastered the carbohydrates. It is hence understandable
that the organic and physiological chemists are increasingly turning their at-
tention to it and I, too, have been concerned with it for a number of years.
It is true that on this hard ground the fruit ripens far more slowly and the
total amount of work that has to be done here is so enormous that in contrast


         SYNTHESES IN THE PURINE AND SUGAR GROUP                            35
the elucidation of the carbohydrates seems child’s play. As against that, how-
ever, better methods and a far richer stock of resources are now available,
added to which the prize beckoning at the end attracts quite a number of
competitors. That is not without its implications for the success of research,
since mass production methods which dominate modern economic life have
also penetrated experimental science. The days have long since gone when
one man such as Berzelius could have a command of, and promote, all
branches of chemistry. The circle within which the individual research
worker, especially as an experimenter, can distinguish himself is continually
shrinking in size. Consequently the progress of science today is not so much
determined by brilliant achievements of individual workers, but rather by
the planned collaboration of many observers.
   Imbued with this conviction, gentlemen of the "Vetenskapsakademien",
I feel that the high distinction which you are conferring on me applies less to
my person than to the branch of science which I represent. As you honoured
last year the great strides made by general chemistry, so this year you have
sought to honour the achievements of organic chemistry, a sentiment quite
in keeping with the long-standing pursuit of our science in this country.
True to Berzelius’ great tradition your Academy has fostered all branches of
chemistry with the same measure of affection and with a success apt to make
many other civilized peoples jealous of Sweden. To be allowed to report on
my studies before such a competent body of scientists, is such a great honour
that I request you to accept my warmest gratitude in return.
