                         HE R M A N N S T A U D I N G E R


                   Macromolecular chemistry
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1953



Macromolecular chemistry is the youngest branch of organic chemistry and
as such has experienced the honour of the award of the Nobel Prize for
Chemistry. I sincerely hope that this great distinction will be the means
whereby macromolecular chemistry will undergo further fruiful devel-
opment.
   Some few months after I had the opportunity of speaking in this audito-
rium on the development of macromolecular chemistry into a new branch
of organic chemistry at the International Congress for Pure and Applied
Chemistry 1, it is today my duty to describe to you the characteristic features
of macromolecular chemistry and demonstrate the new features which it
introduces into organic chemistry.
   The macromolecular compounds include the most important substances
occurring in nature such as proteins, enzymes, the nucleic acids, besides the
polysaccharides such as cellulose, starch and pectins, as well as rubber, and
lastly the large number of new, fully synthetic plastics and artificial fibres.
Macromolecular chemistry is very important both for technology and for
biology.
   In common with all organic compounds, the structure of the organic
macromolecular compounds (inorganic macromolecular compounds are
not discussed in the following) involves in addition to carbon atoms, chiefly
 hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen atoms which in accordance with the laws
 of Kekulé’s structural theory are bound by chief valences2. The only dif-
ference between macromolecules and the small molecules of low molecular
 substances is one of structural size. If it is desired to lay down a boundary
 between macromolecular and low molecular compounds - there are of
 course transitions linking the two groups - the substances with a molecular
 weight greater than ten thousand, i.e. the molecules of which consist of one
 thousand and more atoms, may be classified as macromolecular. Beyond
 roughly this size, characteristic macromolecular properties occur. So far no
 upper limits can be given for the size of the macromolecules. Macromolec-
 ular compounds with a molecular weight of several millions are known,


398                           1953 H.STAUDINGER

i.e. compounds in which one million and more atoms form the macro-
molecules in the manner prescribed by Kekulé’s structural theory.
   In recent decennia the field of macromolecular chemistry has been the
scene of very intensive scientific and technical activity. I personally have
been concerned3 with macromolecular chemistry since 1920 initially at the
Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich. Since my move to the chemical
laboratory in Freiburg University I have devoted myself entirely to extend-
ing this field which, since my retirement, has been further studied in a special
research institute in Freiburg.
   In this work I have been assisted by a number of first-class colleagues who
have published valuable research on this field. Here I should like to mention
 the oldest of them, Signer4, now in Bern, whose support during the discus-
sions on the structure of these compounds in the 1920’s was very valuable
 and who introduced the flow birefringence method for studying the particle
shape of macromolecular substances. In addition Schulz, now in Mainz,
extended the physico-chemical studies in the last two decennia, especially
 the molecular weight determination of macromolecular substancess. He also
worked on the kinetics involved in the formation of macromolecular sub-
stances 6 . Kern 7, now in Mainz, studied the behaviour of polyelectrolytes.
Husemann 8, Freiburg i. Br., studied polysaccharides, i.e. starch, wood poly-
saccharides and, in conjunction with Schulz, the fine structure of cellulose9.
Kohlschütter 10, now in Darmstadt, investigated topochemical reactions
using polyoxymethylenes. Batzer 11 has in recent years successfully continued
Carothers’ work on polyesters. Hengstenberg18, Sauter13 and Plötzer14 car-
ried out X-ray studies at different periods. Staudinger (M.)15 conducted
morphological studies of macromolecular substances, and introduced light,
ultraviolet and electron microscopy - and for some time now, phase contrast
microscopy as well - into macromolecular chemistry. In addition, over the
last 25 years in which almost 400 publications have appeared, she has collab-
orated in these and a series of books. She is the originator in particular of
new considerations in respect of the relations between macromolecular
chemistry and biology16.
   I cannot mention here the names of all the individual assistants and grad-
uate students but today I remember with gratitude the assistance of all those
colleagues who have participated in expanding this field.
   Since, as I explained, macromolecular compounds are built up according
to the laws of Kekulé’s structural theory in exactly the same manner as the
low-molecular organic compounds, i.e. they are genuine organic com-


                       MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                                      399
pounds but with particularly large molecules, the question arises whether
there is any need at all to classify macromolecular chemistry as a new field
of organic chemistry. It has been found, however, that owing to the size
of the macromolecules, a whole series of new problems do actually arise
here so that in many respects macromolecular chemistry differs substantially
from low molecular chemistry.
   Even the classification of the macromolecular compounds is based on
other criteria than in low molecular chemistry: the naturally occurring
macromolecular substances are conveniently treated separately from the
fully synthetic compounds (Table 1).

                Table I. Classification of macromolecular substances.

I. Substances occurring in nature
      1. Hydrocarbons - rubber, guttapercha, balata.
      2. Polysaccharides - celluloses, starches, glycogens, mannans, pectins, polyuronic
          acids, chitines.
      3. Polynucleotides (nucleic acids).
      4. Proteins and enzymes.
       5. Lignins and tans (transition from low- to macromolecular substances).
II. Cowersion products of natural substances
      Vulcanized rubber, rayon, cellophane, cellulose nitrate, leather, lanital, galalith,
      etc.
III. Synthetic materials
      Plastics (polyplastics) formed by
         polymerization - buna, polystyrene, poiymethacrylic ester.
         polycondensation - bakelite, nylon, Perlon, Terylene.
         polyaddition - polyurethane.


For the low molecular compounds such a division is unnecessary and irrel-
evant; the low molecular substances occurring in nature can largely be
manufactured synthetically and these synthetic compounds are indistin-
guishable from the natural products. The situation is otherwise for the ma-
cromolecular compounds. It has so far proved impossible to build a macro-
molecular natural substance by a clear, stepwise synthesis from low molecular
compounds. Thus synthetic polyisoprene is not identical with, say, natural
rubber but has an essentially different constitution and hence other physical
properties as well. In deriving macromolecular natural substances from veg-
etable and animal material the original macromolecules are in many cases
modified to a greater or lesser extent by isolation and purification, and thus


400                          1953 H.STAUDINGER

the macromolecules examined are not the same as those formed by Nature.
Problems of this type prevail for instance in the production of cellulose,
starch, and many proteins. Low molecular products on the contrary can be
isolated from natural products without modification. It is furthermore pos-
sible that Nature creates macromolecules of uniform size but positive proof
of this fact has so far been found only in a few cases. In 1926 for example
Svedberg I7 made the astounding discovery that a number of respiratory
proteins are monodisperse, i.e. that they are composed of uniformly large
macromolecules. Recently a whole series of enzymes and hormone proteins
have been crystallized so that here too the occurrence of natural products
with uniformly large macromolecules is very probable18.
   Against that the technically manufactured transformation products of nat-
ural macromolecular substances which can be termed semi-synthetic prod-
ucts are invariably polymolecular mixtures since the original macromol-
ecules are broken down to a greater or lesser extent during processing. In
all fully synthetic products, i.e. in plastics and fibres, there are also insep-
arable mixtures of polymer homologues. It is thus impossible to prepare
completely uniform products by synthesis as was formerly considered nec-
essary by the organic chemist to elucidate the constitution of organic com-
pounds.
   Macromolecular products are created in various ways. The first to deserve
mention is polymerization, constituting a particular chain reaction such as
is unknown in low molecular chemistry19 (Formula 1). Owing to the

                     Formula I.   Polymerization of styrene.


                    MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                             401
technical importance of the polymerisates, e.g. polystyrenes, polymetha-
crylic esters and polyvinyl chlorides, this reaction has been studied very
thoroughly with reference to the kinetics and the influence of catalysts on
the course of the polymerization20.
   In addition, macromolecular substances can be produced by polyconden-
sation, a process which has long been known to technology and the one
whereby Baekeland secured the phenoplasts which are of unusual technical
importance. This field was then further studied by Carothers21 and led to
such technically valuable products as nylon (Formula 2).


                          Formula 2.   Polyamides.




A further technique to produce macromolecular compounds evolved by
O. Bayer is polyaddition with diisocyanates (Formula 3).


                         Formula 3.    Polyurethanes.




In the most favourable case therefore, in the manufacture of fully synthetic
products, uniform polymeric compounds are formed, i.e. mixtures of fil-
amentary molecules of equal constitution but different length. Very recently,
research conducted by Melville23 and others showed that polymerization
processes are frequently more complex than had formerly been assumed so
that the resultant products are mixtures of polymer isomers.
   Since most natural macromolecular substances as studied are polymolec-
ular mixtures in common with all synthetic macromolecular substances, a


402                           1953 H.STAUDINGER

macromolecular substance must be identified by different criteria than a pure
low molecular substance. Ostwald (Wi.)24, in his Analytical Chemistry, has
pointed out that the task of the analytical chemist is facilitated by the fact
that the agreement of just a few properties of two substances is sufficient
for regarding them as identical. This principle applies only for low molecular
compounds in which, owing to the small size of the molecules or ions,
relatively large differences in the properties occur, i.e. they differ abruptly
from one compound to another. The situation is different for macromo-
lecular compounds; a plastic such as, say, a polystyrene can be consistent with
another polystyrene in a number of essential properties and still differ in
composition. It is moreover also impossible to characterize and identify
macromolecular substances by the melting point and by the mixed melting-
point test, a technique which has contributed greatly to the rapid successes
in the identification of natural substances in low molecular chemistry.
   Initially identifying the constitution of macromolecular compounds seem-
ed to be further complicated by the fact that they do not yield normal mono-
disperse solutions but that - if they dissolve at all - they mostly form poly-
 disperse, colloidal solutions. The procedure for elucidating the constitution
of organic compounds can again be referred to here: It consists in dissolving
the particular compound after elementary analysis and then determining the
size and finally the intrinsic structure of the dissolved particles by further
studies. With completely insoluble substances occurring as a single aggregate
only 25, details of the type of bond in the smaller groups in their molecules
can in many cases be disclosed by decomposition; but the molecular weight
of such a substance is indeterminable. Against that, however, it may not be
inferred from the insolubility of a substance alone that it has a particularly


      Table 2. New classification of disperse systems by the number of atoms.
Increasing degree of dispersion.
Coarse dispersions The particles are composed of more than 109 atoms, do not pass
     through filter paper and can be made visible microscopically. They are poly-
     disperse.
Colloids The particles are composed of 103 to 109 atoms, pass through filter paper,
     cannot be resolved microscopically and cannot be dialysed. They are polydisperse
     or monodisperse.
Low molecular dispersions The particles are composed of 2 to 103 atoms, cannot be
     resolved microscopically, diffuse and dialyse readily. The molecules or ions of
     uniform substances are identical in structure and size.


                     MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                                   403
high molecular weight, a fact which emerged during studies on amino-
plasts26 in the laboratory at Freiburg.
   When considering the various modes of dispersion of organic substances
in a liquid, it is expedient to indicate the size of the dispersed particles by
the number of atoms they contain, the convention27 adopted in Table 2.
The particles of the low molecular organic compounds thus contain up to
a maximum of 103 atoms and as a rule are identical with the molecules. The
molecule concept is defined here in the same way as in low molecular chem-
istry: a molecule is the smallest particle in which all the atoms are linked
by chief valences 2. It
                     . can readily be ascertained whether such particles con-
tain not molecules but associations or double molecules, as applies with
e.g. solutions of fatty acids in benzene.
   The particles of colloidal size which are composed of 103 to 109 atoms
can have a much more varied structure than the particles made up of fewer
atoms (Table 3).
   It follows from Table 3 that for one thing lyophobic colloids can occur
which formerly roused special interest when Ostwald (Wo.)29 drew atten-
tion to the "field of neglected dimensions" and pointed out that every sub-
stance can be broken down into particles of colloid size by appropriate


        Table 3. Classification of colloidal solutions of organic substances.


404                             1953    H.STAUDINGER

dispersion. A further group of colloids are the lyophilic colloids to which
belong on the one hand the micellar colloids and on the other the solutions
of macromolecular substances. Since macromolecules are the size of colloid
particles they can dissolve in no other way than colloidally, even if the sol-
vent is changed, whereas with micellar colloids, e.g. the soaps, low molec-
ular disperse solutions are also possible in certain solvents. The solutions of
macromolecular substances may hence also be termed molecular colloids 30.
   Surprisingly, one group of macromolecular compounds, the linear macro-
molecular substances, exhibit in many respects properties like those of typ-
ical micellar colloids. In particular there is great similarity here to the soaps,
the colloidal nature of which was recognized at the beginning of the century
through the work of Krafft31, Zsigmondy32, McBain33, and others. Since
the solutions of linear macromolecular substances, however, differ substan-
tially from the solutions of low molecular substances, it can be understood
why, a few decennia ago, the colloid particles in these solutions of macro-
molecular substances were assumed to have a micellar structure similar to
those in aqueous soap solutions (Table 4).


                     Table 4. Properties of various substances.




Initially therefore, the efforts of the workers studying rubber, cellulose,
starch, and proteins were aimed at determining the size of the molecules
making up these micells. A number of workers such as Karrer 34, Bergmann35,
Pummerer 36 and Hess37 assumed them to be small molecules whereas Meyer
and Mark38 held that these micells consisted of rather long chief valence
chains.


                     MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                                 405
   Notwithstanding this similarity in the behaviour of micellar colloids and
linear molecular colloids which derives from the elongated shape of the
colloid particles in both cases, there is a profound difference between the
two groups: the particles of the micellar colloids are loose aggregates of
small molecules, in the case of the molecular colloids they are the macro-
molecules themselves.
   The proof was obtained by the conventional methods of organic chem-
istry, i.e. by determination of the "macroradicals". In this context the word
"radical" is used in the meaning given to it by Liebig in his studies of the
benzoyl radical. In many instances a polymeric compound can be trans-
formed into derivatives of a different type without any change in the degree
of polymerization of the compound in exactly the same way as small mol-
ecules can be transformed. A polymer compound can hence be transformed
into polymer analogous derivatives, the transformation proving that all the
basic molecules contained in the colloid particles of these polymeric com-
pounds are linked together by chief valences, in other words the colloid par-
ticles are macromolecules. This proof becomes especially clear because out of
a series ofpolymer homologues various ones can be transformed into polymer
analogous derivatives. Anexplanation can be given with reference to cellulose.
    The              bond of the glucose radical in cellulose was established
by the studies of Haworth39 and Freudenberg40; furthermore Sponsler and
Dore 4I demonstrated that the results of X-ray studies are consistent with the
 chain structure of cellulose. Subsequent studies then clarified the question
 whether the colloid particles in the solutions of celluloses and their deriv-
 atives have a macromolecular or micellar structure 42.


Table 5. Comparison of the molecular weights of decomposed cellulose triacetates as
determined by the osmotic and end-groups methods, and the Km-constants of these
                                   compounds.


406                          1953 H.STAUDINGER

   In a polymer homologous series of decomposed low polymeric cellulose
acetates, the molecular weight determined by the end groups agrees with
that determined by the osmotic method, proof that unbranched filamentary
molecules are present. The viscosity number           of these compounds is
proportional to the degree of polymerization as shown in Table 5.
   The end-group molecular weight of higher polymer cellulose acetates can
not be determined. The relations between the degree of polymerization
determined by the osmotic method and the viscosity number               are the
same, however, as in the low molecular compounds appearing in Table 5,
testifying that these high polymer cellulose acetates are dissolved in the ma-
cromolecular form and their chains are unbranched (Table 6).


           Table 6. Determination of Km- constants of higher polymeric
                         cellulose triacetates in m- cresol.




With care, these cellulose acetates can be saponified to polymer analogous
celluloses, so proving that both the cellulose acetates and the celluloses are
present in solution in the macromolecular state43 (Table 7).
   Finally, with care being exercised, polymer homologous celluloses can be
nitrated to polymer analogous cellulose nitrates with a mixture of nitric acid
and phosphoric acid, so demonstrating the macromolecular structure of the
cellulose nitrates44 (Table 8).
   The studies conducted at the Freiburg laboratory have frequently been con-
cerned with determining macromolecular structure by polymer analogous
transformations of this type. By that means it has been proved for further
polysaccharides, i.e. starch’s, glycogen46, mannan47, and for a number of
plastics that the colloid particles in their solutions are identical with the ma-


                     MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                                  407
 Table 7. Transformation of cellulose triacetates to polymer-analogous celluloses.




cromolecules. It is surprising that with these molecules, some of which are
very large and complex, reactions can be conducted which are customary
with molecules of lower molecular compounds. Such polymer analogous
transformations hence provide an impressive instance of the stability of the
macroradicals which is also of significance for the substances of living cells.
   The question now arises of the origin of the frequent instability and
changeability in the viscosity of macromolecular substances in solution.
These "aging phenomena" arise because even slight amounts of low molec-
ular substances are suffficient, chiefly in the presence of atmospheric oxygen,


 Table 8. Transformation of celluloses into polymer-analogous cellulose nitrates.


408                         1953 H.STAUDINGER

to decompose the linear macromolecules, leading to a profound change in
the solution viscosity. This is shown in Table 9.

                                   Table g.




Initially, as was the case for instance with rubber, these aging phenomena
were particularly obscure because under certain conditions oxygen decom-
poses the filamentary molecules but can also link them together, this be-
coming apparent in an increase of viscosity and, should the linking of the
filamentary molecules proceed further, it causes the soluble rubber to change
into insoluble rubber. For this reason even polymer analogous transforma-
tions involving macromolecular substances are mostly to be conducted only
under special experimental conditions since atmospheric oxygen for in-
stance must be completely excluded. The tests are also complicated by the
fact that the transformation products cannot be purified since all substances
are polymolecular and reprecipitation together with purification would lead
to a change in the composition of the polymolecular mixture. These com-
plications do not exist where low molecular substances are involved.
   With the most important group of macromolecular compounds, the pro-
teins and nucleic acids, scarcely any polymer analogous transformations have
so far been performed; here too it is difficult to produce polymer homol-
 ogous series. The size and structure of the macromolecules have to be deter-
 mined by different methods from those applied with the polysaccharides,
rubber, and the plastics. The molecule concept as formulated for homopolar
 organic compounds is not applicable here without limitation since besides
 chief valences, very powerful secondary valences also participate in the struc-
ture of the particles.
    The proof for the macromolecular structure of colloid particles is of
 fundamental importance since it signifies that these colloids cannot be con-
 sidered in terms of the colloid doctrine as variable associations of small mol-
 ecules but rather as macromolecules which must be treated by the methods of
 organic chemistry in common with molecules of low molecular substances48.


                     MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                                409
   There are still further profound differences between macromolecular and
low molecular compounds: these are based primarily on the fact that the
shape of the macromolecules affects the physical and chemical properties of
the substances considerably more strongly than is the case with the low mo-
lecular compounds. Whereas, for example, normal nonane with elongated
molecules, and tetraethylmethane with spherical molecules, both hydro-
carbons having the composition C9H20, scarcely differ in terms of their prop-
erties, a glycogen in which 5,000 glucose radicals are linked to form a
sphere has properties differing fundamentally from those of a cellulose in
which the same number of glucose radicals are arranged in a long chain.
This state of affairs led to the macromolecular substances being classified into
two large groups, spheromacromolecular substances, i.e. substances with
spherical molecules, and linear macromolecular substances with filamentary
molecules. These two classes are, of course, bridged by transitions: a large
 number of natural and synthetic substances have heavily branched macro-
 molecules, e.g. starch . Table 10 indicates the significant bearing of the
                         4 5



shape on the physical properties of natural macromolecular substances49.


         Table 10. Spherical and filamentary polysaccharides and proteins.


410                          1953 H . S T A U D I N G E R

   In appearance, solubility, and in their further behaviour, macromolecular
substances with spherocolloid molecules scarcely differ from low molecular
substances; only the determination of the molecular weight proves that
macromolecules are involved. The striking properties of macromolecular
substances which, as listed in Table 4, caused a different type of micellar struc-
ture to be assigned to these compounds, occur only with the linear macro-
molecules; these include the natural and fully synthetic fibres, the rubber-
elastic substances and many of the most important plastics. Linear macro-
molecular substances with long filamentary molecules behave in a manner
alien to low molecular substances: inclusion and swelling phenomena, high
solution viscosity, abnormal flow behaviour, etc. Since the constitution of
these substances is known, their striking behaviour can be ascribed to the
length of the filamentary molecules. A comparison of various examples of
a polymer homologous series shows that as the filamentary molecules be-
come longer, their properties change so profoundly that the earlier concepts
which led to the conclusion that the units at the beginning and at the end
had a completely dissimilar structure (Table 11) can be appreciated.

Table II. Relation between physical properties and mean degree of polymerization
                       (DP) of polymer homologous celluloses.


                     MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                              411
   It was therefore particularly difficult to study these linear macromolecular
substances. Even to determine the molecular weight, for example, it was not
possible to apply the customary physical techniques such as the osmotic,
diffusion, or Svedberg ultracentrifuge methods until the abnormal behaviour
of the solutions of these substances could be clarified50.
   The viscosity behaviour of the linear macromolecular substances is partic-
ularly striking. Whereas Einstein’s law applies to the spheromacromolecular
substances such as ovalbumin or glycogen, in the case of solutions of sub-
stances with filamentary molecules, the viscosity of solutions of equal con-
centration increases with the chain length, and with some of these substances,
especially polysaccharides, there is a proportionality between the viscosity
number Zη, and the chain length n or the degree of polymerization P of fil-
amentary molecules. This viscosity number is the specific viscosity of a
solution, i.e. the increase in viscosity caused by 1 g in one litre, or else its
limit value. Since viscosity measurements are simple to perform, this method
has been extensively adopted in technology to determine e.g. the degree of
polymerization of celluloses and cellulose derivatives, as this parameter has
a considerable bearing on the fibre properties as shown in Table 11. With
other linear macromolecular substances such as e.g. the polyesters11 and
many polyvinyl derivatives, the relation between viscosity number Zη and
degree of polymerization is not as simple as with the polysaccharides, al-
though there is a functional relation corresponding to an equation formulated
by Kuhn51 (Table 12).

                          Table 12. Viscosity relations.




   The reasons. are as follows: the filamentary molecules of a linear macro-
molecular substance are usually elongated in the solid crystalline state. The
length of the elementary units and hence the length of the filamentary mol-


412                        1953 H.STAUDINGER

ecules can be determined by X-ray examination, e.g. in the case of cellulose.
On dissolution, owing to vibrations and intramolecular forces of attraction
between the individual groups of the filamentary molecule, the latter be-
comes convolute to a greater or lesser extent depending on the temperature
and also on the type of solvent. Thus the filamentary molecules in good
solvents are more elongated than in poor solvents; in the former the viscos-
ity number of a substance is higher than in a poor solvent. Kuhn 52 states
that the entanglement of a filamentary molecule can be so pronounced in
a poor solvent that the molecule assumes an almost spherical configuration
such as has been experimentally determined with the polyisobutylenes53. A
filamentary molecule would adopt that configuration in the gaseous state
although in practice this state is unattainable, since the boiling point of all
macromolecular substances lies far beyond the point at which they decom-
pose.
   Besides these reversible changes in shape which are governed by the na-
ture of the filamentary molecule and the type of the solvent, chemical action
also brings about irreversible changes in shape which permanently affect the
physical properties of a linear-macromolecular substance. Thus it is common
knowledge that owing to its long, filamentary molecules, rubber yields
highly viscous solutions with swelling. Against this, the solutions of chlo-
rinated rubber, which is used as a paint, are of relatively low viscosity and
therefore it was originally assumed that in the transformation from rubber
to chlorinated rubber the long filamentary molecules were decomposed.
 Such is not the case as the degree of polymerization of chlorinated rubber
is approximately the same as that of rubber54. Thus, when rubber is con-
verted into chlorinated rubber, no decomposition takes place but rather a
strong, chief valence cyclization which induces a permanent convolution of
the filamentary molecules (Table 13).

      Table 13. Polymer-analogous transformation of rubber and balata to
                             chlorination products.


                      MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                                   413




Fig. I. Swelling of a piece of polystyrene with divinyl bonds. Before swelling (left).
                           After swelling in benzene (right).

It is - as already mentioned - characteristic of the chemistry of macromo-
lecular materials that the smallest amounts of substances are capable of
modifying profoundly their physical properties. Hence a 0.0025% addition
of divinyl benzene to styrene is sufficient during polymerization to link
the chains of the polystyrene by divinyl benzene bonds55. Soluble poly-
styrene with its unlimited swelling capacity is thus transformed into a va-
riety with limited swelling capacity which absorbs solvents by solvation
and so swells without altering its shape (Fig. I) and without being able to
dissolve.
   The replacement of a hydroxyl group in low molecular compounds by
a methoxyl group alters the physical and, above all, the chemical behaviour
of the compound considerably. The same applies also to macromolecular
substances except that the percentage proportion of a methoxyl end group
in the macromolecule can be so small that it readily escapes detection.
Auerbach and Barschall56 described two polyoxymethylenes: one is sol-
uble in sodium hydroxide, the other insoluble, yet they are identical in
appearance. The product soluble in sodium hydroxide is a polyoxymethyl-
 ene dihydrate, the insoluble product a polyoxymethylene dimethylether57
 (Formula 4).
   The slight percentage methoxyl end-group content thus blocks the de-
composition of the chains by sodium hydroxide. This reagent can only at-


414                          1953 H.STAUDINGER

tack hydroxyl groups and so dissolve polyo-xymethylene dihydrate. In bio-
logical processes as well, a slight percentage change in a macromolecule
can bring about profound changes in the chemical and physiological behav-
iour of the macromolecular substance.




   Possibly the most important distinction between low molecular and ma-
cromolecular compounds is that the latter can exhibit properties which
cannot be predicted even by a thorough study of the low molecular sub-
stances. This may be illustrated by comparing the organic molecules with
buildings in which the bricks must be joined together systematically. With
a few bricks it is impossible to erect a great variety of buildings; nevertheless,
provided that 10,000 or 100,000 bricks are available it is quite possible to
construct the most diverse buildings, viz. houses, halls, etc., the special con-
struction of which cannot simply be predicted from the buildings com-
prising few bricks.
   One such new type of behaviour of macromolecular substances are, for
example, the swelling phenomena of the linear macromolecular substances
caused by the solvation of the long filamentary molecules on the addition
of solvent without immediately being able to go into solution. These swel-
ling phenomena are complicated, as has been described, in that linking of
the filamentary molecules induces a substance with unlimited swelling capac-
ity to change into a substance of restricted swelling capacity 55, this also being
a very potent factor with proteins. A further instance here are inclusion
phenomena. Inclusion is an indirect swelling of linear macromolecular sub-
stances with liquids that are not solvents. They have mainly been studied
in the case of cellulose, between the filamentary molecules of which inert
liquids such as benzene, carbon tetrachloride, and others can be embedded.
It is noteworthy that these liquids cannot be altogether eliminated from the
linear macromolecular substance even under a high vacuum; they are held
mechanically between the filamentary molecules of the substances. As a


                     MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                                415
Table 14. Amount of solvent included in mercerized cotton (DP 1,600) after drying
                   for two days under high vacuum at 100°C.




result of this inclusion, however, the reactivity of cellulose is appreciably
raised 58 (Table 14).
   A particularly significant phenomenon with linear macromolecular sub-
stances is a characteristic state of dissolution which is impossible with sphero-
macromolecular and low molecular substances: the state in which the fil-
amentary molecules are completely solvated, i.e. essentially dissolved, but
owing to their large bulk, their range of action, they have no free mobility.
The term "gel solution" has been proposed for this characteristic state of
dissolution which is intermediate between the normal state of dissolution
and that of swelling . The solutions of cellulose, cellulose derivatives and
                      5 9



plastics as used technically are gel solutions.
   It will be the task of macromolecular chemistry to examine further these
new, characteristic properties which are governed by the size and configura-
tion of the macromolecules since it will thus be possible to gain fresh insight
into biological processes as well.
   The existence of macromolecules and the steadily deepening knowledge
of their properties have revealed the nature of the building units which the
living cell requires to create matter . The existence of macromolecules
                                           16



makes possible the vastly wide variation of the substances required; thus,
for example, the very number of the isomers in protein molecules is prac-
tically infinite. Assuming a protein of molecular weight 100,000 and com-


416                             1953   H.STAUDINGER

posed of 20 different amino acids, the number of its isomers is 10 1270 . The
size of this number becomes clear when compared with the number of mol-
ecules of water present in the seas of the earth - a mere 10 46 (Table 15).


                                    Table 15.
Number of isomers of a protein having a molecular weight 105; the protein molecule
composed of 50 molecules of each of 20 different amino acids.
                             Number of isomers: 101270.
For comparison the number of molecules of water in the seas of the earth:
Volume of the seas is about 1.3 x 10 24 cm3; 18g water contain 6 x 1023 molecules.
                 The seas thus contain about 4 x 1046 molecules.


It is thus possible by isomerism alone to create an infinite number of sub-
stances. This number is increased still further by variation in the configura-
tion of the macromolecules while they are being built, or else by the
influence of their environment. So, each living organism can create its own
nucleic acids, protein molecules, etc. This conclusion is necessary since every
organism, and every human being too, differs chemically from another.
   Associated with this boundless profusion of matter in the macromolecular
sphere, in contrast, is a remarkable stability of the macromolecules, a stabil-
ity which is governed by their structure as organic compounds in compliance
with the laws of Kekulé’s structural theory. That alone is capable of satisfying
the "inconceivably strict demands on the integrity of the germ plasm"
which are applied to the normal process of development of an organism 60.
This stability of the macromolecules, associated with their reactivity, sup-
plies the living substance with the necessary basis for so specific a process as
that of heredity.
    The known facts of macromolecular chemistry show further that an
individual macromolecule is still not "living", however large it is and how-
ever complex its structure. On the contrary, the term is relevant to a certain
 amount of substance comprising numerous macromolecules with the con-
stituent small molecules combined together in strictly prescribed order, an
"atomos" of living matter16 which is indivisible without losing its "living-
ness". Living nature supplies the answer to the question how large such an
"atomos" has to be in the form of the various germ cells, for nothing can
 be removed from such a cell, whether a spore or a fertilized ovum, otherwise
no normal organism can be formed from it. One of the smallest units capable
of se&propagation is, for example, a bacterial spore. The following estimate


                      MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                                    417
Table 16. A bacterial spore of 0.124p diameter weighs 10 g (sp.gr. = I) and after
                                                             -15


             removal of 50% water content comprises 5·107 atoms.




may afford an idea of what numbers of macromolecules and molecules are
the necessary minimum for "livingness" here (Table 16).
In contrast to former opinions one of the smallest living units thus requires
a quantity of substance.
  In this way macromolecular chemistry appears today to fit between low
molecular organic chemistry and cytology. It is the connecting link between
them, growing systematically out of low molecular chemistry but, with the
incomparably larger wealth of its chemical scope, forming living matter. In
addition, over and above the quantitative laws of pure chemistry, macro-
molecular chemistry makes use of a number of qualitative correlations:
those of shape and of the associated configurational scope, up to the level
of the "atomos" of living substance, on which the game of Life ensues.
  In the light of this new knowledge of macromolecular chemistry, the
wonder of Life in its chemical aspect is revealed in the astounding abundance
and masterly macromolecular architecture of living matter.




 1. H. Staudinger, Chem. Ztg., 77 (1953) 679.
 2. H. Staudinger, Die Chemie der organischen hochmolekularen Stoffe im Sinne der
    Kekuléschen Strukturlehre, (Vortrag auf der Versammlung Deutscher Natur-
    forscher und          in Dusseldorf), Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 59 (1926) 3019.
 3. H. Staudinger, Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 53 (1920) 1073.
    H. Staudinger and J. Fritschi, Helv. Chem. Acta, 5 (1922) 785.
 4. R. Signer, Z. Physik. Chem., A 150 (1930) 257, and subsequent papers.
 5. G. V. Schulz, Z. Physik. Chem., B 30 (1935) 379; B 32 (1936) 27; A 176( 1936) 317,
    and subsequent papers.
 6. Cf. G. V. Schulz in Röhrs-Staudinger-Vieweg, Fortschritte der Chemie, Physik und
    Technik der makromolekularen Stoffe, Vol. 1, Verlag Lehmann, München, 1939, p. 28.


418                            1953 H.STAUDINGER

 7. W. Kern, Z. Physik. Chem., A 181 (1938) 249, 283; A 184 (1939) 197, 302, and
     subsequent papers.
 8. E. Husemann, J. Prakt. Chem., 155 (1940) 13,241, and subsequent papers.
 9. G. V. Schulz and E. Husemann, Z. Physik. Chem., B 52 (1942) 23, and subsequent
    papers.
10. H. W. Kohlschütter, Liebigs Ann. Chem., 482 (1930) 75; 484 (1930) 155, and
     subsequent papers.
11. H. Batzer, Makromol. Chem., 5 (1950) 5, and subsequent papers.
12. J. Hengstenberg, Arm. Physik, 84 (1927) 245 ; H. Staudinger, H. Johner and R.
     Signer, G. Mie, and J. Hengstenberg, Z. Physik. Chem., 126 (1927) 425, and sub-
     sequent papers.
13. E. Sauter, Z. Physik. Chem., B 18 (1932) 417, and subsequent papers.
14. E. Plötze and H. Person, Z. Physik. Chem., B 45 (1940) 193.
15. M. Staudinger, Chem. Ztg., 67 (1943) 316, and other papers.
16. M. Staudinger, Makromolekulare Chemie und Biologie, Verlag Wepf & Co. Basel,
     1947.
17. The Svedberg, Z. Physik. Chem., 121 (1926) 65; The Svedberg and K. 0.
     Pedersen, Die Ultrazentrifuge, Verlag Steinkopff, Dresden, 1940.
18. J. H. Northrop, Crystalline Enzymes, New York, 1939.
19. H. Staudinger and W. Frost, Ber. Dart. Chem. Ges., 68 ( 1935) 2351; G. V. Schulz
     and E. Husemann, Z. Physik. Chem., B 34 (1936) 187, and subsequent papers.
20. L. Küchler, Polymerisationskinetik, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1951.
21. W. H. Carothers, Collected Papers, New York, 1940.
22. O. Bayer et al., Angew. Chem., 62 (1950) 57.
23. J. C. Bevington, G. M. Guzman, and H. W. Melville, Nature, 170 (1952) 1026.
24. Wi. Ostwald, Die wissenschaftichen Grundlagen der analytischen Chemie, 2nd ed.,
     Leipzig, 1897, p. 3.
25. H. Staudinger et al., Liebigs Ann. Chem., 474 (1929) 168.
26. H. Staudinger and K. Wagner, Makromol. Chem., 11 (1953) 79.
27. H. Staudinger, Organische Kolloidchemie, Verlag Vieweg, Brunswick, 1950, 3rd
      ed.; French edition, Dunod, Paris, 1953.
28. H. Staudinger, Zur Nomenklatur auf dem Gebiete der Makromoleküle, Makromol.
      Chem., 9 (1953) 221.
29. Wo. Ostwald, Die Welt der vernachlässigten Dimensionen, 1st ed., Verlag Steinkopff,
      Dresden, 1914.
30. H. Staudinger, Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 62 (1929) 2893.
31. F. Krafft and A. Stem, Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 27 (1894) 1747 et seq.
32. R. Zsigmondy and W. Bachman, Kolloid-Z., II (1912) 145.
33. J. W. McBain, Advan. Colloid Chem., 5 (1944) 102.
34. P. Karrer, Helv. Chem. Acta, 3 (1920) 620; P. Karrer et al., Helv. Chem. Acta, 4
      (1921) 185, 263 ; P. Karrer, Einführung in die Chemie der polymeren Koklenkydrate,
      Leipzig, 1925, pp. 4 and 8.
 35. M. Bergmann, Angew. Chem., 38 (1925) 1141; Naturwiss., 14 (1926) 1224; Ber.
      Dart. Chem. Ges., 59 (1926) 2973.
 36. R. Pummererer, Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 60 (1927) 2167.


                       MACROMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY                                   419
37. K. Hess, Chemie der Cellulose, Leipzig, 1928, p. 590,
38. K. H. Meyer and H. Mark, Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 61 (1928) 593, 1939.
39. W. N. Haworth, The Constitution of Sugars, London, 1929.
40. K. Freudenberg, Tannin, Cellulose, Lignin, Berlin, 1933.
41. 0. L. Sponsler and W. H. Dore, Colloid Symposium Monograph, 126 (1926) 174.
42. H. Staudinger, Svensk Kem. Tidskr., 49 (1937) 3 ; Suomen Kemistilehti, A 24 (1951)
     III.
43. H. Staudinger and G. Daumiller, Liebigs Ann. Chem., 529 (1937) 219.
44. H. Staudinger and R. Mohr, Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 70 (1937) 2302.
45. H. Staudinger and E. Husemann, Liebigs Ann. Chem., 527 (1937) 195.
46. H. Staudinger and E. Husemann, Liebigs Ann. Chem., 530 (1937) I.
47. E. Husemann, J. Prakt. Chem., 155 (1940) 241.
48. H. Staudinger, Die hochmolekularen organischen Verbindungen, Kautschuk und Cel-
     lulose, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1932.
49. H. Staudinger, Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 68 (1935) 1682.
50. H. A. Stuart, Die Physik der Hochpolymeren, Vol. 2: Dar Makromolekül in Lösungen,
     Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1953.
51. W. Kuhn, Angew. Chem., 49 (1936) 858; W. Kuhn and H. Kuhn, Helv. Chem.
     Acta, 26(1943) 1394;28 (1945) 1533.
52. W. Kuhn, Helv. Chem. Acta, 32 (1949) 735.
53. H. Staudinger and H. Hellfritz, Makromol. Chem., 7 (1952) 274.
54. H. Staudinger and Hj. Staudinger, J. Prakt. Chem., 162 (1943) 148.
55. H. Staudinger and W. Heuer, Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 67 (1934) 1164.
56. F. Auerback and H. Barschall, Arb. Kaiserl. Gesundh. Amt, 27 (1907) 183.
57. H. Staudinger and M. Lüthy, Helv. Chem. Acta, 8 (1925) 65 ; H. Staudinger, R.
     Signer et al., Liebigs Ann. Chem., 474 (1929) 145.
58. H. Staudinger and W. Döhle, J. Prakt. Chem., 161 (1942) 219; H. Staudinger, K.
     H. In Den Sir-ken and M. Staudinger, Makromol. Chem., 9 (1953) 148.
59. H. Staudinger, Z. Physik. Chem., A 153 (1931) 391.
60. E. Hadorn, VersammIung der Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und       Springer
     Verlag, 1953, p. 39.
