                              IR V I N G L A N G M U I R


                            Surface chemistry*
                        Nobel Lecture, December 14, 1932



The phenomenon of adsorption has been known and has been studied for
many years. For example, Sir James Dewar found that charcoal cooled in
liquid air was capable of taking up large quantities of such gases as oxygen
and nitrogen. This was known to be a surface action depending on the very
fine state of division of the charcoal.
   The effect of soap in lowering the surface tension of water depends upon
the presence of a higher concentration of soap molecules in the surface layer
than in the solution.
   Willard Gibbs proved thermodynamically that there is a general relation
between the surface adsorption, the lowering of the surface tension and the
concentration of the solution. The equation that he deduced can readily be
put in the form

                                     dF
                                                                                 (1)

where p is the partial pressure of the vapor of the adsorbed substance in equi-
librium with the surface of the liquid, or it may be the partial osmotic pres-
sure of a substance dissolved in the liquid, is the number of molecules ad-
sorbed on the surface per unit area, T is the absolute temperature, and k is
the Boltzmann constant 1.37 x 10-16 erg deg-1, and F, which may be called
the spreading force, is given by




where y O is the surface tension of the pure solvent (in dynes cm-1) and y
is the surface tension of the solution.
   The form of Gibbs’ equation represented by Eq. (I) is thermodynamically
valid if the film is in equilibrium with the two volume phases and if the
law of ideal gases
* This lecture is designed to summarize the author’s contributions and present views
in this field, but does not adequately describe the work of others.


288                              1932 I.LANGMUIR

                                      p=nkT                                       (3)

is applicable in the volume phases.
   Prior to 1910 many different theories of adsorption had been proposed,
but none of them had been very successful. In most of these theories the
increased concentration of the adsorbed substance near the surface was
thought to be analogous to the retention of the earth’s atmosphere by the
gravitational attraction of the earth. An adsorbed gas was thus regarded as
a kind of miniature atmosphere extending out a short distance from a solid
substance. In general such theories were called upon to account only for
qualitative aspects of the adsorption of gases on solids. Most of the knowl-
edge of adsorption was empirical. Even Gibbs’ law had not been verified
experimentally.
   When I first began to work in 1909 in an industrial research laboratory1,2,
I found that the high-vacuum technique which had been developed in in-
candescent lamp factories, especially after the introduction of the tungsten
filament lamp, was far more advanced than that which had been used in
university laboratories. This new technique seemed to open up wonderful
opportunities for the study of chemical reactions on surfaces and of the phys-
ical properties of surfaces under well-defined conditions. I resolved to try
the effect of introducing very small quantities of various gases into a highly
evacuated bulb containing a tungsten filament. Since by a McLeod gauge,
pressures as low as 10-8 atmospheres could be measured, it was possible to
observe the disappearance of an amount of gas of less than 0.1 cubic milli-
meter measured at atmospheric pressure. The use of a tungsten filament
presented particular advantages, for this could be heated in high vacuum to
temperatures of over 3,000°K, so that all impurities could readily be distilled
out of the filament. The ease and accuracy with which any desired tem-
perature could be produced and measured was also important.
   When a hot body, such as a filament, is in contact with a gas at atmo-
spheric pressure in a glass bulb, the convection currents and the uncertain
temperature distribution in the gas, are factors which greatly complicate any
interpretation of observed phenomena involving the interaction of the fil-
ament with the gas.
   If the gas, however, is at a pressure as low as 100 baryes*, the mean free
path of the molecules is many times greater than the diameter of the ordin-
ary tungsten filament. Each molecule which strikes the filament has thus
* A barye or c.g.s. unit of pressure, 1 dyne cm-2, is almost exactly10 -6 atmospheres.


                            SURFACE CHEMISTRY                              289
made so many collisions with the bulb since its last collision with the fil-
ament, that the effective temperature of the gas in contact with the filament
may be taken to be the same as that of the bulb. The disturbing effects of
convection currents are then entirely eliminated and the rate of arrival of
gas molecules at the surface of the filament can be calculated according to
the laws of the kinetic theory of gases. This theory leads to the equation


                                 = (2                                      (4)

where is the rate of arrival of the gas molecules expressed in molecules
cm-2 sec-1, and m is the mass of the molecule. By inserting numerical values
this equation becomes

                             = 2.65 x       p                              (5)

where M is the molecular weight of the gas (oxygen = 16) and p is ex-
pressed in baryes. By using filaments of small size and bulbs of large size, it
was possible to measure experimentally such high rates of disappearance of
gas (clean-up) that every molecule that struck the filament disappeared. Un-
der usual conditions, however, the rates of clean-up were far less than this
theoretical maximum. The fraction      of all the impinging molecules which
reacted on striking the filament could thus be determined.
   Working in this way, a systematic study was undertaken of the effects
of such gases as oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon monoxide, and their
mixtures, etc., on filaments of tungsten, carbon, molybdenum, and plati-
num. I shall refer only to those cases where the experiments have thrown
light upon the phenomenon of adsorption.



                           Clean-up of hydrogen3

When a tungsten filament is heated to temperatures of 1,500°K in hydrogen
at about 20 baryes pressure, the hydrogen slowly disappears, the pressure
decreasing with time as indicated in Curve I of Fig. 1. The pressure falls
to a very low value in 10 to 20 minutes. If more hydrogen is introduced,
the rate of clean-up is somewhat slower, the pressure decreasing according
to Curve II. Although analysis shows the residual gas to be pure hydrogen,
the clean-up gradually comes to a standstill.


290                             1932 I.LANGMUIR

   With a bulb containing two filaments, it is found that the lighting of the
second filament does not cause a recovery in the rate of clean-up. This proves
that the gas which disappears is not taken up by the filament itself. By
keeping the bulb in liquid air, a greater total amount of clean-up is obtained.
Such investigations show that the hydrogen which disappears becomes ad-
sorbed on the surface of the bulb, but that the bulb is capable of adsorbing
only a limited amount of hydrogen. This hydrogen adsorbed on the glass is
capable of reacting with oxygen at room temperature after the filament has
been allowed to cool. The adsorbed hydrogen is therefore in a chemically
very active state. It was finally proved that the heated tungsten filament
dissociates 4,5,6,7,8 a small fraction of the incident hydrogen molecules into
atoms, and that these atoms, because of their unsaturated chemical nature,
exhibit a strong tendency to be adsorbed on glass. These hydrogen atoms,
however, are capable of reacting with one another and forming molecules.
From this point of view, it should be impossible to hold on the glass more
hydrogen than could form a layer one atom deep.
   By cooling the bulb in liquid air the adsorption increased. The maximum
amount of hydrogen adsorbed on the glass in these experiments was 0.03
mm3 per cm 2, measured as molecular hydrogen at atmospheric pressure.
This corresponds to = 1.5 x 1015 atoms of hydrogen per cm2, which is
equal to the number of spheres of diameter 2.8 Å which can be packed per
cm2 into a close-packed hexagonal lattice. The spacing of the adsorbed atoms
is probably determined by the arrangement of the atoms in the underlying
glass which provide "elementary spaces" in which atoms can be held. If the
average diameter of the atoms of the glass can be assumed to be 2.8 Å, the
 observed maximum amount of adsorbed hydrogen thus agrees well with
that to be expected in a monatomic film. If a glass surface saturated with
 atomic hydrogen at liquid-air temperature is allowed to warm up to room
 temperature, part of the hydrogen escapes as molecular hydrogen; the rest
 can be driven off at 300°C. Since adsorbed hydrogen atoms probably react
 on contact to form molecular hydrogen, then experiments indicate that the
 surface mobility of the adatoms* is very small at room temperature.
    It was shown that the atomic hydrogen can diffuse long distances through
 glass tubing at room temperature (but not at liquid-air temperature) and can
 then reduce metallic oxides9, such as WO3 CuO, Fe 2O3, ZnO, or PtO2,

* J. A. Becker, in Trans. Am. Electrochem. Soc, 55 (1929) 153, has suggested this term
for adsorbed atoms.


                            SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                291
and can dissolve in platinum sufficiently to raise its resistance10. It reacts at
room temperature with phosphorus3 to form PH3.



                           Oxygen films on tungsten


 When a tungsten filament is heated to 1,500°K or more in oxygen at very
 low pressures, such as 100 baryes or less, the oxygen reacts 11 with the tung-
 sten to form the oxide WO3 which evaporates from the filament at these
 temperatures as fast as it is produced, leaving the surface of the filament
 apparently clean. At temperatures below about 2,200°K the presence of
                                         -6
 extremely small amounts of oxygen (10 mm) decreases the electron emis-
 sion from a tungsten filament to values that range from 10 -2 to 10-5 of that
 from pure tungsten, depending on the temperature at which the emission
 is measured. This modification of the properties of the surface must depend
 upon the presence of a film which contains oxygen. When the filament
 temperature is high, such as 2,000° or more, the emission returns to a normal
 tungsten emission as soon as the oxygen is completely consumed or is re-
 moved by vaporizing into the bulb a "getter" such as magnesium. If, how-
 ever, the filament temperature is as low as 1,500°, complete removal of
 oxygen from the gas phase, even by introducing caesium vapor as a getter,
 does not remove the oxygen film on the tungsten surface after it has once
been formed. This means that the oxygen from such a film does not evap-
orate appreciably at 1,500°K. Measurements at higher temperatures show
that about half of the adsorbed oxygen evaporates in 27 minutes’ time at
 1,860° and in about 20 seconds at 2,070°12. From the temperature coefficient
at this rate of evaporation it can be concluded that it will take about three
years at 1,500° to remove half the film by evaporation and that the heat of
evaporation is of the order of 160 kcal per gram atom.
    This heat of evaporation is far greater than the heat of dissociation of
oxygen into atoms; so we have very direct evidence that the forces that hold
oxygen to a tungsten surface are comparable to the most powerful chemical
forces known. This gives reason for believing that the oxygen film which
so greatly decreases the electron emission from tungsten consists of a single
layer of oxygen atoms which are chemically combined with the underlying
tungsten atoms.
    The electron emission from the tungsten filament in the presence of oxy-
gen at temperatures below 1,800° is found to be independent of the pressure


292                            1932 I.LANGMUIR

of oxygen, provided that more than about 10-3 barye is present. This must
mean that the surface is practically completely covered with oxygen and that
an increase in oxygen pressure does not cause the thickness of the layer to
increase beyond that of a single layer of atoms.




   Curve III in Fig. 1 indicates the way in which the pressure of oxygen
in the bulb decreases with time when the tungsten filament is maintained at
1,500°K. The rate of disappearance of the oxygen is proportional to the
oxygen pressure and there is no fatigue effect, such as was observed during
the clean-up of hydrogen.



      Interaction of oxygen with hydrogen in contact with tungsten filament

Mixtures of oxygen and hydrogen at low pressures in a bulb containing a
tungsten filament behave in an extraordinary manner13-15 . Typical results
obtained with a filament temperature of 1,500° are shown in Curves IV and
V of Fig. 1. These curves were obtained with a mixture of 3 parts of hy-
drogen and 5 parts of oxygen. When the filament was lighted, the gas dis-


                           SURFACE CHEMISTRY                              293
appeared at exactly the same rate as shown in Curve III when 5 parts of
oxygen alone were present. After about 14 minutes practically all of the
oxygen had disappeared. This was confirmed by analysis of the residual gas
which was found to be pure hydrogen. This hydrogen, however, did not
dissociate in the usual way into atoms and disappear by adsorption on the
glass walls as shown in Curve I, but the pressure remained practically con-
stant until after about 24 minutes, when the pressure suddenly began to
decrease as indicated by Curve V. This Curve V, however, is identical with
Curve I, which is characteristic of the clean-up of hydrogen in absence of
oxygen. Repeated experiments with different amounts of oxygen and hy-
drogen prove that hydrogen does not interfere with the clean-up of oxygen,
but that a minute trace of oxygen of about 10 -3 barye completely prevents
the dissociation of hydrogen into atoms by a tungsten filament at 1,500°K.
The oxygen thus acts as a catalytic poison. Experiments of this kind can be
used to make quite accurate chemical analyses of mixtures of oxygen and
hydrogen.
   The fact that a monatomic film of oxygen on tungsten does not react with
hydrogen at 1,500° is a striking indication that the oxygen is in a condition
far different from that of gaseous oxygen. The results, however, confirm
our conclusion that the film consists of oxygen atoms which are chemically
saturated by the tungsten atoms with which they are in contact.
   In view of the fact that an oxygen film on tungsten at 1,500°K does not
evaporate in less than a year, it is remarkable that in the presence of hy-
 drogen the beginning of the hydrogen clean-up (Curve V) is so sharp. Since
Curve V is exactly like the lower part of Curve I, it appears that once the
hydrogen begins to dissociate, the oxygen is suddenly completely removed
from the surface; in other words, hydrogen can remove monatomic oxygen
films from the tungsten surface if the amount of oxygen on the surface is less
than a definite amount. This probably means that the adsorbed oxygen mol-
ecules cannot react with hydrogen atoms directly but can react with hy-
drogen atoms adsorbed in adjacent spaces on the tungsten surface.



                            Thorium on tungsten16

When a tungsten filament which is made from tungstic oxide containing
about I per cent of ThO2 is heated to temperatures of 2,800° or more, a
minute fraction of the thoria is reduced to metallic thorium. The thoria


294                           1932 I.LANGMUIR

 exists in the filament in the form of minute spherical particles distributed
 throughout the tungsten crystals and not at the boundaries of crystals. If the
 filament is then heated for a period of a few minutes at 1,900 to 2,000°K,
 the metallic thorium which has been produced at the higher temperatures
 diffuses slowly through the crystal grains to the crystal boundaries, then
diffuses rapidly along these boundaries to the surface of the filament and then
spreads over the surface of the filament by surface migration and forms a
 monatomic film of adsorbed thorium atoms on the surface of the filament.
At 2,000° the rate of evaporation of thorium from the filament is so small
that sufficient thorium soon accumulates on the filament to form a nearly
complete monatomic film. If the temperature is raised to 2,200 or 2,400°,
the rate of evaporation of the thorium from the surface increases so much
more rapidly than the rate of arrival from the interior by diffusion, that the
actual surface concentration decreases greatly.
    These changes in the thorium content of the adsorbed film can be studied
by measurements of the electron emission from the filament at a standard
low temperature, called the testing temperature, which is chosen so low that
neither diffusion to the surface, nor evaporation from the surface, causes
appreciable changes in the adsorbed film. A convenient testing temperature
is 1,500°. At this temperature the presence of adsorbed thorium on the sur-
face may increase the electron emission as much as 105-fold over that from
a pure tungsten surface.
    Such experiments make it possible to investigate the electrical properties
of surface films having known amounts of thorium. On the assumption that
each thorium atom on the surface acts as a dipole having a definite dipole
moment, it is possible to show that the logarithm of the electron emission
should increase linearly with the number of thorium atoms on the surface.
The experiments showed that for low concentrations of thorium this rela-
tion holds approximately.
    There are several indications that the adsorbed film of thorium that is
formed by diffusion from the interior never exceeds one atom in thickness.



           The interaction of carbon dioxide with carbon filaments

If a carbon filament is heated to a temperature above 1,700°K in the pres-
ence of carbon dioxide at low pressure, one molecule of carbon monoxide
is liberated from every molecule of carbon dioxidez. If this carbon monoxide


                           SURFACE CHEMISTRY                              295
is pumped out from the bulb and the filament is then heated to 2,300°K, a
volume of carbon monoxide is slowly liberated equal to that originally
formed from the dioxide. This proves that each carbon dioxide molecule
 which comes in contact with the filament and reacts, loses one oxygen atom
 to the filament and thus produces a carbon monoxide molecule. The oxygen
atoms thus transferred to the filament form a monatomic film of oxygen
atoms covering the surface, these atoms being chemically combined with
the carbon atoms with which they are in contact, presumably by double
 bonds. This adsorbed film on the filament is very stable at 1,700°, but when
heated to 2,300°, the film is destroyed, not by the evaporation of the oxygen
 atoms, but by the breaking of the bonds between the carbon atoms which
 are attached to the oxygen and the underlying carbon atoms with which
 they are in contact. Thus the oxygen escapes as carbon monoxide.
    From this point of view we see that we can look upon the adsorbed film
 on the carbon filament either as consisting of adsorbed oxygen, or as an
 adsorbed film of oriented carbon monoxide molecules, or as carbonyl rad-
 icals which are chemically attached by their carbon atoms to the underlying
 carbon atoms in the filament. It is to be expected that the properties of the
 adsorbed film would be very different if it consisted of carbon monoxide
 molecules attached to the underlying surface through their oxygen atoms.
 These experiments thus led to the concept that the properties of adsorbed
 films should in general depend on the orientation of the molecules or radicals
 in the film. It seemed to the writer (in 1915) that evidence of such orienta-
 tion could be found among the data on the surface tensions of pure liquids.



                      Surface energies of pure liquids17,18

If a prism of liquid having a cross section of 1 sq. cm is divided into two
parts by an imaginary plane perpendicular to the axis of the prism, and the
two portions of the liquids are then separated, there has been an increase in
the surface of the liquid of 2 sq. cm. The total energy theoretically required
per sq. cm of new surface to bring about this separation may be called the
total surface energy yO. This is related to the free surface energy y, which is
equivalent to the surface tension of the liquid, by the relation


296                            1932 I.LANGMUIR

 By measurements of the surface tension, the surface energy y Ocan thus be
 measured. This quantity represents the potential energy of the molecules
 which form the surface of the liquid (per sq. cm) in excess of that which
 the same molecules possess when they are in the interior of the liquid.
    In Table 1, data are given for a few substances which serve to illustrate
 the interrelation 19,20 between the orientations of molecules and other prop-
 erties of liquids. The latent heat of evaporation        which, according to
 Trouton’s rule, is approximately proportional to the absolute boiling point
 (TB) serves as a measure of the energy needed to bring a molecule from the
 interior of the liquid out into the vapor phase. We have seen that the surface
 energy yOis the energy per unit area needed to form a surface.
   The molecular volume V given in this table is the volume of the liquid
 divided by the number of molecules. The molecular surface S is the surface
 of a sphere which has the volume V. The extremely low values of            the
heat of evaporation, per molecule, for helium and hydrogen, indicate that
the forces exerted by these molecules on their neighbours are unusually weak.
This is in accord with the great stability of the electron pair which forms
the K shell of atoms and the covalence bond. The diameters of the helium
atom and hydrogen molecule given by the kinetic theory from viscosity
measurements, viz. 1.9. and 2.4 Å, correspond to volumes V of only 3.6 and
7.2 Å3, which are very small compared to the volumes occupied in the
liquid. This very open structure of the liquid is again an indication of the
weak attractive forces between these molecules.
   The effect of replacing one of the hydrogen atoms in the hydrogen mole-
cule by the hydroxyl radical, thus producing water, is to decrease the value


                    Table I. Surface properties of molecules


                             SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                 297
 of V from 47 to 30, an indication of strong forces acting between the hy-
 droxyl groups which compress the liquid. A better measure of these forces
 is given by the 40-fold increase in the value of from 1.67 to 67. The surface
 energy y0 has been increased 24-fold.
    The data for argon illustrate the properties of an atom having a complete
 electron shell or octet. The fact that in spite of the much larger electron
 configuration (with a kinetic theory diameter of 2.9) the volume per mole-
 cule in the liquid is the same as for hydrogen, shows that the field of force
 around the molecule is far greater than for hydrogen and helium. The heat
 of evaporation per unit area        is a very convenient measure of the intensity
 of this field. With H2 He and Ar it is about one-half of the surface energy yO.
The data for methane indicate that this molecule has a value of              about
 the same as that for argon. This molecule has a completed octet which shares
pairs of electrons with hydrogen atoms. Evidently the presence of the hy-
 drogen atoms does not appreciably alter the field of force; the main effect is
to raise the molecular volume, thus raising λ and the boiling point TB almost
in proportion to S.
    The values for       for the saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons beyond pro-
pane are practically constant and equal to 28. The same constancy is shown
in the surface energy yO. The data for octane shown in the table are typical.
 The surfaces of the molecules of the higher-saturated hydrocarbons are thus
very much like those of argon atoms, the effect of the chain formation
manifesting itself principally in the increase in         from 18 to 28.
    The constancy of       is also an indication that the molecules of the vapors
of the higher hydrocarbons are approximately spherical in form. The known
flexibility of the chain and the surface energy reduction resulting from the
more compact form afford ample explanation of this spherical form.
    The effect of substituting a hydrogen atom in octane by a hydroxyl rad-
ical is illustrated in the last line of the table by the data for n-octyl alcohol.
There is a small decrease in V paralleling that observed in H2O, except that
now, since each OH group in the liquid cannot be close to many other OH
groups, the decrease in volume is considerably less. The large field of force
around the OH group is best illustrated by the increase of 26 units in the
value of The fact that this increase is less than half of that observed in the
change from H2 to H 2O shows that the OH group in the molecule of the
vapor of octyl alcohol is able to bury itself, at least in part, in the approx-
imately spherical molecule.
    In spite of the large increase in λ and       in octyl alcohol, the surface en-


298                            1932 I.LANGMUIR

 ergy y0 is the same as for octane. This can be explained by the orientation of
 the molecules in the surface layer of octyl alcohol. The great attractive forces
 exerted by the hydroxyl groups cause them to be drawn down into the
 interior of the liquid. Thermal agitation tends to counteract this tendency.
 According to the Boltzmann equation the relative distribution of molecules
 between two regions of differing energy is measured by exp (W/kT), where
 W is the difference in the energy of the molecule in the two states. Now,
judging from a comparison of the values of for octane and octyl alcohol,
 the energy necessary to bring an OH group from a hydrocarbon environ-
 ment out into free space is at least 26 x 10 -4 erg. The energy corresponding
 to kT room temperature is about 4 x 10-14 erg. Since W thus more than
 6.5 times as great as this, we may conclude that nearly all of the molecules
 [all but about exp (- 6.5) = 10-3] in the surface of octane will be oriented
 in such a way that the hydroxyl groups do not reach the surface.
    We may now understand why the surface energy of octyl alcohol is the
 same as that of octane. We have previously seen that γ 0 can be determined
 by the energy needed to separate a prism into two parts. We may conceive
 of this separation as taking place in two steps. The molecules on the opposite
 sides of an imaginary dividing plane may first be oriented so that the hy-
 droxyl groups are turned away from this plane, leaving only the hydro-
 carbon parts of the molecule in contact with the plane surface. The two
 bodies of liquids are then separated from each other along this plane, which
 would require only the same energy as for pure octane. Because of the orien-
 tation of the molecules, yO.thus differs from that of octane only by the amount
 of energy needed to turn the molecules around in the interior of the liquid,
 which is probably negligible.
    Referring again to Table I we see that a comparison of         with y0 affords
 a measure of the effect of orientation. In general, for molecules with uniform
 fields of force,     is from 0.5 to 0.55 of the value of γ O.
    When, however, a part of the molecular surface has a much weaker field
 of force than that of other parts, the surface of the liquid consists principally
 or wholly of the least active parts, so that     is lower than normal. Thus for
 octyl alcohol      is 0.82 of    while for water it is 1.18, indicating that the
 water molecule is very unsymmetrical and is strongly oriented at the surface.
    At present these illustrations will suffice. In a paper published in 1916 I
 showed that this theory was applicable to the surface tension of organic
 liquids in general, including cases of substituted benzene derivatives where
 the values of depend to a marked degree on the relative positions of the


                            SURFACE CHEMISTRY                               299
substituted groups. Somewhat later W. D. Harkins and his co-workers in-
vestigated large numbers of organic substances in this way and completely
demonstrated the importance of orientation of molecules in the surface
layer of liquids consisting of unsymmetrical molecules.



                           Oil films on water
                                                18,21




When a pure saturated liquid hydrocarbon is placed upon the water, it re-
mains on the surface as a drop or lens which has no effect on the surface
tension of the surrounding water. If, however, an insoluble fatty or oily
substance, such as the common vegetable and animal oils, is placed upon
clean water, it spreads out almost instantly as a thin film over the surface.
If the motions of the surface are made visible by dusting the surface with
powdered talc, it may be seen that, with a limited amount of oil, the film
only spreads out sufficiently to cover a definite area, or at least if the area
exceeds a rather definite value, the oil has no effect on the surface tension of
the water. A comparison of various insoluble organic substances has proved
that the spreading tendency depends upon the presence of certain active
groups or radicals in the organic molecule, these being the groups which
tend to increase the solubility of organic substances in water. For example,
pentane, C5H12, is practically insoluble in water but amyl alcohol, C5H11OH
is relatively soluble. Thus the OH groups in organic molecules exert strong
attractive forces on the OH groups in the water molecules and these man-
ifest themselves by an increase in solubility. Similarly the carboxyl group
COOH tends to make the lower fatty acids much more soluble in water than
the corresponding hydrocarbons.
   Hydrocarbons with high molecular weight such as C18H38 are extremely
insoluble in water. If the carboxyl group replaces the CH 3 group at the end
of the chain C18H38, one end of the molecule only tends to dissolve in water,
whereas the rest of the molecule still retains the insolubility of the hydro-
carbons. By spreading over the surface of the water, molecules of this kind
can bring their carboxyl group in contact with the water without separating
from one another.
   An oil film formed in this way must consist of a single layer of molecules
packed closely on the surface layer of the water. If there is a surplus of the
fatty acid, as compared with the limited area over which it can spread, the
endeavor of the carboxyl groups to come in contact with water causes the


300                            1932 I.LANGMUIR

molecules to become so crowded at the surface that they stand nearly erect,
side by side on the surface. The area occupied by each molecule is thus deter-
mined by the cross section of the hydrocarbon chain or by that of the head
in contact with water, if this happens to be larger than the cross section of
the chain. The thickness of the film is then determined by the length of the
hydrocarbon chain.
   By dissolving known weights of liquid or solid, oily or fatty substances
in a volatile solvent such as hexane, and placing known amounts of these
dilute solutions on the water surface, a definite number of molecules can be
transferred to the water surface. The oil film can be confined to a given
portion of the surface of water in a long tray by a floating strip of paper
reaching across the tray. By measuring the forces exerted on the strip of
paper, it is possible to measure directly the spreading force F in dynes per
cm exerted by an oil film having a given number of molecules of oil per
square cm of surface. This surface concentration we shall denote by the
symbol        Such measurements as these, by which F can be expressed as a
function of and T, give us then the two-dimensional equation of state of
the oil film which corresponds exactly to the three-dimensional equation of
state which characterizes ordinary gases and liquids. In fact, the movable
paper strip in these experiments is the equivalent of a piston which com-
presses the gas in a cylinder.
   The oil films observed on water may exist as two-dimensional solids,
liquids or gases. The film on water obtained from stearic acid C 17H35COOH
is solid. If it is compressed by a force of 10 dynes per cm exerted against the
paper strip, this solidity is manifested if particles of talc are dusted on to the
surface and the effects of air currents directed against the surface are watched.
The talc particles do not move freely over the surface; if a strong wind dis-
places them, they return to their original positions when the wind stops,
proving a surface rigidity and elasticity characteristic of solids. Other sub-
stances such as cetyl alcohol or oleic acid give films which are liquid, since
talc particles circulate freely when small forces are exerted by the wind.
   By slightly increasing the area available for these films of saturated fatty
acids, it is found that the spreading force decreases very nearly to zero, which
proves that these films do not act as two-dimensional gases but rather as two-
dimensional liquids which have an unmeasurably small two-dimensional
vapor pressure. With myristic acid 2 2, however, a definite two-dimensional
vapor pressure of about 0.2 dyne cm -2 is observed. Still lower fatty acids
give typical gaseous films, but they cannot be studied by this method because


                           SURFACE CHEMISTRY                             301
the films are so easily soluble in water that the force exerted by a moving
barrier causes them to go into solution.



                      Adsorbed films on solutions18,21

The foregoing method for studying the properties of oil films on water is
inapplicable if the film is soluble or is volatile. In such cases measurements
must be made in the presence of saturated vapor or saturated solution. Gibbs’
equation, Eq. (1) , gives us a means of determining the relation between
the amount adsorbed on the solution and the spreading force F, in terms of
the partial pressure p of the vapor of the adsorbed substance over the liquid
or the partial osmotic pressure p of the dissolved substance in the underlying
solution. Experimentally F can be measured as the decrease in the surface
tension of the pure liquid produced by the presence of the dissolved sub-
stance. By the integration of this equation, using the experimentally deter-
mined values of F, one can obtain the equation of state of the two-dimen-
sional film whether this is gaseous or liquid or solid.
   For very high or very low surface concentrations, Gibbs’ equation takes
simple limiting forms. At very low concentrations the molecules in the ad-
sorbed films are so far apart that they exert no appreciable forces on one
another. Under such conditions the surface concentration, will be propor-
tional to the volume concentration which in turn is proportional to p. If we
solve Eq. (1) on the assumption that is proportional to p, we find that
it leads to the following equation of state


                                                                          (6)

which is the two-dimensional analogue of Eq. (3), the equation of state of
an ideal gas, and it may therefore be called an equation of state of an ideal
two-dimensional gas.
  The effect of forces acting between the adsorbed molecules is to modify
this equation. A two-dimensional analogue of Van der Waals’ equation can
be written in the form


                                                                          (7)

where a and     are constants.


302                           1932 I.LANGMUIR

   When the gas phase or the liquid phase contains a relatively high concen-
tration, the concentration of the molecules in the adsorbed film tends to
increase to a limiting value corresponding to a complete monomolecular
adsorbed film such as those that we observed in the study of oil films on
water. Although such films show surface elasticity, that is, they are compres-
sible, the forces required to compress the liquid and solid films are so much
greater than those required to compress the gaseous film, that the surface
compressibility can be neglected as the first approximation, so that we can
consider      to be approximately constant, that is, independent of p and F.
Making this substitution in Eq. (1) and integrating, we obtain the fol-
lowing equation which should be applicable for concentrated surface films

                               =

These two limiting equations are completely in accord with the genera1
relationships found by J. Traube23. In Eq. (8) p O is an integration constant
whose value cannot be found from Gibb’s equation.
  From the Boltzmann equation we can estimate the energy change in-
volved in bringing a molecule from the vapor or liquid phase to the surface
phase. We thus have

                              =        exp                                (9)

Traube found that with molecules of aliphatic compounds having different
lengths of hydrocarbon chains, the ratio F/p for dilute solutions (which
should be proportional to         increases about threefold for each CH2.
When this is interpreted in accord with Gibb’s and Boltzmann equations,
we conclude that the energy involved in the adsorption of these molecules
increases linearly with the length of the chain. This means that each CH2
group in the molecule must be similarly situated in the surface film. In
other words, in these dilute films where there is much free water surface
available, the hydrocarbon molecules must lie flat on the surface. With the
concentrated films in which is constant so that Eq. (8) applies, there is no
available free surface of water and the molecules must stand nearly erect on
the surface.
   These two cases given by Eqs. (6) and (8) are only limiting cases and the
complete equation of state for the whole range from dilute to concentrated
films would be more complicated, since it must involve the intermediate


                            SURFACE CHEMISTRY                               303
states between those in which the molecules lie flat on the surface and stand
erect on the surface. The experimental difficulties of the accurate measure-
ments of the surface tensions of solutions are such, that relatively little work
has been done on the equation of state of these adsorbed films on solutions
as compared with the large amount of work done by N. K. Adam22 and
others on the equations of state of films of insoluble substances on water.
   The molecules in adsorbed films on liquids are of course free to move over
the surface of the liquid except in so far as the film itself may possess the
properties of a solid.



                           Adsorbed films on solids

Adsorbed films on solids may exist in three states corresponding to two-
dimensional gases, liquids or solids. A new factor now appears, however,
which was not present in the case of adsorbed films on liquids. The forces
exerted by the underlying solid on adsorbed atoms or molecules tend to hold
the molecules in definite positions fixed by the lattice of the solid. The solid
surface is thus to be looked upon as a type of checker-board containing defi-
nite numbers and arrangements of elementary spacess13,24, each of which is ca-
pable of holding an adsorbed molecule. To move a molecule from one el-
ementary space to another thus presumably requires something analogous
to an activation energy; only those molecules possessing a sufficient kinetic
energy to pass over a potential barrier can succeed in hopping from one el-
ementary space to another 2 5. On this basis we should expect a surface mobil-
ity at high temperatures which would disappear at low temperatures. The
logarithm of the rate of mobility, or the surface diffusion coefficient, should
vary linearly with the reciprocal of the absolute temperature and the slope
of this line should be proportional to the activation energy.
   In general the surface diffusion coefficient increases with for the ability
of adatoms to cross the potential barrier is not determined solely by the ther-
mal agitation of the molecules but depends on              since differences in
the value of F over the surface contribute to the mobility.
   We may thus consider that in general the adatoms on solids move over
the surface by hopping between elementary spaces. If the adatoms move
nearly independently of one another, so that they migrate freely on to all
unoccupied portions of the surface, the adsorbed films can be regarded as
a two-dimensional gas in spite of the fact that the atoms tend to occupy


304                            1932 I.LANGMUIR

definite positions. Such films constitute a two-dimensional crystalline gas,
the crystalline character being imparted by the underlying lattice. If attractive
forces exist between the adatoms which are sufficiently strong to cause them
to form a definite two-dimensional condensed phase in equilibrium with
a two-dimensional vapor phase, we clearly have to do also with a two-
dimensional solid or liquid. If the mobility is high, this condensed film may
have properties characteristic of liquids; with no mobility at lower tem-
peratures, the conditions will be analogous to that of a two-dimensional glass.
A two-dimensional solid analogous to ordinary three-dimensional solids
would exist only if the forces exerted by the adatoms on each other can keep
them from slipping past one another.



           Condensation-evaporation theory of adsorption on solids

When molecules of a gas in contact with a solid impinge individually on
the solid, they may either condense or may rebound from the solid as though
elastically reflected. Those molecules that condense may subsequently evap-
orate. There is much theoretical and experimental evidence that a true reflec-
tion of molecules under these conditions is a rather abnormal occurrence,
although the specular reflection of molecular rays from certain crystalline
surfaces shows that it sometimes exists. In the great majority of cases, how-
ever, the observed phenomena indicate that the larger part of all incident
molecules condense on the surface and reach thermal equilibrium with it
before they evaporate 2 6 , 2 7 . With such gases as hydrogen and helium, ac-
commodation coefficients materially less than unity have been found. In
general these occur with gases striking solids at such temperatures that the
rate of evaporation may be assumed to be so high that the life of the con-
densed molecule is of the order of 10-13 seconds, which is about the time
required for a molecule to perform a single thermal oscillation on the surface.
Under these conditions it is not surprising that thermal equilibrium is not
reached.
   When the rate at which molecules impinge on the surface is         as given
by Eq. (4), and v is the rate at which they evaporate (molecules cm-2
sec-1), then the rate at which they accumulate on the surface is given by

                                do


                            SURFACE CHEMISTRY                               305
where a, the condensation coefficient, in the majority of cases is equal to
unity, but in any case can never exceed unity. The rate of evaporation v is
in general dependent on the temperature and on       the surface concentration.
Of course it also depends on the nature of the solid surface on which adsorp-
tion occurs. If the surface is strictly homogeneous, v may be a function of
  and T only for a given surface, but it may be possible that different portions
of the surface are capable of exerting different forces on adatoms, so that
v and may not be uniform over the surface.
   In a stationary state when is not changing with time, the general condition
that must be fulfilled is

                                        = v                                (11)

If we divide the rate of evaporation v by the number of atoms per square
cm, we obtain the average probability per second for the evaporation of the
individual atoms. The reciprocal of this     is thus the average life of an
adatom on the surface. Thus we have




This time lag that exists between the condensation and the evaporation of
adatoms may thus be looked upon as the fundamental cause of the adsorp-
tion of gases on solid surfaces.
   In general, v should increase rapidly with temperature like the vapor pres-
sure of substances. Thus the logarithm of v should increase approximately
linearly when plotted against the reciprocal of the absolute temperature, and
the slope of this line is proportional to the heat of evaporation and is a
measure of the magnitude of the forces by which the adatoms are held on
the surface. Thus v should be approximately given by an equation of the
type

                           v = const. exp                                  (13)

where is a measure of the energy required to remove an adatom from the
surface. The reason for the large variations of v for different substances is
due mainly to variations of rather than to difference28 in the constant factor
in Eq. (13). This is indicated by such approximate laws as Trouton’s rule.
   The forces acting between atoms and molecules are normally of extremely


306                             1932 I.LANGMUIR

short range 27,29 , so that the forces acting on an adatom, which determine
the magnitude of and therefore of v, depend mainly upon the atoms with
which any given adatom is in contact. When the gas pressure is raised or
the temperature is lowered so that increases to such a point that there is
no longer room for any additional molecules in the first layer in contact with
the solid, a still further increase in would require that a large number of
adatoms must be contained in a second layer. Now these adatoms in the
second layer cannot be in contact with the solid surface on which the primary
adsorption occurs, and therefore for these atoms                should differ from the
value of that applies to the adatoms in the first layer. Since λ occurs in
the exponent of Eq. (13), a relatively small change in λ is sufficient to cause
a marked difference in the value of v.
   Thus when the adsorbed substance is not nearly identical in its properties
with the substance on which adsorption occurs, we should expect the value
of v for atoms in the first and atoms in the second layer to be greatly different
from one another. Naturally two cases may arise28: v z may be either greater
or less than v l.
   Case 1: v 2 < v l. If v 2 is less than v I, the atoms in the second layer are held
by stronger forces to those in the first layer than these latter are by the
atoms of the underlying solid. There is therefore a tendency for the atoms
in the first layer to form clusters and on these clusters the second and third,
etc., layers begin to form long before the whole of the first layer is covered27.
 Such phenomena are of common occurrence. For example, when mercury,
cadmium or iodine is vaporized in vacuum and is condensed on a glass sur-
face, at a not too low temperature, discrete crystals of the condensed sub-
stances form on the glass. This is a direct indication that these atoms exert
greater forces on one another than they do on the underlying glass.
    If the glass surface is maintained at a temperature so high that these nuclei
 do not form, then the glass surface appears to reflect all the incident atoms,
for they evaporate from the glass surface far more rapidly than they do from
 a cadmium surface at the same temperature. Such observations were made
 by R. W. Wood, who attempted to explain them by a large reflection
coefficient. He believed that experiments indicated that molecules of mer-
 cury incident at low pressures on cold glass surfaces were completely reflect-
 ed at temperatures above -90°C, but were completely condensed below
that temperature.
    From our present viewpoint such a critical temperature has nothing to do
 with a true reflection but is dependent on the fact that with a given stream


                              SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                   307
of mercury or cadmium atoms there is a definite temperature below which
evaporation of the individual adatoms cannot take place fast enough to
prevent accumulation sufficient to form a monatomic film, so that all further
evaporation at these low temperatures ceases. Experiments show conclusively
that at all temperatures the mercury atoms condense, but that, if the tem-
perature conditions are favorable, single atoms re-evaporate from the glass
at fairly low temperatures.
    It is evident therefore that those cases in which v 2 is less than v 1 are charac-
terized by the growth of crystals from nuclei and do not lead to the forma-
tion of monomolecular films but rather to discrete crystal particles.
   Case 2: v 2 >v,. In this case, as the pressure is gradually raised or the tem-
perature is lowered, increases until a monomolecular film is formed, but
it then takes a considerable decrease in temperature or increase in pressure
before a second layer begins to form. These conditions therefore commonly
lead to the formation of films which do not exceed a molecule in thickness
over a wide range of experimental conditions. This case therefore is charac-
terized by typical adsorbed films.



                              Adsorption isotherms

The fundamental equation governing the amount of adsorbed substances on
a solid surface is given by Eq. (11). To put this into a definite form relating
the pressure p of the external gas and the surface concentration, we need
only to be able to express a and v as functions of and T. The functional
relation of v to depends not only on the forces exerted by the underlying
solid, but on the forces acting between adatoms. Furthermore we must con-
sider that the incident molecules corresponding to cannot all go directly
into elementary spaces on the bare surface, but many of them will make
their first contact at places already occupied by adatoms. An important
aspect of the problem of the adsorption isotherm is the determination of the
manner in which these incident atoms find places in the first layer. Many
atoms may temporarily be forced to occupy places in the second layer from
which they can either evaporate at a much higher rate than from the first
layer, or may migrate until they drop into positions in the first layer.
   It is natural. under these conditions to make assumptions which are as
simple as possible and to see whether the resulting equations can find a field
of application24. If the adatoms do not exert appreciable forces on one an-


308                           1932 I.LANGMUIR

other, we may thus assume that the life oft of each one is independent of
the presence of other atoms on the surface. Thus by Eq. (12), v is propor-
tional to
   Instead of dealing with the surface concentration of it is often con-
venient to use the covering fraction defined by

                                       =                                  (14)

where  is the surface concentration in a complete monomolecular film.
 Thus we may put

                                   v                                      (15)

where vI represents the rate of evaporation from a completely covered sur-
face.
   When molecules incident on the surface strike a part which is unoccupied
by other adatoms, we may assume that the fraction          condenses. The frac-
tion of such surface which is bare may be represented by I -         Therefore
the number of incident atoms which go directly into the first layer may be
put equal to       (I - 0)  The fate of the other incident atoms, viz. those
that first strike adsorbed atoms, will depend on many factors, some of which
we shall discuss later. A very simple, although not very probable, assump-
tion is that all these atoms re-evaporate so fast that they do not have oppor-
tunities to find positions in the first layer. On these assumptions we find


                                                                          (16)

Substituting this and Eq. (15) into Eq. (11) and solving for        we obtain
the following simple adsorption isotherm,


                                                                          (17)
                                           +

This equation has been found to apply with reasonable accuracy to a surpris-
ingly large number of cases of adsorption on plane surfaces. Considering the
nature of the simplifying assumptions made in its derivation, it should of
course not be looked upon as a general equation for the adsorption isotherm.
The cases where this equation is most likely to apply are those in which the


                             SURFACE CHEMISTRY                               309
adsorption occurs only in elementary spaces which are so far separated from
one another that the adatoms in the separate spaces do not exert appreciable
forces on one another. This can justify the assumption of Eq. (15). Also
in this case the condensation may reasonably occur according to Eq. (16),
because if a given space is occupied, which has a probability proportional
to the incident atom cannot merely slip into an adjacent elementary space
but must fall on to an area on which it is held with so little force that it
evaporates before it can move into any vacant elementary space. These as-
sumptions will give us an equation like Eq. ( 17) except that the significance
of and of the coefficient       is somewhat modified.
   Recent experiments have shown that in the mechanism of condensation
mobility plays an important part . Thus in general an incident molecule
                                     30



striking a surface already covered may be assumed to move an appreciable
distance before finally settling into a position in the first layer. Certainly if
the surface is homogeneous so that all parts of it are available for adsorption,
an incident molecule striking an isolated adsorbed molecule can hardly be
regarded as being even temporarily in a second layer. Such an atom will slip
into a position in the first layer before having any occasion to rebound or
evaporate from the surface. An atom cannot be in a second layer even tem-
porarily unless it is supported by at least three, or more often four, atoms in
the underlying layer. Even if there is no mobility, the probability that an in-
cident atom could occupy a place in the second layer would be proportional
to     where n is at least as great as 3 or 4. If the rate of evaporation is very
high, we might expect these atoms to evaporate before finding places in the
first layer. On this basis, therefore, instead of Eq. (16), the expression for
the rate of arrival of atoms in the first layer should be

                                 = a,                                       (18)

Some experiments were made to test the reasonableness of these conclusions.
The bottom of a tray was covered with steel balls     inch diameter) closely
packed into a square lattice and cemented into position. This surface thus
possessed many of the features of a homogeneous crystal surface, the steel
balls corresponding to the individual atoms. When other balls of the same
size were thrown on to the surface, they occupied definite elementary spaces,
each being in contact with four underlying balls. The number of such el-
ementary spaces (except for an edge correction) was the same as the number
of balls which were cemented into place (zero layer). A large number of


310                              1932       I.LANGMUIR

balls, sufficient to cover the fraction of the available spaces, was placed
in the tray (in first layer) and the tray was shaken to give a random distribu-
tion. A small number of additional balls were then dropped at random from
a height of 5 cm to the surface, and the number of these which went into
the second layer was counted. It was found that the probability P that a given
incident ball would occupy a position in the second layer was quite accu-
rately given by




The fraction of the incident balls finding positions in the first layer was thus
I         A comparison of this with Eq. (18) gives a value of n = 4.5. The
reason that n is greater than 4, the number of underlying atoms, is probably
that the kinetic energy of the balls causes some of them to roll from their
positions of first contact.
   Applying these results to adsorption, we should expect that, until is very
close to unity, all atoms incident on the surface should reach positions in the
first layer without any opportunity of evaporation or reflection, even if the
evaporation rate in the second layer is very high.



                   Effect of forces acting between adatoms28

The fact that two adatoms cannot occupy the same elementary space at the
same time must mean that they exert repulsive forces on one another. This
will manifest itself in the equation of state of the adsorbed atoms by a factor
such as the I     in the denominator of the first term of the second member
of Eq. (7). This means that the spreading force tends to rise indefinitely as
  approaches the value unity. Combining this equation of state with Gibbs’
equation, and assuming α = 1, we obtain for an adsorption isotherm the
equation

                ln (v/O) = ln [I/(      I    0)]   I/(   0)                (20)

Thus we see that the rate of evaporation should increase indefinitely as
approaches unity. It is just this effect which limits the amount of material
in typical adsorbed films on liquids or solids to that contained in a mono-
molecular layer.


                             SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                 311
    The forces holding adatoms on the surface in characteristic cases of ad-
sorption are usually far greater than those acting between adatoms. If this
were not the case, we would be dealing normally with the case in which v2
is less than vl, so that we would not have adsorbed films but crystal nuclei.
The effect of these strong forces originating from the underlying surface is
to polarize the adatoms. If these are all of one kind, they thus tend to become
similarly oriented dipoles which repel one another with a force varying
inversely as the fourth power of the distance between them. There may also
be attractive forces of the Van der Waal’s type, but these will vary with a
much higher power of the distance. The dipole forces will have a range of
 action far greater than other forces involved. A knowledge of these factors
which are probably important in most cases of adsorption can best be ac-
 quired by a detailed study of some one example in which quantitative deter-
 minations of all the factors are possible. The example that I have chosen for
 this purpose is that of adsorption of caesium vapor on tungsten, for in this
 case we can measure with great precision the surface concentration as
 well as the rates of evaporation v of atoms, of ions, and of electrons 30. Thus
 we are able to express these values of va, vp and vr as functions of Θ and T. These
 measurements enable us not only to determine the forces acting between
 the adatoms but also to determine the electrical properties of the adsorbed
 films.



                           Caesium films on tungsten

The ionizing potential of caesium is 3.9 volts, which is lower than that of
any other chemical element. The heat of evaporation of electrons from
tungsten corresponds to 4.6 volts. Thus the energy necessary to detach an
electron from a caesium atom is 0.7 volts less than that necessary to pull an
electron out of metallic tungsten. It is therefore not surprising that exper-
iments31-32 show that every caesium atom which strikes a tungsten filament
at high temperature loses its electron and escapes as a caesium ion. The
electric current that thus flows from the tungsten is a quantitative measure
of the number of atoms of caesium that strike the filament. Since currents of
 10 -17 A can be measured by an electrometer, it thus becomes possible to
detect a pressure of caesium vapor so low that only 100 caesium atoms per
second strike the surface of a filament.
   The escape of the caesium ions from the tungsten surface is an evaporation


312                            1932 I.LANGMUIR

phenomenon. If the temperature is below about 1,100°K, the rate of evap-
oration of the ions may be so low that it does not keep pace with the rate at
which the atoms arrive, so that there is an accumulation of adsorbed caesium
on the surface. As a matter of fact, the rate of evaporation of the adsorbed
caesium from the surface at a thousand degrees is about the same as that from
a surface of metallic caesium at room temperature (300°K). Thus from Trou-
ton’s rule we should expect the heat of evaporation of caesium adatoms to
be about three times as great as the heat of evaporation of caesium itself.
   Such large forces between the adsorbed caesium atoms and the under-
lying tungsten surface are to be expected as a result of the fact that the
caesium tends to lose its electron when close to the tungsten surface. Thus
the positively charged caesium ion induces into the conducting tungsten
surface a negative charge, which exerts a force of attraction on the ion (the
"image force") equal to e2/4x 2, where x is the distance of the ion from the
surface. This image force is of ample magnitude to account for the strong
forces holding caesium on tungsten.
   If a thoriated tungsten filament is used, and this is given the special heat
treatment required to bring a complete monatomic film of thorium to the
surface, the heat of evaporation of electrons falls to about three volts, which
is 0.9 of a volt lower than the ionizing potential of caesium. In accord with
this fact the experiments show that caesium atoms are not converted into
ions by an activated thoriated filament, nor is there any observable tendency
for the caesium to become adsorbed on the filament.
   If, with a pure tungsten filament in presence of caesium vapor, the tem-
perature is maintained low enough to permit an adsorbed film of caesium
to be formed, the positively charged adatoms, which cause a positive con-
tact potential against the pure tungsten surface, have the effect of lowering
the heat of evaporation of the electrons. When such an amount of caesium
is present on the surface that the heat of evaporation is materially below 3.9
volts, the tendency of the filament to rob incoming caesium atoms of their
electrons and thus allow them to escape as ions is lost. This means that vP,
the rate of evaporation of ions, becomes very small as        the fraction of the
surface covered by caesium atoms, increases.
   At temperatures of about 700°K, in presence of caesium vapor saturated
at room temperature (pressure about 10-9 atmosphere),           increases to ap-
proximately 0.7 and the heat of evaporation has then been lowered to such
a point that the electron emission is 10 2 2 times greater than that of a clean
tungsten filament at the same temperature.


                              SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                  313
   Within the last three years, Dr. J. B. Taylor and I have made a detailed
study
       2 8 , 3 0
                 of the rates of evaporation of atoms, ions and electrons from these
caesium films on tungsten as functions of and T. In order to measure
a method was devised for determining the number of adsorbed atoms per
square cm of tungsten surface. Two methods were found. When is less
than 0.08, a sudden heating or flashing of the filament at temperatures above
1,300° causes every caesium adatom to escape from the filament as an ion
so that the ballistic kick measured with the galvanometer gives directly the
value of The second method, which is applicable at any values of (even
those corresponding to polyatomic layers), involves the evaporation of the
adatoms as atoms, in the presence of a retarding field which prevents the
escape of ions. This burst of atoms falls on a parallel neighboring tungsten
filament heated above 1,300° from which these atoms escape as ions. The
ballistic kick of current from this second filament thus measures on the
first filament. We call this the two-filament method of measuring
   The measurements of showed that as the caesium pressure is increased
or the filament temperature lowered, increases to a definite limiting value
       which is 4.8 x 10 atoms per square cm of apparent filament surface.
                                I4



A study of the crystal habits of tungsten has shown that the surface lattice
of surfaces etched by evaporation contains 1.425 x 1015 atoms per square
cm. Since the diameter of the caesium atoms is almost exactly twice that
of tungsten, and because of the tendency of the adatoms under the strong
forces exerted by the tungsten, to occupy definite elementary spaces on the
surface, we conclude that the maximum number of caesium adatoms is one
quarter the number of tungsten atoms and therefore the true value of               is
3.563 x 10 atoms per square cm. Comparing this with the observed or
                 14



apparent value of it appears that the true surface of the tungsten filament
is 1.347 times the apparent surface, this difference being due to the slight
etching of the filament surface by evaporation at high temperatures.
   A study of transient states during which increases or decreases with time
has proved conclusively that the phenomenon of condensation or evapora-
tion goes on independently of one another, the condensation being dependent
on while the evaporation v is strictly a function of and T only, and does
not depend upon the way the surface film has been formed.
   The experiments show that within the accuracy of the experiments (about
0.5%) the condensation coefficient is always equal to unity even when
is as great as 0.98. This proves that the incident atoms, which under these
conditions must nearly all strike adatoms, can slide around in a second layer


314                           1932 I.LANGMUIR

until they find positions in the first layer. The experiments prove, however,
that the number of atoms which exist at any time in the second layer is
extremely minute, of the order of 10-7 . The atoms in the second layer pos-
sess very high surface mobility.
   The rate of evaporation of atoms v a increases at any given temperature
extremely rapidly as increases. Thus at 1,000°K an increase of from 0.1
to 0.9 causes a 1011-fold increase in v a. This indicates very strong repulsive
forces between the adatoms in agreement with the fact that these adatoms
tend to be positively charged as indicated by the effect of the film in in-
creasing the electron emission. It has been possible to develop this relation-
ship between v a and v e into a quantitative theory.
   A single caesium adatom on a tungsten surface may be regarded as an ion
held to the metal by its image force. The image and the ion thus constitute
a dipole, having an electric moment M, oriented with its axis perpendicular
to the surface. Because of the strong electric fields close to the ion when it
is adsorbed on the surface, we should expect the conduction electrons in the
metal to be drawn towards the ion so that the dipole moment should be
considerably less than we would calculate for a caesium ion at a distance
from an ideal metal surface equal to its radius. The experimental values of
M have actually been found to be 16.2 x 10-18 , whereas we calculate
25 x 10-18 for a spherical caesium ion in contact with an ideal conducting
plane.
   The force f between two such adion dipoles is given by


                                f = (3/2) M2/ r4                          (21)

where r is the distance between the adions.
   We may now work out the equation of state of the adsorbed caesium
films in terms of these forces by means of Clausius’ virial equation which
for surfaces takes the form

                          F =                                             (22)

where the summation is to extend over all adatoms which act on any one
adatom. The forces f are of two kinds: first, the long-range forces which
correspond to the dipole repulsion given by Eq. (21), and second, the short-
range forces acting between atoms in contact which prevent any two from
occupying a single elementary space at the same time. These short-range


                            SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                315
forces may be taken into account by dividing the second member of Eq.
(6) by          as has already been done in Eq. (7). In this way by an in-
tegration process it has been possible to derive the general equation of state
for adsorbed atoms which repel as dipoles. This equation is

        F =                + 3.34           +
                                                                            (23)

where I is an integral whose numerical value can never exceed 0.89 and
which can be obtained from tables and curves from the value of M, and
  The spreading force F calculated in this way cannot be measured directly
for a solid surface but it can be related to the rate of evaporation v a by means
of Gibbs’ equation



                                d ln                                        (24)


By substituting in this equation the values of F from Eq. (23), v a can be
calculated in terms of M. Actually we have reversed the process. From the
experimentally determined values of v u as functions of and T, we have
calculated F by Eq. (24) and from these by Eq. (23) have obtained M .
These values of M are found to be functions of but are not appreciably
dependent on T, although a slight dependence is indicated by the form of
Eq. (23).
  A test of this theory can be made since the values of M obtained from v a
may be compared with values of M obtained from the contact potential
which may in turn be obtained from measurements of v e. The contact
potential V of a surface covered with an adsorbed film as compared with
that of a pure metal surface is given by

                                    V =                                     (25)

Furthermore the electron emission v e is related to the contact potential V by
the Boltzmann equation

                                  = exp (

where v Iv is the electron emission from pure tungsten at the same tem-
perature. The full line curve in Fig. 2 gives values of V calculated by Eq.


316                           1932 I.LANGMUIR

(25) from M as determined from v a. The points shown by small circles
represent values of V obtained from V a by Eq. (26).
   The values of V obtained by these two independent methods agree nearly
perfectly when       <0.5. The deviations at higher values of      seem to in-
dicate that for high values of the short-range forces are somewhat greater
than those given by the factor I       the denominator of the first term of the
second member of Eq. (23). Calculation shows that for a value of = 0.75,
that part of the spreading force which is due to the short-range forces is ac-
tually 45 percent greater than is given by the first term in the second mem-
ber of Eq. (23).
   It is also possible to calculate the contact potential from data on v p, the
rate of evaporation of ions from the surface. The values of va, ve and vp must
be so related to one another that they give concentrations of atoms, electrons
and ions in the vapor space near the filament which agree with the thermo-
dynamical requirement for equilibrium among these particles. We may thus
put
                                         =                                (27)

where K is the equilibrium constant that can be determined from the ioniz-
ing potential in accordance with the Saha equation. When this is done, and
we combine with the Boltzmann equation and the Dushman equation for
the electron emission from tungsten, we obtain

                             ln                           V)              (28)

where Vi is the ionizing potential of caesium, and V W is the heat of evapora-
tion of electrons from tungsten. The values of the contact potential V cal-
culated from v p in this way are indicated in Fig. 2 by crosses. These points
lie on the curve obtained from v n.
   This agreement of the values of V obtained by these three methods shows
that our theory gives a complete account of the electrical and chemical prop-
erties of moderately dilute adsorbed films of caesium on tungsten. It proves
also that the surface of these tungsten filaments was essentially homogeneous,
so that the probability of evaporation of any adatom or adion was inde-
pendent of the position of the atoms on the surface and was determined
wholly from the value of at that point.
   The experiments showed, however, that this conclusion, although true
for over 99 per cent of the surface, did not hold exactly. Deviations at very


                             SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                     317




   Fig.2. Contact potentia lof caesium films on tungsten against clean tungsten.

low values of indicated that about 0.5 per cent of the surface consisted of
what we may call active spots which adsorbed caesium far more strongly
than the rest of the surface, so that the heat of evaporation of these areas was
about 37 per cent greater than that for atoms on the normal part of the
surface. Experiments also showed that adsorption on this part of the surface
was of the type indicated by Eq. (17) : the simple type of adsorption iso-
therm. This means that the atoms adsorbed in the active areas did not exert
appreciable forces on one another. Evidently the active spots consist of
separated elementary spaces distributed over the surface, probably near grain
boundaries or at steps in the crystal faces.
   A variation of the dipole moment M with results from the depolarizing
effect of neighbouring dipoles. The electric fields due to these dipoles can be
calculated by an integration process similar to that used in calculation of F,
and are of the order of 5 x 107 volts cm-1.


318                            1932 I.LANGMUIR

   When a tungsten filament is heated to about 1,100° in caesium vapor and
there is an accelerating field drawing ions from its surface, two coexistent
surface phases may occur. For one of these is about 0.15, while in the other
it is very close to zero. The atoms that strike the less concentrated phase
evaporate as ions, while those that strike the concentrated phase evaporate
as atoms. The phase boundary is perfectly stable and stationary at a definite
temperature in the presence of a given pressure of caesium. If the tempera-
ture is raised slightly, the phase boundary moves towards the concentrated
phase, so that the whole filament gradually becomes bare; a lowering of the
temperature causes the whole surface to become covered with the concen-
trated phase. A detailed analysis of the mechanism at the boundary between
the phases which involves diffusion from one phase to the other, makes it
possible to measure the surface diffusion coefficient D. Results have shown
that

                         log D = - 0.70 - 3060/T

From the temperature coefficient of D it can be calculated that the surface
diffusion activation energy is about 0.6 volts. This means that between each
of the elementary spaces there is a potential barrier of the height of 0.6 volts
over which the adatoms must hop in order to migrate over the surface.
   The experimental methods involved in these studies of caesium films on
tungsten are capable of very great accuracy and sensitiveness, so that they
seem to offer a rich field for the detailed study of adsorption phenomena.
Dr. Taylor and I are continuing work in this field. We are planning to make
accurate comparisons between the properties of films of adsorbed caesium,
rubidium and potassium. We have developed a method of introducing def-
inite small amounts of oxygen by diffusion through a heated silver tube. In
this way known numbers of oxygen atoms may be placed on the surface of
a tungsten filament thus forming negative dipoles. These attract the positive
caesium dipoles which tend to form clusters around them, forming a kind
of two-dimensional colloidal distribution of caesium. We hope by the de-
tailed study of such systems to learn the effects not only of repulsive but also
of attractive forces between adatoms. Experiments are also in progress to
study the adsorption of caesium on tungsten surfaces containing known num-
bers of adsorbed thorium atoms.
   In such ways as these, together with the methods involving the spreading
of oil films on water, it becomes possible to determine the equations of states


                           SURFACE CHEMISTRY                              319
of two-dimensional gases, with nearly the same degree of accuracy as in the
case of three-dimensionals, but with the further advantage that the condi-
tions are especially favorable for the determination of the mechanism of all
of the processes involved.



                             Types of adsorption

The classical kinetic theory of gases, as for example in the treatment of
viscosity by Sutherland and of the continuity of the transition from gas to
liquid by Van der Waals, led to the recognition of attractive forces between
molecules at large distances and of strong repulsive forces at short distances.
The chemist has long known that exceptionally large attractive and repul-
sive forces are associated with the chemical union between adjacent atoms,
which he represents by the valence bond (primary valence) and that weaker
forces, which he has called secondary valence forces, usually correspond to
other types of chemical combinations. The physicist has studied the forces
between charged particles, such as ions and dipoles, and more recently has
discovered the interchange forces, which are best explained in terms of
quantum mechanics.
     In the structure of matter there can be no fundamental distinction be-
 tween chemical and physical forces: it has been customary to call a force
chemical, when it is more familiar to chemists, and to call the same force
physical, when the physicist discovers an explanation of it. There are also
usually no sharp dividing lines between attractive and repulsive forces or
between the various kinds of attractive or repulsive forces. Nevertheless a
recognition of various types of forces responsible for the stability of matter
proves useful in classifying natural phenomena. Thus in a qualitative way
 we may consider the following types of force29.
 ( I) Coulomb forces between ions or ions and electrons varying with
 where r is the distance between ions. The best examples of these forces are
 in salt-like substances.
(2) Forces between dipoles which vary with         and depend on the orien-
 tation of the dipole.
 (3) Valence forces, associated with the sharing of electrons between atoms.
 (4) Van der Waals’ attractive forces, which depend on the mutual polariza-
 bility of molecules. These forces are usually considered to vary with
(3) Repulsive forces due to the mutual impenetrability of completed elec-


320                            1932 I.LANGMUIR

tronic shells. It is primarily these which determine the collision areas of mole-
cules in the kinetic theory. Born and Mayer 3 3 find that the potential energy
of these repulsive forces between two completed shells is given by

                           A exp        +

where and are the effective radii of the two shells and r0 is a universal
constant equal to 0.435 A, while A is another universal constant. This means
that this type of repulsive force between two atoms can be expressed as a
function of the distances between the surfaces of the atoms, this function being
the same for nearly all atoms (or molecules) which have completed shells,
regardless of their electric charge. From a consideration of several of the
other properties of solids and liquids I had previously drawn a similar con-
clusion20, that the repulsive forces should be regarded "as surface forces
which should be expressed as functions of the distances between the surfaces
of the atoms (fixed by the electron orbits), rather than in terms of the dis-
tances between the centers of the atoms". A consideration of Van der Waals’
forces showed that for these also the "intensities of the fields around dif-
ferent non-polar molecules are practically identical when regarded as surface
forces".
   The fact that these repulsive forces, according to Born and Mayer, de-
crease to 1/eth value for each increment of 0.435 A° in the distance between
the atoms, indicates that they have a very small range of action.
(6) Electron pressures - The force that counterbalances the Coulomb attrac-
tion of the electrons and ions in the alkali metals - and probably in other
metals - is that due to the pressure of the Fermi electron gas.
   Since all of these forces can be effective at the surface as well as in the
interiors of solids and liquids, they must take part in adsorption phenomena.
There should thus be various types of adsorption corresponding to the sev-
eral types of forces which hold the atoms or molecules on the surface. Let us
consider some examples:
   Caesium on tungsten - The caesium ions are held by Coulomb attractive
forces (here a modified image force) to the underlying metal. The corres-
ponding repulsive forces which hold the ion a definite distance from the sur-
face (and thus determine the dipole moment M) result from the pressure
gradient in the Fermi electron gas which extends beyond the lattice of tung-
sten atoms. The forces between the caesium adatoms are typical dipole repul-
sions.
   Oxygen on tungsten or carbon - The attractive forces are probably typical


                             SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                321
valence forces. That they are not ordinary Coulomb forces, such as those
effective in caesium adsorption, is suggested by a consideration of the relation
of the contact potential to the heat of evaporation of the adatoms. A film
of caesium which has the maximum effect on the electron emission                 =
0.67) has a contact potential of + 3.0 volts against tungsten, while the heat
of evaporation of the adatoms corresponds to 1.9 electron volts. With an
oxygen film produced when a tungsten filament at 1,600° is in contact with
oxygen at low pressure, the contact potential against tungsten at 1,600° is
- 1.6 volts, but the heat of evaporation is about 7 volts.
   The adsorption of oxygen, hydrogen and carbon monoxide on platinum36
affords other examples of adsorption dependent on primary valence forces.
   Oil films on water - In these cases the attractive forces that cause the active
heads to spread over the surface are principally dipole forces between the
heads and the water molecules with some contribution from Van der Waals’
forces. Above the heads there is a hydrocarbon phase in which Van der
Waals’ forces and the repulsive forces between completed shells predominate.
   Non-polar gases on glass - The adsorption of such gases as nitrogen, argon,
etc. on glass or mica at low temperatures is determined by typical Van
der Waals’ forces24.



                             Activated adsorptions

Because of the various types of adsorption that exist, a single gas may be
adsorbed by a given surface in several different ways. At sufficiently low
temperatures Van der Waals’ forces alone would be sufficient to cause ad-
sorption (Van der Waals’ adsorption). At higher temperatures molecules on
the surface may undergo chemical change and thus be held by valence
forces. The heat of adsorption is then far greater than corresponds to the
Van der Waals adsorption. The only reason that such adsorption does not
occur at low temperatures is that the reaction velocity of the chemical change
may be too low. Since there is an activation energy associated with each
such reaction, H. S. Taylor has proposed the term activated adsorption for
                            34



the adsorption which involves such chemical changes.
   In some cases, such as the adsorption of caesium atoms on tungsten, the
adsorption involves only the transfer of one electron and can thus occur at
very low temperatures so that activation is not required, and only one type
of adsorption is observed.


322                           1932 I.LANGMUIR

   The distinction between Van der Waals’ adsorption and activated adsorp-
tion was pointed out by the writer in 1918 and illustrated by the adsorption
                                    24



of carbon monoxide and of oxygen on platinum. At the temperature of
liquid air and with a clean platinum surface in contact with carbon monoxide
at a pressure of 16 baryes, the surface concentration of the adsorbed carbon
monoxide was 3.9 x 1014 molecules cm , but, as the temperature of the
                                               -2



platinum gradually rose to 20°C, decreased to 1.4 x 1014 and then increased
again to 3.9 X I0 1 4 and remained nearly constant until 200°C had been
reached. When oxygen was brought into contact with platinum at liquid
                                            -2
air temperature, I.5 X 1014 molecules cm were adsorbed immediately. On
raising the temperature to 20°C, increased very slowly (in 18 hours) to
3.0 x 1014. At 360°C rose to 4.8 X 10 . It was concluded "that at liquid-
                                          14



air temperature platinum adsorbs carbon monoxide in much the same way
that glass does, that is, by secondary valence forces. With a moderate rise in
temperature this gas is released, but in the neighborhood of room tempera-
ture the reaction velocity becomes sufficient for the platinum to react (pri-
mary valence) with the carbon monoxide to form a much more stable ad-
sorbed film."
   In a discussion of the mechanism of the dissociation of hydrogen on tung-
sten filaments in 1916 the writer considered7 the possibility that the adsorbed
hydrogen exists on the surface in two forms and that the velocity of inter-
action between these forms may determine the rate of production of atomic
hydrogen. The mathematical formulation which was given is applicable to
many cases of activated adsorption.
   Within recent years H. S. Taylor34 and his co-workers have discovered
many cases of activated adsorption and have demonstrated their importance
in an understanding of contact catalysis. The velocity of the activation reac-
tion, which is often low even at a temperature of several hundred degrees,
has been measured and the activation energy calculated. Other investigators
have sought to explain these slow surface reactions by assuming solution of
the adsorbed gas in the underlying substance or slow penetration into cracks
or capillary spaces.
                                                                              35
   That this cannot be a general explanation is proved by some experiments
that Dr. Blodgett and I have made on the thermal accommodation coeffi-
cient of hydrogen in contact with tungsten. At temperatures from 200°K to
600°K a stable adsorbed film of hydrogen on tungsten is formed which gives
an accommodation coefficient of about 0.22. As the temperature is raised,
this film goes over slowly into a much more stable film which is charac-


                             SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                  323
terized by a value of α = 0.14. The reaction velocity is such that the forma-
tion of the stable film requires several minutes at 600°K and a small fraction
of a second at 900°, indicating an activation energy of the order of at least
20 kg calories per molecule. Since the accommodation coefficient is a purely
surface property, these experiments prove that these two forms of hydrogen
film are both monatomic films which probably represent two kinds of
chemical binding by valence forces. At temperatures below liquid-air tem-
perature a clean tungsten surface would undoubtedly show also Van der
Waals’ adsorption of hydrogen. This would thus be a third kind of adsorbed
film of hydrogen on tungsten.



                           Catalytic action of surfaces

 A monatomic film of oxygen on tungsten at 1,500° acts as a catalytic poison
 for nearly all the reactions which would otherwise occur in contact with the
 tungsten surface 15. Thus the dissociation of hydrogen into atoms at 1,500°K
 is stopped by a trace of oxygen, as is also the decomposition of ammonia,
 methane, or cyanogen. The effect of the oxygen is to cover the surface so
 that the other gas cannot make contact with the tungsten surface.
    Similarly hydrogen and carbon monoxide act as catalytic poisons on plati-
 num surfaces36. The rate at which carbon monoxide and oxygen combine
 in contact with platinum is proportional to the pressure of oxygen and in-
 versely proportional to the pressure of the monoxide. The reaction velocity
 depends on that fraction of the platinum surface which is not covered by ad-
 sorbed molecules of carbon monoxide. The oxygen molecules that can be-
 come adsorbed in these vacant spots and so be adsorbed on the platinum
 surface can thus react with adjacent adsorbed molecules of carbon monoxide.
    In numerous cases investigated, the action of a surface in catalyzing a gas
 reaction involves just such interaction between molecules adsorbed in ad-
jacent elementary spaces on the surface. On this basis it is possible to de-
 velop 7 , 1 3 , 3 6 a "law of mass action" for the velocity of surface reactions by
 which the observed reaction velocities can be explained quantitatively. It has
 been pointed out 15 that reactions of this sort are extremely sensitive to the
 actual distances between the atoms in the surface of the catalyst. Thus with
 many surfaces ‘there is only a relatively small fraction of the surface on which
 the reaction can occur with extreme rapidity, while over the larger part of
 the surface it takes place at a negligible rate. A quantum theory explanation


324                              1932 I.LANGMUIR

of the importance of the spacing of the atoms in the catalyst has recently
been given by Sherman and Eyring37.
   The presence of a second layer of adsorbed atoms or molecules, although
this second layer may cover only a minute fraction of the surface, is often
of great importance in the mechanism of gas reactions brought about by
a surface catalyst.
   Thus in the oxidation of heated tungsten filaments in oxygen at low pres-
sures by which WO3 is formed, the oxygen molecules incident on a surface
already nearly completely covered by a monatomic film of oxygen atoms,
condense and momentarily exist in a second adsorbed layer29. Although the
rate of evaporation from this second layer is so high that the surface concen-
tration is very low, the adsorbed atoms or molecules in this layer move freely
over the surface and thus fill up the holes in the first layer, formed when
WO3 molecules evaporate, far faster than would otherwise be possible. These
 atoms in the second layer can also interact with those in the first layer and
 with the underlying tungsten to form the molecules of WO 3 which escape
from the surface.




In the following list of references, the papers are by I.Langmuir except as indicated.

 1. Ind. Eng. Chem., 20 (1928) 332. This paper gives an account of the author’s early
     work on gases in lamps.
 2. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 37 (1915) 1139 "Chemica1 reactions at low pressures".
 3. Ibid., 34 (1912) 1310 "A chemically active modification of hydrogen".
 4. Ibid., 34 (1912) 860 "The dissociation of hydrogen into atoms".
 5. I. Langmuir and G. M. J. Mackay, ibid., 36 (1914) 1708.
 6. Ibid., 37 (1915) 417.
 7. Ibid., 38 (1916) 1145. (Papers 5-7 describe determinations of the degree of dissocia-
     tion of hydrogen at high temperatures.)
 8. Gen. Elec. Rev., 29(1926) 153 "Flames of atomic hydrogen(and a recalculation of
     the degree of dissociation)".
 9. Trans. Am. Electrochem. Soc., 29 (1916) 294; also Gen. Elec. Rev., 16 (1913) 962.
10. A. E. Freeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 35 (1913) 927.
11. Ibid., 35 (1913) 105 "The clean-up of oxygen in a tungsten lamp".
12. I. Langmuir and D. S. Villars, ibid., 53 (1931) 495.
13. Ibid., 38 (1916) 2221-95 "Constitution and fundamental properties of solids and
     liquids", Part I (see p. 2271).
14. Trans. Electrochem. Soc., 29 (1916) 262.
15. Trans. Faraday Soc., 17 (1921) 607 "Chemical reactions on surfaces" (see p. 608).


                             SURFACE CHEMISTRY                                   325
16. Phys. Rev., 22 (1923) 357 "Electron emission from thiorated tungsten filaments".
17. Met. Chem. Eng., 15 (1916) 468.
18. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 39 (1917) 1848-1906 "Constitution and fundamental properties
     of solids and liquids", Part II.
19. "The distribution and orientation of molecules", in Third Colloid Symposium
     Monograph, Chemical Catalog Co., New York (1925), p.48.
20. "The effects of molecular dissymmetry on properties of matter", in J. Alexander
     (Ed.), Colloid Chemistry, Vol. I (1926), pp. 525-46, in particular pp. 529-31.
21. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.,3 (1917) 251 "The shapes of molecules forming the surfaces
     of liquids".
22. N. K. Adam, a series of papers in Proc. Roy. Soc. (London). See also N. K. Adam,
      Physics and Chemistry of Surfaces, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1930).
23. J. Traube, Ann. Physik, 265 (1891) 27.
24. J. Am. Chem. Soc, 40 (1918) 1361 "The adsorption of gases on plane surfaces of
      glass, mica, and platinum" (see pp. 1399-1400).
25. Phys. Rev., 40 (1932) 463 "The mobility of caesium atoms adsorbed on tungsten".
26. Ibid., 8 (1916) 149 "Evaporation, condensation, and adsorption".
27. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 3 (1917) 141 "The condensation and evaporation of gas
      molecules".
 28. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 54 (1932) 2798 "Vapor pressures, evaporation, condensation,
      and adsorption" (see pp. 2811 and 2815).
 29. Chem. Rev., 6 (1929) 451 "Forces near the surfaces of molecules" (see p.473).
 30. J. B. Taylor and I. Langmuir, Phys. Rev., 44 (1933) 423 "The rates of evaporation
      of atoms, ions and electrons from caesium films on tungsten".
 31. Science, 57 (1923) 58.
 32. I. Langmuir and K. H. Kingdom, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), A107 (1925) 61
      "Thermionic effects caused by vapours of alkali metals".
 33. M. Born and J. E. Mayer, Z.Physik, 75 (1932) 1.
 34. H. S.Taylor, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 53 (1931) 578.
 35. K. B. Blodgett and I. Langmuir, Phys. Rev., 40 (1932) 78 "Accomodation coef-
      ficients and surface films".
 36. Trans. Faraday Soc., 17 (1921) 621 (Catalytic oxidation of hydrogen and carbon
       monoxide by platinum)).
  37. A. Sherman and H. Eyring, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 54 (1932) 2661 "Quantum me-
       chanics of activated adsorption".
