UBIQUITIN AT FOX CHASE

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2004
by
Irwin Rose

University of California, Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
College of Medicine, Irvine, CA 92697–4560, USA.




My interest in protein breakdown as a research problem began in l955 at
about the time I joined the Biochemistry Department of Yale University. It
was known that proteins break down intracellularly in the mature animal1, 2.
In l955 I learned from Melvin Simpson about experiments he had published
2 years earlier3 showing that a variety of conditions that should lower the ATP
level of liver slices (anaerobiosis, cyanide, 2, 4-dinitrophenol) decreased the
rate of liberation of labeled methionine from protein of rat liver slices.
Simpson and I had just joined the Biochemistry Department and we had
down the hall labs from each other. Simpson’s research goal at Yale was to
look for an in vitro system that performed protein synthesis rather than pro-
tein breakdown. During my Yale years I concentrated on enzyme mechanism
questions relating to the keto-aldose isomerases using tritium to establish the
occurrence of proton transfer4 but I kept an eye out for reports in the litera-
ture on progress in the protein breakdown field.
   Nothing new was being reported by 1963 when we relocated to the
Institute for Cancer Research of Fox Chase, Philadelphia. At that time I be-
gan looking for a cell free system that would show an ATP dependence using
the Ehrlich ascites cells that were available from our animal colony. My usual
procedure was to label cells in suspension with an essential amino acid, wash
the cells, lyse them by homogenization, and look for acid soluble counts
adding either ATP or 2-deoxyglucose plus hexokinase to deplete the endoge-
nous ATP.
   During 1972 on a half year sabbatical divided between Oxford (J. Knowles)
and Jerusalem (Y. Stein), I was able to do further experiments with tissues
supplied by Hans Krebs and by Jacob Mager, who had been Avram Hershko’s
Ph.D research director at the Hadassah Medical School. Both men were
highly supportive. But I was not able to find a cell free system. At the same
time I was talking to Jacob Bar Tana of the Biochemistry Department and we
came up with a Pulse/Chase method that could be used to determine the
functionality, binding constant and rate of dissociation of potential enzyme-
substrate complexes5.


218


GETTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Hershko had been with Gordon Tompkins in San Francisco on a post docto-
ral fellowship essentially confirming Simpson’s findings but with the tyrosine
aminotransferase of cells in culture. When he returned to Israel to set up his
own lab in Haifa he also looked for a cell free system. I did not meet Avram
Hershko until l975 at a Fogerty Conference on Regulation in Bethesda where
we learned of each others interest in protein breakdown. Meanwhile
Tompkins died tragically during a brain tumor operation. And Hershko was
looking for a U.S. lab in which to expand his further work during sabbatical
years and summers. It is not clear to me why he chose our lab in suburban
Philadelphia for this purpose. We had no reputation in protein breakdown
having never published in the field. Our limited expertise was expected to be
in mechanistic enzymology.
   In l977, when we joined forces at Fox Chase, Etlinger and Goldberg6 had
done the first successful experiment using a cell free system with lysates of
rabbit reticulocytes. Hershko and his student Aaron Ciechanover7 had al-
ready started fractionating the reticulocyte extract and recognized the heat
stable factor (APF-1) before they came to Fox Chase that summer. Their subse-
quent work, much of which was reported in collaboration with members of
the Rose lab, is to be found in the Hershko chapter. The key observation that
8 kDa APF-1 formed units of a chain linked to the protein targeted for break-
down was the most unexpected and unique aspect of the process8.
   The identification of APF-1 with ubiquitin was made by three post docs at
Fox Chase: Keith Wilkinson and Arthur Haas from the Rose/Hershko lab
and Mike Urban from the next-lab over. Urban was working with chromatin
and especially knew about their interesting components, the histones9. The
pivotal question asked of Urban was: Do you know any examples of two pro-
teins that are linked covalently. This recalled the small protein of unknown
function, ubiquitin, a covalent ligand of histone H2A. The size and amino
acid composition of APF-l reported by Hershko and known for ubiquitin
were in agreement.
   The failure of many cell extracts to give ATP dependent protein break-
down is probably due to a lysosomal trypsin-like protease that destroys the
ubiquitin of the preparation. This was discovered by Haas et al.10 who obser-
ved the loss of enzyme binding capacity of an ubiquitin affinity column when
liver extracts were put through the column. Haas could show ATP/ubiquitin
dependent protein breakdown with liver extracts that were preincubated to
inactivate the trypsin-like activity. Ubiquitin was already known to be trypsin
sensitive at the arg74-gly75 bond.

THE UBIQUITIN ACTIVATING ENZYME
Enzymologists usually study the initial rates of reactions measuring product
formation as a function of substrate concentration or other variable. Cell bio-
logists are more likely to want to know the effect of a change on the steady


                                                                           219


Scheme 1. The sequence and distribution of enzyme intermediates (Haas & Rose, 1982).




state behavior of a complex system. When the ubiquitin activating enzyme,
E1, was discovered by Hershko it could not be studied by rate of product for-
mation because the enzyme produced a covalently linked end-product. In
1982, Art Haas used isotope exchange at equilibrium to establish the reaction
sequence and a number of equilibrium and rate constants of E1, the only en-
zyme of the cell that uses Ubiquitin, per se, as a substrate.
   The Ub activation process is defined by the formation of two equivalents of
PPi, one equivalent of bound AMP-Ub and two exchange reactions, ATP with
PPi and ATP with AMP:

                     E1 + ATP + Ub <-- > E1.AMP-Ub + PPi
                       E1.AMP-Ub <--> E1-S-Ub + AMP
                E1-S-Ub + ATP + Ub <--> E1-S-Ub.AMP-Ub + PPi

AMP-Ub, prepared from E1, ATP, and Ub and eluted by denaturing the
enzyme is sensitive to both DTT and hydroxylamine indicating an acyl-P
anhydride linkage. The AMP-Ub could be converted back to ATP upon addi-
tion of PPi and Mg2+ or to E-S-Ub which did not require PPi or Mg2+11-13. Only
the formation of enzyme-bound Ub was inhibited by iodoacetamide indicating
transfer to cysteine of the enzyme, (Ub being cysteine free). The linkage to Ub
had already been established to involve the C-terminal glycine of Ub14.
   ATP was shown to precede Ub in combining with E1 and with E1-S-Ub
(see Scheme 1) since Ub above 10 M caused inhibition of ATP/PPi
exchange and at 400 M inhibition was complete. Addition was not random12.
Equilibrium constants of the expanded Scheme I could be estimated from

220


Scheme 2.




the influence of varying AMP and PPi on the concentrations of EAMP-Ub
and ES-Ub which were determined with T-ATP by acid precipitation and
labeled Ub by electrophoresis. The affinity for ATP, ~40 M , tighter than the
level of ATP in the cell assures that in the cell’s E1 will be in the E1-ATP or E1-
S-Ub-(ATP) form ready to pick up any free Ub (Km=0.58 M). The sensitivity
to AMP as an inhibitor, K6= 0.027 M, much tighter than ATP as a substrate,
suggests that AMP may be acting as a feedback inhibitor at an allosteric site as
well as with E-S-Ub.


UB-CARBOXY TERMINAL HYDROLASE: DISCOVERY AND MECHANISM
It was observed that the usual one turnover assay of E1 used ATP well beyond
expectation when glutathione was included in the assay. The explanation:
The Ub of E1-S-Ub is readily transferred nonenzymatically to mild nucleophiles
such as glutathione, DTT, and hydroxylamine. By itself this would increase the
consumption of ATP to the amount of Ub present in the assay. But much more
was taken up. Were the Ub derivatives unstable? None of the expected Ub-
S-DTT from an incubation of AMP-Ub and DTT could be isolated on a
covalent-Hg+ column unless great care was taken in the conversion. Most
revealingly the yield was increased if urea was added immediately after the
reaction. This indicated that an enzyme carried over with the AMP-Ub from
the E1 preparation was regenerating the Ub. These two observations: the
transfer of Ub from E1-S-Ub to mild nucleophiles and an enzyme contaminating
E1 that would restore free Ub were needed to explain why much more ATP
was consumed than could have been expected in the E1 assay15. The combined

                                                                               221


action of E1, glutathione, and the hydrolase results in a futile cycle converting
ATP to AMP+PPi, Scheme 2. AMP-Ub is normally too tightly bound to E1 to
lead to a futile cycle of its own in the presence of an active nucleophile.
   Amides of Ub were not available to test as substrates of the new Ubiquitin-
thioesterase until their synthesis was made possible by Cecile Pickart by action
of E1+E2 on primary amines16. This was of great interest because the enzymes
required for recovery of Ub from conjugation in the newly emerging Ub
system were believed to be isopeptidases. An E1.E2-S-Ub complex normally
transfers Ub to the -NH2 of lysine of proteins. To determine the substrate
specificity of this system Dr. Pickart found that a variety of small primary amines
at much higher concentration are also very good Ub acceptors. The Ub-amides
were good substrates for the previously purified Ub-thiolesterase which
henceforth has been known as Ub-Carboxy-terminal hydrolase, UCH. The
pure enzyme, m.w. 29kDa, was readily prepared from mature human red cells
(~0.1 Units/ml packed cells). Its turnover rate is quite high, almost diffusion
limited and its Vmax is ~10 s-1. Ub conjugated to glutathione or to a polyamine
in cells with such activity should be negligible.
   The rate of the E1.E2, UCH, amine system can be determined by measuring
ATP consumption in a futile cycle similar to that of Scheme 2 where the rate
can be used to test the activity or the specificity of the component present in
rate determining amount. UCH enzymes are limited in the size of the substrate
they will act upon. Any role in the deubiquitination of polyubiquitin chains is
doubtful. This activity is given over to much larger enzymes, DUBs.
   Considerations of the mechanism of UCH start with the observation that
these enzymes are inactivated by iodoacetamide, protected by Ub, and therefore
should have an active site thiol group and possibly a Ub-thiolester intermediate.
We found that inactivation of UCH was brought about by borohydride if
ubiquitin was also present17. Both T from borohydride and label from Ub
were tightly fixed to the inactive enzyme. Both isotopes were released upon
mild acid denaturation. T traveled with the Ub. The released product was
~1000x more inhibitory than Ub in an assay using T-butanol-4-NH2-Ub as a
substrate. This effect was lost with borohydride addition to the inhibitor
which was protected from reduction if enzyme were added first. We concluded
that the acid-liberated inhibitor must be the C-terminal aldehyde form of Ub.
This was shown with T-NaBH4, and isolation of T-ethanolamine among the
acid hydrolysis products. The basis for the protection of the Ubal by the
enzyme must be the formation of a strong complex that shields the aldehyde
function. A combination of chemical and physical forces would result from
the addition of the active site -SH to the carbony, a thiolhemiacetal on the
one hand and multiple protein-protein interactions between the active site
and the remainder of the Ubal. Additional stabilization may come from the
resemblance of the thiohemiacetal to the tetrahedral intermediates and
transition states in the amidase reaction as would be drawn for papain and
cathepsin B, Scheme 3.
   This interpretation of the mechanism of action of Ubal has been confir-
med and extended by x-ray crystallography of Ubal complexed with the UCH

222


Scheme 3.




of yeast, Yuh 1 by Johnston et al.18 and with the 352 residue UCH domain
that was cut out of the 1102 residue long HAUSP deubiquitinating enzyme
(DUB) by Hu et al.19. In both cases Ubal caused significant distance and
angle rearrangements in the catalytic triad regions compared with structures
done without Ubal19, 20, respectively as well as placement of H-bonding
residues to accommodate the expected oxyanion hole of a thiohemiacetal
Ub adduct.
   The large DUBs, about 80 of which have been identified, serve to reverse
the lengthening of the polyubiquitin chains that leads to the destruction of
the targeted protein at the proteasome. HUASP is also known as a co-tumor
suppressor protein because, by deubiquitinating p53, the tumor suppressor
transcription factor of tissues, it should raise its steady state level. The large size
of DUBs is consistent with high specificity and signal control. The roles of the
UCHs are not yet clear. The size of the Ub-extension that can be removed by
these smaller enzymes is smaller than a Ub so that Ub-Ub cleavage interme-
diates, if they arise in the deubiquitination process will not be further degraded
by a UCH.


UNRESOLVED ISSUES
1. Current discussions of the E1 E2 E3 system often ignore the potential of
E1-AMP-Ub to transport Ub units between the solvent and E1-SH to E2 without
dissociation of the E1E2 complex. This possibility should be easily evaluated
by pulse chase using heavy isotope labeled Ub in the pulse, unlabeled Ub in
the chase and analyzing the product by mass spec sequencing.
   2. This approach may fail if the E2.E3. protein interactions are weak. In

                                                                                  223


addition the experiment should give information about the processivity of
the system, how many Ubs can be added in succession.
   3. This approach should also answer the question of whether when Ubs are
added to the growing chain they are added to the distally located end of the
chain as is often stated but which seems unreasonable as the chain length
increases.
   4. An interesting problem stems from the observation by Cecile Pickart16,17
that hydroxylamine at Km ~1 mM inactivates the C-terminal hydrolase of
erythrocytes, and possibly all UCHs, in the required presence of Ub. Using
the hydroxamate of Ub as a substrate, complete inactivation requires ~2000
turnovers of the enzyme. Labeled Ub is not found on the reisolated enzyme,
nor is activity recovered. Unless hydroxylamine has some unexplored way of
reacting with the S- of the Ub-thiolester- enzyme intermediate, the classical
reaction products should be Ub-hydroxamate and active enzyme. In view of
the important role of the deubiquitinating enzymes and a practical interest
in their inactivation it will be useful to know how hydroxylamine works.

CREDITS
It is a pleasure to pay tribute to Dr. Avram Hershko whose analytic intuition
was always productive and whose generous spirit made our interactions always
harmonious. The post docs: Aaaron Ciechanover, Art Haas, Cecile Pickart,
and Keith Wilkinson were all major contributors who have continued their
careers in the Ub field with notable success. Thanks are also due to Hannah
Heller and Jesse Warms for their contributions in the lab.
    Finally, we wish to pay tribute to Melvin V. Simpson who in 1953 demon-
strated that protein breakdown in whole cells was energy dependent (3) and
to Etlinger and Goldberg who in 1977 opened the way to in vitro studies with
the demonstration of ATP dependent protein breakdown in rabbit reticulo-
cyte lycates (6).


REFERENCES
 1. Schoenheimer, R. (1942) The Dynamic State of Body Constituents, Harvard Press,
    Cambridge, MA.
 2. Schimke, R. T. and Doyle, D. (1970) Annu. Rev. Biochem. 39, 929–976.
 3. Simpson, M. V. (1953) J. Biol. Chem. 20, 143–154.
 4. See previous autobiographical chapter.
 5. Rose, I. A., et.al. (1974) J. Biol. Chem. 249, 5163–5168.
 6. Etlinger, J. D. and Goldberg, A. L. (1977) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 86, 7751–7755.
 7. Ciechanover, A., Hod, Y., and Hershko, A. (1978) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
    81, 1100–1105.
 8. Hershko, A., Ciechanover, A., Heller, H., Haas, A. L., and Rose, I. A. (1980) Proc. Natl.
    Acad. Sci. USA 77, 1783–1786.
 9. Wilkinson, K. D., Urban, M. K., and Haas, A. L., (1980) J. Biol. Chem. 255, 7529–7532.
10. Haas, A. L., Murphy, K. E., and Bright, P. M. (1985) J. Biol. Chem. 260, 4694–4703.
11. Haas, A. L., Warms, J.V.B., Hershko, A. and Rose, I. A.( 1982) J. Biol. Chem. 257,
    2543–2548.
12. Haas, A. L. and Rose, I. A. (1982) J. Biol. Chem. 257, 10329–10337.

224


13. Haas, A. L., Warms, J.V.B. and Rose, I.A. (1983) Biochemistry 22, 4388–4394.
14. Hershko, A., Ciechanover, A., and Rose, I.A. (1981) J. Biol. Chem. 256, 1525–1528.
15. Rose, I.A, and Warms, J.V.B. (1983) Biochemistry 22, 4288–4294.
16. Pickart, C.M. and Rose, I.A. (1985) J. Biol. Chem. 260, 7903–7910.
17. Pickart, C.M. and Rose, I.A. (1986) J. Biol. Chem. 261, 10210–10217.
18. Johnston, S.C. Riddle, S.M., Cohen, R.E. and Hill, C.P. (1999) The EMBO J. 18,
    3877–3887.
19. Hu, M., Li, P., Li, M., Li, W. Yao, T., Wu, J-W., Gu, W., Cohen, R, E. an Shi, Y. (2002)Cell,
    111, 1041–1054.
20. Johnston, S.C., Larsen, C.N., Cook, W.J., Wilkinson, K.D. and Hill, C.P. The EMBO J.
    16, 3787–3796.




                                                                                            225
