204   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Early cryo-electron
      microscopy
      Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2017 by Jacques Dubochet
      University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.



      in this very special moment my first feeling is thankfulness. It goes
      out to my late parents, to my family that I have the pleasure of seeing in
      the audience, to my scientific colleagues, to whom I owe being here, to my
      friends, and to all those who contributed to making me who I am, here
      and now. I want to pay a special tribute to Prof. Édouard Kellenberger, my
      “doctor father” and lasting friend, who taught me how to be a scientist
      and passed onto me the sense of responsibility that should be associated
      with this profession. My special thanks also go out to Sir John Kendrew,
      first General Director of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory
      (EMBL) in Heidelberg, who gave me the chance to conduct, under ideal
      conditions, our ambitious project on water in electron cryo-microscopy
      (ecm).

      WHY ELECTRON CRYO-MICROSCOPY?
      Like any living organisms, we are a bag of water, formed from billions of
      cells which all are small bags of water. Since air is not transparent to elec-
      trons, an electron microscope must operate under vacuum – which
      means that any observed biological specimen must be dry. This is not
      good. The original structure can’t be preserved in these conditions. When
      water is removed, floating molecules stick to each other. Skilled micros-
      copists know how to minimize the damage, but they will never prevent
      some forms of aggregation since “fishes never fly”. Even objects supposed


                                                             Jacques Dubochet Lecture      205




Figure 1. Prof. Édouard Kellenberger, Sir John Kendrew.


to be resistant, like bacteriophage T4, look terrible when they are dried on
a solid surface without particular precautions (figure 2a). For decades,
electron microscopists have invented methods improving the structural
preservation of every possible dry specimen. Negative staining has proved
especially effective, as the subtle details visible on the micrograph demon-
strate (figure 2b). Freeze-drying is a bit more complicated, but also has its
advantages (Figure 2c). Nevertheless, it is obvious that the head of the
virus does not look healthy.
   Since the end of the 60s, I was among those working hard to find better
methods for preparing and observing delicate biological specimens. At




Figure 2. T4 bacteriophages prepared by different methods. a) Direct drying. b) Negative
staining; the specimen is in a solution of heavy metal salt that forms a protective coat
around the particle when water evaporates. c) Freeze-drying; a thin layer of suspension
is frozen on a supporting film. Ice is removed by sublimation under vacuum.


206   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      the time, my hero was Nigel Unwin. I was impressed by his creativity and
      skill. Beside the similarity of our research’s direction, I discovered – hav-
      ing been invited in his home the first time I was in Cambridge – under the
      bed, a self-made telescope of the same type that the one I had built myself
      in my late adolescence. Would the Nobel Prize by-law allow four persons
      to share the prize, I do believe that we would be standing here together. In
      the 70s, Nigel had a brilliant idea. He realized that drying a biological
      specimen in a heavy metal salt was not the best environment for preserv-
      ing a delicate structure; friendlier surroundings would be better. He tried
      to do it in sugar. It worked. Of course, the contrast in sugar is much lower
      than in metal, but Nigel realized that contrast is not the limitation – that
      is the signal-to-noise ratio. This can be improved by means of methods
      used in X-ray crystallography, taking advantage of the redundancy of the
      information in a crystal. He joined forces with his friend and colleague
      Richard Henderson, an experienced crystallographer, and together in 1975
      they solved the first 3-dimensional structure of a membrane protein
      (Henderson and Unwin, 1975).
          Bob Gleaser is another person of great importance for me. I worked in
      his steps for a good part of my PhD, and it was a micrograph he published
      in 1976 (Taylor and Glaeser, 1976) that redirected my working plans. It
      was a sample of broken bacteria containing a rich collection of their vari-
      ous substructures. Some of them were also subjects of our own research.
      This micrograph was special because it was a thin frozen layer of the
      aqueous sample observed at –170°C in a specially cooled specimen
      holder. The specimen was in ice and the biological material was more
      beautiful than anything I had ever seen before. I was immediately
      convinced that cold water was the future. Two years later, Sir John Ken-
      drew offered me a position as group leader at the newly formed EMBL for
      a project entitled “How to Deal with Water in Electron Cryo-Microscopy”.
      As it has been explained elsewhere (Dubochet, 2011), it didn’t start well at
      all. But the continuation proved to be better.
          The problem with water is that it crystallizes into ice when it is cooled
      at a temperature in which it does not evaporate in the vacuum of the elec-
      tron microscope. So, we had to learn more about water, cooling, freezing,
      and observing. We tried everything we could think of, and learned from
      all our predecessors in the field. As it turns out, we started experimenting
      with the sophisticated machine presented in Figure 3 (a copy of it is pres-
      ently exposed in the Nobel Museum). On the right, not visible, is a nebu-
      lizer throwing a stream of microdroplets of water through a small slit in
      the cupboard. The mobile tweezer, above the dewar filled with liquid
      nitrogen at –188°C, is holding a grid covered with a thin specimen sup-
      porting film. We let the tweezer fall and the grid, having harvested some
      droplets while crossing the stream, is immediately frozen. The frozen ice


                                                    Jacques Dubochet Lecture   207



                                                    Figure 3. The apparatus
                                                    for freezing water
                                                     microdroplets.




droplet has the characteristic aspect shown in Figure 4a. One day, my col-
league Alasdair McDowall (Figure 4b, inset) decided to place a little
beaker in the liquid nitrogen dewar and condense in it liquid ethane,
because it was known that it is a better coolant than liquid nitrogen. He
called me to the microscope, something unexpected was there (Figure
4b). It was a “frozen” microdroplet; it was not ice, it was amorphous. We
didn’t know what it was. We let the specimen warm up slowly – at that
moment it was at about –160°C – hoping that the evaporation of the
droplet would tell us more about its nature. Suddenly, at −135°C, in a few
seconds, the droplet turned into a multi-crystal of a substance we knew
well from previous experiments. It was cubic ice, a form of ice which is
typically formed by condensation of water vapor at low temperature. The
conclusion was obvious. We were seeing ice originating from an amor-
phous substance: it was vitreous water. I told Alasdair: “Aha! We have
something great!”


208   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Figure 4. a. Frozen ice microdroplet. b. Vitrified water microdroplet.



         The trouble was that vitrification of liquid water should have been
      impossible. This was demonstrated on solid thermodynamics grounds
      over decades of previous work. Basile Luyet, acknowledged father of cry-
      obiology and Catholic priest in the congregation of St-François de Sales
      was among the major contributors to this body of work. I like Basile Luyet
      because of his strange combination of strict Catholic faith with uncom-
      promised scientific mindset. I also like him because he was born in
      Savièse, a village in the Wallis Alps of Switzerland to which he remained
      attached all his life. It is only a few kilometers away from the village of
      Nendaz where I spent my first school years, at a time when understanding
      things of nature became important to me.
         As a consequence of the accepted impossibility of vitrifying water, the
      report of our observation was rejected from publication. The editor was
      doubly wrong.
         Firstly, because at the very moment our article was rejected, the same
      journal had in press the article of an Austrian group demonstrating that
      vitreous water can be obtained by rapid cooling of the liquid. Their exper-
      iment was similar to ours but they used X-ray diffraction to demonstrate
      the nature of the observed substance and its transformation into ice upon
      warming (Mayer and Bruggeler, 1980).
         Secondly, they were also wrong because – as we reported – vitrifica-
      tion is rapid, reproducible and easily repeated.
         So why is it possible to obtain vitreous water when it should be impos-
      sible? Is this one more illustration that science sometimes fails? Not so
      fast! The work of Luyet and of those of the field is solid, and thermody-
      namics should not be taken lightly. At present, we still don’t really under-
      stand the nature of the vitreous water we observe. We know that it is not
      simply immobilized liquid water, but some other form of amorphous
      solid. The science of water still has shadowed regions. I can imagine that,
      when the light comes, it will have consequences on a larger scale – for


                                                    Jacques Dubochet Lecture   209


biology also. For now, we are pleased to observe that biological objects
vitrified by rapid cooling seem to be indiscernible from those floating in
good bona fide liquid water. Electron cryo-microscopists feel safe in their
knowledge for now, but they prudently keep an eye on the real nature of
vitreous water.
   Knowing how to vitrify a droplet of water is one thing; preparing a bio-
logical sample for biological observation is another. The major problem
comes from the high surface tension of liquid water, which makes water
droplets spherical. Spreading a thin layer of liquid on a supporting film
requires that the interaction’s energy between the drop and the surface
must exactly compensate the surface tension of water. I was an expert on
how to treat supporting film for optimal wetting. We were combining this
knowledge with our newly acquired competence in vitrification. At that
time, late Dr. Marc Adrian (Figure 5 inset), a French microscopist of great
culture and strong mind, had joined the group. He didn’t like our subtle
and poorly reproducible spreading procedures. He wanted to get rid of the
supporting film altogether. I tried to discourage him, but Marc was not
one to easily give up. A while later, he came up with the kind of image
shown on Figure 5. It was a vitrified layer of a Semliki Forest Virus (SFV)
suspension stretched over the 18µm holes of a grid. There is no support-
ing film, just a thin layer of suspension with perfectly preserved virus
floating immobilized in their vitrified aqueous medium. Indeed, the ideal
specimen for electron microscopy observation. Adrian’s method is simple.
The grid is held on a tweezer, itself mounted on a plunger. A drop of sus-
pension is put on the grid and most of it is then sucked away with a blot-
ting paper. This takes about one second. The surprising thing is that the
last fraction of a micrometer takes another full second before it breaks
and vanishes. This leaves ample time for the operator to liberate the
plunger and let the grid fall freely into an ethane beaker some 10 cm


                                                          Figure 5.
                                                          Unsuppor­ted thin
                                                          film of vitrified
                                                          suspension of SFV.
                                                          Inset: Marc Adrian


210   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      below. The preparation is simple, it only takes a few seconds and it is eas-
      ily reproducible. It came as no surprise that the rumor of this elegant
      preparation method spread rapidly. It was a great time in our laboratory.
      Water specialists, some of them quite incredulous, came to observe the
      strange phenomena of vitrification. We learned a lot from them. Electron
      microscopist colleagues wanted to adopt the method. The first electron
      cryo-microscopy course was organized. The result was broadly published
      (Adrian et al., 1984). One day, I got a phone call from Pierre-Gilles de
      Gennes, the world leader on entangled polymers and spreading viscous
      fluids. One of his books was a difficult read I kept on coming back to, time
      and time again. That early morning, he was teasing me. “I am sure that
      you do not know why your thin layer can survive the final step of the
      preparation!” He was right. He explained that, in order to break, the two
      surfaces of the thin layer must fuse together and entropy prevents that –
      for a moment. He could even articulate a number: one second.
          More than thirty years later, the basic principle of Adrian’s method is
      still being used, unchanged. The bare grid was soon abandoned for a grid
      covered with a film with µm-sized holes. The biological suspension is
      then stretched through the holes. Nowadays, only the older generation is
      still using a manual plunger, as full automatic devices are making
      cryo-specimen preparation simpler and more reproducible. But democra-
      tization has a price.
          Our results were soon published. When he saw the micrographs of his
      pet adenovirus in unprecedented details, Lennart Philipson, who suc-
      ceeded Sir John Kendrew as General Director of the European Molecular
      Biology Laboratory (EMBL), became convinced that this project by physi-
      cists about water was valuable and so it gained his full support. We joined
      forces with R.H. Vogel and S.W. Provencher, specialists in 3-d reconstruc-
      tion from 2-d images, and in 1986 we published a 3-dimensional model of
      the SFV at 35 Å resolution (Vogel et al., 1986) (Figure 6).
          Building on previous work and continuously improved by the creative
      efforts of many scientists – the long-lasting efforts of Joachim Frank for
      3-dimensional reconstruction of single particles were of seminal impor-
      tance – electron cryo-microscopy progressed smoothly throughout the
      years. The thirty-five Ångstrom of 1986 was well and good but some spe-
      cialists in X-ray diffraction – for long the dominant method for molecular
      structure determination – jokingly invented the word “blobology” to
      describe our work. Thirty years later, 3.5 Å is achieved on a nearly routine
      basis. Who could imagine this in the 80s? Richard Henderson was per-
      haps the only one who had this clear vision. He worked continuously to
      make it become real.
          Three and a half Å is certainly not an impressive number for non-spe-
      cialists. Nevertheless, everyone can understand that the resolution was


                                                               Jacques Dubochet Lecture   211




Figure 6. 3-dimensional model of a SFV at 35 Å resolution. Nature 320 (6062), 10 April
1986.




improved by a factor of 10 since the 80s. This means that the volume ele-
ment resolved at present is one thousand times smaller than before; the
density of information that can be harvested from the specimen is now
multiplied by one thousand. This is truly a remarkable achievement.
Bravo!
   But the real breakthrough came from the fact that, around 3.5 Å, atoms
become visible. Or, in other words: blobology becomes chemistry. This is
the reason why three biophysicists who never thought of themselves as
good chemists are gratified with a Nobel Prize in Chemistry. This is not
because we have reached our level of incompetence, as promised by
Peter’s principle; it is a testimony to the unity of science. Physics, biology,
chemistry; all is just science.
   At present, electron cryo-microscopy has not yet brought an important
result that could be translated into practical applications whether in med-


212   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      icine or in technology, but this will come, soon! Chemistry is a powerful
      science. When the arrangement of atoms can be visualized, the possibility
      to act on them is not very far from our reach. For example, will it soon be
      possible to prevent the pathological entangled binding of proteins that
      seems to be associated with Alzheimer’s disease and numerous other
      neurological disorders? Many of us would be interested in such progress
      “for the greatest benefit to mankind”, along the line of Alfred Nobel’s
      expectations.
         And science will continue. It will take time to explore the brain. We
      may understand how we think. Perhaps conscience will emerge. This is
      knowledge without limits.
         But knowledge also has its practical consequences. It shapes our lives.
         I got my first personal computer in 1984 as Adrian’s method was being
      implemented. Nowadays, billions of people are sitting in front of a com-
      puter screen for the major part of their days, and communication between
      individuals is fundamentally changed.
         My grandfather’s father was living in scarcity. He was never sure he
      could bring home the minimum required for a decent life for his family.

         => Now we are submerged with excess
         =>		      and the world’s climate is collapsing
         => 			            as is the glacier just above our mountain hut.




      Figure 7. Extraordinary ice collapse in the glacier of Ferpècle (Wallis, Switzerland). Photo:
      Gerard Stampfli.


                                                       Jacques Dubochet Lecture   213


Five hundred years ago, François Rabelais wrote,

  Science sans conscience n’est que ruine de l’âme.
  Science without conscience is but the ruin of the soul.

The problem is not new but now, it is urgent.
   What can we do?
   One thing is for certain: we scientists must come down from our ivory
tower and be involved in the society for which we produce knowl-
edge. That knowledge can have equally good or bad consequences, and
we must become more aware and responsible.
   This is the reason why, more than 20 years ago, we introduced a com-
pulsory curriculum in our university: “Biology and Society”. We want our
students to be as good citizens as they are biologists.
   This is good, but it is not enough.
   How can we be as good in using our knowledge for the well-being of all
as we are in producing it?
   I don’t know the solution, but I know the value of knowledge. It is our
most precious common good. We must protect it, develop it and make the
best of it for the well-being of mankind, now and for future generations.

Imagine,
  It’s easy if you try.

Imagine, for example, that we think about health.
  Imagine that we empower the World Health Organization, United
Nations WHO, with all we know about medicine and medical treatments,
and trust this institution with the duty and the competence to use this
knowledge for the well-being of all. Of course, we will give those who pro-
duce the knowledge the rightful reward for their efforts.

It isn’t hard to do.
Imagine…
You may say I’m a dreamer
But I’m not the only one
I hope someday you’ll join us
And the world will live as one
                     John Lennon


214   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      references
      Adrian, M., Dubochet, J., Lepault, J. & McDowall, A. W. (1984), “Cryo-electron
        microscopy of viruses,” Nature 308, 32–36.
      Dubochet, J. (2011), “Cryo-EM – The first thirty years,” J. Microscopy 245, 221–
        224.
      Henderson, R. & Unwin, P. N. T. (1975), “Three-dimensional model of purple mem-
        brane obtained by electron microscopy,” Nature 257, 28–32.
      Mayer, E. & Brüggeller, P. (1980), “Complete vitrification in pure liquid water and
        dilute aqueous solutions,” Nature 288, 569–571.
      Taylor, K. A. & Glaeser, R. M. (1976), “Electron microscopy of frozen hydrated bio-
        logical specimens,” J. Ultrastruct. Res. 55(3), 448–456.
      Vogel, R. H., Provencher, S. W., Von Bonsdorff, C.-H., Adrian, M. & Dubochet, J.
        (1986), “Envelope structure of semliki forest virus reconstructed from
        cryo-electron micrographs,” Nature 320, 533–535.
