From Chemical Topology to
Molecular Machines
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2016

by Jean-Pierre Sauvage
University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.




T    o a large extent, the field of “molecular machines” started after several groups
     were able to prepare reasonably easily interlocking ring compounds (named
catenanes for compounds consisting of interlocking rings and rotaxanes for
rings threaded by molecular filaments or axes). Important families of molecular
machines not belonging to the interlocking world were also designed, prepared
and studied but, for most of them, their elaboration was more recent than that
of catenanes or rotaxanes. Since the creation of interlocking ring molecules is
so important in relation to the molecular machinery area, we will start with this
aspect of our work. The second part will naturally be devoted to the dynamic
properties of such systems and to the compounds for which motions can be
directed in a controlled manner from the outside, i.e., molecular machines. We
will restrict our discussion to a very limited number of examples which we con-
sider particularly representative of the field.


CHEMICAL TOPOLOGY

Generally speaking, chemical topology refers to molecules whose graph (i.e.,
their representation based on atoms and bonds) is non-planar [1–2]. A planar
graph cannot be represented in a plane or on a sheet of paper without crossing
points. In topology, the object can be distorted as much as one likes but its topo-
logical properties are not modified as long as no cleavage occurs [3]. In other

                                                                                 111


112                                                                    The Nobel Prizes


words, a circle and an ellipse are topologically identical. The most representative
examples of topologically non-planar, and thus non-trivial, molecules are inter-
locking ring molecules or knotted cycles such as the trefoil knot. Interestingly,
topology and chemistry were not at all connected till 1961 when two chem-
ists working at Bell Telephone Laboratories, Frisch and Wasserman, published
an important discussion simply entitled “Chemical Topology” [1]. For the first
time, chemists were exposed to topology thanks to this seminal paper. It con-
tains a very clear account of most of the ideas that constitute the background of
chemical topology. For example, the idea of topological isomers (also named
“stereoisomers”) is introduced by comparing a [2]catenane (drawing III, two
interlocked rings) to the set of the two separate cyclic molecules (object IV) as
shown in Figure 1. Another example is provided by considering a single closed
curve, which can be a normal cycle such as I (topologically trivial or planar)
or the knotted cycle, the simplest example being the trefoil knot II. Hypothetic
compounds I and II of Figure 1 are topological stereoisomers: although they may
consist of exactly the same atoms in the same sequence, and the same chemical
bonds between them, they cannot be interconverted by any type of continuous
deformation in three-dimensional space.




FIGURE 1. The historical publication introducing the notion of chemical topology in the
chemical literature. Trefoil knot II and catenane III are topologically non-planar in the
sense that their graphs, once projected on a plane, will always require crossings in order
to be represented.


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                        113


     Schill’s book Catenanes, Rotaxanes and Knots, written in 1971, is indispens-
able for the topologist [4]. In addition to interesting theoretical considerations
regarding interlocked rings and knots, it contains much information on the
experimental approaches used by Lüttringhaus, Schill and their co-workers to
prepare such topologically novel systems. One of the first [2]catenanes to be
reported in the literature was prepared by Schill and Lüttringhaus more than
50 years ago [5]. This remarkable piece of work was greeted by the scientific
community due to the elegance of the procedure and also due to the impressive
synthetic work it represented at the time. Unfortunately, the complete synthesis
required a large number of steps and, as a consequence, the overall yield was lim-
ited. In spite of the novelty of the work, there were very few follow-up contribu-
tions from other organic chemists, mostly because of the extreme difficulty that
a gram scale synthesis of such compounds would represent following a purely
organic chemistry approach similar to that of Schill and Lüttringhaus.
     Before our group started in the field of catenanes, we were interested in
markedly different topics. We contributed to various research areas such as
homogeneous catalysis of the water-gas shift reaction using iridium complexes
[6], electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide [7] and inorganic photochemis-
try [8] in relation to solar energy conversion to chemical energy. Like a relatively




FIGURE 2. A [2]catenane and a [2]rotaxane. The number in square brackets (2 in this
case) indicates the number of components incorporated in the interlocking structure. A
[2]catenane is considered as the prototype of molecules having a non planar graph. In
mathematics, the object consisting of two interlocking rings is called “Hopf link.” Heinz
Hopf was a German topologist.


114                                                               The Nobel Prizes


large number of other research teams, we were fascinated by the “grand project”
known by the community as “water splitting,” i.e., photochemical splitting of
the water molecule into oxygen and hydrogen, supposedly the ideal fuel for the
future. Since the Nobel Foundation recommended that the laureates tell as hon-
estly as possible “the story behind the discovery,” I would like to explain how we
moved from inorganic photosensitizers to catenanes and related species. At the
end of the 70s, there was considerable interest for ruthenium complexes of the
Ru(bipy)32+ family (bipy : 2,2’-bipyridine) [9]. Several prestigious photochemistry
groups had shown that this compound displays promising properties in terms
of ability to transfer electrons, positive holes or electronic energy. Even more
spectacular, several approaches to the “water splitting” reactions had already
been reported [10]. A particularly interesting project was to replace the second
raw ruthenium metal, notoriously know to be rare and expensive, by common
first raw transition metals. Along this line of research, very few candidates appear
as reasonable. The only one was copper(I) since this metal was known to form
highly coloured complexes with aromatic diimine ligands of the bipy family. The
absorption band responsible for the colour in the visible spectrum was shown
long ago to be a Metal-to-Ligand Charge Transfer band. An American photo-
chemist, David R. McMillin (Purdue University) had already published seminal
work on the photochemical properties of copper(I) complexes in 1978 [11]. At
the beginning of the 80s, our group prepared 2,9-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline
(dpp) for various reasons, mostly in relation to sterically hindering ligands able
to favour coordination unsaturation once complexed to rhodium or iridium cen-
tres [6]. David spent some time in Strasbourg when he was on sabbatical leave.
He visited our group and, after several discussions, we embarked in a common
project dealing with Cu(dpp)2+ and related complexes containing two intertwined
ligands disposed more or less orthogonally to one another once coordinated to
the central Cu(I). At that time Cu(dpp)2+ was unknown since dpp itself seemed to
be a new compound. The beginning of this collaboration coincided with another
major event which was the arrival of Christiane Dietrich-Buchecker in our team.
Christiane had a superb organic chemistry background and we knew that she
had all the necessary expertise for making novel ligands either by herself or
associated to the PhD students she would co-supervise with me. Coming back
to Cu(dpp)2+, by looking carefully at its three-dimensional representation [8] as
shown on Figure 3, it was relatively easy to figure out that this compound, with
its two intertwined ligands, was the ideal precursor to a [2]catenane.
     There is perhaps an important factor in the fact that we recognised the link
between Cu(dpp)2+ and catenanes: the molecules were drawn manually using
Indian ink since this period corresponded to the “pre-ChemDraw era.” We thus


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                   115




FIGURE 3. The simple coordination chemistry reaction leading to Cu(dpp)2+ and its
3-dimensional representation.



had time to completely “digest” the molecular structures of the compounds we
were making and, first, that we had to draw. From the drawing of Figure 2, it is
clear that by connecting the two para-positions of the phenyl nuclei attached to
the same 1,10-phenanthroline group, one should obtain a ring. Furthermore, by
doing this operation simultaneously on both dpp sub-units within the complex,
formation of a [2]catenane appeared to be almost certain.
    With Christiane, we thus embarked in the new field of catenanes. After a few
months, we obtained the first positive results and about one year after the begin-
ning of the project, the first communication on our new strategy for making
interlocking rings was published [12] (Figure 4).
    We described this new strategy as a 3-dimensional template synthesis around
a transition-metal centre by reference to classical template effects so efficiently
used for making macrocycles by several groups such as Busch and his team in
particular [13]. The work seemed to be the first practical synthesis of a [2]cat-
enane in the sense that, for a good chemist, 500 milligrams could be obtained
within a few weeks. After the preparative work performed by Christiane, what
remained was to characterise the compound and convince ourselves that the
molecule obtained was indeed a [2]catenane. 1H NMR studies demonstrated


116                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




FIGURE 4. The title and the abstract of the first publication on catenanes from our group
with the picture of the late Dr C.O. Dietrich-Buchecker (1942–2008).



that the two dpp coordinating fragments were intertwined, thus indicating that
the rings were interlocking with one another. The general strategy is depicted
in Figure 5.
    Strategy A is both very general and simple. Both coordinating fragments
have to bind to the metal centre so as to be mutually perpendicular. By an appro-
priate choice of metal, chelates, linkers (g-g), and functional groups (f and g),
the system consisting of two intertwined organic fragments interacting with the
central metal will react in the expected fashion with formation of two inter-
locked rings. The only apparent weakness of strategy A is that a total of eight
reacting points have to find one another in the double-cyclisation reaction. The
second approach, strategy B, reduces this problem since it involves only four
reacting groups to be interconnected in a single cyclisation (twice g-f) leading
to the catenane. The only requirement is that the starting macrocycle has to be
pre-synthesised before the template reaction is performed. This ring contains a
coordinating fragment (f-f) and a non-coordinating linker (g-g), and it is also
likely to be formed as an intermediate in strategy A. It is noteworthy that, pro-
vided the threaded bis-chelate complex (bottom left) is stable enough, it must
form quantitatively from a 1:1:1 mixture of the macrocycle, the metal ion, and the


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                         117




FIGURE 5. Synthesis of interlocking ring systems. The strategy is based on a 3D-template
effect induced by a transition metal centre, copper(I) in the present case. The arcs of a
circle and the rings contain coordinating fragments f-f able to interact with a transition
metal centre (black disk). The f and g letters represent chemical functions able to react
with one another and form an f-g chemical bond.


open-chain fragment. A statistical mixture of complexes, as would arise if two
different open-chain ligands were reacted with a metal ion, cannot occur because
it is impossible for two of the macrocyclic ligands to attach to the same metal ion.
      Since it was less risky, we started with strategy B, which led to an interlocked
system in good yield (1983) [12]. Later on, we used strategy A since it is slightly
shorter than strategy B in terms of number of steps from commercially available
compounds (1984) [14]. The actual reactions carried out are shown in Figures
6 and 7. It is noteworthy that strategy B is more general than strategy A since
it opens the way to asymmetric [2]catenanes, i.e., compounds containing two
different rings. In addition, the threaded intermediate is close to a [2]rotaxane:
it suffices to end-functionalise the threaded fragment of the compound using
bulky groups to generate such a [2]rotaxane. We have used this synthesis route
extensively for making porphyrin-containing catenanes and rotaxanes as well as
variously substituted compounds of the same family.
      The copper-complexed catenane of Figure 7 could be quantitatively demeta-
lated using a cyanide salt. The back reaction leading to the starting copper(I)


118                                                                    The Nobel Prizes




FIGURE 6. The starting compound represented on the left is formed from commercially
available 1,10-phenanthroline in two steps. It can be made at the 10-gram scale within
one or two weeks. In the presence of copper(I), the entwined compound represented on
the right is formed quantitatively.




FIGURE 7. The double cyclisation reaction leading to the catenane is relatively low-
yielding. Nevertheless, it was possible to prepare batches of 0.5 g within a few weeks. By
slightly modifying the structure of the starting molecules and by applying the ring-closing
methodology brilliantly proposed by Grubbs, we substantially improved the yield (up to
92%) [15].


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                     119




FIGURE 8. The demetalation-remetalation reaction and the X-rays structures of the
copper(I) catenate and the catenand.


complex from the metal-free compound was perfectly reversible as shown on
Figure 8. X-ray quality crystals of both forms could be grown and their crystallo-
graphic structures were obtained by Pascard and co-workers [16]. We coined the
terms “catenates” and “catenands” for complexes whose ligands are interlocking
rings and for the corresponding metal free-compounds, respectively.
    The X-ray structures are represented below the corresponding chemical
drawings of the copper-complexed and metal-free [2]catenanes. As far as the
copper complex is concerned, the similarity between the drawing and the X-ray
structure is striking. By contrast, the shape of the solid state free catenane is sig-
nificantly different from the drawing. In any case, demetalation of the complex
or complexation of the free form results in a complete rearrangement of the
organic backbone. This metamorphosis can clearly be connected to the molecu-
lar machinery field although it is still relatively far from movements taking place
in real molecular machines.
    The Strasbourg approach to catenanes represented significant progress in
the catenane and rotaxane field. All of a sudden, the transition metal templated
approach developed by our team opened the way to novel topologies and to
rotaxanes. In fact, the potential of transition metal in relation to catenanes,


120                                                               The Nobel Prizes


rotaxanes and even knotted rings appeared to be limitless. Although the con-
tribution of Lüttringhaus and Schill was conceptually important, the template
approach completely modified the way molecular chemists looked at catenanes.
Within a few years, they changed status from very exotic and almost impos-
sible-to-make species, at least at a macroscopic scale, to normal and reason-
ably accessible compounds. A few pioneering contributions based on organic
templates were successfully explored by other groups. In 1989 Stoddart and his
group reported a particularly efficient and attractive synthesis of a [2]catenane
[17]. They took advantage of acceptor-donor interactions between an electron
deficient 4,4’-bipyridinium derivative and an aromatic electron donor, combined
to favourable hydrogen bonds, to predispose the various groups implied in a
very favourable situation before a cyclisation reaction leading to the desired
[2]catenane. This seminal piece of work was followed by two reports based on
hydrogen bonding only, published in 1994 by Hunter and his group [18] and
Voegtle and co-workers [19]. Both teams reported almost simultaneously very
similar data although they were working far away from one another. These two
pioneering hydrogen bonding-based approaches were followed by remarkable
work performed by Fujita and co-workers [20]. It was based on kinetically labile
Pd-N bonds and hydrophobic interactions. Fujita introduced the concept of
“magic rings” since the [2]catenane could be reversibly dissociated to the set of
two non-interlocking rings by just changing the nature of the medium in which
the catenane was dissolved or the concentration of its constitutive components.
      As far as rotaxanes are concerned, cyclodextrins turned out to be particularly
interesting. These natural rings were used as the cyclic components of a large
variety of rotaxanes. In the presence of appropriate string-like organic fragments,
threading through the cyclodextrin was shown to take place thanks to hydro-
phobic forces. The first convincing example of a cyclodextrin-based [2]rotaxane
was reported by Ogino in 1981 [21]. This pioneering publication was followed
by remarkable work from various groups and, in particular, from Harada and
co-workers [22].
      Figure 9 gathers a few remarkable topologies which could be obtained at the
molecular level by our group using a generalised transition metal-based strategy,
i.e., by assembling two or more transition metal centres and molecular threads
containing two or more coordinating fragments: a [3]catenane [23], the trefoil
knot [24] and a doubly interlocking [2]catenane also known as the Solomon
rings [25]. Other groups have also been interested in chemical topology. Impres-
sive topologies at the molecular level have been reported by the research teams
of Stoddart, Leigh and Siegel, just to cite a few [26, 27, 28].


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                   121




FIGURE 9. From a simple [2]catenane to more complex topologies. The examples repre-
sented on Figure 9 are those made in Strasbourg.



MOLECULAR MACHINES

The field of molecular machines, mostly initiated by Stoddart, Balzani and their
co-workers [29–30], was to a large extent an extension of that of interlocking ring
molecules, at least at the beginning. The structures of catenanes and rotaxanes
seem to be ideally suited to the making of molecular switches and machines,
i.e., compounds which can undergo large amplitude motions in a controlled and
reversible way.

Electrochemically-driven swinging motion of a copper-complexed catenane
The very first system made by our group for which a large amplitude motion can
deliberately be triggered by an external signal was reported in 1994 [31]. A ring
could be forced to rotate inside the other ring by playing with the copper(I)/
copper(II) redox couple which led us to name the compound a “swinging cat-
enane.” Since that time, molecular machinery has blown up in a very impressive


122                                                              The Nobel Prizes




FIGURE 10. Catenanes and rotaxanes in motion: towards molecular machines.



way thanks to the great contributions of various groups, either working with
catenanes or rotaxanes, or using non-interlocking compounds. Stoddart, Kaifer
and co-workers reported their first molecular “shuttle” in the same year [30]. The
compound made and studied in Strasbourg is a copper-complexed [2]catenane,
displaying two very distinct coordination modes corresponding to two extremely
different geometries. Having taken advantage of the roughly tetrahedral arrange-
ment of the copper(I) centre in bis-diimide complexes to construct catenanes
and molecular knots, the electrochemical properties of related copper complexes
have later been used in our group to design and prepare a large variety of cat-
enanes and rotaxanes and for investigating their controlled dynamic properties,
playing on the two classical oxidation states of copper, +1 and +2. As far as the
first “swinging catenane” is concerned, the interconversion between both forms
of the complex is electrochemically triggered and corresponds to the sliding
motion of one ring within the other. It leads to a profound rearrangement of
the compound and can thus be regarded as a complete metamorphosis of the
molecule. The principle of the process is explained in Figure 11.
     The key feature of the transformation is the difference in preferred coor-
dination number (CN) for the two different redox states of the metal: CN = 4
for copper(I) and CN = 5 (or 6) for copper(II). The organic backbone of the


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                            123




FIGURE 11. Principle of electrochemically induced molecular motions in a copper-com-
plexed [2]catenane. The stable 4-coordinate monovalent complex (top left, the black circle
represents Cu(I)) is oxidised to an intermediate tetrahedral divalent species (top right,
the white circle represents Cu(II)). This compound undergoes a complete reorganisation
process to afford the stable 5-coordinate Cu(II) complex (bottom right). Upon reduction,
the 5-coordinate monovalent state is formed as a transient (bottom left). Finally, the latter
undergoes the conformational change that regenerates the starting complex. The biden-
tate coordinating fragment is phen (1,10-phenanthroline), part of the dpp ligand, and the
tridentate ligand is terpy (2,2’:6’,2”-terpyridine).




asymmetric catenate consists of a dpp bidentate chelate included in one cycle
and, interlocked to it, a ring containing two different subunits: a dpp moiety and
a terpy ligand. Depending upon the mutual arrangement of both interlocking
rings, the central metal copper can be tetrahedrally complexed (two dpp units)
or 5-coordinate (dpp + terpy). Interconversion between these two complexing
modes results from a complete pirouetting of the two-site ring in one given
direction or the other. It can easily be induced electrochemically, by means of
a chemical reductant or oxidant or even photochemically [32]. From the stable
tetrahedral monovalent complex, oxidation leads to a 4-coordinate Cu(II) state,
which rearranges to the more stable 5-coordinate compound. The process can
be reversed by reducing the divalent state to the 5-coordinate Cu(I) complex,
obtained as a transient species before a changeover process takes place to afford
back the starting tetrahedral monovalent state.


124                                                                 The Nobel Prizes




FIGURE 12. Square scheme corresponding to the process whose principle is depicted in
Figure 11, with the chemical structures of the compounds. The dpp-containing cycle is a
30-membered ring whereas the dpp+terpy incorporating one is a 31-membered ring. It
could be shown that the 5-coordinate Cu(II) complex has a square pyramidal geometry
and not a trigonal bipyramid one. [33]



     The real molecules are represented in Figure 12 as well as the square scheme
interconverting the 4-and the 5-coordinate species.
     Interestingly, the transformations of Figure 11 and Figure 12 is accompanied
by a change in the electrochemical properties of the complex as well as spec-
troscopic changes. As expected, the tetrahedral copper complex has a relatively
high redox potential: Eo = +0.63 V vs. SCE in CH3CN, whereas the 5-coordinate
species has a slightly negative potential, pointing to greater stabilisation of the
divalent copper than in the 4-coordinate species: Eo = –0.07 V.
     The obvious weak point of the swinging catenane of Figures 11 and 12 is
its kinetic inertness. It should be noted that this first system was dramatically
improved by modifying structural parameters of the compounds and, in par-
ticular in replacing the [2]catenane organic backbone by a [2]rotaxane, either
acting as a pirouetting species or as a two- or three-station molecular shuttle. The
rearrangement process was also markedly sped up by modifying the structure of
the bidentate chelate incorporated in the rings. By replacing the highly sterically


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                          125


hindering dpp fragment by an endocyclic but non-sterically hindering chelating
group of the 8,8’-diaryl-3,3’-biisoquinoline family, fast moving rotaxanes were
obtained [34–35]. Finally, it should be noted that the motion taking place in the
swinging [2]catenane is by no means a rotation motion. The ring that incorpo-
rates both a bidentate and a tridentate chelating group undergoes a “pirouetting”
motion corresponding to a 180° rotation in a given direction or in the other. Real
rotary machines were reported much later. Feringa’s contribution to the field of
rotary motions was indeed crucial [36].


TOWARDS SYNTHETIC MOLECULAR MUSCLES: CONTRACTION AND STRETCHING OF A
LINEAR ROTAXANE DIMER

The topic of this paragraph is dealing with a special type of molecular machine
related to contraction and extension of switchable species reminiscent of muscles
[37–38]. Rotaxane dimers as represented in Figure 13, can be regarded as syn-
thetic analogues of natural muscles. Since real muscles mostly consist of fila-
ments able to glide along one another, a molecular assembly in which two string-
like molecular fragments can glide along one another was designed. This is the
process taking place in the sarcomere, in which the thick filament (containing




FIGURE 13. The molecular structure of a rotaxane dimer or pseudo-[2]rotaxane dimer
(i.e., without bulky stoppers at the ends of the threaded filaments) is adapted to the con-
traction/extension motion mimicking the dynamic properties of a muscle.


126                                                              The Nobel Prizes


myosin) moves along the thin filament (actin polymer) in one direction or the
other so as to induce contraction or elongation. The actin-myosin complex as
well as other motor proteins are fascinating biological systems which represent
an inexhaustible source of inspiration for synthetic chemists.
     After careful design mostly based on space-filling model, we started the syn-
thesis work. It turned out to be particularly delicate and time consuming. In the
present discussion, we will skip the preparation of the ring-and-lateral thread
conjugate although the synthesis of this compound was far from trivial.
     A 31-membered ring incorporating a dap fragment (dap: 2,9-diaryl-
1,10-phenanthroline), prepared in several steps from commercially avail-
able compounds, was covalently linked to a linear fragment incorporating a
2,9-dimethyl-3,8-bis-(p-hydroxyphenyl)-1,10-phenanthroline so as to afford
the bis-chelating target consisting of a coordinating ring attached to a lateral
arm containing another bidentate chelating group. The reaction of the ring-and-
string conjugate with a stoichiometric amount of [Cu(CH3CN)4]PF6 in CH3CN/
CH2Cl2 at room temperature led to the doubly threaded species whose structure
is represented in Figure 15. The success of this latter reaction was certainly far
from being certain, considering the number of Cu(I) complexes which could be
formed by coordinating the two different chelating fragments (endocyclic and




FIGURE 14. Cu(I)-induced double threading process leading to a dicopper(I) rotaxane
dimer. The reaction is quantitative. The structure of the doubly threaded compound
obtained is shown in Figure 15.


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                      127


lateral coordination sites) of the ligand to metal centres. Nevertheless, we were
happy to observe that formation of the doubly threaded complex was quantita-
tive. In fact, the complexity of the reaction leading to the doubly threaded spe-
cies is reflected by the slowness of the reaction leading to the desired product
(several days at room temperature). Many coordination/de-coordination steps
have to occur before the system finds its thermodynamic well. The desired [2]
pseudorotaxane was formed under thermodynamic equilibrium and thus it was
obtained pure as a deep red crystalline solid without further purification. X-ray
quality crystals were grown from acetone/diethyl ether by diffusion. The crystal-
lographic structure of the dicopper(I) [2]rotaxane dimer is represented in Figure
15. The most striking feature of the structure is its linear extended arrangement,
which results in a distance between the two terminal phenolic oxygen atoms
of 36.3 Å. The two copper atoms are 18.3 Å apart and occupy similar environ-
ments. The coordination tetrahedron around both copper(I) atom are strongly
distorted.
    In order to complete the synthesis of the switchable dimer rotaxane we had
to introduce additional function. In particular, the project involved two potential




FIGURE 15. X-ray structure of the dicopper(I) rotaxane dimer. The pale grey ring-and-
string component and the black subunit are identical. The carbon atoms are pale grey or
black. The two copper(I) centres are green. The nitrogen and oxygen atoms are deep blue
and red, respectively.


128                                                                 The Nobel Prizes




FIGURE 16. Functionalisation of the [2]pseudorotaxane dimer, precursor to the “muscle,”
by attaching a terpy-bulky stopper conjugate to its both ends. The “muscle” represented
at the bottom of the figure is in its extended situation.


binding modes to a transition metal centre for the organic backbone: 4-coordi-
nate or 5-coordinate. Tridentate ligands of the terpy family were thus introduced
simultaneously to the stoppers, whose function was simply to prevent unthread-
ing of the molecular filament from the rings they were threaded through. The last
organic reaction of the synthesis sequence is shown in Figure 16. The function-
alised terpy represented on the upper part of Figure 16 incorporates a tridentate
chelating group and is attached to a bulky stopper. It was prepared separately and
subsequently it was attached to both ends of the dicopper(I) precursor of Figure
15. This last reaction afforded the muscle-like compound depicted on Figure 16
(bottom) as a dark red solid in 60% yield. The last coupling step not only allowed
the introduction of terdentate sites on both sides of the molecular assembly but
also afforded a real rotaxane which cannot undergo any unthreading reaction.
    As usual in our group, Cu(I) was used as a gathering and templating metal.
The movement was induced by a chemical reaction, namely a metal exchange. As
shown in Figure 17 in a very schematic fashion, the doubly threaded compound
can interact simultaneously with two metal centres, either in a four- or in a five-
coordinate geometry each.
    Due to the synthesis procedure, each Cu(I) centre was coordinated to two
1,10-phenanthroline units, resulting in a four-coordinate situation. This binding


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                       129




FIGURE 17. Principle—Contraction/extension of a [2]rotaxane dimer by gliding one
strand along the other one. The W-shaped fragment represents a terdentate chelating
group such as terpy whereas the U-shaped species is a bidentate ligands of the dpp type.



mode corresponds to an extended geometry (upper part of Figure 17), whereas
coordination of a divalent metal ion such as Zn2+ affords a five coordinate situ-
ation corresponding to interaction of each metal centre with one 1,10-phen-
anthroline or dpp unit and one terpy. It corresponds to a contracted geometry
(bottom of Figure 17).
     As shown on Figure 18, by treating the dicopper(I) pseudorotaxane dimer
with KCN, the metal-free ligand was obtained in quantitative yield (not shown
on the figure). After remetalation using Zn(NO3)2, the colourless di-zinc com-
plex (bottom) was obtained quantitatively. It is now in the contracted form. The
extended dicopper(I) dimer could be regenerated by the reaction of the di-zinc
complex with an excess of [Cu(CH3CN)4]PF6 at room temperature. Using a metal
exchange reaction, the muscle-like compound is thus set in motion. The Cu(I)
complex corresponds to the extended form and the Zn(II)-complexed species
is the contracted state. A metal exchange reaction was utilised to set the muscle
in motion due to the fact that the electrochemical method turned out to be inef-
ficient. The copper(I) complex was oxidised with the purpose of contracting the
system to a dicopper(II) complex with two 5-coordinate Cu(II) centres but the
motion was very slow which led us to use a chemical signal. The kinetic barrier


130                                                                    The Nobel Prizes


to the rearrangement is very large due to the fact that the gliding motion of a
given thread is strongly coupled to that of the other thread. The tight connection
between the two subunits makes it impossible for the [2]rotaxane dimer to move
in a stepwise manner.
     The two rotaxane dimers of Figure 18 represent one of the first examples of a
unimolecular linear array able to elongate and contract at will under the action
of a given stimulus. From Corey–Pauling–Koltun (CPK) model, one can estimate
that the length of the compound changes from 83 to 65 Å between both situa-
tions (Figure 18). This corresponds roughly to the same relative amount as what
is found in natural muscles (~27 %).
     It is noteworthy that several muscle-like compounds have been proposed in
recent years. In most cases, they were set in motion using principles which were
somewhat different from ours. It is not the place in this article to review in detail




FIGURE 18. The two forms of the muscle-like [2]rotaxane dimer. Whereas the interconver-
sion between both forms is easily induced by metal exchange, oxidation of copper(I) to
copper(II) (upper form of the figure) was unfortunately not followed by rearrangement of
the complex to the extended situation, at least on a reasonable timescale. Due to the rigid
structure of the molecule, the gliding motions of both threads along one another have to
take place simultaneously and in a concerted manner. The kinetic barrier to the global
motion is thus very high which explains why the motion is so slow when no demetalation
step is involved.


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                 131


the work done by other groups in this area but we would like to mention some of
the most significant contributions. Several groups prepared dynamic [2]rotaxane
dimers based on cyclodextrins which, under the action of a given signal, could
be contracted or elongated [39–40]. Reversible molecular motions mimicking
natural muscles proceed through hydrophobic forces, size constraints, solvents
polarity changes or photochemical isomerization of azobenzene or stilbene
derivatives.
     Another family of muscle-like compounds was developed based on other
types of interlocking architectures. These systems contain two types of recogni-
tions sites, one of them being based on hydrogen bonding (and thus pH sensi-
tive) and the other one operating via acceptor-donor interactions. A few years
ago, Stoddart and co-workers showed that a contraction and expansion motion
was triggered by changing the pH of the solution containing the rotaxane [41].
They described a new bistable rotaxane dimer architecture in 2008, namely a
two-component [c2]daisy chain topology. This system consists of two self-com-
plementary interlocking molecular fragments in which a secondary ammonium
ion-containing lateral arm is attached to a crown ether. The end of each arm is
connected to a bulky stopper. Each crown ether glides between the two spe-
cific binding sites incorporated in the thread, the motion being triggered by
modifying the pH. The gliding motions result in contracting or elongating the
rotaxane dimer.
     Simultaneously with the former piece of work, Coutrot et al. published
another example of pH-switchable molecular muscle [42] based on a related
principle. The system incorporates a cyclic rotaxane dimer consisting of two
interlocking monomers. Again, each monomer incorporates a crown ether
attached to a linear fragment. This fragment contains two different stations and
the system can be switched from a contracted state to an elongated situation by
modifying the pH. A remarkable extension of Coutrot’s work was published in
2012 [43]. Giuseppone and co-workers designed and synthetised a pH-driven
muscle-like system similar to Coutrot’s “muscle” in which [2]rotaxane dimers
are linked together linearly by taking advantage of a very efficient coordination
chemistry-based polymerisation process. A remarkably high degree of poly-
merisation was obtained (~3,000 units) for both the contracted and extended
forms. As in Coutrot’s work, at low pH, a doubly-threaded dimer adopts an
extended geometry. At basic pH, the compound adopts a contracted form. These
two states were very convincingly characterized by dynamic light-scattering and
small angle neutron scattering experiments. This remarkable piece of work is
probably one the first examples of molecular muscle operating at a microscopic
scale and thus functioning as a real device.


132                                                              The Nobel Prizes


CONCLUSION

The main field of research of our group since the beginning of the 80s has clearly
been that of transition metal chemistry. In relation to the molecular machine
area, it should be stressed that the metals had a dual function:

      1. Interlocking and knotted ring compounds were obtained by using transi-
         tion metals such as Cu(I) in particular for gathering and disposing in a
         precisely defined geometry various organic fragments before they were
         incorporated in the target molecule.
      2. The presence of transition metals provided the molecular systems
         with electrochemical or photochemical properties which allowed to set
         given fragments of the molecule in motion and thus to obtain molecu-
         lar machines.

     Generally speaking, motivation for doing research in the field of controlled
dynamic systems of the muscle-like family is manifold. The most important one
is related to the scientific challenge that the synthesis and the study of complex
and functional molecular systems that can be set in motion in a controlled way
represents. Making contractile and extensible molecules of the rotaxane dimer
type was probably not even envisioned a few decades ago due to expected syn-
thetic and analytical difficulties. Preparing and studying linear or rotary motors
or artificial muscles is related to the fascination that biology exerts on chemists
and engineers. It is very challenging for a synthetic chemist to make a molecule
or molecular system whose function and mode of action are reminiscent of those
of biological systems. The few examples discussed in the present chapter are cer-
tainly very remote from natural muscles and they are undoubtedly very primi-
tive compared to their natural analogues. Nevertheless, it was a great challenge
to elaborate these compounds and to show that they can be set in motion in a
well-controlled fashion.
     The field of molecular machines in general, still a basic science area of
research, has been acknowledged by the Royal Swedish Academy of Science and
the Nobel Committee. I would like to thank these prestigious organisations for
this recognition. This field is nowadays more than 20 years old and it is cer-
tainly time to address the question of applications, either in a general fashion
for machine-like compounds or more precisely for contractile and extensible
molecular species. In which field of application will the area of molecular mus-
cles be the most important in the future? It is today very risky to give an answer
to this question. Presently, one of the most impressive extension of molecular
machines towards applications is concerned with “molecular computing” and


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                   133


the molecular approach to electronic memory devices. The Stoddart and Heath
groups reported promising work in this area [44].
    Many types of nanodevices and nanomachines can be envisaged in relation
to chemical applications (for example, sorting and transport of molecules in
solution or through membranes) but also to purely mechanical applications. In
the future, nano- and microrobots able to fulfil a large variety of functions (from
medicine to everyday life) will have to be articulated. The use of molecular com-
ponents to control their movements is certainly a promising possibility. In a rela-
tively long term prospective, artificial muscles of various length (from microns
to millimetres or even centimetres) might be needed for various applications
such as humanoid robots, actuators for microfluidic science and technology or
prosthetic organs. However, in spite of all the possibilities offered by molecular
machines in terms of potential applications for the future, it should be stressed
that basic research is still of utmost importance and is or has been at the origin
of the many technologies which are nowadays part of our daily life.
    Finally, I would like to stress that the recent book written by Bruns and Stod-
dart represents a monumental piece of work which, today, gathers all the impor-
tant data obtained by hundreds if not thousands of researchers since the begin-
ning of catenanes, rotaxanes and molecular machines. Any interested reader
must of course have a copy of this book.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The work on molecular machines performed in Strasbourg was financially sup-
ported by the University of Strasbourg (formally Université Louis Pasteur), the
CNRS (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique), the European Commis-
sion and the International Center for Frontier Research in Chemistry (ICFRC).
We would like to thank these organisations. I also acknowledge the important
contribution of Dr Christiane O. Dietrich-Buchecker (deceased in 2008). Her
contribution to the early work performed in Strasbourg on molecular catenanes
and molecular machine prototypes has really been crucial.
    I would also like to thank my mentor, Professor Jean-Marie Lehn. Jean-
Marie has represented a model for me since I worked with him as a PhD stu-
dent. I am grateful to two teachers who had a strong influence on me: Professor
Guy Ourisson (organic chemistry) and Raymond Weiss (inorganic and physi-
cal chemistry). I would also like to express my gratitude to Professor Malcolm
L.H. Green. As a postdoctoral fellow in his team, I learnt transition metal and
organometallic chemistry, which also had a strong impact on the future projects
of my group.


134                                                                           The Nobel Prizes



                          Laboratoire de Chimie Organo-Minérale

                  1. Members of the University. of Strasbourg or of CNRS
   Marc Beley, Christiane Dietrich-Buchecker †, Jean-Claude Chambron, Jean-Paul Collin,
     Valerie Heitz, Jean-Marc Kern †, Stéphanie Durot, Angélique Sour, Valérie Sartor

                                       2. Ph D students
      Pascal Marnot, Romain Ruppert, Jean Weiss, Jean-Claude Chambron, André Edel,
      Abdelaziz Jouaiti, Sylvie Chardon-Noblat, Catherine Hemmert, Stéphane Guillerez,
     Christophe Coudret, Valerie Heitz, Abdelhakim Bailal, Angélique Sour, Jean-François
             Nierengarten, Fabrice Odobel, Sandrine Chodorowski, Aude Livoreil,
     Nathalie Solladié, Jean-Luc Weidmann, Gwénaël Rapenne, Myriam Linke, Laurence
    Raehm, Isabelle Dixon, Anne Chantal Laemmel-Gouget, Didier Pommeranc, Christine
   Hamann-Schaffner, Etienne Baranoff, Pierre Mobian, Benoit Colasson, Damien Jouvenot,
  Nicolas Belfrekh, Sylvestre Bonnet, Benoit Champin, Christian Tock,Julien Frey, Fabien Durola,
           Jacques Lux, Julie Voignier, Yann Trolez, Maryline Beyler, Cécile Roche



FIGURE 19. 1. Permanent researchers of the “Laboratoire de Chimie Organo-Minérale”
(LCOM): University members and CNRS researchers including the late Dr Christiane
Dietrich-Buchecker (1942–2008) and the late Prof. Jean-Marc Kern (1944–2004). 2. PhD
students listed by chronological order. The two first students, Pascal Marnot and Romain
Ruppert, started their PhD work in 1980.


    Many researchers have been associated to the work of our team, “Laboratoire
de Chimie Organo-Minérale.” In spite of the expected and unexpected difficul-
ties they frequently had to face in the course of their work, these researchers
have always been very enthusiastic and efficient. I owe them the success of our
research team. The names of our CNRS researchers or University members (from
assistant to full professors), of our PhD students and post-doctoral researchers
as well as those of other visitors who contributed to our research are listed in
Figure 19 and 20.



                          Laboratoire de Chimie Organo-Minérale

                         Post-doctoral researchers and other visitors

  David Amabilino, Audrey Auffrant, Christine Beemelmanns, Martial Billon, Maria-Jesus
   Blanco-Pillado, James I. Bruce, Diego J. Cardenas, Ricardo Carina, John D. Crane,
      Christian S. Diercks, Vincent Duplan, Jonathan A. Faiz, Yoshio Furusho, Pablo
     Gaviña, Christine Goze, David Hanss, Neri Geum Hwang, Akiko Hori, Elisabetta
    Iengo, Fumiaki Ibukuro, Stuart James, Maria Consuelo Jimenez, Antoine Joosten,
  Robert Kayhanian, Jérome Kieffer, Abdel Khemiss, Masatoshi Koizumi, Tomáš Kraus,
  Ulla Létinois-Halbes, Jacques Lux, Alexander G. Martynov, Dennis Mitchell, Bernhard
      Mohr, Cécile Moucheron, Frédéric Niess, Laure-Emmanuelle Perret-Aebi, Ingo
     Poleschak, Alexander I. Prikhod’ko, Felipe Reviriego, Zeinab Saad, Efstathia G.
    Sakellariou, Xavier J. Salom-Roig, Emma Schofield, Hideki Sugihara, Pierre Louis
      Vidal, Michael D. Ward, Noémie Weber, Oliver Wenger, J. A. Gareth Williams



FIGURE 20. Post-doctoral researchers and other visitors.


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                              135


    Finally, I thank my parents, my wife, Carmen, and my son, Julien, for
their continuous support and for their forgiveness regarding my pace of work
and travel.


REFERENCES
 1. Frisch, H.L., Wasserman, E. (1961) Chemical Topology. Journal of the American
    Chemical Society, 83, 3789–3795.
 2. Walba, D.M. (1985) Topological Stereochemistry. Tetrahedron, 41, 3161–3212.
 3. Adams, C.C. (1994) The Knot Book. W.H. Freeman and Company, New York.
 4. Schill, G. (1971) Catenanes, Rotaxanes and Knots. Academic Press, New York/London.
 5. Schill, G., Lüttringhaus, A. (1964) The Preparation of Catena Compounds by
    Directed Synthesis. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 3, 546–547.
 6. Marnot, P.A., Ruppert, R., Sauvage, J.-P. (1981) Catalysis of the water gas shift reac-
    tion by complexes of rhodium and iridium with 2,2’-bipyridine and similar ligands.
    Nouveau Journal de Chimie, 5, 543–548.
 7. Beley, M., Collin, J.-P., Ruppert, R. (1984) Nickel(II)-cyclam: An extremely selec-
    tive electrocatalyst for reduction of CO2 in water. Chemical Communications,
    1315–51316.
 8. Dietrich-Buchecker, C.O., Marnot, P.A., Sauvage, J.-P., Kirchhoff, J.R., McMillin,
    D.R. (1983) Bis(2,9-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline) copper(I): a copper complex
    with a long-lived charge-transfer excited state, Chemical Communications, 513–514.
 9. Juris, A., Balzani, V., Barigelletti, F., Campagna, S., Belser, P., Von Zelewsky, A. (1988)
    Ru(II) polypyridine complexes: photophysics, photochemistry, electrochemistry and
    chemiluminescence, Coordination Chemistry Reviews, 84, 85–277 and references.
10. Lehn, J.-M., Sauvage, J.-P. (1977) Chemical storage of light energy: Catalytic genera-
    tion of hydrogen by visible light or sunlight irradiation of neutral aqueous solutions.
    Nouveau Journal de Chimie, 1, 449–457. Kirch, M., Lehn, J.-M., Sauvage, J.-P. (1979)
    Hydrogen generation by visible light irradiation of aqueous solutions of metal com-
    plexes. An approach to the photochemical conversion and storage of solar energy.
    Helvetica Chimica Acta, 62, 1345–1384 and references.
11. Buckner, M.T., McMillin, D.R. (1978) Photoluminescence from copper( I) com-
    plexes with low-lying metal-to-ligand charge transfer excited states, Chemical
    Communications, 759–761.
12. Dietrich-Buchecker, C.O., Sauvage, J.-P., Kintzinger, J.-P. (1983) Une nouvelle famille
    de molécules: les métallo-caténanes, Tetrahedron Letters, 24, 5095.
13. Thompson, M.C., Busch, D.H. (1964) Reactions of coordinated ligands. IX.
    Utilization of the template hypothesis to synthesize macrocyclic ligands in Situ,
    Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 3651–3656
14. Dietrich-Buchecker, C.O., Sauvage, J.-P., Kern, J.-M. (1984) Templated synthesis of
    interlocked macrocyclic ligands: The catenands, Journal of the American Chemical
    Society, 106, 3043–3045.
15. Mohr, B., Sauvage, J.-P., Grubbs, R. H., Weck, M. (1997) High-Yield Synthesis of
    [2] catenanes by intramolecular ring-closing metathesis, Angewandte Chemie
    International Edition, 36, 1308–1310.


136                                                                         The Nobel Prizes


16. Cesario, M., Dietrich-Buchecker, C.O., Guilhem, C., Pascard, C., Sauvage, J.-P.
    (1985) Molecular structure of a catenand and its copper(I) catenate: complete
    rearrangement of the interlocked macrocyclic ligands by complexation, Chemical
    Communications, 244–247.
17. Ashton, P.R., Goodnow, T.T., Kaifer, A.E., Reddington, M.V., Slawin, A.M.Z.,
    Spencer, N., Stoddart, J.F., Vicent, C., Williams, D.J. (1989) A [2]Catenane made to
    order, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 28, 1396–1399.
18. Hunter, C.A. (1992) Synthesis and structure elucidation of a new [2]catenane.
    Journal of the American Chemical Society, 114, 5303–5311.
19. Vögtle, F.; Meier, S.; Hoss, R. (1992) One-step synthesis of a fourfold functionalized
    catenane, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 31, 1619–1622.
20. Fujita, M., Ibukuro, F., Hagihara, H., Ogura, K. (1994) Quantitative Self-Assembly of
    a [2]Catenane from Two Preformed Molecular Rings. Nature, 367, 720.
21. Ogino, H. (1981) Relatively high-yield syntheses of rotaxanes. Syntheses and prop-
    erties of compounds consisting of cyclodextrins threaded by α,ω-diaminoalkanes
    coordinated to cobalt(III) complexes. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 103,
    1303–1304.
22. Harada, A. (2001) cyclodextrin-based molecular machines. Accounts of Chemical
    Research, 34, 456 and references therein.
23. Dietrich-Buchecker, C.O., Sauvage, J.-P., Khemiss, A. (1986) High-yield synthe-
    sis of multiring copper(I) catenates by acetylenic oxidative coupling. Chemical
    Communications, 1376–1377.
24. Dietrich-Buchecker, C.O., Sauvage, J.-P. (1989) A synthetic molecular trefoil knot.
    Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 28, 189–192.
25. Nierengarten, J.-F., Dietrich-Buchecker, C.O., Sauvage, J.-P. (1994) Synthesis of
    a doubly interlocked [2]-catenane. Journal of the American Chemical Society,
    116, 375–376.
26. Forgan, R.S., Sauvage, J.-P., Stoddart, J.F. (2001) Chemical topology: complex
    molecular knots, links, and entanglements. Chemical Reviews, 111, 5434–5464 and
    references.
27. Gil-Ramirez, G., Leigh, D., A., Stephens, A. J. (2015) Catenanes: fifty years of molec-
    ular links. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 54, 6110–6150.
28. Arias, K. I., Zysman-Colman, E., Loren, J.C., Linden, A., Siegel, J. S. (2011) Synthesis
    of a D3-symmetric “trefoil” knotted cyclophane. Chemical Communications, 47,
    9588–9590.
29. Ballardini, R., Balzani, V., Gandolfi, M. T., Prodi, L., Venturi, M., Philp, D., Ricketts, H.
    G., Stoddart, J. F. (1993) A photochemically driven molecular machine. Angewandte
    Chemie International Edition, 32, 1301–1303.
30. Bissel, R. A., Cordova, E., Kaifer, A.E., Stoddart, J.F. (1994) A chemically and elec-
    trochemically switchable molecular shuttle. Nature, 369, 133–137.
31. Livoreil, A., Dietrich-Buchecker, C.O., Sauvage, J.-P. (1994) Electrochemically trig-
    gered swinging of a [2]-catenate. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 116, 9399.
32. Livoreil, A., Sauvage, J.-P., Armaroli, N., Balzani, V., Flamigni, L. Ventura, B. (1997)
    Electrochemically and photochemically driven ring motions in a dissymmetrical
    copper [2]catenate. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 119, 12114–12124.


From Chemical Topology to Molecular Machines                                            137


33. Baumann, F., Livoreil, A., Kaim, W., Sauvage, J.-P. (1997) Changeover in a mul-
    timodal copper(II) catenate as monitored by EPR spectroscopy. Chemical
    Communications, 35–36.
34. Durola, F., Sauvage, J.-P. (2007) Fast Electrochemically Induced Translation of the
    Ring in a Copper-Complexed [2]Rotaxane: The Biisoquinoline Effect. Angewandte
    Chemie International Edition, 46, 3537–3540.
35. Collin, J.-P., Durola, F., Lux, J., Sauvage, J.-P. (2009) A Rapidly Shuttling Copper-
    Complexed [2]Rotaxane with Three Different Chelating Groups in Its Axis.
    Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 48, 8532–8535.
36. Koumura, N., Zijistra, R.W.J., van Delden, R.A., Harada, N., Feringa, B.L. (1999)
    Light-driven monodirectional molecular rotor. Nature, 401, 152–155.
37. Jiménez-Molero, M.C., Dietrich-Buchecker, C., Sauvage, J.-P. (2000) Towards syn-
    thetic molecular muscles: contraction and stretching of a linear rotaxane dimer.
    Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 39, 3284–3287.
38. Jiménez-Molero, M.C., Dietrich-Buchecker, C., Sauvage, J.-P. (2002) Chemically
    induced contraction and stretching of a linear rotaxane dimer. Chemistry: A
    European Journal, 8, 1456–1466.
39. Dawson, R. E., Lincoln, S. F., Easton, C. J. (2008) The foundation of a light driven
    molecular muscle based on stilbene and α-cyclodextrin. Chemical Communications,
    34, 3980–3983.
40. Tsukagoshi, S., Miyawaki, A., Takashima, Y., Yamaguchi, H., Harada, A. (2007)
    Contraction of Supramolecular Double-Threaded Dimer Formed by α-Cyclodextrin
    with a Long Alkyl Chain. Organic Letters, 9, 1053–1055.
41. Wu, J., Leung, K.-F., Benítez, D., Han, J.-H., Cantrill, S.J., Fang, L., Stoddart, J.F.
    et al (2008) An Acid–Base-Controllable [c2]Daisy Chain. Angewandte Chemie
    International Edition, 47, 7470–7474.
42. Coutrot, F., Romuald, C., Busseron, E. (2008) A New pH-Switchable Dimannosyl[c2]
    Daisy Chain Molecular Machine. Organic Letters, 10, 3741–3744.
43. Du, G., Moulin, E., Jouault, N. et al (2012) Muscle-like Supramolecular Polymers:
    Integrated Motion from Thousands of Molecular Machines. Angewandte Chemie
    International Edition, 51, 12504–12508.
44. Bruns, C.J., Stoddart, J.F. The nature of the mechanical bond: from molecules to
    machines, Wiley Ed., 2016.
45. Green, J.E., Choi, J.W., Boukai, A., Bunimovich, Y., Johnston-Halperin, E., Delonno,
    E., Luo, Y., Sheriff, B.A., Xu, K., Shin, Y.S., Tseng, H.-R., Stoddart, J.F., Heath, J.R.
    (2007) A 160-kilobit molecular electronic memory patterned at 1011 bits per square
    centimetre. Nature, 445, 414–417.
