232   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Single-Particle
      Reconstruction of Biological
      Molecules – Story in a Sample
      Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2017 by Joachim Frank1,2
      1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia 2Uni-
      versity Medical Center; 2Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia
      University, New York, NY, USA.


      THE BACKGROUND
      I developed an interest in electron optics when I worked with Ernst
      Kinder on my masters thesis project in Physics at the University of
      Munich. The subject of my thesis was backscattering of electrons on the
      surface of liquid gold, an ambitious undertaking that forced me to con-
      struct a vacuum chamber, a crucible to heat up the gold, a detector, and
      an electron gun. In 1943, working with the electron microscope, Kinder
      had studied butterfly wings, which as he realized gained their brilliant
      colors from interference of light on gratings formed by tiny scales,
      arranged in regular order.
         I signed on to a graduate project with Walter Hoppe at the Max-Planck
      Institute in Munich (Fig. 1), an X-ray crystallographer whose interest had
      turned to electron microscopy (EM) as a means to study biomolecules. He
      viewed the electron microscope as a diffractometer that, unlike the one
      employed in X-ray crystallography, could record not just amplitudes of
      diffracted electrons, but their phases as well. This was a fancy way of say-
      ing electron microscopes were able to form images.


                                                          Joachim Frank Lecture   233




                                                               Figure 1. Walter
                                                               Hoppe (1917–
                                                               1986) with the
                                                               Siemens El-
                                                               miskope 102.




   It is necessary at this point to look back at the state of the art of molec-
ular EM in the late 60s and early 70s. During the initial years, from the
1930s to the 1950s, the contributions of EM to biology had been confined
mainly to the investigation of tissue at relatively low magnification. Seri-
ous forays into the quantitative visualization of molecular structure did
not commence until the 1960s and were concentrated in three groups:
Aaron Klug’s at the Laboratory of Molecular Biology of the Medical
Research Council (MRC) in Cambridge, England, my mentor Walter
Hoppe’s at the Max-Planck Institute in Munich and Edward Kellenberger’s
at the Biozentrum in Basel. (Photograph from archives of the Max-Planck
Society, Berlin).
   Unless symmetries are present, three-dimensional reconstruction of an
object requires the combination of its projections from a wide angular
range. The first pioneering achievements in molecular structure research
with the electron microscope were the three-dimensional (3D) recon-
struction of the bacteriophage tail with helical symmetry in 1968 by
DeRosier and Klug (1968) and the first reconstruction of an icosahedral
virus in 1970 by Tony Crowther (Crowther et al., 1970; Crowther, 1971).
   At that time biological molecules could not be imaged in a close to
native state. Negative staining – which amounts to embedding the mole-
cule in a puddle of heavy metal salt as it is air-dried from solution – was
the only means available to produce contrast. On the other hand, biologi-
cal molecules were known to be quite fragile, and maintenance of their
integrity would require a fully hydrated environment.


234   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      Graduate Studies and Harkness Fellowship
      As I started my work as graduate student under Walter Hoppe, in 1967, I
      was exposed to discussions in a Workshop in Hirschegg in the Tyrolean
      Alps, co-organized by Walter Hoppe and Max Perutz in 1968, later to be
      continued in meetings in Hirschegg in 1970 and Alpbach in 1976. These
      were the first meetings that brought together protein crystallographers
      and people working in EM (see Holmes, 2017).
         In my thesis project I analyzed electron micrographs with the optical dif-
      fractometer and explained patterns observed in case of drift in terms of
      Thon rings (Thon, 1966) modulated by a sinc function or Young’s fringes
      (Frank, 1969). I also examined the statistical properties of digitized micro-
      graphs. For digitization I used a densitometer built in-house, which ren-
      dered the images on punched tape to be fed into the computer. In my first
      applications of digital image processing in EM, I explored the use of correla-
      tion functions for alignment of images (Langer et al., 1970). Another topic of
      my dissertation was the distortion of information by the contrast transfer
      function (CTF), caused by the lens aberrations of the electron microscope
      (Scherzer, 1948), and its recovery by CTF correction (Frank et al., 1970).
         After finishing my Ph.D., in 1970, I went to the United States for two
      years under a Harkness Fellowship. The visit to three labs I chose was an
      eye-opener in several regards. The Jet Propulsion Lab (JPL) in Pasadena,
      at the time, was arguably the most advanced place in image processing
      hardware and software. In a project aimed to correct the contrast transfer
      function from a defocus series, I used their scanner to digitize micro-
      graphs of negatively stained DNA that were given to me by Walter Stoeck-
      enius at UCSF, and I adapted my programs to interface with JPL’s VICAR
      system. VICAR, used to process images from the Jupiter fly-by mission,
      was a modular image processing system that would later serve as a model
      for the development of SPIDER. The second lab I visited was the Donner
      Lab in Berkeley, where Robert M. Glaeser studied the effects of radiation
      damage on biological molecules under the electron beam (Glaeser, 1971).
      He also started developing techniques to render molecules frozen-hy-
      drated in the EM (Taylor and Glaeser, 1974). The third lab was Benjamin
      Siegel’s at Clark Hall, Cornell University, where an experimental micro-
      scope in the mid-voltage (600 kV) range was being built. It was here that I
      first met Ken Downing, who worked on optical methods of information
      retrieval such as single-side band holography, and William Goldfarb, who
      would later join me in Albany.
         The numerous problems faced by people attempting to image biologi-
      cal molecules in the EM were discussed at a workshop organized by
      Edward Kellenberger in Gais, in the Swiss Alps in 1973. The state of the art
      at the time was reflected in the title of a proceedings paper (Beer et al.,
      1974) as “high resolution” was equated with any results at better than


                                                         Joachim Frank Lecture   235


30Å. Paramount at the Workshop was the search for a method that would
keep the molecule fully hydrated while exposed to the electron beam. In
addition, following the pioneering studies by Glaeser (Glaeser, 1971) – just
at the time I visited his lab as a Harkness Fellow – radiation damage was
recognized as a major obstacle in the efforts to achieve high resolution.
Averaging over a large number of repeats of a structure exposed to very
low dose was seen as a general solution to this problem. Thus this meet-
ing set the stage for a ground-breaking study by Richard Henderson and
Nigel Unwin (1975): the reconstruction of bacteriodhopsin from the pur-
ple membrane of Halobacter embedded in glucose under near-native con-
ditions. The confluence of novel approaches to three areas, namely sam-
ple preparation, data collection at extremely low electron dose (< 1 e–/A2),
and merging a tilt series of these noisy images into a 3D image, made this
work a towering achievement. The time after this was marked by general
excitement in the community, and many attempts to use the same or sim-
ilar methods in the study of other proteins amenable to 2D crystallization.
However, the intrinsically low contrast between proteins and glucose and
residual disorder in the crystals formed made these attempts difficult, and
embedment in ice remained the agreed general goal.
   In the 70s, and well into the 80s, most researchers in the field that was
to be called Structural Biology were united in the belief that serious struc-
ture determination required highly ordered samples, such as 2D crystals,
helical arrangements, or viruses with high symmetry. Attempts to extract
structural information from free-standing, single, asymmetric molecules
were not taken seriously. One such alternative approach, pursued by Wal-
ter Hoppe, was to tilt the EM grid to which isolated molecules were
attached into multiple angles while collecting the projections, from which
the molecules could then be reconstructed (Hoppe et al., 1974).
   While the angles are exactly known in Hoppe’s “tomographic”
approach, the accumulation of radiation damage over multiple exposures,
to more than 1000 electron per Angstrom square, rendered the end result
essentially meaningless (Baumeister and Hahn, 1975). The other approach
was the one I formulated in a concept paper in 1975 (Frank, 1975), to be
elaborated in the following.


POSTDOCTORAL WORK AT THE CAVENDISH LAB: THE CONCEPT
OF SINGLE-PARTICLE AVERAGING AND RECONSTRUCTION
The concept of the single-particle approach began to take shape while I
was working at the Old Cavendish Laboratory, Free School Lane, Cam-
bridge, starting in 1973 – at the very place where Max Perutz had started
the Laboratory of Molecular Biology in a courtyard barrack. I had
accepted a postdoc position in the group of Vernon Ellis Cosslett.


236   THE NOBEL PRIZES


          The approach takes advantage of the fact that biological molecules puri-
      fied from cell extracts and suspended in solution typically exist in thou-
      sands or even millions of “copies” (that is, separate realizations) with virtu-
      ally identical structure. Hence, if a grid to which such a sample has been
      applied is put into the EM, a large number of projection images of the same
      molecule lying in random orientations are encountered (Fig. 2). The impor-
      tant point is that instead of collecting multiple images from one molecule by
      tilting it in the EM, one merely has to take a snapshot of multiple copies of
      that molecule with a very small radiation dose. The advantage in the latter
      case is that the 3D image obtained relates to a molecule that has “seen”
      only one single low exposure, and has remained practically undamaged.
      The later-coined terms “single-particle averaging” and “single-particle
      reconstruction” make reference to the fact that the molecules in the sample
      are free-standing, not attached to one another as in a crystal.
          At this point it is important to emphasize that no symmetries are
      assumed. Rather, the idea was that entirely asymmetric molecules could
      be reconstructed in this way. Symmetries obviously simplify the problem
      as in those cases the image contains multiple projections of the repeating
      unit in different, known orientations, allowing data from different mole-
      cules to be readily merged.
          Simple as the concept sounds, the realization of single-particle recon-
      struction required several problems to be solved, all in the area of image
      processing. These can be stated in the form of five questions: (1) Is it at all
      feasible to align noisy molecule images with one another with sufficient
      accuracy? (2) How do we estimate the resolution of an average (or recon-
      struction) obtained by combining all images? (3) How do we sort mole-
      cule images by appearance related to view angle or conformation? (4)




      Figure 2. Schematic of single-particle data collection for air-dried, negatively stained
      molecules. The molecules are randomly oriented and each is embedded in a layer of
      heavy metal salt, which provides high contrast in the electron beam. Air-drying results in
      partial collapse of the molecule in z-direction.


                                                                   Joachim Frank Lecture      237




Figure 3. Left: Cross-correlation function of two micrographs of carbon foil, taken succes-
sively in the same area. Right: Autocorrelation function of one of the micrographs. In
the autocorrelation function, the peak reflects superimposition of both signal and noise
parts, hence its sharpness. In the cross-correlation function, the noise term is eliminated
and the peak reflects only the signal part. (Reproduced from J. Frank, Ph.D. thesis 1970)



How do we find the viewing angles of projections a posteriori? (5) How do
we reconstruct the molecule from projections at randomly spaced view
angles?
   It was in the nature of these problems and their novelty that progress
was slow and piecemeal, one step at a time. During the work on my Ph.D.
thesis (1968–1970) I had already explored the use of the cross-correlation
function for aligning electron micrographs. I discovered that two succes-
sive images of the same area of carbon could be aligned with precision
better than 3 Angstroms, the resolution of the electron microscope
(Frank, 1970; Langer et al., 1970) (Fig. 3).
   Actually, the process of 2D alignment is a bit more complicated, since
molecules picked from the micrograph differ both in shift and in-plane
orientation. The solution I found to determine both relative rotation angle
and shift simultaneously makes use of the fact that the autocorrelation
function of a molecule image is shift-invariant – it does not depend on its
position within the image frame (Frank, 1980). Thus the determination of
rotation can be entirely decoupled from that of shift (Fig. 4).
   Working with Owen Saxton, I was able to show that alignment via
cross-correlation would be accurate enough for the purpose of aligning
noisy images of single molecules if the dose exceeded a certain level, which
depended on the molecule’s size and contrast against the background (Sax-
ton and Frank, 1977). Using the ribosome as an example, it became clear
from the formula we obtained that the single-particle approach to structure
research was indeed feasible for molecules of sufficient size:
   PARTICLE SIZE > 3/[CONTRAST2 x RESOLUTION (in Å) x CRITI-
CAL ELECTRON DOSE]


238   THE NOBEL PRIZES



                                                             Figure 4. Schematic of image
                                                             alignment making use of the
                                                             translation-invariance of the au-
                                                             tocorrelation function. (reprodu-
                                                             ced with permission from Kessel
                                                             et al., 1980).




      MOVE TO THE WADSWORTH CENTER: FROM
      CONCEPT TO PRACTICE
      My appointment in 1975 as Senior Research Scientist at the Division of
      Laboratories and Research of the New York State Department of Health
      (DLR, later named Wadsworth Center) in Albany, New York offered me the
      opportunity to explore this idea with practical applications. (I had been
      asked to start an image processing group at DLR by Donald Parsons, a
      Roswell Park, Buffalo research scientist who was in the process of moving
      the Albany and setting up a high-voltage EM facility there).
         With the help of micrographs provided by David Eisenberg, Tim Baker,
      Peter Zingsheim and Miloslav Boublik I was able to demonstrate the feasi-




      Figure 5. Single-particle averages obtained from images of negatively stained glutamine
      synthetase. Left: gallery of particles selected from the micrograph and aligned. Right:
      averages with and without six-fold symmetrization. (Reproduced from Frank et al., 1978).


                                                            Joachim Frank Lecture     239



                                                    Figure 6. Single-particle
                                                    averages obtained from
                                                    images of negatively stained
                                                    acetylcholine receptor of
                                                    Torpedo marmorata. Top:
                                                    examples for images selected
                                                    from micrographs. Bottom:
                                                    two half-averages and one full
                                                    average (right). The average
                                                    shows distinct departure from
                                                    5-fold symmetry deduced
                                                    from low-resolution 2D crys-
                                                    tals averages by other groups.
                                                    (Reproduced, with permission,
                                                    from Zingsheim et al., 1980).



bility of obtaining two-dimensional averages showing enhanced features
of molecules with images of glutamine synthetase (Frank et al., 1978; Kessel
et al., 1980) (Fig. 5), acetylcholine receptor (Zingsheim et al., 1980) (Fig. 6),
and 40S ribosomal subunits from HeLa cells (Frank et al., 1981a) (Fig. 7).
   Among these, the 40S subunit averages were arguably the most strik-
ing in showing the potential of the single-particle averaging technique,
results that proved instrumental for gaining funding from the National
Institutes of Health. Nonetheless, presentations of the results for glu-
tamine synthetase, acetylcholine receptor and ribosome by myself and
two of my collaborators, Martin Kessel and Peter Zingsheim, at the meeting
organized by Wolfgang Baumeister in Burg Gemen, Germany (1979) were
greeted with a great deal of skepticism.
   One issue to be addressed, as mentioned before, was the fact that due
to the absence of crystal order, the average of aligned molecule images



                                                    Figure 7. Single-particle av-
                                                    erages obtained from images
                                                    of 40S ribosomal subunits of
                                                    HeLa cells. Top: micrograph
                                                    showing 40S subunits in two
                                                    views, left-facing (L) and
                                                    right-facing (R). Bottom, from
                                                    left to right: two half-aver-
                                                    ages, variance map, and full
                                                    average of 81 L-view particles.
                                                    (Reproduced, with permission,
                                                    from Frank et al., 1981a).


240   THE NOBEL PRIZES



                                                           Figure 8. Reproducibility
                                                           of the signal content in
                                                           two successive electron
                                                           micrographs of carbon
                                                           film, demonstrated for
                                                           three different defocus
                                                           settings. Upper row:
                                                           optical diffraction pattern
                                                           of one of the micrographs,
                                                           showing Thon patterns.
                                                           Lower row: Young’s fring-
                                                           es obtained by first alig-
                                                           ning the micrograph pairs
                                                           and then translating them
                                                           relative to each other by
                                                           a slight amount. (Repro-
                                                           duced from J. Frank, Ph.D.
                                                           thesis, 1970).




      shows no diffraction spots in its Fourier transform, and therefore lacks an
      inherent measure of resolution. Without such a measure, progress in
      quality could not be tracked and compared among different groups. From
      the earlier study, during my dissertation work, on the effects of drift on an
      electron micrograph (Frank, 1969), I realized that signal bandwidth is
      reflected by the extent of reproducible information in Fourier space (Frank
      and Al-Ali, 1975; Frank, 1976). This extent of reproducible information is
      apparent from the extent of Young’s fringes that show up in the optical
      diffraction pattern when two successive micrographs of the same speci-
      men field are superimposed with a slight shift (Fig. 8).
         How could this idea be translated into a quantitative measure? The
      extent of reproducibility in Fourier space can be quantified computation-
      ally by dividing the data going into an average randomly in half, then com-
      paring the Fourier transforms of half-averages over rings in Fourier space.
      Resolution is then defined as the Fourier ring radius where a measure of
      comparison, such as phase residual, or R-factor (Frank et al., 1981a), or
      cross-correlation (“Fourier ring correlation”) (Saxton and Baumeister,
      1982; van Heel et al., 1982), passes a critical threshold (Fig. 9). The same
      measures, computed over shells, would later prove important in estimat-
      ing resolution of 3D reconstructions, as well (Harauz and van Heel, 1986).
         These first studies of image averaging immediately brought up the
      problem of heterogeneity – only those molecule images could be reasona-
      bly combined in an average if they originated from molecules of identical
      structure and presented the same view. At that time, one of Ernst van
      Bruggen’s students, Marin van Heel, visited my lab bringing with him
      images of Limulus polyphemus hemocyanin – an oligomer with distinct
      architecture showing multiple preferred views when negatively stained


                                                         Joachim Frank Lecture     241



                                            Figure 9. Resolution of single-par-
                                            ticle averages defined by reprodu-
                                            cibility of half-averages in Fourier
                                            space. Shown is the differential
                                            phase residual as a function of
                                            Fourier ring radius for the half-av-
                                            erages of 40S ribosomal subunits
                                            of HeLa cells. Resolution is then
                                            defined by the ring radius where
                                            the phase residual first exceeds 45
                                            degrees. (Reproduced with permis-
                                            sion from Frank et al., 1981a).




and imaged in the electron microscope (Fig. 10a). These images therefore
presented a perfect example of heterogeneity. Before attempting to aver-
age those images, they had to be sorted, or classified into their subsets.
The solution to this problem (van Heel and Frank, 1981; Frank 1984) came
from the insight that images, once aligned with one another, may be
regarded as vectors in a space of N dimensions, where N is the number of
pixels. Groups of images that are similar will then show up as clusters of
vectors in that space. Equivalent problems of finding clusters in high-di-
mensional space had been encountered in many fields of science, and
gave rise to multivariate statistical analysis, a procedure which deter-
mines a compact low-dimensional subspace tailored to the problem. With
the help of Jean-Pierre Bretaudiere, a Wadsworth Center scientist working
in Laboratory Medicine, we were able to use a program meant to sort
blood samples to sort images instead (see Mossman, 2007, where this epi-
sode is recounted). Application to hemocyanin proved an immediate suc-
cess (Fig. 10b, c).
   Early on, as I set out on the single-particle approach to recovering
structure, it became clear to me that in order to make systematic progress
in the development of algorithms and computer programs with
ever-changing and expanding goals required a workbench with a large set
of tools. To this end I developed a modular image processing system
called SPIDER (for System for Processing of Image Data in Electron
microscopy and Related fields) (Frank et al., 1981b), which made it possi-
ble to design complex programs from pre-coded building blocks using a
simple script language. For example, the command WI would invoke a
routine for extracting a rectangular portion of an image, FT would invoke
Fourier transformation, and AC would compute the autocorrelation of an


242   THE NOBEL PRIZES



                                             Figure 10. Sorting of hemocyanin images
                                            by Correspondence Analysis, a branch of
                                            multivariate statistical analysis. Top: Make-
                                            up of the dodecameric molecule of Limulus
                                            polyphemus hemocyanin. The slightly
                                            rhombic, twisted arrangement of the
                                            subunits creates a nonplanar architecture,
                                            reflected by the rocking of the molecule on
                                            the grid. Middle: Micrograph of negatively
                                            stained molecules showing them in diffe-
                                            rent three-dimensional positions, related by
                                            flipping and rocking. Bottom: Factorial map,
                                            obtained by multivariate data analysis of
                                            the aligned molecule images, separates the
                                            images into four clusters. (Reproduced, with
                                            permission, from van Heel and Frank, 1981).




      image. Hundreds of commands were implemented over the course of the
      next few years.
         All programs were coded in FORTRAN, the most advanced language at
      the time. In most of the initial programming I was assisted by Helen
      Dowse, a SUNY Albany student of Computer Science, and Brian Shimkin,
      an undergraduate. As the functionality of SPIDER expanded, its script
      language became literally the lingua franca in my lab and, as the suite was
      disseminated to other labs, within a growing community of users. As
      noted earlier, I trace the idea underlying the SPIDER system and its mod-
      ular design back to my stay at the Jet Propulsion Lab in 1970 under the
      Harkness Fellowship, where I became familiar with JPL’s own VICAR
      image processing system.


      DETERMINATION OF ANGLES AND
      THREE-DIMENSIONAL RECONSTRUCTION
      For computing the 3D structure of an object from its projections, one
      requires a fairly even coverage of the whole view range, and the angles of
      each projection must be known. Thus, in the single-particle approach,
      determination of the angles of randomly oriented molecules recorded in a
      micrograph was the most important yet most difficult problem to be


                                                           Joachim Frank Lecture       243



                                                     Figure 11. Random-conical
                                                     data collection geometry.
                                                        Top: Concept. Untilted
                                                     grid is shown with molecu-
                                                     les attached with the same
                                                     face but different azimuths.
                                                     Tilting of the grid by a large
                                                     angle results in a unique
                                                     direction of projection for
                                                     each molecule. In Fourier
                                                     space these correspond to
                                                     intersecting central sections.
                                                     (Frank, 1979; hand-drawn
                                                     sketch on an overhead trans-
                                                     parency, unpublished).
                                                        Bottom: Illustration of data
                                                     collection, and equivalent
                                                     conical geometry. (Repro-
                                                     duced with permission from
                                                     Frank, 1998).




solved. The solution came from the insight that two micrographs, one of a
field of untilted particles, one of the same field tilted by a large angle, con-
tained all the information required to assign Eulerian angles to each tilted
particle (Frank et al., 1978; Radermacher et al., 1986; 1987a). In this geom-
etry (Fig 11a), the angles of the tilted projections lie on a cone with ran-
dom azimuths (Fig. 11b), a feature which would later give rise to the term
“random-conical reconstruction.”
   In 1982 I was joined by physicist Michael Radermacher, also a student
of Walter Hoppe, who had worked in his dissertation project on algo-
rithms for 3D reconstruction from projections arranged in a regular coni-
cal geometry. Thus, he had the perfect background required to develop
computer programs that implemented the concept of the random-conical
reconstruction. One important step was still missing, though: the general-
ization of the 3D reconstruction algorithm, which assumed regularly
spaced conical tilting, to the general case of random angles. Once this had
been accomplished, as reported in a short communication in 1986
(Radermacher et al., 1986), we obtained the first single-particle recon-
struction using the random-conical method: the 50S subunit of the E. coli
ribosome (Radermacher et al., 1987b) (Fig. 12). It is now on permanent
exhibit in the Nobel Museum in Stockholm in the form of a transparent
contour stack mounted in a wooden frame.
   This reconstruction was limited in quality by two factors: one was the
missing cone of information in the 3D Fourier transform, the source of
unidirectional artifacts in the 3D density map, and the other were the arti-


244   THE NOBEL PRIZES



                                                                     Figure 12. First single-par-
                                                                     ticle reconstruction of an
                                                                     asymmetric molecule: the
                                                                     50S subunit of the E. coli
                                                                     ribosome, prepared by
                                                                     negative staining. Scale
                                                                     bar is 100 Å. The panels
                                                                     A–F depict the molecule
                                                                     with increasing density
                                                                     threshold, using a then-no-
                                                                     vel surface representation
                                                                     technique (Radermacher
                                                                     and Frank., 1984).




      facts due to the preparation of the sample by air-drying and negative
      staining. Both limitations were readily overcome within a short period of
      time: the missing cone problem was solved by merging datasets obtained
      with three or more different zero-degree views (Penczek et al., 1992), and
      the preparation of the sample with negative staining was replaced by
      cryo-embedding in vitreous ice, following the spectacular success of
      Jacques Dubochet’s vitrification method by plunge-freezing into liquid
      ethane (Dubochet and McDowall, 1981) in the application to viruses
      (Adrian et al., 1984).
         Yet another important problem to be addressed, which affected the
      quality of all reconstructions from EM data, was the modulation of the
      image transform by the CTF. I had first worked on this problem during
      my dissertation work, then through contributions to specific issues




      Figure 13. Schematic of single-particle data collection for molecules randomly oriented
      and embedded in vitreous ice. The molecules are fully hydrated in an aqueous medium
      and, in contrast to the preparation with negative staining and air-drying shown in Fig. 2,
      they exhibit no shrinkage in the direction normal to the grid plane.


                                                                     Joachim Frank Lecture      245



                                                                Figure 14. Contrast trans-
                                                                fer function correction
                                                                using Wiener filtering.
                                                                The Fourier transform of
                                                                the corrected image is
                                                                obtained by a weighted
                                                                sum of Fourier transforms
                                                                of the defocus series. The
                                                                weights Wn are given by
                                                                the Wiener filter, which
                                                                is proportional to the
                                                                CTF Hn weighted by
                                                                the signal-to-noise ratio
                                                                SNRn. (Damping due to
                                                                partial coherence is not
                                                                shown here for simpli-
                                                                city). (Reproduced, with
                                                                permission, from Penczek
                                                                et al., 1997).




(Frank, 1972; Frank, 1973; Wade and Frank, 1977). This problem and its
resolution-limiting effects on the reconstructed density maps were even-
tually overcome through the merging of data obtained with different defo-
cus settings using a Wiener filtering algorithm (Zhu et al., 1997; Penczek
et al., 1997) (Fig. 14).
   The first molecules we visualized by cryo-EM and reconstructed in
three dimensions with the single-particle methods described above were
the E. coli ribosome (Frank et al., 1991; Penczek et al., 1992; Frank et al.,
1995), hemocyanin (Lambert et al., 1994), and calcium release channel
(Radermacher et al., 1992; Rademacher et al., 1994; Wagenknecht et al.,
1994) (Fig. 15).




Figure 15. Cryo-EM reconstructions of three molecules obtained with the matured
single-particle reconstruction method: (a) E. coli ribosome (Frank et al., 1995), (b) Octopus
hemocyanin (Lambert et al., 1994), (c) calcium release channel/Ryanodine receptor (Ra-
dermacher et al., 1994).


246   THE NOBEL PRIZES



                                                           Figure 16. Cryo-EM re-
                                                           construction of the large
                                                           ribosomal subunit from
                                                           Haloarcula marismortui,
                                                           used for solving a phasing
                                                           ambiguity in solving the
                                                           X-ray structure. (Reprodu-
                                                           ced, with permission, from
                                                           Ban et al., 1998).




         A cryo-EM reconstruction of the Haloarcula marismortui ribosome
      (Fig. 16) proved to be helpful in the phasing of the first X-ray structure of
      the large ribosomal subunit (Ban et al., 1998; Ban et al., 2000; Steitz,
      Nobel lecture 2009).
         The quality of final reconstructions benefits from iterative angular
      refinement that starts out with the first rough reconstruction. In any pro-
      ject dealing with a molecule whose structure is unknown, it is practical to
      make a distinction between two phases, a bootstrap phase and a refine-
      ment phase. In the bootstrap phase, a first rough reconstruction is
      obtained – either by the random-conical method, or by an alternative
      method, developed by Marin van Heel and others, in which common lines
      in Fourier space are employed (Goncharov et al., 1987; van Heel, 1987;
      Penczek et al., 1996; van Heel et al., 1997). In the refinement phase
      (Penczek et al., 1992; 1994), an existing reconstruction (i.e., the density
      map obtained by a bootstrap reconstruction) is used to generate a library
      of even-spaced projections with which each of the experimental projec-
      tions is compared to assign refined angles to it for the next round of
      reconstruction (Fig. 17).
         The mid-90s marked the time when a methodology of 3D reconstruc-
      tion in EM could first be discerned in outline, as best documented in vari-
      ous contributions to the Proceedings of the 15th Pfefferkorn Conference
      (1997). At about that time I compiled a book for the first time summariz-
      ing computational methods of single-particle 3D EM (Frank, 1996; re-ed-
      ited in Frank, 2006).
         From the time where the first refined, CTF-corrected reconstructions
      were obtained, in the mid-90s, more than 15 years had to go by before the
      “resolution revolution” brought us to the resolution, 2–4Å, where atomic


                                                                   Joachim Frank Lecture    247



                                                                Figure 17. Iterative ang-
                                                                ular refinement scheme
                                                                by projection matching,
                                                                a scheme that underlies
                                                                practically all cryo-EM
                                                                reconstructions. (Repro-
                                                                duced with permission
                                                                from Frank, 2011).




modeling becomes possible. The interpretation of the many low-resolu-
tion cryo-EM reconstructions obtained during that time was often dis-
missed as “blobology,” a characterization that was unjust and unfair in
most instances. In the following I would like to make this point by show-
ing a few examples just from the area I’m most familiar with – the struc-
tural basis of protein biosynthesis. These examples demonstrate that well
before it reached the present state of perfection, cryo-EM gave us impor-
tant insights into pivotal processes of translation by the ribosome. This
happened on the level of resolution that allowed the constellations and
movements of entire domains to be described.
   In the late 90s, one of my postdocs, Rajendra Agrawal, prepared a sam-
ple containing elongation factor G (EF–G) bound to the ribosome as it




Figure 18. Ratchet-like motion of the E. coli ribosome during mRNA-tRNA translocation.
Upon binding of EF-G, the small subunit (yellow) is seen to rotate relative to the large
subunit (blue). (Reproduced with permission from Valle et al., 2003a).


248   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      catalyzes translocation of mRNA and tRNAs (Agrawal et al., 1998, 1999).
      He used a GTP analog to arrest the factor at the point where GTP hydrol-
      ysis is normally triggered. Comparison of the cryo-EM reconstruction
      with that of the unbound ribosome showed a dramatic change: the small
      subunit had rotated by seven degrees with respect to the large subunit
      (Frank and Agrawal, 2000; Valle et al., 2003a) (Fig. 20). This finding of the
      “ratchet-like” motion provided first clues on the mechanism of mRNA-
      tRNA translocation.
         In 2002, Mikel Valle, another of my postdocs, found that during the
      decoding process, aminoacyl-tRNA (aa-tRNA) enters the ribosome in
      complex with the protein factor EF-Tu in a strongly distorted form, in the
      so-called A/T state (Valle et al., 2002; 2003b) (Fig. 19). In this case the
      antibiotic kirromycin was used to keep the factor from leaving the ribo-
      some after GTP hydrolysis. This observation indicated that the tRNA acts
      as a molecular spring, apparently setting the threshold for discrimination
      between cognate and near-cognate codon-anticodon pairing (Yarus et al.,
      2003). A later study in my lab confirmed that the same mechanism holds
      for all three classes of tRNA (Li et al., 2008).
         To give a third example, we teamed up in 2001 with Jennifer Doudna,
      then at Yale, to visualize the mRNA from hepatitis C virus in the process
      of hijacking the human ribosome. My postdoc Christian Spahn, working
      alongside Jeff Kieft from the Doudna team, discovered the way the
      so-called IRES element of the virus’ mRNA engages the small subunit of
      the ribosome (Spahn et al., 2001).
         Once density maps reached the sub-nanometer mark, it became possi-
      ble to interpret them on the basis of existing structures and to build
      “quasi-” atomic models. Over the decade following the appearance of the
      ribosome X-ray structure, my group spearheaded three methods of such
      interpretations: real-space refinement in which entire domains were fitted




      Figure 19. The tRNA captured in the process of entering the ribosome. As tRNA arrives
      in ternary complex with elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) and GTP, it binds the ribosome in a
      strongly distorted form, first seen by cryo-EM using kirromycin. Left: Juxtaposition of
      ternary complex entering the ribosome, with tRNA in the distorted A/T state, and riboso-
      me after departure of EF-Tu and accommodation of cognate tRNA. Right: tRNA confor-
      mations in A/A and A/T states. (Reproduced with permission from Valle et al., 2003b).


                                                         Joachim Frank Lecture     249



                                                          Figure 20. (A)–(C)
                                                          40S ribosomal
                                                          subunit of HeLa cells
                                                          (control) shown in
                                                          different views; (D)–
                                                          (F) 40S ribosomal
                                                          subunit of HeLa cells
                                                          with hepatitis C virus
                                                          IRES bound; (G)–(I)
                                                          same as (D)–(F)
                                                          after removal of one
                                                          domain. (Reprodu-
                                                          ced with permission
                                                          from Spahn et al.,
                                                          2001).




as rigid bodies (Gao et al., 2003; Gao and Frank, 2005), normal mode
analysis (Tama et al., 2003), and Molecular Dynamics Flexible Fitting, or
MDFF (Trabuco et al., 2007). More about the use of MDFF below.


MOVE TO COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY – STORY IN A SAMPLE AND
RESOLUTION REVOLUTION
In 2008 I joined Columbia University and the faculties of two depart-
ments: Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, and Biological Sciences.
What attracted me particularly were opportunities for many collabora-
tions on the two vibrant campuses at the Medical Center and Morning-
side.
   Two examples for MDFF fitting among many obtained in my lab fall
into this next stage of my career: (i) a 6.7Å density map representing a
snapshot of the decoding process (LeBarron et al., 2008) and its interpre-
tation by Elizabeth Villa (Villa et al., 2009) (Fig. 21, left), and (ii) the
atomic model of the ribosome from T. brucei built from a 5.5Å map by
Yaser Hashem (Hashem et al., 2013) (Fig. 21, bottom).


250   THE NOBEL PRIZES




                                                     Figure 21. Top: the E. coli 70S
                                                     ribosome bound with the
                                                     aminoacyl-tRNA•EF-Tu•GDP
                                                     ternary complex in the presence
                                                     of the antibiotic kirromycin. A
                                                     6.7-Å cryo-EM density map was
                                                     interpreted by atomic modeling
                                                     with the aid of MDFF (Reprodu-
                                                     ced, with permission, from Villa
                                                     et al., 2009).
                                                        Bottom: structure of the T.
                                                     brucei ribosome obtained by
                                                     flexible fitting of a 5.5-Å cryo-
                                                     EM density map. Left: 40S sub-
                                                     unit, right: 60S subunit. Expan-
                                                     sion segments are painted red.
                                                     (Reproduced, with permission,
                                                     from Hashem et al., 2013a).




          These two examples illustrate the potential of modeling using flexible
      fitting, but at the same time give a sense of the large effort that was
      required to obtain an atomic model prior to the advent of the direct elec-
      tron detectors, in 2013.
          Starting at my new place, I focused on a unique advantage of single-par-
      ticle cryo-EM that is now utilized in many applications. Here, unlike in
      X-ray crystallography, molecules are unconstrained by crystal packing and
      thus are able to assume the full range of conformations present in solution.
      For a processive molecular machine such as the ribosome, unless it is
      stopped by a chemical intervention, many different states coexist (Schme-
      ing and Ramakrishnan, 2009; Frank and Gonzalez, 2010). The full potential
      of single-particle cryo-EM to present an inventory of structures coexisting
      in a sample began to be realized with the introduction of maximum likeli-
      hood classification by Sjors Scheres, who worked as a student in the lab of
      Jose-Maria Carazo (Scheres et al., 2007) and later, as an independent prin-
      cipal investigator, at the Laboratory of Molecular Biology (LMB) of the
      Medical Research Council (MRC) in Cambridge (Scheres 2012). These algo-
      rithms, first introduced into single-particle processing by Fred Sigworth


                                                                                       Joachim Frank Lecture            251




                                                                 Number of particles
                                                                                          SU- 1 2 3 4 5
                                                                                        ML-1
                                                                                       ML-2
                                                                                       ML-3                      ML-4
                                                                                       cross-correlation difference




Figure 22. Maximum likelihood classification of ~90,000 images of the E. coli ribosome
with and without EF–G bound. Upper row: maximum-likelihood classification into four
classes. Lower row: supervised classification into five classes, using an EF–G-bound
ribosome as a reference. (In this inferior method, classes ar defined and ordered by incre-
asing similarity with the reference. Adapted, from Scheres et al., 2007).



(1998), perform the seemingly impossible task of disentangling changes of
view angle from changes in structure (Sigworth, 2007). A large well-charac-
terized ribosome data set we supplied was correctly (i.e., conforming with
supervised classification, as the ground truth was unknown) classified in
the initial study by Scheres et al. (Fig. 22). Working with this toolset, multi-
ple structures are now routinely recovered from a single sample (Agirreza-
bala et al., 2012; Hashem et al., 2013b; Budkevich et al., 2014; des Georges
et al., 2016; Loveland et al., 2017).
   Four years after my move to Columbia University the field was revolu-
tionized with the introduction of commercial direct electron detecting
cameras already mentioned above. The fact that the poor quality of image
recording presented a serious bottleneck in attempts to reach high resolu-
tion was implicit in the results of an earlier study of Richard Henderson
(Henderson, 1995). Since 2013, as a consequence of the superior perfor-
mance of the new cameras, a large number of cryo-EM maps have been
obtained at near-atomic resolution (2–4 Å). Cryo-EM has become a main-
stream technique of structural biology (Nogales, 2016).
   Again resorting to the ribosome to make a general point, I show two
examples for the “Story in a Sample” paradigm at near-atomic resolution.
In one study, several states of the elongation cycle are “fished out” from
images of ribosomes purified from a cell extract of Plasmodium falci-
parum, the malaria parasite (Sun et al., 2015) (Fig. 23 left). These states
proved to correspond to those earlier identified by trapping the eukary-
otic ribosome from yeast or mammals with GTP analogs. In another
study by my group, part of the elongation cycle is visualized in a sample


252   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Figure 23. Two examples for determination of multiple structures from the same sample.
      Left: five 80S structures from Plasmodium falciparum ribosomes purified from a cell
      extract. Four of these (upper row) bear tRNAs and one (bottom) is empty. Inventory of
      all tRNA positions observed is on bottom right. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sun
      et al., 2015). Right: four E. coli 70S ribosome structures obtained from a sample where
      EF–G.GTP is present and bears a mutation H74A on the Switch 2 loop, slowing down GTP
      hydrolysis by a large factor (Li et al., 2015). The four structures are arranged along with
      two models in the order of the translation elongation cycle.


      containing a mutant of EF–G (Li et al., 2015) (Fig. 23 right). Literally,
      cryo-EM is now able to tell us a story from a single sample of molecules in
      equilibrium, showing how the molecule changes its shape and binds or
      sheds ligands.
          This potential for resolving dynamic changes of molecules in equilib-
      rium is augmented by the development of time-resolved techniques that
      are able to trap short-lived states evolving in a non-equilibrium experi-
      ment (Berriman and Unwin, 1994; Chen and Frank, 2015; Chen et al.,
      2015; Fu et al., 2016; Lu et al., 2009; Shaikh et al., 2014). Ultimately, even
      the recovery of a continuum of structures reflecting the states of a biolog-
      ical molecule at work, and the mapping of its free-energy landscape are
      no longer distant goals (Dashti et al., 2014; Dashti et al., 2017; Frank and
      Ourmazd, 2016). This most recent development is made possible by our
      ability to collect large quantities of data, ensuring that even states
      encountered with low probability are represented in the ensemble.
          Even though I have illustrated the progress achieved by using my
      favorite molecule, the ribosome (best resolution thus far at 2.5 Å – Liu et
      al., 2016; Fig. 24a), the range of applications in biology is virtually unlim-
      ited except for some lower bound on molecule size, and, of course, the
      necessity of having the molecule suspended in solution. My own recent
      collaborations with the groups of Andrew Marks, Wayne Hendrickson,
      Alexander Sobolevsky, and Filippo Mancia demonstrate the gain in knowl-
      edge achievable now for membrane-bound channels and receptors (Zalk
      et al., 2015; des Georges et al., 2016; Twomey et al., 2016; 2017a; 2017b;
      Chen et al., 2016) (Fig. 24 b,c).


                                                           Joachim Frank Lecture      253



                                                        Figure 24. Three recent
                                                        reconstructions at
                                                        near-atomic resolution
                                                        obtained in my lab in va-
                                                        rious collaborations. Left:
                                                        T. cruzi ribosome. Liu et
                                                        al., 2016)(reproduced with
                                                        permission, from Frank,
                                                        2017); Center: Calcium
                                                        release channel. (reprodu-
                                                        ced with permission, from
                                                        des Georges et al., 2016);
                                                        Right: AMPA receptor
                                                        (reproduced, with permis-
                                                        sion, from Twomey et al.,
                                                        2017b).



CONCLUSIONS
Structural Biology, as a field, is in the process of being remade as the rela-
tive contributions of X-ray crystallography, NMR and cryo-EM are being
reevaluated and repositioned. This is a process that will go on for a num-
ber of years, whose dynamics are difficult to predict. Right now there are
three points to be made: (i) As there is no need for crystals, a large gap in
structural knowledge can be filled now, particularly concerning mem-
brane-bound channels and receptors, but also large molecular assemblies
with high flexibility. (ii) The lower size limit on molecules is rapidly reced-
ing as phase plates improve contrast and cameras promise to become
even more powerful. The recent determination of the structure of hemo-
globin (Koshouei et al., 2017), with 64 kD molecular weight, is a feat once
unthinkable. (iii) The ability to recover multiple structures, or even a con-
tinuum of structures, from a single sample sets off cryo-EM sharply from
X-ray crystallography, and promises to give us very detailed information
on molecular mechanisms of ligand binding, allosteric switching, and gat-
ing events.
   To conclude this account of a 40-year journey, I must confess that even
though I was always a firm believer in the technique I dreamed up many
years ago, I never thought I would see it come to fruition in this spectacular
way – let alone that it would earn me a share of the highest prize coveted
by scientists all over the world. It has been a truly fantastic journey overall.
   Knowing that Human Medicine as a whole stands to benefit from the
new technology is ultimately the best reward.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In my account of more than four decades of work I have focused on con-
tributions of my own lab. It goes without saying that as the field devel-


254   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Figure 25. Albany reunion picture of then-current and former postdocs and colleagues,
      at the 1999 Gordon Conference for 3D Electron Microscopy. Upper row: Nicolas Boisset,
      Michael Radermacher, Joachim Frank, Carmen Mannella, Roland Beckmann, Martin Kes-
      sel, Pawel Penczek, Bruce McEwen, Jose-Maria Carazo. Lower row: Rasmus Schroeder,
      Montsertat Samso, Rajendra Agrawal, Bob Grassucci, and Holland Cheng.



      oped many people have contributed to it worldwide, in areas reaching
      from sample preparation over instrument design and the development of
      computational tools, as recounted in many recent reviews (e.g., Nogales,
      2016). As a community the cryo-EM crowd is unusual in its spirit of
      cooperation and mutual respect, as reflected in the cordial atmosphere at
      topical meetings such as the Gordon Conference on 3DEM and the
      so-called Hybrid Meetings at Lake Tahoe.
         I should at this point give tribute to all the people who have made this
      development possible over the years. First of all, without the pivotal con-
      tributions and leadership of my co-laureates Jacques Dubochet and Rich-
      ard Henderson the field would not have come together and prospered in
      this way. My thanks go to my students, postdocs, and collaborators who
      shared my vision and put in so much hard work to make it all happen
      (Fig. 25). Bob Grassucci has been with my group for more than 30 years in
      management and support of instruments of ever-increasing complexity.
         My very special thanks goes to my wife Carol Saginaw who has steadily
      supported me for close to 40 years and never lost faith in me, and my
      family and non-scientist friends who have cheered me on at every turn.
         Much of the earlier developments of the technique took place at the
      Wadsworth Center in Albany, which provided a sheltered, supportive


                                                                Joachim Frank Lecture    255


environment with generous funding by the State of New York, particularly
in the starting phase when it counted most. In my expression of gratitude
to the Wadsworth Center I would like to single out Carmen Mannella, who
supported me throughout those years as a colleague, collaborator and
friend. My affiliation with the Department of Biomedical Sciences of the
University at Albany since 1985 allowed me to foster academic interac-
tions with the SUNY faculty at large. Since 2008, when I joined the facul-
ties of Columbia’s Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics
and Department of Biological Sciences, I enjoyed the multifaceted intel-
lectual environment fostered and nurtured by one of the country’s great-
est universities.
   My work has been generously supported by the National Institute of
General Medical Sciences of NIH almost without interruption since 1981.
Funding for two inspiring Sabbatical stays in England and Germany was
provided, respectively, by the Fogarty Foundation and the Humboldt Foun-
dation. Over the years, I received sizeable awards from the National Science
Foundation for several instrument purchases. Support by the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute for almost 20 years has allowed me to build up a
state-of-the-art, professionally supported cryo-EM facility first at the Wad-
sworth Center and later at Columbia University. It is important to point out
in these times that Government support is absolutely necessary for science
to prosper and, with it, the chances of success in fighting disease.




references
Adrian, M., Dubochet, J., Lepault, J., and McDowall, A.W. (1984). “Cryo-electron
  microscopy of viruses,” Nature 308, 32–36.
Agirrezabala, X., Liao, H., Schreiner, E., Fu, J., Ortiz-Meoz, R.F., Schulten, K.,
  Green, R., and Frank, J. (2012). “Structural characterization of mRNA-tRNA
  translocation intermediates,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 6094–6099.
Agrawal, R.K., Penczek, P., Grassucci, R.A., and Frank, J. (1998). Visualization of
  elongation factor G on the Escherichia coli 70S ribosome: the mechanism of
  translocation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 6134–6138.
Agrawal, R.K., Heagle, A.B., Penczek, P., Grassucci, R.A., and Frank, J. (1999).
  EF-G-dependent GTP hydrolysis induces translocation accompanied by large
  conformational changes in the 70S ribosome. Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 643–647.
Ban, N., Freeborn, B., Nissen, P., Penczek, P., Grassucci, R.A., Sweet, R., Frank, J.,
  Moore, P.B., and Steitz, T.A. (1998). “A 9 Å resolution X-ray crystallographic
  map of the large ribosomal subunit,” Cell 93, 1105–1115.
Ban, N., Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Moore, P.B., Steitz, T.A. (2000). “The complete
  atomic structure of the large ribosomal subunit at 2.4 Å resolution,” Science
  289, 905–920.
Baumeister and Hahn (1975). “Relevance of of three-dimensional reconstruction
  of stain distributions for structural analysis of biomolecules,” Hoppe-Seyler’s Z.
  Physiol. Chem. 356, 1313–1316.


256   THE NOBEL PRIZES

      Beer, M., Frank, J., Hanszen, K.J., Kellenberger, E., and Williams, R.C. (1974). “The
         possibilities and prospects of obtaining high-resolution information (below 30
         Å) on biological material using the electron microscope.” Some comments and
         reports inspired by an EMBO workshop held at Gais, Switzerland, October
         1973. Quart. Rev. Biophys. 7, 211–238.
      Berriman, J. and Unwin, P.N.T. (1994). “Analysis of transient structures by
         cryo-microscopy combined with rapid mixing of spray droplets,” Ultramicros-
         copy 56, 241–252.
      Budkevich, T.V., Giesebrecht, J. Behrmann, E., Loerke, J., Ramrath, D.J., Mielke, T.,
         Ismer, J., Hildebrand, P.W., Tung, C.S., Nierhaus, K.H., Sanbonmatsu, K.Y. and
         Spahn, C.M. (2014). “Regulation of the mammalian elongation cycle by subunit
         rolling: a eukaryotic-specific ribosome rearrangement,” Cell 158, 121–131.
      Chen, B., Kaledhonkar, S., Sun, M., Shen, B., Lu, Z., Barnard, D., Lu, T., Gonzalez,
         R.L., and Frank, J. (2015). “Structural dynamics of ribosome subunit association
         studied by mixing-spraying time-resolved cryo-EM,” Structure 23, 1097–1105.
      Chen, B., and Frank, J. (2015). “Two promising future developments of cryo-EM:
         capturing short-lived states and mapping a continuum of states of a macromol-
         ecule,” Microscopy 65, 69–79.
      Chen, Y., Clarke, O.B., Kim, J., Stowe, S., Kim, Y.-K., Assur, Z., Cavalier, M., Godoy-
         Ruiz, R., von Alpen, D.C., Manzini, C., Blaner, W.S., Frank, J., Quadro, L., Weber,
         D.J., Shapiro, L., Hendrickson, W.A., and Mancia, F. (2016). “Structure of the
         STRA6 receptor for retinol uptake,” Science 353. DOI: 10.1126/science.aad8266 .
      Crowther, R.A., Amos, L.A., Finch, J.T., De Rosier, D.J., and Klug, A. (1970). “Three
         dimensional reconstructions of spherical viruses by Fourier synthesis from
         electron micrographs,” Nature 226, 421–425.
      Crowther, R.A. (1971). “Procedures for three-dimensional reconstruction of spher-
         ical viruses by Fourier synthesis from electron micrographs.,” Phil. Trans. R.
         Soc. Lond. B 261, 221–230.
      Dashti, A., Schwander, P., Langlois, R., Fung, R., Li, W., Hosseinizadeh, A., Liao,
         H.Y., Pallesen, J., Sharma, G., Stupina, V.A., Simon, A.E., Dinman, J., Frank, J.,
         and Ourmazd, A. (2014). “Trajectories of the ribosome as a Brownian nanoma-
         chine,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 17492–17497.
      Dashti, A., Hail, D.B., Mashayekhi, G., Schwander, P., des Georges, A., Frank, J.,
         and Ourmazd, A. (2017). “Conformational dynamics and energy landscapes of
         ligand binding in RyR1,” bioRxiv. DOI: 10.1101/167080.
      DeRosier, D.J. and Klug, A. (1968). “Reconstruction of 3-dimensional structures
         from electron micrographs,” Nature 217, 130–134.
      Des Georges, A., Clarke, O.B., Zalk, R., Yuan, Q., Condon, K.J., Grassucci, R.A.,
         Hendrickson, W.A., Marks, A.R., and Frank, J. (2016). “Structural basis for gat-
         ing and activation of RyR1,” Cell 167, 145–157.
      Dubochet, J., and McDowall, A. W. (1981). “Vitrification of pure water for electron
         microscopy,” J. Microsc. 124, 3–4.
      Frank, J. (1969). Nachweis von Objektbewegungen im lichtoptischen Diffrakto-
         gramm von elektronenmikroskopischen Aufnahmen. Optik 30, 171–180.
      Frank (1970) Untersuchungen von elektronenmikroskopischen Aufnahmen mit
         hoher Auflösung mit Bilddifferenz- und Rekonstruktionsverfahren. [Analysis of
         electron micrographs using image subtraction and reconstruction methods].
         Thesis. Re-printed by TUM University Press, Muenich 2019.
      Frank, J. (1972). “A study on heavy/light atom discrimination in bright field elec-
         tron microscopy using the computer,” Biophys J 12, 484–511.


                                                                 Joachim Frank Lecture     257

Frank, J. (1973). “The envelope of electron microscopic transfer functions for par-
   tially coherent illumination,” Optik 38, 519–539
Frank, J. (1976). Determination of source size and energy spread from electron
   micrographs using the method of Young’s fringes. Optik 44, 379–391.
Frank, J. (1980). The role of correlation techniques in computer image processing.
   In Computer Processing of Electron Microscope Images, Topics in Current Physics.
   Vol. 13. P.W. Hawkes, editor. Springer, Berlin. 187–222.
Frank, J. (1984). “The role of multivariate image analysis in solving the architec-
   ture of the Limulus polyphemus hemocyanin molecule,” Ultramicroscopy 13,
   153–164.
Frank, J. (1996). Three-dimensional Electron Microscopy of Macromolecular Assem-
   blies, San Diego, Academic Press. (2nd edition: Frank, J. (2006), New York,
   Oxford U. Press).
Frank, J. (1998). “How the ribosome works,” American Scientist 86, 428–439.
Frank, J. (2011). “Visualization of molecular machines by electron microscopy,” In:
   Molecular Machines in Biology – Workshop of the Cell. J. Frank, ed. Cambridge
   University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 20–37.
Frank, J. (2017). Advances in the field of single-particle cryo-electron microscopy
   over the last decade. Nature Protocols 12, 209–212.
Frank, J., and Al-Ali, L. (1975). “Signal-to-noise ratio of electron micrographs
   obtained by cross correlation,” Nature 256, 376–379.
Frank, J., and Gonzalez, R.L. (2010). “Structure and dynamics of a processive
   Brownian motor: The translating ribosome,” Ann. Rev. Biochem. 79, 381–412.
Frank, J., and Ourmazd, A. (2016). “Continuous Changes in Structure Mapped by
   Manifold Embedding of Single-Particle Data in Cryo-EM,” Methods 100, 61–67.
Frank, J., Bußler, P., Langer, R., and Hoppe, W. (1970). Einige Erfahrungen mit der
   rechnerischen Analyse und Synthese von elektronenmikroskopischen Bildern
   höher Auflösung. [Experience gained from digital analysis and synthesis of
   high-resolution electron micrographs]. Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 74, 1105–1115.
Frank, J., Goldfarb, W., Eisenberg, D., and Baker, T.S. (1978). “Reconstruction of
   glutamine synthetase using computer averaging,” Ultramicroscopy 3, 283–290.
Frank, J., Verschoor, A., and Boublik, M. (1981a). “Computer averaging of electron
   micrographs of 40S ribosomal subunits,” Science 214, 1353–1355.
Frank, J., Shimkin, B., and Dowse, H. (1981b). “SPIDER – A modular software sys-
   tem for image processing,” Ultramicroscopy 6, 343–358.
Frank, J., Penczek, P., Grassucci, R., and Srivastava, S. (1991). Three-dimensional
   reconstruction of the 70S Escherichia coli ribosome in ice: The distribution of
   ribosomal RNA. J. Cell Biol. 115, 597–605.
Frank, J., Zhu, J., Penczek, P., Li, Y., Srivastava, S., Verschoor, A., Radermacher, M.,
   Grassucci, R., Lata, R.K., and Agrawal, R.K. (1995). “A model of protein synthe-
   sis based on cryo-electron microscopy of the E. coli ribosome,” Nature 376,
   441–444.
Fu, Z., Kaledhonkar, S., Borg, A., Sun, M., Chen, B., Grassucci, R.A., Ehrenberg, M.,
   and Frank, J. (2016). “Key intermediates in ribosome recycling visualized by
   time-resolved cryo-electron microscopy,” Structure 24, 2092–2101.
Glaeser, R.M. (1971). “Limitations to significant information in biological electron
   microscopy as a result of radiation damage,” J. Ultrastruct. Res. 36, 466–482.
Gao, H., and Frank, J. (2005). “Molding atomic structures into intermediate-reso-
   lution cryo-EM density maps of ribosomal complexes using real-space refine-
   ment,” Structure 13, 401–406.


258   THE NOBEL PRIZES

      Gao, H., Sengupta, J., Valle, M., Korostelev, A., Eswar, N., Stagg, S.M., Van Roey, P.,
          Agrawal, R.K., Harvey, S.C., Sali, A., Chapman, M.S., and Frank, J. (2003). Study
          of the structural dynamics of the E. coli 70S ribosome using real-space refine-
          ment. Cell 113, 789–801.
      Goncharov, A.B., Vainshtein, B.K., Ryskin, A.I., and Vagin, A.A. (1987). “Three-di-
          mensional reconstruction of arbitrarily oriented particles from their electron
          photomicrographs,” Sov. Phys. Crystallogr. 32, 504–509.
      Harauz, G. and van Heel, M. (1986). “Exact filters for general geometry three-di-
          mensional reconstruction,” Optik 73, 146–156.
      Hashem, Y., des Georges, A., Fu, J., Buss, S.N., Jossinet, F., Jobe, A., Zhang, Q.,
          Liao, H.Y., Grassucci, R.A., Bajaj, C., Westhof, E., Madison-Antenucci, S., and
          Frank, J. (2013a). “High-resolution cryo-electron microscopy structure of Tryp-
          anosoma brucei ribosome,” Nature 494, 385–389.
      Hashem, Y., des Georges, A., Dhote, V., Langlois, R., Liao, H.L., Grassucci, R.A.,
          Hellen, C.U.T., Pestova, T.V., and Frank, J. (2013b). “Structure of the mammalian
          ribosomal 43S preinitiation complex bound to the scanning factor DHX29,” Cell
          153, 1108–1119.
      Henderson, R. and Unwin, P.N.T. (1975). “Three-dimensional model of purple
          membrane obtained by electron microscopy,” Nature 257, 28–32.
      Henderson, R. (1995). “The potential and limitations of neutrons, electrons and
          X-rays for atomic resolution microscopy of unstained biological molecules,” Q.
          Rev. Biophys. 28, 171–193.
      Holmes, K. C. (2017). Aaron Klug – A Long Way from Durban: A Biography. Cam-
          bridge University Press.
      Hoppe, W., Gassmann, J., Hunsmann, N., Schramm, H.J. and Sturm, M. (1974).
          “Three-dimensional reconstruction of individual negatively stained yeast fat-
          ty-acid synthetase molecules from tilt series in the electron microscope,” Hoppe
          Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem. 355, 1483–1487.
      Kessel, M., Frank, J., and Goldfarb, W. (1980). “Averages of glutamine synthetase
          molecules as obtained with various stain and electron dose conditions,” J.
          Supramol Struct. 14, 405–422.
      Khoshouei, M., Radjainia, M., Baumeister, W., and Danev, R. (2017). “Cryo-EM
          structure of haemoglobin at 3.2 Å determined with the Volta phase plate,”
          Nature Communications 8, doi:10.1038/ncomms16099
      Lambert, O., Boisset, N., Penczek, P., Lamy, J., Taveau, J.C., Frank, J., and Lamy,
          J.N. (1994). “Quaternary structure of Octopus vulgaris hemocyanin. Three-di-
          mensional reconstruction from frozen-hydrated specimens and intramolecular
          location of functional units Ove and Ovb,” J. Mol. Biol. 238, 75–87.
      Langer, R., Frank, J., Feltynowski, A., and Hoppe, W. (1970). Anwendung des Bild-
          differenzverfahrens auf die Untersuchung von Strukturänderungen dünner
          Kohlefolien bei Elektronenbestrahlung. [Application of the image difference
          method to the analysis of structural changes of thin carbon films during electron
          exposure]. Ber Bunsenges Phys Chem 74, 1120–1126.
      LeBarron, J., Grassucci, R.A., Shaikh, T.R., Baxter, W.T., Sengupta, J., and Frank, J.
          (2008). “Exploration of parameters in cryo-EM leading to an improved density
          map of the E. coli ribosome,” J. Struct. Biol. 164, 24–32.
      Li, W., Agirrezabala, X., Lei, J., Bouakaz, L., Brunelle, J.L., Ortiz-Meoz, R.F., Green,
          R., Sanyal, S., Ehrenberg, M., and Frank, J. (2008). “Recognition of aminoa-
          cyl-tRNA: A common molecular mechanism revealed by cryo-EM,” EMBO J 27,
          3322–3331.


                                                                  Joachim Frank Lecture     259

Li, W., Liu, Z., Koripella, R.K., Langlois, R., Sanyal, S., and Frank, J. (2015). Activa-
    tion of GTP hydrolysis in mRNA-tRNA translocation by Elongation Factor G.
    Science Advances 1 e1500169.
Liu, Z., Gutierrez-Vargas, C., Wei, J., Grassucci, R.A., Ramesh, M., Espina, N., Sun,
    M., Tutuncuoglu, B., Madison-Antenucci, S., Woolford, J.L., Tong, L., and Frank,
    J. (2016). “Structure and assembly model for the Trypanosoma cruzi 60S ribo-
    somal subunit,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 12174–12179.
Loveland, A.B., Demo, G., Grigorieff, N., and Korostev, A.A. (2017). “Ensemble
    cryo-EM elucidates the mechanism of translational fidelity,” Nature 546, 113–
    117.
Lu, T.R., Barnard, D., X., Mohamed, H., Yassin, A., Mannella, C.A., R.K., Lu, T.-M.
    and Wagenknecht, T. (2009). “Monolithic microfluidic mixing-spraying devices
    for time-resolved cryo-electron microscopy,” J. Struct. Biol. 168, 388–395.
Mossman, K. (2007). “Profile of Joachim Frank,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104,
    19668–19670.
Nogales, E. (2016). “The development of cryo-EM into a mainstream structural
    biology technique,” Nature Methods 13, 24–27.
Penczek, P., Radermacher, M., and Frank, J. (1992). “Three-dimensional recon-
    struction of single particles embedded in ice,” Ultramicroscopy 40, 33–53.
Penczek, P.A., Grassucci, R.A., and Frank, J. (1994). “The ribosome at improved
    resolution: new techniques for merging and orientation refinement in 3D
    cryo-electron microscopy of biological particles,” Ultramicroscopy 53, 251–270.
Penczek, P.A., Zhu, J., and Frank, J. (1996). “A common-lines based method for
    determining orientations for N > 3 particle projections simultaneously,” Ultra-
    microscopy 63, 205–218.
Penczek, P.A., Zhu, J., Schröder, R., and Frank, J. (1997). “Three -dimensional
    reconstruction with contrast transfer compensation from defocus series,”
    Scanning Microscopy 11, 147–154.
Radermacher, M., and Frank, J. (1984). “Representation of three-dimensionally
    reconstructed objects in electron microscopy by surfaces of equal density,” J.
    Microsc. 136, 77–85.
Radermacher, M., Wagenknecht, T., Verschoor, A., and Frank, J. (1986). “A new 3-D
    reconstruction scheme applied to the 50S ribosomal subunit of E. coli,” J.
    Microsc. 141, RP1-2.
Radermacher, M., Wagenknecht, T., Verschoor, A., and Frank, J. (1987a). “Three-di-
    mensional reconstruction from a single-exposure, random conical tilt series
    applied to the 50S ribosomal subunit of Escherichia coli,” J. Microsc. 146, 113–136.
Radermacher, M., Wagenknecht, T., Verschoor, A., and Frank, J. (1987b).
    “Three-dimensional structure of the large ribosomal subunit from Escherichia
    coli,” EMBO J. 6, 1107–1114.
Radermacher, M., Wagenknecht, T., Grassucci, R., Frank, J., Inui, M., Chadwick,
    C., and Fleischer, S. (1992). “Cryo-EM of the native structure of the calcium
    release channel/ryanodine receptor from sarcoplasmic reticulum,” Biophys. J.
    61, 936–940.
Radermacher, M., Rao, V., Grassucci, R., Frank, J., Timerman, A.P., Fleischer, S.,
    and Wagenknecht, T. (1994). “Cryo-electron microscopy and three-dimensional
    reconstruction of the calcium release channel/ryanodine receptor from skeletal
    muscle,” J Cell Biol 127, 411–423.
Saxton, W.O., and Frank, J. (1977). “Motif detection in quantum noise-limited elec-
    tron micrographs by cross-correlation,” Ultramicroscopy 2, 219–227.


260   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      Saxton, W.O. and Baumeister, W. (1982). The correlation averaging of a regularly
         arranged bacterial cell envelope protein. J. Microscopy 127, 127–138.
      Scheres, S.H., Gao, H., Valle, M., Herman, G.T., Eggermont, P.P., Frank, J., and
         Carazo, J.M. (2007). “Disentangling conformational states of macromolecules
         in 3D-EM through likelihood optimization,” Nat Methods 4, 27–29.
      Scheres, S.H. (2012). “A Bayesian view on cryo-EM structure determination,” J.
         Mol. Biol. 415, 406–418.
      Scherzer, O. (1948). “The theoretical resolution limit of the electron microscope,”
         J. Appl. Phys. 20, 20–29 (1948).
      Schmeing, T. and Ramakrishnan, V. (2009). “What recent ribosome structures
         have revealed about the mechanism of translation. Nature 461, 1234–1242.
      Shaikh, T.R., Yassin, A.S., Lu, Z., Barnard, D., Meng, X., Lu, T.M., Wagenknecht, T.
         and Agrawal, R.K. (2014). “Initial bridges between two ribosomal subunits are
         formed within 9.4 milliseconds, as studied by time-resolved cryo-EM,” Proc.
         Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 9822–9827.
      Sigworth F.J. (1998). “A maximum-likelihood approach to single-particle image
         refinement,” J. Struct. Biol. 122, 328–339.
      Sigworth, F. J. (2007). “From cryo-EM, multiple protein structures in one shot,”
         Nature Methods 4, 20–21.
      Spahn, C.M.T., Kieft, J.S., Grassucci, R.A., Penczek, P.A., Doudna, J.A., and Frank,
         J. (2001). “Hepatitis C Virus IRES RNA–induced changes in the conformation
         of the 40S ribosomal subunit,” Science 291, 1959–1962.
      Steitz, T. (2009) “From the Structure and Funktion of the Ribosome to new Anti-
         biotics”, Les Prix Nobel, 179–204.
      Sun, M., Li, W., Blomqvist, K., Das, S., Hashem, Y., Dvorin, J.D., and Frank, J.
         (2015). Dynamical features of the Plasmodium falciparum ribosome during
         translation. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, 10515–10524.
      Tama, F., Valle, M., Frank, J., and Brooks, C.L., 3rd (2003). “Dynamic reorganiza-
         tion of the functionally active ribosome explored by normal mode analysis and
         cryo-electron microscopy,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100, 9319–9323.
      Taylor, K.A. and Glaeser, R.M. (1974). “Electron diffraction from Frozen, hydrated
         protein crystals,” Science 186, 1036–1037.
      Thon, F. (1966). “Zur Defokussierunsabhängigkeit des Phasenkontrastes bei der
         elektronenmikroskopischen Abbildung,” Z. Naturforsch. 21a, 476–478.
      Trabuco, L.G., Villa, E., Mitra, K., Frank, J., and Schulten, K. (2008). “Flexible fit-
         ting of atomic structures into electron microscopy maps using molecular
         dynamics,” Structure 16, 673–683.
      Twomey, E.C., Velshanskaya, M.V., Grassucci, R.A., Frank, J., and Sobolevsky, A.I.
         (2016). “Elucidation of AMPA receptor–stargazin complexes by cryo–electron
         microscopy,” Science 353, 83–86.
      Twomey, E.C., Yelshanskaya, M.V., Grassucci, R.A., Frank, J., and Sobolevsky, A.I.
         (2017a). “Channel opening and gating mechanism in AMPA-subtype glutamate
         receptors,” Nature 549, 60–65.
      Twomey, E.C., Yelshanskaya, M.V., Grassucci, R.A., Frank, J., and Sobolevsky, A.I.
         (2017b). “Structural bases of desensitization in AMPA receptor-auxiliary subu-
         nit complexes,” Neuron 94, 569–580.
      Valle, M., Sengupta, J., Swami, N.K., Grassucci, R.A., Burkhardt, N., Nierhaus,
         K.H., Agrawal, R.K., and Frank, J. (2002). “Cryo-EM reveals an active role for
         aminoacyl-tRNA in the accommodation process,” EMBO J 21, 3557–3567.
      Valle, M., Zavialov, A., Sengupta, J., Rawat, U., Ehrenberg, M., and Frank, J.
         (2003a). “Locking and unlocking of ribosomal motions,” Cell 114, 123–134.


                                                                Joachim Frank Lecture     261


Valle, M., Zavialov, A., Li, W., Stagg, S.M., Sengupta, J., Nielsen, R.C., Nissen, P.,
   Harvey, S.C., Ehrenberg, M., and Frank, J. (2003b). “Incorporation of aminoa-
   cyl-tRNA into the ribosome as seen by cryo-electron microscopy,” Nat. Struct.
   Biol. 10, 899–906.
van Heel, M. and Frank, J. (1981). “Use of multivariate statistics in analysing the
   images of biological macromolecules,” Ultramicroscopy 6, 187–194.
van Heel, M., Keegstra, W., Schutter, W. and van Bruggen, E.F.J. (1982), in: Life
   Chemistry Reports, Suppl. 1, The Structure and Function of Invertebrate Respira-
   tory Proteins, EMBO Workshop, Leeds, ed. E.J. Wood, pp. 69–73.
van Heel, M. (1987). “Angular reconstitution: a posteriori assignment of projection
   directions for 3D reconstruction,”Ultramicroscopy 21, 111–124.
van Heel, M., Orlova, E.V., Harauz, G., Stark, H., Dube, P., Zemlin, F. and Schatz,
   M. (1997). “Angular reconstitution in three-dimensional electron microscopy:
   Historical and theoretical aspects,” Scanning Microsc. 11, 195–210.
Villa, E., Sengupta, J., Trabuco, L.G., LeBarron, J., Baxter, W.T., Shaikh, T.R., Gras-
   succi, R.A., Nissen, P., Ehrenberg, M., Schulten, K., Frank, J. (2009). “Ribo-
   some-induced changes in elongation factor Tu conformation control GTP
   hydrolysis,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1063–1068.
Wade, R.H., and Frank, J. (1977). “Electron microscopic transfer functions for par-
   tially coherent axial illumination and chromatic defocus spread,” Optik 49,
   81–92.
Yarus, M., Valle, M., and Frank, J. (2003). “A twisted tRNA intermediate sets the
   threshold for decoding,” RNA 9, 384–385.
Zalk, R., Clarke, O.B., des Georges, A., Grassucci, R.A., Reiken, S., Mancia, F., Hen-
   drickson, W.A., Frank, J., and Marks, A.R. (2015). “Structure of a mammalian
   ryanodine receptor,” Nature 517, 44–49.
Zhu, J., Penczek, P.A., Schröder, R., and Frank, J. (1997). “Three-dimensional
   reconstruction with contrast transfer function correction from energy-filtered
   cryoelectron micrographs: procedure and application to the 70S Escherichia
   coli ribosome,” J. Struct. Biol. 118, 197–219.
Zingsheim, H.P., Neugebauer, D.C., Barrantes, F.J., and Frank, J. (1980). “Structural
   details of membrane-bound acetylcholine receptor from Torpedo marmorata,”
   Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77, 952–956.
