ASYMMETRY AND ENZYME ACTION
Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1975
by JOHN WARCUP CORNFORTH
University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, England



It must, I think, be rare to be rewarded so generously for work that was so
purely a pleasure in planning and execution. I shall try, in return, to impart
some of that pleasure today.
   In 1948, a short but historic note by Alexander Ogston appeared in the
scientific magazine Nature, demonstrating the importance of a particular
type of stereochemical thinking in relation to biochemical processes catalysed
by enzymes. Up to that time I had, as an organic chemist interested in the
synthesis of natural products, the same kind of feeling for stereochemistry
that a motorist might have for a system of one-way streets - a set of rules form-
ing one more obstacle on the way to a destination. But 1948 was a year in
which as well as continuing collaboration with Robert Robinson on the total
synthesis of sterols, I had begun to co-operate with biological scientists at the
National Institute for Medical Research; so that Ogston’s note was a seed that
germinated the more readily in my mind.
   The essential principles of the three-dimensional structure of organic mol-
ecules had been correctly formulated by the first Nobel laureate in Chemistry,
Jacobus van’t Hoff, as early as 1874. In particular he (and independently Le
Bel) gave a structural basis to Louis Pasteur’s discovery that certain molecules
can exist in two optically active forms that differ from each other in their
effect on a beam of plane polarized light; the plane of polarization is rotated
to the right when the beam passes through a solution of one form, and to the
left when the other form is substituted. van’t Hoff theorized that when a
carbon atom in a molecule is attached to its maximum number of four other
atoms, these occupy the four apices of a tetrahedron, with the carbon atom in
the middle. Another way of saying the same thing is that the four atoms keep
as far away from each other as they can, given that they are bound at fixed
distances from the central atom. If these four atoms are all different, or at any
rate if each forms part of a different group of atoms, they can occupy two
distinct spatial arrangements that are chiral: their relationship is that of a
right hand with a left hand and they are mirror images of one another (I, II).
                  mirror plane
                I


188                               Chemistry 1975


The central carbon may then be called a centre of asymmetry. On the other
hand, if two of the atoms or groups are indistinguishable from each other
 (III), only one arrangement about the central atom is possible.
    Most molecules, including enzymes, that mediate the processes of life are
optically active and have centres of asymmetry, but many molecules quite im-
portant in life processes have no centre of asymmetry and one of these is
citric acid (IV), which was first isolated in 1784 by the great Swedish chemist
Scheele: it is a Caabc compound, the two acetic acid groups attached to the
central carbon being identical. When processes in living cells began to be
studied with the help of radioactive and stable isotopes as tracers, an apparent
anomaly arose that centred round this substance.
    The biochemical course of events, which was outlined quite correctly on
the evidence available at the time, was studied with preparations of pigeon
liver and is expressed in Scheme 1. Pyruvic acid reacts with carbon dioxide
to give oxaloacetic acid, and this condenses with “active acetate” (now
known to be acetyl-coenzyme A) to yield citric acid. The citric acid then un-
dergoes oxidation with loss of carbon dioxide to 2-oxoglutaric acid, which
is further oxidized to a second molecule of carbon dioxide and succinic acid.
All these reactions are catalysed by enzymes (though the last step can also be
done chemically) but the original stereochemical reasoning about the se-
quence was based on what would happen if the same reactions were carried
out nonenzymically. The reasoning went something like this: “citric acid is
a symmetrical molecule of the type Caabc; there is no difference between
the two a groups, which are both acetic acid residues; so that if we make one
of them radioactive, for instance by using radioactive carbon dioxide in the


                                  J. W. Cornforth                              189


first step, then when the citric acid is broken down by way of 2-oxoglutaric
acid to succinic acid and carbon dioxide the two residues will be affected
indifferently and half the radioactivity will be in succinic acid and half will be
in the second molecule of carbon dioxide liberated on oxidation”.
   But experiment showed that all the radioactivity appeared in carbon dioxide
and none in succinic acid, and no explanation (except the incorrect conclusion
that citric acid took no part in the biochemical sequence) could be found
before Ogston’s note. Although Ogston clearly grasped the principle, I am
giving the explanation in rather more general terms.
   Enzymes catalyse chemical reactions by binding the reactant molecules
 (substrates) at a specific site in the enzyme molecule. Enzymes are proteins,
and proteins are made up of a large number of asymmetric units, the amino-
acids. There is no element of symmetry in an enzyme, or in its specific site.
Moreover, each enzyme will characteristically accept very few molecular types
as substrates: small changes in shape or size from the normal substrate may re-
sult in a very much slower reaction or in none at all. Emil Fischer had this
in mind when he said, as long ago as 1894, that enzyme and substrate must fit
each other like lock and key.
   A lock and key must fit each other; but also, if the lock has no symmetry,
the key has to be oriented three-dimensionally in an unique manner for intro-
duction into the lock; and then the key has to be turned in a particular sense
to operate the lock, so that one particular side of the key executes the actual
operation of moving the lock’s mechanism.
   So that if a molecule of oxaloacetic acid is considered as a key, then only
one particular side (above or below the plane of the paper) of its ketone car-
bonyl group can react with the other substrate, acetyl-coenzyme A. The other
side cannot be fitted to the enzyme without changing the whole orientation
of the substrate, as if one tried to fit the wrong end of a key, or a key upside
down, into a lock. This is quite different from the reactions of the same car-
bonyl group in free solution, where both sides are equally open to attack by a
reagent.
   If the oxaloacetic acid carries a radioactive label, as it does when it has
been made from pyruvic acid and radioactive carbon dioxide, then the citric
acid which is formed on the enzyme carries its labelled acetic acid residue
in a particular orientation that is distinct from the orientation of the
other acetic acid residue - the one that originates from acetyl-coenzyme        A.
Since the next reaction in the biochemical sequence produces a change in
one of the acetic acid residues, it is obvious that all citric acid molecules
presented to the enzyme that alters them will have the labelled residue altered,
or else they will all have the unlabelled residue altered: this is a necessary
consequence if the citric acid molecules must be presented to the enzyme in a
particular orientation. As it happens, the labelled residue is the one altered;
and the relevant stereochemistry of the process, as elucidated much later by
Kenneth Hanson and Irwin Rose, is as shown (Scheme 2).
   Asymmetric synthesis is not unknown to organic chemists: for example a
reaction in free solution that produces a new centre of asymmetry by bringing


190                                   Chemistry 1975




 Scheme 2. Actual stereochemistry of citric acid enzymic synthesis and degradation

together a symmetrical and an unsymmetrical molecule will often produce an
excess of one of the two chiral forms. But here was something of a different
order: two reactions promoted with complete specificity by an asymmetric
catalyst. And in both reactions the asymmetry of the catalysis is hidden: if it
had not become possible to place the experimenter’s private mark, in the
 shape of an isotopic label, on one of the two acetic acid residues, the Ogston
 effect, as it has come to be known, might have remained unsuspected for
many years. In this field of work, the use of isotopes as markers is almost in-
dispensable: replacement of an atom in a substrate molecule by one of its iso-
topes makes very little change in shape or chemistry; and an enzyme will al-
ways accept a labelled substrate, though it may transform it a little slower.
   In 1953, Frank Westheimer, in collaboration with the biochemists Frank
Loewus and Birgit Vennesland, studied yeast alcohol dehydrogenase. This en-
zyme catalyses the reversible transfer of a hydrogen atom between a molecule
of ethanol and a molecule of a coenzyme, nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide.
The transfer neither creates nor destroys a centre of asymmetry, but neverthe-
less, the two hydrogen atoms on the oxygenated carbon of ethanol, and the two
sides of the nicotinamide ring in the coenzyme, are stereochemically distinct
in the Ogston sense. A simple test of this is to look at the rest of the molecule
from the viewpoint of each hydrogen atom in turn, or from each side of the


                                     J. W. Cornforth                         191

ring in turn: if the two views are different (as they are) an enzyme can, and
probably will, concern itself with only one of the atoms or only one of the
sides. By using the hydrogen isotopes deuterium or tritium as marking labels it
was indeed possible to show that the hydrogen that is transferred occupies an
unique stereochemical position in both substrate and coenzyme. A hydrogen
not occupying one of these positions is not transferred at all. The stereochem-
istry has been worked out since then in a number of laboratories, including
mine, and it is as shown (Scheme 3).
   Further, when hydrogen was transferred from an unlabelled coenzyme to
acetaldehyde in which the aldehydic hydrogen had been replaced by deute-
rium, the alcohol formed showed measurable (though small) rotation of pola-
rized light, which made possible the correlation of its stereochemistry with
this physical property. Finally, when the deuteriated ethanol was submitted to
a purely chemical procedure: hydrolysis of its toluene-4-sulphonyl ester, a
new specimen of deuteriated ethanol was obtained which, unlike its precur-
sor, transferred deuterium and not hydrogen to the coenzyme in the presence
of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (Scheme 4).




Scheme 4. Stereochemical inversion of 1-deuterioethanol

   Now although this last experiment was not carried out for the purpose, it
can be regarded as proving that the hydrolysis of a typical sulphonic ester of a
primary alcohol proceeds with inversion of configuration at carbon; which
was something never demonstrated before, although it had been shown to be
true of secondary alcohols in which the asymmetry owed nothing to isotopic
substitution. Knowledge of the stereochemistry of a chemical reaction is one
of the most useful guides in elucidating the correct mechanism and in exclud-
ing alternatives.
   I had been following this work with much interest, and perceived some of
its potential importance for studying enzymic mechanisms; but I was en-
gaged at the time with my biochemical colleague George Popják and our col-
laborators, on a problem of biosynthesis: by chemical degradation of cholesterol
synthesized in rat liver preparations from acetic acid, we were showing the
pattern of incorporation of the precursor into the ring structure of the sterol.
Later, and especially when mevalonic acid emerged as the parent substance of
steroids and terpenoids, we were able to plan experiments of greater subtlety,
using mevalonic acid specifically labelled with carbon isotopes to decide de-
tails of the molecular rearrangement that takes place when the steroid ring


192                                  Chemistry 1975




Scheme 5. Biosynthesis of squalene from 3R-mevalonic acid

structure is formed. At the same time, Konrad Bloch and Feodor Lynen were
identifying the intermediate stages leading from mevalonic acid to the ster-
ols in yeast, and Popják was demonstrating that the same intermediates
were formed in rat liver. The sequence from mevalonic acid to squalene, the
precursor of all steroids and triterpenoids, was mapped out as shown (Scheme
5).
   In 1960 we were checking on the formation of squalene from two molecules
of farnesyl pyrophosphate. This reaction looks like a symmetrical coupling of
two identical halves: in fact, we found that the process is attended by the ex-
change of one, and only one, hydrogen atom from one of the carbon atoms that
become joined together in squalene. This non-symmetrical synthesis of a
symmetrical molecule roused further my curiosity about the mechanism of the
whole process, from mevalonic acid to squalene.
   Mevalonic acid has asymmetry of the ordinary kind, with Cabcd sub-
stitution at the central carbon atom, but this type of asymmetry is soon lost in
the biochemical sequence. But mevalonic acid has three Caabc centres
 (Scheme 6) and all of these undergo changes in bonding on the way to squa-
lene. Each of these six hydrogen atoms in these three groups is stereochemi-
cally distinct in the Ogston sense, and so it was possible in principle to fol-
low the fate of a hydrogen atom from any one of these six positions, until it




        H     H     H     H
 Scheme 6. Mevalonic acid and its six methylene hydrogens


                                 J. W. Cornforth                             193


was either lost in the aqueous medium of reaction or came to a specific, and
stereospecific, destination in a molecule of squalene. This fate is uniquely
determined by, and therefore throws light on, the stereochemistry of the enzy-
mic reactions in the biosynthetic sequence.
    Thus it became necessary to place a distinguishing mark on each of these
six hydrogen atoms in turn, and this could not be done except by replacing
normal hydrogen by one of its isotopes: the stable deuterium or the radioac-
tive tritium. This problem was solved to a large extent by drawing on the
vast store of organic chemical knowledge, especially that part which concerns
the stereochemistry of reactions. In this way, the individual labelling of four
out of the six hydrogen atoms was achieved by non-enzymic processes, and an
organic reaction of known stereochemical preference was employed to define
the stereochemistry of an enzyme - mevaldate reductase - which was used to
generate a label on the fifth hydrogen: the sixth was also labelled, eventually,
with the help of enzymes of known stereochemistry.
   These labelled mevalonic acids were introduced into enzyme preparations
made from rat or pig liver. According to the nature of the preparation and to
the presence or absence of co-factors or inhibitors, it was possible to execute
the whole sequence from mevalonic acid to squalene or to stop at various in-
termediate stages; phosphomevalonic acid, isopentenyl pyrophosphate, or far-
nesyl pyrophosphate (see Scheme 5). Especially in experiments where the la-
bel was deuterium, unusually large amounts of product - typically, 50 milli-
grams - had to be accumulated from these enzymic incubations, and Popjak
and I became familiar with the dialogue “How much can you make?” “How
little do you need?”
   After the enzymic transformations, the products were examined to find out
what had happened to the labelling isotope. When it was a question of wheth-
er the isotope had been lost from, or retained in, the product the procedure
was relatively simple; one examined the product in a mass spectrometer for
the presence or absence of deuterium, or one measured the radioactivity as-
signable to tritium. When the absolute stereochemistry at a labelled position
was needed, it was necessary to use deuterium as the label and to degrade the
product chemically, by reactions that either left the labelled centre undis-
turbed or altered it in a well-defined manner, to a substance suitable for exam-
ination by polarimetry or mass spectrometry. It was fortunate that this work
coincided with the development of polarimeters sensitive enough to mea-
sure, in favourable cases, optical activity due solely to substitution of hydro-
gen by deuterium in specimens of a few milligrams. Our first measurements
of this sort were, indeed, made on a prototype machine at the National Physi-
cal Laboratory. Since contamination by optically active material of the
usual type could have been damaging, we had to develop a technique for re-
crystallization in capillary tubes. This permitted the recrystallization of suc-
citric acid, for example, in milligram quantities from about two parts of wa-
ter. Once the optical rotation was known it could be compared with the rota-
tion of a sample into which a known absolute configuration had been built
by enzymic and chemical synthesis.


194                                   Chemistry 1975


   Thus the work required in unusual measure the harmonious blending of
stereospecific synthesis, isotopic labelling, enzymology, chemical degradation
on the centigram scale, and sensitive physical methods of analysis, into a
single experimental sequence. In the end, we succeeded in demonstrating ste-
reospecificity for all but one of the enzymic steps then known for squalene
biosynthesis; the fate of individual hydrogen atoms was as shown in Scheme
7. This was about as far as we could get by introducing asymmetry into
CH 2bc groups by isotopic substitution of one of the hydrogens, but the availa-
bility of these specifically labelled mevalonic acids was to prove, in our hands
and in others’, of considerable use in mapping the pathways of terpenoid
biosynthesis in general.
   One step in terpenoid biosynthesis is the (reversible) isomerization of iso-
pentenyl pyrophosphate into dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (see. Scheme 5). The
addition of a proton from the aqueous medium to the terminal methylene
group, if it is stereospecific, is to one side only of the terminal methylene
group. Thanks to the work already done, labelled mevalonic acids were avail-
able which were known to give isopentenyl pyrophosphate having a geomet-
rically defined deuterium or tritium label at either of the two hydrogens of
the methylene group; but if this group was converted in a normal incubation
to a methyl group, free rotation about its C-C bond would give indistinguish-
able products whatever the initial geometry of the label and whatever the
direction of addition of the proton. The only way in which it seemed possi-
ble to retain the individuality of the three hydrogen atoms concerned was to
use all three isotopes of hydrogen - protium, deuterium and tritium - in proper
sequence. Then, if the isopentenyl pyrophosphate was stereospecifically la-




Scheme 7. Partial stereochemistry of squalene biosynthesis from 3R-mevalonic acid


               mirror plane




Scheme 8. Generation of a chiral methyl group

belled with two hydrogen isotopes and the third isotope was supplied in the
water of incubation, a stereospecific addition of hydrogen from the water
would give a chiral methyl group, the chirality of which would be determined
by, and diagnostic of, the direction of proton addition (Scheme 8).
    Chiral methyl groups were unknown at the time, and it was not obvious
how their absolute configuration could be determined: optical rotation was
an unlikely candidate for measurement since a substance having tritium in
atomic proportion (instead of the usual small labelling concentration) would
have a specific radioactivity of some 30,000 Curies per mole, and the rota-
tory power would probably be so small as to require large specimens having
this order of radioactivity.
    The solution of the problem grew from a suggestion made by Hermann Eg-
gerer in 1967. He had been studying the enzyme malate synthase, which
makes malic acid, an asymmetric substance having sinistral or S chirality ac-
cording to the convention of Cahn, Ingold and Prelog, from glyoxylic acid and
acetyl-coenzyme A; and he was led to favour a mechanism for the reaction
which predicted a particular stereochemical relation between the hydrogen
atom that is lost from the methyl group and the glycollic acid residue that re-
places it (Scheme 9). If this mechanism was correct and if the reaction was
attended by a normal “isotope effect”, then protium should be displaced from
a chiral methyl group more often than deuterium. Thus, the molecules of ma-
lic acid that contained tritium should comprise a larger proportion of the
species containing deuterium and tritium than of the species containing
tritium and protium; and in these two species the stereochemical location of
the tritium must be different. An analytical method for determining this
location was already available: the enzyme fumarase was known to cata-
lyse the stereospecific anti elimination (Scheme 10) of water from S malic


196                                  Chemistry 1975




Scheme 9. Predicted distribution of tritium in S malate made from chiral acetates and
glyoxylate on malate synthase, assuming retention of configuration at the chiral methyl
group




Scheme 10. Stereochemistry of loss of carbon-bound hydrogen from S malate on the enzyme
fumarase


acid. So that if one carried out the sequence chiral acetate     acetyl-coenzyme
A      malate     fumarate and measured the percentage loss of tritium in the
last stage, this percentage should be different for the two chiral forms of ace-
tate: the percentage retention for the one should equal the percentage loss for
the other. And if the stereochemical mechanism for malate synthase was as-
sumed correct, one could infer the chirality of the acetate from these measure-
ments of radioactivity alone.
   The final plan (Scheme 11 ) did not depend on this assumption (which
was just as well, for it turned out to be wrong). Instead, we were able at Mil-
stead to synthesize, purely by chemical methods, potassium acetates the chi-
rality and absolute stereochemistry of which were defined rigorously by the
method of synthesis. When these were put through the sequence acetate
acetyl-coenzyme A        malate    fumarate in Eggerer’s laboratory, the malate
derived from S acetate lost over three-quarters of its tritium on incubation with
fumarase. In complementary contrast, malate derived from R acetate retained
more than three-quarters of its tritium. Thus, without making any assump-
tions about the mechanisms of the enzymes used, we had a convenient meth-


                                     J W. Cornforth                                   197




                                                                            (76%) +




Scheme 11. Actual distribution of tritium in S malate made from synthetic chiral acetates
and glyoxylate on malate synthasc

od for determining whether a given specimen of chiral acetate was R or S.
At ETH. Zürich, Duilio Arigoni and Janos Retey independently produced
a very similar solution of the same problem. With this analytical method it
became possible to solve not only the problem of the addition of hydrogen to
isopentenyl pyrophosphate but also to deduce the stereochemistry of a large
and still growing number of enzymic reactions in which a methyl group is
either generated or transformed. When at last we knew the stereochemical
origin of all fifty hydrogens in squalene biosynthesized from mevalonic acid,
I had a three-dimensional model made to illustrate this. The last scheme sum-
marizes the information conveyed (Scheme 12).




Scheme 12. Complete stereochemistry of squalene biosynthesis from 3R-mevalonic acid


198                               Chemistry 1975


   Our adventure with the chiral methyl group reinforced the conviction that
stereospecificity is something not just incidental, but essential, to enzymic ca-
talysis. Life does depend on accurate replication of molecules and its complex-
ity often requires that an enzyme shall accept one molecular species or type
and transform it to equally specific products. But the hidden specificity that
we have helped to reveal goes much further than this: an enzyme must, it
seems, catalyse strictly stereospecific reactions even when this specificity is
not required by the structural relation of substrate to product. Indeed, many
examples are now available in which an enzyme can accept more than one
molecular species as substrate but still transforms each of them with absolute,
though hidden, control of the stereochemistry of reaction.
   By combining chemical, biochemical and physical techniques it has thus
become possible to investigate the nature of enzymic catalysis in a novel
manner, complementary to the other approaches which have developed over
the same period. The work required concentrated effort, and I owe much to
the skill and dedication of many collaborators; but I call your attention to
three. George Popják sustained the biochemical side of these investigations
with exceptional insight, ability and resource until 1967. I was fortunate
enough to be associated with him as colleague and partner for over twenty
years and, after him, to enjoy collaboration with another great biochemist,
Hermann Eggerer, whose co-operative spirit made light the difficulties of
concerting experiments in laboratories a thousand kilometers apart. Thirdly,
my wife Rita Cornforth, with patience and great experimental skill, exe-
cuted much of the chemical synthesis on which the success of the work was
founded. To her, in this as in other ways. I owe more than I can well express.
   To my teacher and friend, Robert Robinson, whose death early this year
sadly forestalled his presence on this occasion, I remain especially grateful,
and could hope for nothing better than to retain, as he did to the end of a long
and creative life, fresh curiosity and wonder at the chemistry of Nature.
