                             J O H N H . NO R T H R O P


             T he preparation of pure enzymes and
                        virus proteins*
                         Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1946



The problem of the chemical nature of the substances which control the
reactions occurring in living cells has been a subject of research, and also of
controversy, for nearly two hundred years. Before the eighteenth century
these reactions were considered as "vital processes", outside the realm of
experimental science. The work of Spallanzani, Payen and Persoz, Schwann,
Kühne, and finally Buchner proved that many of these reactions could take
place without living cells and were probably caused by the presence of small
amounts of unstable and active substances, which Kühne called "enzymes".
   Berzelius, a century ago, pointed out that these enzymes were similar to
the catalysts of the chemist and suggested that they be considered as special
catalysts formed by the cells. This hypothesis was far ahead of its time and
met with great opposition, since many workers considered that enzyme reac-
tions differed qualitatively from ordinary chemical reactions. The work of
Tamman, Arrhenius, Henri, Michaelis, Nelson, von Euler, Willstätter, War-
burg, and other chemists, however, has shown that Berzelius’ viewpoint was
correct and enzyme reactions are now considered a special kind of catalysis
which does not differ qualitatively from other catalytic reactions.
   While the study of enzyme reactions made rapid progress all attempts to
isolate an enzyme and so determine its chemical nature were unsuccessful
until recently.
   The early workers were of the opinion that enzymes were probably pro-
teins and in 1896 Pekelharing isolated a protein from gastric juice which he
considered to be the enzyme pepsin. He was not able to crystallize the pro-
tein and his conclusion as to the identity of the enzyme and the protein was
never accepted. I repeated these experiments about 1920 but was unable to
carry them further at that time. In the meantime a large amount of work,
* A detailed description of the results described in this paper may be found in Crystalline
Enzymes, by J. H. Northrop, M. Kunitz, and R. M. Herriott, Columbia University
Press, New York, 2nd ed., 1948. This book also contains complete references to the
literature.


   PREPARATION OF PURE ENZYMES AND VIRUS PROTEINS                            125




   Fig. I. Crystalline pepsin ( x 90).   Fig. 2. Crystalline pepsin from 15 per cent
            Northrop, 1930.                   alcohol ( x 225). Northrop, 1946.

principally by Willstätter and his students, led to the conclusion that enzymes
were a special class of unknown compounds, and certainly not proteins.
   However, in 1926 Sumner isolated a crystalline protein from beans which
he considered to be the enzyme urease. This conclusion was also received
with skepticism but, as you know, it has turned out to be perfectly correct.
Professor Sumner, himself, has reported this work to you.
   Sumner’s results encouraged me to take up the pepsin problem again and
in 1930 I isolated a crystalline protein from a commercial pepsin preparation
which appeared to be the enzyme pepsin. Since then five more enzymes, as
well as some of their precursors, have been isolated in my laboratory. Tryp-
sin, and its precursor trypsinogen, a polypeptide which inhibits trypsin, and
a compound of this substance with trypsin, chymotrypsinogen, and three
forms of chymotrypsin were isolated and crystallized by Kunitz and myself.
Kunitz and McDonald isolated and crystallized ribonuclease and hexokinase.
Anson crystallized carboxypeptidase, and Herriott isolated and crystallized
pepsinogen. These experiments required a great deal of the most painstaking
and difficult work and could not have been successfully carried out without
my collaborators, Herriott, Anson, Desreux, McDonald, Holter, Krueger,
Butler, and, especially, Dr. Kunitz, who possesses a real genius for handling
 these unstable and elusive substances.
   In the meantime some twenty enzymes have been crystallized in all by
 other workers; all of these enzymes are proteins. The respiratory ferments of
Warburg and other oxidative enzymes contain special groups other than


126                              1946 J.H.NORTHROP




Fig. 3. Crystalline 60 per cent active acetyl   Fig. 4. Crystalline pepsinogen ( X 340).
pepsin ( x 28). Herriott & Northrop, 1933.                  Herriott, 1936.

amino acids, but the purely hydrolytic enzymes, so far as is known, do not.
   While this work was in progress a new controversy, very similar to the old
controversy over the nature of enzymes, arose concerning the chemical na-
ture of viruses. Dr. Stanley succeeded in crystallizing the virus of tobacco
mosaic and has isolated a number of other viruses. Bawden and Pirie have
crystallized the bushy stunt virus of tomatoes. I have isolated a nucleoprotein
which appears to be one of the bacterial viruses, or bacteriophages. This is
Dr. Stanley’s field and he will report to you concerning it.
   As a result of these experiments, it appears probable that all enzymes and
at least some viruses are proteins. The mere fact that the preparations are crys-
talline proteins is not, of course, sufficient to warrant this conclusion and we
have spent a great deal of time in establishing the purity of our preparations
and in testing by every method available the relation between the activity
and the protein.
   Before discussing these results, I will describe briefly the experimental
methods we have used in the isolation and crystallization of these active pro-
teins. No one general method has been found which will lead to the isolation
and crystallization of an enzyme, but certain general principles have been
found to be of great assistance. In the first place large quantities of material
are used, so that actual solid material is handled and not merely dilute solu-
tions. The failure of so many early attempts to isolate enzymes was due, I
believe, largely to the fact that nearly all of the work was carried out with


    PREPARATION OF PURE ENZYMES AND VIRUS PROTEINS                           127




Fig. 5. Crystalline active acetyl pepsin   Fig. 6. Crystalline trypsinogen ( x 320).
 ( x 34). Herriott & Northrop, 1934.              Kunitz & Northrop, 1935.

dilute solutions. In the second place filtration by suction was used wherever
possible since this method results in far better separation of the precipitate
from the mother liquor than does the use of the centrifuge. Had Pekelharing
filtered his pepsin preparation and then dissolved it in a very small amount of
water, instead of centrifuging the precipitate and dissolving it in a large
amount of water, I am quite sure he would have crystallized the enzyme
nearly fifty years ago.
    In the third place fractionation was carried out largely by the use of con-
centrated neutral salts in the presence of which proteins are much more stable
than in dilute salt solutions.
    Pepsin, for instance, decomposes at the rate of about 3 per cent a day in
hydrochloric acid solution at pH 2.7 and 0º C. Even in nearly saturated mag-
nesium sulfate solutions at 0º C, the most stable condition known, the rate is
1 per cent a day.
    Trypsin at pH 8.0 and 30º C loses 90 per cent or more of its activity in a
day. This reaction is exceptional since it is bimolecular so that in this case
dilute solutions are more stable than concentrated ones.




Solubility. There is no doubt that the crystalline materials isolated by Sum-


128                           1946 J.H.NORTHROP




 Fig. 7. Crydine trypsin ( x 200).     Fig. 8. Crystalline trypsin-inhibitor ( X 225).
     Kunitz & Northrop, 1935.                   Kunitz & Northrop, 1935.

ner, myself, and others are proteins but the proof that these proteins are the
 enzymes, themselves, is open to question owing to the difficulty of estab-
 lishing the purity of a protein. In organic chemistry constant properties,
 composition, and melting point, through repeated fractional crystallization
 are considered as sufficient proof of purity. In the case of proteins, constant
 analysis means very little and the melting point, which is the most sensitive
 test, cannot be used since proteins decompose instead of melting. However,
 the solubility of the protein, which, from the point of view of the phase rule,
 is strictly analogous to the melting point, may be determined instead.
    According to Willard Gibbs’s phase rule, a system consisting of a single
 solid in equilibrium with its solution is of fixed composition. That is to say,
 if more of the same solid is added no change in concentration will occur. If
 any other substance is added, however, a change will occur. The test is ex-
 ceedingly specific, even more so than the serological tests as Landsteiner and
 Heidelberger pointed out. It will, in fact, distinguish between optical iso-
 mers, even though the two isomers have exactly the same solubility. In addi-
 tion, the concentration of the active material as well as the protein may be
 determined. From the experimental point of view it has the great advantage
 that the test may be carried out in concentrated salt solution, in which the
 proteins are most stable. Very few pure proteins have ever been obtained, as
judged by this test. Of these, chymotrypsinogen is probably the best. Pepsin,
 pepsinogen, chymotrypsin, trypsin, ribonuclease, and hexokinase all give


   PREPARATION OF PURE ENZYMES AND VIRUS PROTEINS                              129




Fig. 9. Crystalline inhibitor and trypsin com- Fig. 10 . Crystalline chymotrypsinogen
 pound ( x 370). Kunitz & Northrop, 1935.        ( x 260). Kunitz & Northrop, 1934.

solubility curves closely approaching those of a single substance and as good
or better, than those obtained with most other proteins.
   The fact that strictly homogeneous proteins are so difficult to prepare in-
dicates that very closely related groups of proteins, and not one particular
individual, are synthesized by the organism. The recent interesting results of
Pedersen and of Wyman, Rafferty, and Ingalls, who found that the proteins
of young animals differ from those of old animals, confirm this explanation.
It is very unlikely that an animal synthesizes the "young" protein for a cer-
tain time and then suddenly synthesizes the "old" protein and hence it is
probable that the various kinds of protein are present at the same time in any
one animal.
   Analysis in the ultracentrifuge. The many important and striking results
which Professor Svedberg has obtained with the ultracentrifuge are famil-
iar to all of you. I need only say that it is a very valuable criterion of ho-
mogeneity in protein solution. There is an experimental difficulty in the case
of the extremely unstable proteins with which we are involved in that
concentrated salt solutions cannot be used owing to their high specific grav-
ity, and some of the proteins are too unstable in dilute salt, even at 0º C, to
enable the measurement to be made. Nevertheless, the enzymes pepsin
 (Philpot and Eriksson-Quensel), ribonuclease and hexokinase (Rothen), and
the bacteriophage nucleoprotein (Wyckoff) were found to be homogeneous
by this test.


130                            1946 J.H.NORTHROP




Fig. 11. Crystalline chymotrypsin ( x 100).   Fig. 12. Crystalline beta chymotrypsin
         Kunitz & Northrop, 1934.                     ( x 300). Kunitz, 1937.

  Electrophoresis. The elegant electrophoresis technique of Tiselius also needs
no description in Stockholm. Ribonuclease, hexokinase, and chymotryp-
sinogen have been examined by Rothen and found to be homogeneous.
Tiselius, Henschen, and Svensson studied the electrophoresis of pepsin and
found the main protein component to be strictly homogeneous under a wide
variety of conditions, but some inactive nitrogenous material was separated
from the protein by this method.
   Ågren and Hammarsten found that the enzyme migrated to the anode at
pH 3.4 and to the cathode at pH 2.7. Tiselius, Henschen, and Svensson, on
the other hand, found the protein migrated always to the anode, while I had
found by cataphoresis experiments that the protein was isoelectric at about
pH 2.4. The electrophoresis experiments were repeated by Herriott, Des-
reux, Rothen, and Longsworth, using a specially purified pepsin preparation,
and both the Tiselius, and the Theorell apparatus. The experiments showed
that the various conflicting results were due to decomposition products in
the pepsin preparations. In the presence of those products the enzyme has an
isoelectric point at pH 2.5 to 3.0, whereas the pure protein has no deter-
minable isoelectric point. This marked effect of hydrolysis products on the
electrophoresis of pepsin had been observed many years ago by Ringer. These
non-protein decomposition products may be removed partially by electro-
phoresis but we could find no evidence for the presence of more than one
protein by this method.


   PREPARATION OF PURE ENZYMES AND VIRUS PROTEINS                           131




Fig. 13. Crystalline gamma chymotrypsin      Fig. 14. Crystalline carboxypeptidase
         ( x 15). Kunitz, 1937.                       ( x 85). Anson, 1936.

   Ågren and Hammarsten were also able to separate crystalline carboxy-
peptidase into several components, so it appears that this enzyme has not yet
been prepared in pure form.
   The results of these various tests of purity warrant the conclusion, I believe,
that the enzymes pepsin, trypsin, chymotrypsin, hexokinase, and ribonu-
clease are at least as homogeneous as any known proteins. Chymotrypsi-
nogen is probably the purest protein so far isolated. This statement refers
only to specially prepared and highly purified samples. The first crystalliza-
tion usually results in a product which still contains impurities and in some
cases more than one protein.



            Relation of the activity to the protein by other methods

Formation of enzymes from their precursors. Pepsin, trypsin, and chymotrypsin
are derived from inactive precursors. These precursors were isolated and
crystallized and the formation of the active enzyme studied. The formation
of pepsin from pepsinogen and trypsin from trypsinogen are autocatalytic
reactions. These enzymes may therefore be "propagated", just as are bacteria.
The formation of trypsin from trypsinogen may also be catalyzed by entero-
kinase, an enzyme of the digestive tract, or by an enzyme produced by a
mold (Penicillium.) The formation of chymotrypsin from chymotrypsinogen


132                             1946 J.H.NORTHROP




Fig. 15. Crystalline ribonuclease ( x 200).   Fig. 16. Crystalline hexokinase ( x 100).
              Kunitz, 1939.                         Kunitz & McDonald, 1942.

is catalyzed only by trypsin, so far as is known. In all these reactions the
increase in enzymatic activity is accompanied quantitatively by the appear-
ance of the new enzyme protein which is quite different in all its properties
from the original precursor. It seems to me that these results are perhaps the
most convincing evidence that the enzymatic activity is actually a property
of the protein molecule.
   Rate of diffusion of the protein and the active substance. The relationship of the
protein and the enzyme may be tested further by measuring the rate of diffu-
sion of the preparation by means of protein determinations and also by en-
zyme activity measurements. The rate of diffusion was suggested by Arrhe-
nius years ago as a means of determining the size of unknown substances.
The method has been developed and used by von Euler.
   Theoretically it is simple but experimentally it was difficult. These dif-
ficulties were overcome by Anson and myself, who developed a diffusion
cell made of a porous disk across which diffusion takes place. This greatly
accelerates and simplifies the experiment. The method is the only one, I be-
lieve, which permits the estimation of the molecular weight of unknown and
impure substances.
   The diffusion of pepsin, trypsin, chymotrypsin, chymotrypsinogen, and
bacteriophage has been followed by this method. The results show that the
protein and the active substance diffuse at exactly the same rate.
   Effect of hydrolysis of the protein on the enzymatic activity. Digestion of tryp-


    PREPARATION OF PURE ENZYMES AND VIRUS PROTEINS                            133

sin or ribonuclease with pepsin results in loss of activity which is almost
exactly parallel to the loss of protein. There is no indication that the protein
may be hydrolyzed without also destroying the enzymatic activity, nor that
any of the hydrolysis products possess measurable activity. Similar results
were obtained during the autolysis of pepsin and the digestion of bacterio-
phage with chymotrypsin.
   Denaturation of the protein and loss of activity. The denaturation of proteins is
a characteristic property and has an extremely high temperature coefficient.
The rate of formation of denatured protein and the loss in enzymatic activity
has been compared in the case of pepsin, trypsin, chymotrypsin, ribonuclease
and hexokinase. In every case the loss of native protein is accompanied by a
concomitant loss of enzymatic activity.
   An equilibrium exists between native and denatured trypsin which is ac-
curately predicted by Van ’t Hoff’s equation.
   Reversal of the reaction results in recovery of the enzymatic activity in
proportion to the recovery of native protein.
   Effect of chemical changes in the protein molecule on the activity. Ketene reacts
with pepsin to form a series of acetylated products. Herriott has isolated and
crystallized three of these derivatives. One contains three or four acetyl
groups, probably attached to the primary amino groups. This derivative has
the same activity as the original pepsin. A second derivative has about ten
acetyl groups and 60 per cent of the original activity, while the third prepara-
tion contains twenty to thirty acetyl groups and is inactive. There is evidence
that the acetyl groups which are attached to the hydroxyl group of tyrosine
are responsible for the loss of activity. This conclusion is borne out by the
fact (Herriott) that iodination of pepsin results in the addition of iodine to
the tyrosine groups, and also results in loss of activity.
   Pepsin, as well as other enzymes, is also inactivated by mustard gas (di-
chlor ethyl sulfide). This substance is an excellent protein reagent. It reacts in
slightly acid solution with carboxyl groups and probably with the hydroxyl
group of tyrosine.



                                    Summary

The enzymes, pepsin, trypsin, chymotrypsin, carboxypeptidase, ribonu-
clease, and hexokinase have been isolated and crystallized. The precursors of
pepsin, trypsin, and chymotrypsin have also been isolated and crystallized. A


I34                         1946 J.H.NORTHROP

nucleoprotein which appears to be bacteriophage has been isolated but not
crystallized.
   The purity of the enzyme preparations, with the exception of carboxy-
peptidase, has been tested by means of solubility measurements, ultracen-
trifuge analysis (pepsin, ribonuclease, hexokinase, and bacteriophage), and
electrophoresis (pepsin, ribonuclease, hexokinase, chymotrypsinogen). They
appear to be pure proteins by all these methods.
   The relation of the enzymatic activity to the protein has been tested by
diffusion measurements (pepsin, trypsin, chymotrypsin, chymotrypsinogen,
bacteriophage), denaturation of the protein (pepsin, trypsin, chymotrypsin,
ribonuclease, hexokinase), hydrolysis of the protein (trypsin, ribonuclease,
pepsin, bacteriophage), formation of the active enzyme from an inactive pre-
cursor (pepsin, trypsin, chymotrypsin), and by the formation and isolation
of definite chemical derivatives of pepsin. These experiments confirm the
conclusion that the enzymatic activity is a property of the protein molecule
itself, and is not due to a non-protein impurity.
