THE ROLE OF FRONTIER ORBITALS
IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1981

by
KENICHI FUKUI
Department of Hydrocarbon Chemistry, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606, Japan



Since the 3rd century for more than a thousand years chemistry has been
thought of as a complicated, hard-to-predict science. Efforts to improve even a
part of its unpredictable character are said to have born fruit first of all in the
success of the “electronic theory”. This was founded mainly by organic chem-
ists, such as Fry, Stieglitz, Lucas, Lapworth and Sidgwick, brought to a
completed form by Robinson and Ingold, and developed later by many other
chemists.1 In the electronic theory, the mode of migration of electrons in
molecules is noted and is considered under various judgements. For that
purpose, a criterion is necessary with respect to the number of electrons which
should originally exist in an atom or a bond in a molecule. Therefore, it can be
said to be the concept by Lewis of the sharing of electrons that has given a firm
basis to the electronic theory.2
   In the organic electronic theory, the chemical concepts such as acid and
base, oxidation and reduction and so on, have been conveniently utilized from
a long time ago. Furthermore, there are terms centring closer around the
electron concept, such as electrophilicity and nucleophilicity, and electron
donor and acceptor both being pairs of relative concepts.
   One may be aware that these concepts can be connected qualitatively to the
scale of electron density or electric charge. In the electronic theory, the static
and dynamic behaviours of molecules are explained by the electronic effects
which are based on nothing but the distribution of electrons in a molecule.
   The mode of charge distribution in a molecule can be sketched to some
extent by the use of the electronegativity concept of atoms through organic
chemical experience. At the same time, it is given foundation, made quantita-
tive, and supported by physical measurements of electron distribution and
theoretical calculations based on quantum theory.
   The distribution of electrons or electric charge - with either use the result is
unchanged - in a molecule is usually represented by the total numbers (gener-
ally not integer) of electrons in each atom and each bond, and it was a concept
easily acceptable even to empirical chemists as having a tolerably realistic
meaning. Therefore, chemists employed the electron density as a fundamental
concept to explain or to comprehend various phenomena. In particular, for the
purpose of promoting chemical investigations, researchers usually rely upon
 the analogy through experience, and the electron density was very effectively
 and widely used as the basic concept in that analogy.


10                                  Chemistry 1981


   When the magnitude of electron density is adopted as the criterion the
electrostatic attraction and repulsion caused by the electron density are taken
into account. Therefore, it is reasonable to infer that an electrophilic reagent
will attack the position of large electron density in a molecule while a nucleo-
philic reaction will occur at the site of small electron density. In fact, Wheland
and Pauling3 explained the orientation of aromatic substitutions in substituted
benzenes along these lines, and theoretical interpretations of the mode of many
other chemical reactions followed in the same fashion.
   However, the question why one of the simple reactions known from long
before, the electrophilic substitution in naphthalene, for instance, such as
nitration, yields α-substituted derivatives predominantly was not so easy to
answer. That was because, in many of such unsubstituted aromatic hydrocar-
bons, both the electrophile and the nucleophile react at the same location. This
point threw some doubt on the theory of organic reactivity, where the electron
density was thought to do everything.




THE CONCEPT OF FRONTIER ORBITAIL INTERACTIONS

The interpretation of this problem was attempted by many people from various
different angles. Above all, Coulson and Longuet-Higgins 4 took up the
change of electron density distribution under the influence of approaching
reagent. The explanation by Wheland5 was based on the calculation of the
energy required to localize electrons forcibly to the site of reaction. But I myself
tried to attack this problem in a way which was at that time slightly unusual,
Taking notice of the principal role played by the valence electrons in the case of
the molecule formation from atoms, only the distribution of the electrons
occupying the highest energy π orbital of aromatic hydrocarbons was calculat-
ed. The attempt resulted in a better success than expected, obtaining an almost
perfect agreement between the actual position of electrophilic attack and the
site of large density of these specified electrons as exemplified in Fig. 1. 6




Fig. 1. Nitration of naphthalene.


                                     K. Fukui                                   11

   The “orbital” concept, which was established and developed by many
scientists, such as Pauling, Slater, Mulliken, Roothaan, Löwdin, Hückel, Parr
and so on, had till then been employed to construct the wave function of a
molecule, through which molecular properties were usually interpreted.7 It
seemed that the electron distribution in an orbital was directly connected to
chemical observations and this fact was certainly felt to be interesting by many
chemists.
   But the results of such a rather “extravagant” attempt was by no means
smoothly accepted by the general public of chemists. That paper received a
number of controversial comments. This was in a sense understandable, be-
cause, for lack of my experiential ability, the theoretical foundation for this
conspicuous result was obscure or rather improperly given. However, it was
fortunate for me that the paper on the charge-transfer complex of Mulliken
was published in the same year as ours.
   The model of Mulliken et al. for protonated benzene was a good help. 9 Our
work in collaboration with Yonezawa, Nagata and Kato provided a simple and
pointed picture of theoretical interpretation of reactions,” as well as the
“overlap and orientation” principle proposed by Mulliken with regard to the
orientation in molecular complexes.11 Subsequent to the electrophilic substitu-
tion, the nucleophilic substitution was discussed and it was found that in
this case the lowest energy vacant orbital played this particular part. 12 In
reactions with radicals, both of the two orbitals mentioned above, became
the particular orbitals.
   There was no essential reason to limit these particular orbitals to π orbitals,
so that this method was properly applied not only to unsaturated compounds
but also to saturated compounds. The applicability to saturated compounds
was a substantial advantage in comparison with many theories of reactivity
which were then available only for π electron compounds. The method dis-
played its particular usefulness in the hydrogen abstraction by radicals from
paraffinic hydrocarbons, the SN2 and E2 reactions in halogenated hydrocar-
bons, the nucleophilic abstraction of α−hydrogen of olefins, and so forth-13
   These two particular orbitals, which act as the essential part in a wide range
of chemical reactions of various compounds, saturated or unsaturated, were
referred to under the general term of “frontier orbitals”, and abbreviated
frequently by HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO (low-
est unoccupied molecular orbital).
   In this way, the validity of the theory became gradually clearer. The vein of
ore discovered by chance was found to be hopefully more extensive than
expected. But it was attributed to the role of the symmetry of particular orbitals
pointed out in 1964 with regard to Diels-Alder reactions14 that the utility of
our studies was further broadened. It was remarked that as is seen in Fig. 2, the
symmetries of HOMO and LUMO of dienes and those of LUMO and HOMO
of dienophiles, respectively, were found to be in a situation extremely favoura-
ble for a concerted cyclic interaction between them.
   This signified the following important aspects: First, it pointed out a possible
correlation between the orbital symmetry and the rule determining the sub-


                                 Chemistry 1981




stantial occurrence or non-occurrence of a chemical reaction, which may be
called the “selection rule”, in common with the selection rule in molecular
spectroscopy. Second, it provided a clue to discuss the question concerning
what was the “concertedness” in a reaction which forms a cycle of electrons in
conjugation along the way.
   In 1965 Woodward and Hoffmann proposed the stereoselection rules which
are established today as the “Woodward-Hoffmann” rules. 15,16 An experi-
mental result developed in Havinga’s important paper” was extended im-
mensely. It is only after the remarkable appearance of the brilliant work by
Woodward and Hoffmann that I have become fully aware that not only the
density distribution but also the nodal property of the particular orbitals have
significance in such a wide variety of chemical reactions. In fact, we studied
previously the noted (4n+2) rule proposed by Hückel18 and noticed that the
sign of the bond order in the highest energy electron orbital of an open-chain
conjugation should be closely related to the stabilization of the corresponding
conjugated rings. 19 We did not imagine, however, on that occasion that the
discussion might be extended to the so-called Mobius-type ring-closure!20


                                     K. Fukui                                  13


   By considering the HOMO-LUMO interactions between the fragments of a
conjugated chain divided into parts,21 the frontier orbital theory can yield
selection rules which are absolutely equivalent to those obtained from the
principle called “the conservation of orbital symmetry” by Woodward and
Hoffmann. One point that I may stress here is, as was pointed out by Fujimoto,
Inagaki and myself, that the electron delocalization between the particular
                       22



orbitals interprets definitely in terms of orbital symmetries the formation and
breaking of chemical bonds which, I believe, should be a key for perceiving
chemical reaction processes.
    In the cycloaddition of butadiene and ethylene shown in Fig. 2, both the
interaction between the HOMO of diene and the LUMO of dienophile and
that between the LUMO of diene and the HOMO of dienophile stabilize the
interacting system. If one is interested in the local property of interaction,
however, one may recognize the clear distinction between the roles of the two
types of orbital interactions. The HOMO of ethylene and the LUMO of
butadiene are both symmetric with regards to the symmetry plane retained
throughout the course of cycloaddition. This signifies that each of the carbon
atoms of ethylene are bound to both of the terminal carbons of butadiene. The
chemical bonding between the diene and dienophile thus generated may be
something like the one in a loosely bound complex, e.g., protonation to an
olelinic double bond. On the contrary, the HOMO of butadiene and the
LUMO of ethylene are antisymmetric. The interaction between these orbitals
leads, therefore, to two separated chemical bonds, each of which combines a
carbon atom of ethylene and a terminal carbon atom of butadiene. Needless to
say it is the interaction between the HOMO of diene and the LUMO of
dienophile that is of importance for the occurrence of concerted cycloaddi-
tion. 22
    In this way, it turned out in the course of time that the electron delocaliza-
tion between HOMO and LUMO generally became the principal factor deter-
mining the easiness of a chemical reaction and the stereoselective path, irre-
spective of intra- and intermolecular processes, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Besides
our own school, a number of other chemists made contributions. I want to refer
 to several names which are worthy of special mention.
    First of all, the general perturbation theory of the HOMO-LUMO interac-
 tion between two molecules was built up by Salem. 23-25 One of Salem’s
papers was in line with the important theory of Bader, which specified the
          25                                                26



 mode of decomposition of a molecule or a transition complex by means of the
symmetry of the normal vibration. Furthermore Pearson 27 investigated the
 relation between the symmetry of reaction coordinates in general and that of
 HOMO and LUMO.
    The discussion so far may seem to be an overestimation of these selected
 orbitals, HOMO and LUMO. This point was ingeniously modified by Klop-
 m a n .28 He carefully took into account the factors to be considered in the
 perturbation theory of reacting systems and classified reactions into two cases:
 the one was “frontier-controlled” case in which the reaction was controlled by
 the particular orbital interaction, and the other was the “charge-controlled”


14                                       Chemistry 1981




Fig. 3. The mode of interaction between orbitals of two molecules



case, where it was controlled by the electrostatic interaction of charges. This
classification was conveniently used by many people. In this context the review
articles of Herndon 29 and of Hudson30 appeared to be very useful. The names
of Coulson4 and Dewar 31 should also be noted here as those who contributed
to the development of reactivity theories.
   Returning to the subject again, let us assume that two molecules approach
each other and orbital overlapping takes place. The perturbation theory32 o f
this sort of interaction indicates that, the larger the orbital overlapping is and
the smaller the level separation of two overlapping orbitals is, the larger is the
contribution of the orbital pair to the stabilization of an interacting system.
Accordingly, at least at the beginning, a reaction will proceed with a mutual
nuclear configuration which is most favourable for the HOMO-LUMO over-
lapping.
   Now let us suppose an electron flow from the HOMO of molecule I to the
LUMO of molecule II. In each molecule the bonds between the reaction
centre - the place at which the orbitals overlap with those of the other mole-
cule - and the remaining part of the molecule are weakened. On this occasion,
in molecule I the bonds which are bonding in HOMO are weakened and those


                                                K. Fukui                                              15


antibonding in HOMO are strengthened, while in molecule II the bonds which
are antibonding in LUMO are weakened and those bonding in LUMO are
strengthened. Consequently, the HOMO of molecule I particularly destabi-
lizes as compared with the other occupied orbitals, and the LUMO of molecule
II discriminatively stabilizes among unoccupied orbitals, so that the HOMO-
LUMO level separation between the two molecules is decreased. Such a
circumstance is clearly understandable in Fig. 3.
    The following tendency is further stressed. When the bond weakenings
specified above have arisen, the HOMO and the LUMO tend to become more
localized at these weakened bonds in each molecule. Besides, the weakening of
the bonds between the reaction centre and the remaining part causes an
increase of the amplitudes of HOMO and LUMO at the reaction centres,
resulting in a larger overlapping of HOMO and LUMO.33 Such a trend of the
characteristic change in the orbital pattern is made numerically certain by
actual calculations. The role of interaction between HOMO and LUMO turns
out in this way to become more and more important as the reaction proceeds.
    A series of studies on chemical interactions were attempted in which the
interaction of reactants was divided into the Coulomb, the exchange, the
polarization, and the delocalization interactions, and their magnitude of contri-
bution to the interaction energy was quantitatively discussed .32,34 The inter-
actions discussed by this method were the dimerization35 and the addition to
ethylene 36 of methylene and the dimerization of BH 3, and also several
                                                                                    37



d o n o r - a c c e p t o r i n t e r a c t i o n s - B H 3 - N H3 , B H3 - C O , N H3 - H F ,40 etc. The
                                                                    38           39



method was applied also to reactions of radicals, such as the abstraction of a
methane hydrogen by methyl radical, the addition of methyl radical to ethyl-
ene41 and recombinations, disproportionations, and self-reactions of two radi-
cals. 42 In these calculations, the configuration analysis proposed originally by
 Baba 43 was also utilized conveniently. We could show numerically the mode of
increase of the electron delocalization from HOMO to LUMO along with the
proceeding of reaction, the increasing weight of contribution of such a delocali-
zation to the stabilization of the reacting system, the driving force of the
reaction in terms of orbital interactions, and so on.
    The question “Why HOMO and LUMO solely determine the reaction
 path?” was one which I very frequently received from the audiences in my
 lectures given in the past in different places. The discussion so far made here is
 thought to correspond, at least partly, to that answer. But one may not adhere
 so strictly to the HOMO and LUMO. In one-centre reactions like substitu-
 tions, which the orbital symmetry has nothing to do with, any occupied orbitals
 which are very close to HOMO should properly be taken into account. 12 In
 large paraffin molecules a number of HOMO’s (high-lying occupied MO’s),
 and furthermore as will shortly be referred to later, in metal crystals, even
 “HOMO-band” must be taken along the line of reactivity argument. If
 HOMO or LUMO happens to be inadequate owing to its extension, the
 symmetry, or the nodal property, the next orbital should be sought for. One of
 the simplest examples of such an instance is the protonation of pyridine. In this
 case, the nitrogen lone-pair orbital is not HOMO, but the addition of proton to


16                                Chemistry 1981


the nitrogen lone-pair so as not to disturb the π conjugation will evidently be
more advantageous than the addition to higher occupied π orbitals which may
intercept the π conjugation. Thus, the reason why proton dare not add to the
positions of large amplitude of π HOMO in this case will easily be understood.
It is not completely satisfactory to dispose of a disagreement between the
HOMO-LUMO argument and the experimental fact formally as an exception to
the theory. A so-called exception does possess its own reason. To investigate
what the reason is will possibly yield a novel finding.
     The HOMO-LUMO interaction argument was recently pointed out44 to be
in an auxiliary sense useful for the interpretation of the sign of a reaction
constant and the scale of a substituent constant in the Hammett rule 45 which
has made an immeasurable contribution to the study of the substituent effect in
chemical reactivity. In the cyclic addition, like Diels-Alder reactions and 1,3-
dipolar additions, the relative easiness of occurrence of reactions, various
subsidiary effects, and interesting phenomena like regioselection and periselec-
tion were interpreted with considerable success simply by the knowledge of the
height of the energy level of HOMO and LUMO, the mode of their extension,
their nodal structure, etc. 46 - I defined these in a mass: the "orbital pattern".
     Other topics that have been discussed in terms of HOMO-LUMO interac-
tions are thermal formation of excited states,47 singlet-triplet selectivity,48 the
chemical property of biradicals and excited molecules,49 the interaction of the
 central atom and ligands in transition metal complexes, 50 the interaction of
 three or more orbitals51 and so forth. Inagaki et al. included in the theory the
polarization effect in HOMO and LUMO due to the mixing in of other orbitals
and gave an elucidation for a number of organic chemical problems which were
 not always easy to explain. The unique stereoselection in the transannular
cross-bond formation, the lone-pair effect, the d orbital effect, and the orbital
 polarization effect due to substituents were the cases.52
     As was partly discussed above, the method of orbital interaction was applied
 not only to the ground electronic state but to the excited states, giving an
 explanation of the path of even complicated photochemical isomerizations.13
 21
    In a majority of ca ses the HOMO and the LUMO of the ground-state
 molecule were also found to be the essential orbitals. Even the ground-state
 reaction of a strong electron acceptor (or donor) causes a mixing in of an
 ionized electron configuration or an excited electron configuration in another
 molecule. In consequence, a partial HOMO-HOMO or LUMO-LUMO inter-
 action, which would be trivial if there were no influence of the acceptor (or
 donor), becomes important in stabilizing the interacting system.*’
     The problems so far discussed have been limited to chemical reactions.
 However, the HOMO-LUMO interaction must come into relation also with
 other chemical phenomena in almost the same mechanism - with the exception
 of one different point that they usually do not bring about so remarkable a
 change in the nuclear configuration as in the case of chemical reactions. N OW
 let us examine the possibility of applying the theory to so-called “aromati-
 city”- one of the simplest, but the hardest-to-interpret problems. There seem
 to be few problems so annoying to theoreticians as the explanation of this


                                         K. Fukui                                         17


chemically classical concept. I greatly appreciate the contribution of Dewar’s
theory 53, 54 based on a quantitative energy values argument. Here, however, I
want to give a quality comment through a totally different way of consider-
ation.
   It is easily ascertained in Fig. 4 that in benzene, naphthalene, phenan-
                            55



threne, etc., any virtual division of the molecule into two always produces the
parts in which their HOMO and LUMO overlap in-phase at the two junctions.




 Fig. 4. The HOMO-LUMO phase relationship in virtual division of aromatic hydrocarbons.
 (SOMO: a singly occupied MO of a radical)


18                                 Chemistry 1981


But these circumstances are not seen in anthracene which is usually looked
upon as one of the typical representatives of aromatic compounds. Hosoya 55
pointed out from the comparison with phenanthrene indicated in Fig. 4, that
the ring growth of type (II) was less stable than that of (I),




It is well known that anthracene occasionally exhibits a reactivity of olefin-like
additions.
   In view of so-called Hückel’s (4n+2)-rule mentioned above, an anthracene
molecule has 14π electrons and fulfils the stability condition for “aromaticity.”
Actually, if one considers a molecule of anthracene with the two inside bonds
deleted,




it is really seen that the HOMO and the LUMO of the two parts overlap in an
in-phase manner at both of the junctions:




 In this way, it is understood that the two bonds which were deleted above
 exerted a certain unfavourable influence for aromaticity. Such an influence
 bears a close resemblance to that of impurity scattering in the wave of a free
 electron moving in a metal crystal.
    This discussion seems to be a digression but, as a matter of fact, it relates to
 the essential question as to how an electron in a molecule can delocalize. As will
 be mentioned later, Anderson56 solved the question how an electron in a


                                      K. Fukui                                   19


random system can localize. In a molecule, there are potential barriers between
atoms which should be got over by the aid of a certain condition to be satisfied,
in order for an electron to move around it freely. Although the question how
valence electrons can delocalize in a molecule have not yet been solved
satisfactorily under the condition of unfixed nuclear configuration, the in-phase
relation of HOMO and LUMO at the junctions of the two parts of the
molecule seems to be at least one of the conditions of intramolecular delocaliza-
tion of electrons.
   Generally speaking, the electron delocalization gives rise to a stabilization
due to “conjugation” which is one of the old chemical concepts. If so, similar
stabilization mechanisms must be chemically detected in other systems than
aromatic compounds. The discussion of this delocalization stabilization at the
transition state or on the reaction path was nothing but the reactivity theory
hitherto mentioned. The term “delocalizability” was attached to the reactivity
indices we derived,” and our reactivity theory itself was sometimes called
“delocalization approach.“ 14 The “hyperconjugation” of various sorts is ex-
plained in the same manner. The stabilization due to homoaromaticity or
bicycloaromaticity of Goldstein, 57 the stability in spirocycles, pericycles, 58
“laticycles” and “longicycles” of Hoffmann and Goldstein,59 that of spirarenes
of Hoffmann and Imamura,60 and so on, are all comprehended as examples of
the stabilization due to the delocalization between HOMO and LUMO,
although other explanations may also be possible.
   You may be doubtful to what extent such a qualitative consideration is
reliable. In many cases, however, a considerably accurate nonempirical deter-
mination of the stable conformation of hydrocarbon molecules61, 62 results in a
conclusion qualitatively not much different from the expectation based on the
simple orbital interaction argument mentioned above.




CHEMICAL REACTION PATHWAYS

It has already been pointed out that the detailed mechanism of a chemical
reaction was discussed along the reaction path on the basis of the orbital
interaction argument. For that purpose, however, it is required that the prob-
lem as to how the chemical reaction path is determined should have been
solved. The method in which the route of a chemical reaction was supposed on
the potential energy surface and the rate of the reaction was evaluated by the
aid of a statistical-mechanical formulation was established by Eyring.63 Many
people wrote papers where the rate expression was derived wave-mechanically
with the use of the potential energy function. Besides, the problem of obtaining
the trajectory of a given chemical reaction with a given initial condition was
treated by Karplus. 64
   The centre line of the reaction path, so to speak, the idealized reaction
coordinate - which I called “intrinsic reaction coordinate” (IRC)65 - seemed
to have been, rather strangely, not distinctly defined till then. For that reason, I
began with the general equation which determines the line of force mathemat-


20                                 Chemistry 1981


i c a l l y . 3 4 , 6 6 , 6 7 Al though my papers themselves were possibly not very
original, they turned out later to develop in a very interesting direction. 68-74
These papers opened the route to calculate the quasistatic change of nuclear
configuration of the reacting system which starts from the transition state
proceeding to a stable equilibrium point. 66 I termed the method of automatic
determination of the molecular deformation accompanying a chemical reaction
as “reaction ergodography.” 34 67 This method was applied to a few definite
examples by Kato and myself 67 and by Morokuma. 72, 73 T h o s e e x a m p l e s
were: abstraction and substitution of methane hydrogen by hydrogen atom, 67
nucleophilic replacement in methane by hydride anion,72 and isomerization of
methylcarbylamine to acetonitrile. 73 All of these reactions thus far treated are
limited to the simplest cases, but there seems to be no principal difficulty in
extending the applicability to larger systems. Once IRC was determined in this
way, the driving force of a chemical reaction was analyzed on the basis of the
orbital interaction argument. 66
     In the reacting system with no angular momentum it is possible to obtain the
 IRC by the use of the space-fixed Cartesian coordinate system. All of the
calculated examples mentioned above belong to this case. However, in the
reaction in which rotational motion exists, it is required to discuss the IRC
after separating the nuclear configuration space from the rotational motion. 74-
 77
    For that p urpose, it is essential to derive the general classical Hamiltonian of
 the reacting systems and then to separate the internal motion which is deter-
 mined only by the internal coordinates. The nuclear configuration space thus
 separated out is in general a Riemannian space. The classical Lagrangian form
 to be obtained in that process of constructing the Hamiltonian is used to deriye
 the IRC equation in the presence of rotational motion. It is thus understood
 that the rotational motion of the reacting system generally causes a deviation of
 I R C .7 4
     Once the method of determining unique reaction pathways is obtained, the
 next problem we are concerned with is to see if the calculated pathways are
 interpreted in terms of the frontier orbital interactions. A method referred to as
 the “interaction frontier orbitals” or “hybrid molecular orbitals” has been
 developed very recently by Fujimoto and myself in order to furnish a lucid
 scheme of frontier orbital interactions with the accuracy of nonempirical calcu-
 lations now and in the future. 78-80 By including properly contributions of other
 MOs than the HOMO and the LUMO, we realized in terms of orbital
 diagrams how ingenious the empirically established chemical concepts - “reac-
 tion sites” and “functional groups”- and the empirical concept of reaction
pathways could be. Fig. 5 compares the HOMO of styrene and its interaction
frontier orbital for protonation to the olelinic double bond. The latter is seen to
be localized very efficiently in the frontier of chemical interaction. The double
bond is evidently the functional unit in this case. Innovation of the frontier
orbital concept will hopefully be continued by young people to make it useful
for one of our ultimate targets: theroretical design of molecules and chemical
reactions.


                                            K Fukui                                             21




Fig. 5. A comparison of HOMO and the interaction frontier orbital for protonation in styrene.




FRONTIER ORBITALS IN RELATED FIELDS

Theoretical treatments of the property of solid crystals, or chemisorption on a
solid surface, appear to have hitherto been almost monopolistically treated by
the methodology of physics. But the orbital pattern technique has also ad-
vanced gradually in this field.
   The “cluster approach, ”          in which a portion of the metal crystal is
                              81, 82



drawn out as the form of a cluster of atoms and its catalytic actions or other
properties are investigated, has contributed to the development of the orbital
pattern approach, because the physical methods mentioned above can hardly
be applied to such sizable systems. It is expected that, if clusters of various sizes
and various shapes are studied to look into the characteristic feature of their
HOMO’s (high-lying occupied MO’s) and LUMO’s (low-lying unoccupied
MO’s), the nature of chemisorption and catalytic action, the mode of surface
chemical reaction, and several related subjects of interest can be investigated
theoretically.
    As is the case of molecular interactions in usual chemical reactions, only the
HOMO- and LUMO-bands lying in the range of several electron volts near the
Fermi level can participate in the adsorption of molecules and surface reactions
on solid crystals. You may recollect here that, in the BCS (Bardeen-Cooper-
Schrieffer) theory of superconductivity, too, only the HOMO’s and LUMO’s
in close proximity to the Fermi surface can be concerned in forming electron
pairs as the result of interaction with lattice vibration. In the case of solid
catalysts mentioned above, the discrimination of particular orbitals and elec-
 trons from the others have made the situation much easier.
    Consider a system composed of a regular repetition of a molecular unit, for
instance, a one-dimensional high polymer chain or a one-dimensional lattice, in
which a certain perturbation is imposed at a definite location. Sometimes it is
convenient to discuss the influence of this perturbation by transforming the


22                                Chemistry 1981


orbitals belonging to the HOMO-band to construct the orbitals localized at
that place. One such technique was proposed by Tanaka, Yamabe and my-
self. 83 This method is expected to be in principle applied to a local discussion
of such problems as the adsorption of a molecule on the two-dimensional
surface of catalysts, surface reactions, and related matters. This approach may
be called a little more chemical than the method using the function of local
density of states 84 or similar ones, in that the former can be used for the
argument of the reactivity of molecules on a catalyst surface in terms of the
phase relationship of localized orbitals.
   What is called low-dimensional semiconductors and some superconductors
have also been the objects of application of the orbital argument. In these
studies, the dimerization of S 2N 2 to S4N 485 and the high-polymerization to
( S N )x 8 6 were discussed, and the energy band structure of (SN)x polymer chain
was analyzed to investigate the stable nuclear arrangement and the mode of
inter-chain interactions.87
   The modern technique employed in solid state physics to interpret the
interesting characteristic behaviours of noncrystalline materials, in particular
of amorphous materials, in which the nuclear arrangements were not regular,
was certainly striking. Anderson showed generally that in a system of random
 lattice the electron localization should take place.56 Mott, stating in his 1977
 Nobel lecture that he thought is the first prize awarded for the study of
 amorphous materials, answered the question, “How can a localized electron be
 conducted?” with the use of the idea of hopping. Here, too, the HOMO-
 LUMO interaction - in this case the consideration of spin is essential - would
 play an important part.
    Here in a few words, I want to refer to the meaning and the role of virtual
orbitals. The LUMO, which has been one of the stars in orbital arguments
hitherto discussed, is the virtual orbital which an external electron is consid-
ered to occupy to be captured by a molecule to form an anion. Virtual orbitals
always play an essential part in producing metastable states of molecules by
electron capture. To discuss such problems generally, Tachibana et al.
                      88                                                        89



systematized the theory of resonant states from the standpoint of complex
eigenvalue problem. The idea of resonant states will take a principal part in
chemical reactions, particularly in high-energy reactions which will be devel-
oped more in the future.


PROSPECT

In introducing above a series of recent results of the studies carried out mainly
by our group, I have ventured to make those things the object of my talk which
are no more than my prospective insight and are not yet completely estab-
lished. This is just to stimulate, by specifying what are the fields I believe
promising in the future, the intentional efforts of many younger chemists in
order to develop them further.
   In my opinion, quantum mechanics has two different ways of making partici-
pations in chemistry. One is the contribution to the nonempirical comprehen-


                                      K. Fukui                                  23


sion of empirical chemical results just mentioned. However, we should not
overlook another important aspect of quantum mechanics in chemistry. That is
the promotion of empirical chemistry from the theoretical side. But, also for
this second purpose, as a matter of course, reliable theoretical foundations and
computational methods are required. The conclusions of theories should be
little affected by the degree of sophistication in approximations adopted.
    On the other hand, for theoreticians to make the second contribution, the
cases where predictions surpassing the experimental accuracy are possible by
very accurate calculations are for the present limited to those of a very few,
extremely simple molecules. In order to accomplish this object in regard to
ordinary chemical problems, it becomes sometimes necessary to provide quali-
tative theories which can be used even by experimental chemists. If one can
contribute nothing to chemistry without carrying out accurate calculations
with respect to each problem, one can not be said to be making the most of
quantum mechanics for the development of chemistry. It is certainly best that
the underlying concepts are as close to experience as possible, but the sphere of
chemical experience is steadily expanding. Quantum chemistry has then to
perform its duty by furnishing those concepts with the theoretical basis in order
to make them chemically available and serviceable for the aim of promoting
empirical chemistry.
    Even the same atoms of the same element, when they exist in different
molecules, exhibit different behaviours. The chemical symbol H even seems to
signify atoms of a completely different nature. In chemistry, this terrible
individuality should never be avoided by “averaging,” and, moreover, innu-
merable combinations of such atoms form the subject of chemical research,
where it is not the “whole assembly of compounds of different kinds but each
individual kind of compounds” that is of chemical interest. On account of this
formidable complexity, chemistry possesses inevitably one aspect of depending
on the analogy through experience. This is in a sense said to be the fate alloted
 to chemistry, and the source of a great difference in character from physics.
Quantum chemistry, too, so far as it is chemistry, is required to be useful in
 promoting empirical chemistry as mentioned before.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Lastly, I want to mention at this opportunity out of a sense of gratefulness the
names of many people in our group who have been walking on the same road as
mine since my first paper (1952) on quantum chemistry, particularly Drs. T.
Yonezawa, C. Nagata, H. Kato, A. Imamura, K. Morokuma, T. Yamabe and
H. Fujimoto, and also I can not forget the names of younger doctors mentioned
in the text who made a contribution in opening new circumstances in each
field. Among them, Prof. T. Yonezawa was helpful in performing calculations
in our 1952 paper, and also, it is to be mentioned with appreciation that the
attractive title “frontier orbitals” of my lecture originated from the terminology
I adopted in that paper by the suggestion of Prof. H. Shingu, who kindly
participated in that paper as an organic chemist to classify the relevant experi-


24                                      Chemistry 1981


mental results. Furthermore, many other collaborators are now distinguishing
themselves in other important fields of chemistry, which, however, have not
been the object of the present lecture.
   It was the late Prof. Yoshio Tanaka of the University of Tokyo and Prof.
Masao Horio of Kyoto University who recognized the existence and signifi-
cance of my early work in advance to others. I owe such a theoretical work,
which I was able to carry out in the Faculty of Engineering, Kyoto University,
and moreover in the Department of Fuel Chemistry, to the encouragement and
kind regard of Prof. Shinjiro Kodama, who fostered the Department. What is
more, it was the late Prof. Gen-itsu Kita, my life-teacher, and the founder of the
Department, who made me enter into chemistry, one of the most attractive and
promising fields of science, and led me to devote my whole life to it. For all of
these people no words of gratitude can by any means be sufficient.



REFERENCES
 I. For instance, see Ingold, C. K., Structure and Mechanism in Organic Chemistry, Cornell
    University Press (1953), Ithaca, N.Y.
 2. For instance, see Lewis, G. N., Valence and the Structure of Atoms and Molecules, Chemical
    Catalog Co. (1923), New York, N.Y.
 3. Wheland, G. W. and Pauling, L., J. Am. Chem Soc. 57, 2086 (1935).
 4. Coulson, C. A. and Longuet-Higgins, H. C., Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A191, 39; A192, 16
    (1947).
 5. Wheland, G. W., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 64, 900 (1942).
 6. Fukui, K., Yonezawa, T. and Shingu, H., J. Chem. Phys. 20, 722 (1952).
 7. For instance, see Parr, R. G., The Quantum Theory of Molecular Electronic Structure,
    Benjamin (1963), New York, N.Y. and references cited therein.
 8. Mulliken, R. S., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 74, 811 (1952).
 9. Picket, L. W., Muller, N. and Mulliken, R. S., J. Chem. Phys. 21, 1400 (1953).
10. Fukui, K., Yonezawa, T. and Nagata, C., Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 27, 423 (1954); Fukui, K.,
    Kato, H. and Yonezawa, T., ibid. 34, 1112 (1961).
11. Mulliken, R. S., Rec. Trav. Chim. 75, 845 (1956).
12. Fukui, K., Yonezawa, T., Nagata, C. and Shingu, H., J. Chem. Phys. 22, 1433 (1954).
13. For instance, see Fukui, K., Theory of Orientation and Stereoselection, Springer (1970),
    Berlin.
14. Fukui, K. In: Molecular Orbitals in Chemistry, Physics and Biology, Löwdin, P.-O. and
    Pullman, B. eds., Academic (1964), New York, N.Y., p. 513.
15. Woodward, R. B. and Hoffmann, R., Angew. Chem. 81, 797 (1969); The Conservation of
    Orbital Symmetry, Academic Press (1969), New York, N.Y.; see papers In: Orbital Symmetry
    Papers, Simmons, H. E. and Bunnett,J. F., eds., ACS (1974), Washington D.C.
16. Woodward, R. B. and Hoffmann, R., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 395 (1965).
17. Havinga, E., de Kock, R. J. and Rappoldt, M. P., Tetrahedron 11, 276 (1960); Havinga, E. and
    Schlatmann, J. L. M. A., ibid. 15, 146 (1961).
18. Hückel, E., Z. Phys. 70, 204 (1931); 76,628 (1932).
19. Fukui, K., Imamura, A., Yonezawa, T. and Nagata, C., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 33, 1501
     (1960).
20. Heilbronner, E., Tetrahedron Lett., 1964, 1923.
21. Fukui, K., Acc. Chem. Res. 4, 57, (1971).
22. Fujimoto, H., Inagaki, S. and Fukui, K., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 98,2670 (1976).
23. Salem, L., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 90, 543, 553 (1968).
24. Devaquet, A. and Salem, L., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 91, 3743 (1969).


                                            K. Fukui                                          25


25. Salem, L., Chem. Brit. 5,449 (1969).
26. Bader, R. F. W., Can., J. Chem. 40, 1164 (1962).
27. Pearson, R. G., Symmetry Rules for Chemical Reactions, John Wiley (1976), New York, N.Y.
    and references cited therein.
28. Klopman, G., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 90, 223 (1968). Also see Klopman, G., Chemical Reactivity
    and Reaction Paths, John Wiley (1974), New York, N.Y.
29. Herndon, W. C., Chem. Rev. 72, 157 (1972).
30. Hudson, R. F., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Eng. 12,36 (1973).
31. For instance, see Dewar, M. J. S. and Dougherty, R. C., The PMO Theory of Organic
    Chemistry, Plenum (1975), New York, N.Y. and many papers cited therein; see also Dewar,
    M. J. S., Thetrahedron S8, Part I, p. 85 (1966).
32. Fukui, K. and Fujimoto, H., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 41, 1989 (1968).
33. Fukui, K. and Fujimoto, H., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 42, 3392 (1969).
34. Fukui, K. In: The World of Quantum Chemistry, Daudel, R. and Pullman, B. eds., Reidel
    (1974), Dordrecht, p. 113.
35. Fujimoto, H., Yamabe, S. and Fukui, K., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 45, 1566 (1972).
36. Fujimoto, H., Yamabe, S. and Fukui, K., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 45, 2424 (1972).
37. Yamabe, S., Minato, T., Fujimoto, H. and Fukui, K., Theoret. Chim. Acta (Berl.) 32, 187
    (1974).
38. Fujimoto, H., Kato, S., Yamabe, S. and Fukui, K., J. Chem. Phys. 60, 572 (1974).
39. Kato, S., Fujimoto, H., Yamabe, S., Fukui, K., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 96, 2024 (1974).
40. Yamabe, S., Kato, S., Fujimoto, H. and Fukui, K., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 46, 3619 (1973);
    Yamabe, S., Kato, S., Fujimoto, H. and Fukui, K., Theoret. Chim. Acta (Berl.) 30, 327 (1973).
41. Fujimoto, H., Yamabe, S., Minato, T. and Fukui, K., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 94, 9205 (1972).
42. Minato, T., Yamabe, S., Fujimoto, H. and Fukui, K., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 51, 1 (1978);
    Minato, T., Yamabe, S., Fujimoto, H. and Fukui, K., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 51, 682 (1978).
43. Baba, H., Suzuki, S. and Takemura, T., J. Chem. Phys. 50, 2078 (1969).
44. Henri-Rousseau, O. and Texier, F., J. Chem. Education 55,437 (1978).
45. For instance, see Hammett, L. P., Physical Organic Chemistry, McGraw-Hill (1940), New
    York, N.Y.
46. Houk, K. N., Acc. Chem. Res. 8, 361 (1975) and references cited therein.
47. Inagaki, S., Fujimoto, H. and Fukui, K., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 97,6108 (1975).
48. See Fleming, I., Frontier Orbitals and Organic Chemical Reactions, John Wiley (1976), New
    York, N.Y.; Gilchrist, T. L. and Storr, R. C., Organic Reactions and Orbital Symmetry,
    Cambridge Univ. Press, 2nd ed. (1979), London.
49. Fukui, K. and Tanaka, K., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 50, 1391 (1977).
50. Fukui, K. and Inagaki, S., J. Am. Chem. SOC . 97,4445 (1975) and many papers cited therein.
51. Inagaki, S., Fujimoto, H. and Fukui, K., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 98,4693 (1976).
52. Inagaki, S. and Fukui, K., Chem. Lett. 1974, 509; Inagaki, S., Fujimoto, H. and Fukui, K., J.
    Am. Chem. Soc. 98, 4054 (1976).
53. Dewar, M. J. S., The Molecular Orbital Theory of Organic Chemistry, McGraw-Hill (1969),
    New York, N.Y.
54. Dewar, M. J. S., Angew. Chem. 83,859 (1971).
55. Fukui, K., Kagaku to Kogyo 29,556 (1976); Hosoya, H., Symposium on Electron Correlation
    in Molecules, Res. Inst. for Fund. Phys., Dec. 18, 1976.
56. Anderson, P. W., Phys. Rev. 109, 1492 (1958); cf. 1977 Nobel Lectures in Physics by Anderson,
     P. W., and by Mott, N. F.
57. Goldstein, M. J., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 89,6357 (1967).
58. Simmons, H. E. and Fukunaga, T., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 89, 5208 (1967).
59. Goldstein, M. J. and Hoffmann”, R., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 93,6193 (1971).
60. Hoffman”, R., Imamura, A. and Zeiss, G., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 89, 5215 (1967).
61. For instance, see Hehre, W. J. and Pople, J. A., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 97,694l (1975).
62. Hehre, W. J., Acc. Chem. Res. 8, 369 (1975).
63. For instance, see Glasstone, S., Laider, K. J. and Eyring, H., The Theory of Rate Processes,
     McGraw-Hill (1941), New York, N.Y. and references cited therein.


26                                      Chemistry 1981


64. Wang, I. S. Y. and Karplus, M., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 95, 8060 (1973) and references cited
    therein.
65. Fukui, K., J. Phys. Chem. 74, 4161 (1970).
66. Fukui, K., Kato, S. and Fujimoto, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 97, 1 (1975).
67. Kato, S. and Fukui, K., J. Am. Chem. Soc.98,6395 (1976).
68. Tachibana, A. and Fukui, K., Theoret. Chim. Acta (Berl.) 49, 321 (1978).
69. Tachibana, A. and Fukui, K., Theoret. Chim. Acta (Berl.) 51, 189, 275 (1979).
70. Tachibana, A. and Fukui, K., Theoret. Chim. Acta (Berl.) 5, (1979).
71. Fukui, K., Rec. Trav. Chim., Pays-Bas 98, 75 (1979).
72. Joshi, B. D. and Morokuma, K., J. Chem. Phys. 67,488O (1977).
73. Ishida, K., Morokuma, K. and Komornicki, A., J. Chem. Phys. 66, 2153 (1977).
74. Fukui, K., Tachibana, A. and Yamashita, K., Intern. J. Quant. Chem., Quant. Chem. Symp.
     15,621 (1981).
75. Miller, W. H., Handy, N. C. and Adams, J. E., J. Chem. Phys. 72, 99 (1980); Gray, S. K.,
    Miller, W. H., Yamaguchi, Y. and Schaefer, H. F., III., ibid. 73, 2732 (1980).
76. Fukui, K., Intern. J. Quant. Chem., Quant. Chem. Symp. 15,633 (1981).
77. Fukui, K., Act. Chem. Res. 14, 363 (1981).
78. Fukui, K., Koga, N. and Fujimoto, H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 103, 196 (1981).
79. Fujimoto, H., Koga, N., Endo, M. and Fukui, K., Tetrahedron Letters 22, 1263; 3427 (1981).
80. Fujimoto, H., Koga, N. and Fukui, K., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 103, 7452 (1981).
81. For instance, see Johnson, K. H. In: The New World of Quantum Chemistry, Pullman, B. and
    Parr, R. G. eds., Reidel (1976), Dordrecht, p. 317 and references cited therein.
82. Kobayashi, H., Kato, H., Tarama, K. and Fukui, K., J. Catalysis 49, 294 (1977); Kobayashi,
    H., Yoshida, S., Kato, H., Fukui, K. and Tarama, K., Surface Science 79, 189 (1979).
83. Tanaka, K., Yamabe, T. and Fukui, K., Chem. Phys. Letters 48, 141 (1977).
84. For instance, Schrieffer, J. R. In: The New World of Quantum Chemistry, Pullman, B. and
    Parr, R. G. eds., Reidel, D., Dordrecht (1976), p. 305; Danese, J. B. and Schrieffer, J. R.,
    Intern. J. Quant. Chem., Quant. Chem. Symp. 10, 289 (1976).
85. Tanaka, K., Yamabe, T., Noda, A., Fukui, K. and Kato, H., J. Phys. Chem. 82, 1453 (1978).
86. Yamabe, T., Tanaka, K., Fukui, K. and Kato, H., J. Phys. Chem. 81, 727 (1977).
87. Tanaka, K., Yamabe, T. and Fukui, K., Chem. Phys. Letters 53, 453 (1978).
88. For instance, see Ishimaru, S., Yamabe, T., Fukui, K. and Kato, H., J. Phys. Chem. 78, 148
    (1974); Ishimaru, S., Fukui, K. and Kato, H., Theoret. Chim. Acta (Berl.) 39, 103 (1975).
89. Tachibana, A., Yamabe, T. and Fukui, K., J. Phys. B. Atom. Molec. Phys. 10, 3175 (1977);
    Adv. Quant. Chem. II, 195 (1978).
