NMR STUDIES OF STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
OF BIOLOGICAL MACROMOLECULES
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2002
by
KURT WÜTHRICH
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzer-
land, and The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA.




INTRODUCTION
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is unique among the methods
available for three-dimensional structure determination of proteins and
nucleic acids at atomic resolution, since the NMR data can be recorded in so-
lution. Considering that body fluids such as blood, stomach liquid and saliva
are protein solutions where these molecules perform their physiological func-
tions, knowledge of the molecular structures in solution is highly relevant. In
the NMR experiments, solution conditions such as the temperature, pH and
salt concentration can be adjusted so as to closely mimic a given physiological
fluid. Conversely, the solutions may also be changed to quite extreme non-
physiological conditions, for example, for studies of protein denaturation.
Furthermore, in addition to protein structure determination, NMR applica-
tions include investigations of dynamic features of the molecular structures,
as well as studies of structural, thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of interac-
tions between proteins and other solution components, which may either be




                                                   Figure 1. NMR structure of the
                                                   Antennapedia homeodomain
                                                   (1). A bundle of 20 superim-
                                                   posed conformers represents
                                                   the polypeptide backbone. For
                                                   the polypeptide segment 7–59
                                                   the tight fit of the bundle indi-
                                                   cates that the structure is de-
                                                   fined with high precision,
                                                   whereas the two chain ends are
                                                   disordered.

                                                                               235


                                                              Figure 2. NMR struc-
                                                              ture of the complex
                                                              formed between the
                                                              Antennapedia home-
                                                              odomain (blue, with
                                                              functionally impor-
                                                              tant residues in red,
                                                              yellow, green and
                                                              brown) and its opera-
                                                              tor DNA (yellow and
                                                              red) (2).




other macromolecules or low molecular weight ligands. Again, for these sup-
plementary data it is of keen interest that they can be measured directly in so-
lution.
   The NMR structure of the Antennapedia homeodomain (Figure 1) illus-
trates one of the exciting features of being able to perform structural studies
in solution. The polypeptide chain in this protein is only partially folded, with
both chain ends showing pronounced disorder (1). In the complex with its
operator DNA (Figure 2) the N-terminal chain end is located in the minor
groove of the DNA, where it adopts a well-defined structure (2). This mode of
intermolecular recognition illustrates the functional importance of partially
structured polypeptide chains. Mammalian prion proteins are an even more
striking example of partial polypeptide folding, since the three-dimensional
structure of the benign “cellular” form (PrPC) includes a flexibly disordered
100-residue tail linked to the N-terminal end of a globular domain (Figures 3
and 4) (3). Considering that the mechanism of transformation of PrPC into
the aggregated, disease-related form of mammalian prion proteins is still sub-
ject to speculation, the observation of this flexible tail has been highly in-
triguing.
   Partially folded polypeptide chains are usually difficult to crystallize.
Furthermore, if crystals can be obtained, the chain segments that are disor-
dered in solution will either be ordered by intermolecular contacts in the
crystal lattice, or they will not be visible by diffraction methods. As a conse-
quence, NMR has in many cases been the only method capable of providing
structural information on partially folded polypeptides. Although a standard
protocol for NMR structure determination provides a static picture of the un-
structured chain segments (Figures 1 and 4) (4), additional NMR experi-

236


                                                          Figure 3. NMR struc-
                                                          ture of the bovine
                                                          prion protein (3).
                                                          In the C-terminal
                                                          globular domain of
                                                          residues 126–230, -
                                                          helices are green,
                                                          an antiparallel -
                                                          sheet is blue, and
                                                          non-regular sec-
                                                          ondary structure is
                                                          yellow; the “unstruc-
                                                          tured” N-terminal
                                                          tail of residues
                                                          23–125 is white.




ments can provide information on the frequencies of the rate processes that
mediate transitions between discrete states of the molecule within the con-
formation space spanned by the static bundle of NMR-conformers (5, 6).
   The ability of NMR techniques to characterize macromolecular structures
and their intermolecular interactions with high spatial and temporal resolu-
tion has long attracted keen interest. This article reports on experience
gained with NMR studies of proteins in my laboratory during the past 35
years (7).




                                                          Figure 4. Visual im-
                                                          pression of the varia-
                                                          tion of the bovine
                                                          prion protein struc-
                                                          ture (Figure 3) dur-
                                                          ing a time period of
                                                          about 1 nanosecond.
                                                          The superposition of
                                                          20 snapshots illus-
                                                          trates that the globu-
                                                          lar domain main-
                                                          tains its mean
                                                          geometry, whereas
                                                          the tail undergoes
                                                          large-scale changes
                                                          with time.

                                                                           237


NMR SPECTRA OF PROTEINS IN SOLUTION
When I joined the field of biomacromolecular NMR spectroscopy in 1967,
important qualitative NMR features of amino acids and proteins had already
been noted and tentatively rationalized (8–12). Most important, it had been
well documented that the spectrum of a globular protein is more complex
than the sum of the NMR lines from the constituent amino acid residues in
the polypetide chain (Figure 5), and the differences between the 1H NMR
spectra of folded and unfolded (“random coil”) forms of a polypeptide chain
had been tentatively explained by different interactions with the solvent
(Figure 6). The spectral analysis was primarily focused on the positions of the
individual NMR lines in the 1H NMR spectrum, as given by the “chemical
shift”, , in parts per million (ppm) relative to a reference compound (Figure
5). Although the chemical shift is primarily determined by the covalent struc-
ture of the amino acid residue, it can also be significantly affected by the in-
teractions with the solvent. Therefore, the exclusion of the solvent water from
the interior of a globular protein (Figure 6) causes the chemical shifts of the
core residues to be different from those of the water-exposed amino acid
residues, so that even NMR lines originating from multiple residues of the
same amino acid type can be distinguished. This “conformation-dependent
chemical shift dispersion” was found to be sufficiently large to enable 1H
NMR studies of protein denaturation (Figure 7) (12). This then indicated the
exciting prospect of using NMR for detailed studies of protein folding, and in
particular for distinguishing between two-state and multiple-state folding and
unfolding transitions. For me, the observations and ideas illustrated by
Figures 5 to 7 also showed that one would need the ability of resolving and an-
alyzing highly complex NMR spectra (upper trace in Figure 5) in order to ob-
tain information about physiologically active, folded forms of proteins. This
was a clearly defined problem that appeared sufficiently challenging to be at-
tractive for my own research.




                                         Figure 5. One-dimensional (1D) 1H NMR
                                         spectra of the small protein bovine pancre-
                                         atic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI, M ≈ 6000).
                                         Top: Experimental spectrum of folded, ac-
                                         tive BPTI in a freshly prepared 2H2O-solu-
                                         tion. Bottom: Simulated spectrum for the
                                         unfolded, random coil form of the BPTI
                                         polypeptide chain.


238


                                                    Figure 6. Scheme illustrating
                                                    that the solvent (blue) has
                                                    free access to all parts of a ran-
                                                    dom coil polypeptide chain
                                                    (rc), whereas it is excluded
                                                    from the core of a folded
                                                    globular protein.




   In attempts at rationalizing in more detail the observations of Figures 5
and 7, it had been suggested that local magnetic fields generated by “ring cur-
rents” in the aromatic amino acid side chains (Figure 8) should cause out-
standingly large conformation-dependent chemical shifts of hydrogen atoms
located near the rings in the three-dimensional protein structure. This was
qualitatively confirmed by comparison of the largest observed deviations
from random coil chemical shifts (4) in hen egg white lysozyme (Figure 7)
with calculations of the “ring current shifts” based on the then-available low-
resolution crystal structure of this protein (12). It had also been pointed out
that hemoproteins could be expected to have particularly large ring current
shifts for hydrogen atoms located near the heme groups (Figure 9) (10,12).
   For my start in the field of NMR with proteins, the prediction of unique,
large heme ring current shifts seemed to be an attractive feature of hemo-




                                                    Figure 7. Low-field and high-
                                                    field regions of 1D 1H NMR
                                                    spectra of the protein lysozyme
                                                    at different temperatures, re-
                                                    flecting the transition from the
                                                    folded form at 56 °C to the
                                                    random coil form of the
                                                    polypeptide chain at 73 °C
                                                    (220 MHz, H2O-solution)
                                                    (adapted from ref. 12).


                                                                                 239


                                       Figure 8. Local “ring current field” around
                                       aromatic rings in solution induced by an ex-
                                       ternal, static magnetic field. The shape of
                                       the ring current field is indicated by the red
                                       double-cone and by broken magnetic-field-
                                       lines. The minus-sign indicates that the
                                       NMR lines of hydrogen atoms located in-
                                       side the cone in the three-dimensional pro-
                                       tein structure are shifted “upfield” (to the
                                       right in the spectra of Figure 5), whereas
                                       for atoms outside of the cone the shifts are
                                       “downfield”.



proteins, and the presence of the heme iron (Figure 9) was appealing in view
of my background in inorganic chemistry. As an additional advantage, low-
resolution crystal structures for several hemoproteins were already available
in 1967. It turned out that for several years nearly all my research projects
were focused on the heme iron and its coordinatively linked ligands, and on
the non-bonding interactions of the heme groups with their immediate envir-
onment in the hemoproteins.




                                       Figure 9. Chemical structure of heme c,
                                       which is the prosthetic group in cyto-
                                       chromes c. The red arrows connect groups
                                       of hydrogen atoms in the covalent structure
                                       of heme c that are separated by a sufficient-
                                       ly short distance to be connected by nuclear
                                       Overhauser effects (NOE).

240


                                                             Figure 10. 1D 1H NMR
                                                             spectrum (360 MHz,
                                                             52°C, solvent 2H2O) of
                                                             horse ferrocytochrome
                                                             c (M ≈ 12000).




   As anticipated, the large heme ring current field generates a small number
of well-separated resonance lines in the spectra of folded, globular hemopro-
teins (Figure 10). For the paramagnetic states of hemoproteins, additional
well-resolved lines result from interactions with the unpaired electrons of the
heme iron. Although they represented less than 3% of all the hydrogen
atoms in any given hemoprotein, the well-resolved resonances were of crucial
importance, because these lines could be selectively irradiated in 1D 1H NMR
experiments. For example, performing some simple ligand exchange and re-
dox reactions with cytochrome c (Figure 11) resulted in the identification of
one of the axial ligands bound to the heme iron, which had not been seen in
the low resolution X-ray crystal structure available in 1969.
   The experiments in Figure 11 (13) started with the oxidised form of cyto-
chrome c. As was then learned through this study (see below), ferricyto-




Figure 11. Three chemical reaction steps with cytochrome c that were used to identify me-
thionine as one of the axial ligands of the heme iron (13). The roman numerals indicate
the oxidation state of the heme iron, and His stands for the amino acid residue histidine.
The solid and broken arrows indicate rapid and slow reaction steps, respectively. Colour
code: black, heme iron with ligands, where the horizontal line through Fe represents a side
view of the heme c ring (Figure 9); blue, chemicals added to the protein solution; red, new
structural features resulting from the preceding reaction.


                                                                                      241


                                 Figure 12. Changes with time in the 1D 1H NMR spec-
                                 trum of cytochrome c after reducing the ferric
                                 cyanide complex with dithionite (220 MHz, 9°C, sol-
                                 vent 2H2O).



chrome c contains a methionine side chain of its polypeptide chains in one of
the axial heme iron coordination sites. Upon addition of KCN to the protein
solution, this methionine is replaced in the binding site on the heme iron by
a cyanide ion, and therefore moves out of the heme ring current field. The
completion of this reaction can readily be monitored, since different patterns
of well-resolved resonance lines are present in the 1H NMR spectra of ferricyto-
chrome c and its cyanide complex, respectively. After reduction of the heme
iron to the ferrous state, the cyanide complex is thermodynamically less stable
than the native form of cytochrome c, and in a slow reaction the cyanide in
the axial coordination site of the heme iron is again replaced with the natural
methionine ligand. The return of the axial methionine into the heme ring
current field was monitored in real time (Figure 12) by the appearance of its
typical high-field lines in the 1H NMR spectrum (Figure 10). This experiment
resulted in the identification of the nature of this axial ligand in the native, ac-
tive form of cytochrome c, and further yielded information on the relative
thermodynamic stabilities of the four different structures in Figure 11.
   As a sideline, comparison of the figures 10 and 12 illustrates the influence
of various experimental factors on the appearance of the NMR spectra. The
higher resonance frequency and the high temperature used in the experi-
ment of Figure 10, which was recorded around 1980 with Fourier transform
spectroscopy, resulted in narrower and more clearly separated peaks in the
region 0 to -5 ppm than the experiment in Figure 12, which was recorded in
1968 with continuous-wave NMR spectroscopy at low temperature.
   Other early experiments based on the observation of well-resolved reso-
nances in the 1H NMR spectra of hemoproteins resulted in the characteriza-
tion of conformation changes during the oxygenation of myoglobin and he-

242


moglobin (14, 15), and to detailed characterization of the electronic struc-
ture of the heme groups in different classes of hemoproteins (16–18).


THE WAY TO NMR STRUCTURES OF PROTEINS
Around 1970 there was a lot of enthusiasm in my laboratory and elsewhere
about the success of experiments of the types illustrated by Figures 5 to 12.
During the following years, however, there was little further progress toward
an NMR method for de novo structure determination of proteins. In hindsight
this can readily be rationalized: Early successful structural interpretations of
NMR data invariably supplemented a previously known low resolution X-ray
crystal structure of the same protein. In spite of the high symmetry of the
ring current fields (Figure 8) and other sources of local conformation-de-
pendent chemical shifts, including natural paramagnetic centers and extrin-
sic “paramagnetic shift reagents” (17, 19), the observed chemical shifts could
thus in some instances yield exciting new information. In a de novo protein
structure determination, however, the high symmetry of the local magnetic
fields would lead to ambiguities in the structural interpretation of the result-
ing chemical shifts. Different approaches were therefore called for, and even-
tually a NMR method for protein structure determination could be based on
the following four principal elements:

1. Measurement of NOE upper distance limits as conformational constraints
Nuclear Overhauser effects (NOE) are due to dipolar interactions between
different nuclei. The intensity of the NOE is related to the product of the in-
verse sixth power of the internuclear distance and a correlation function,
f(c), which describes the modulation of the dipole–dipole coupling by sto-
chastic rate processes, with an effective correlation time c :




   Although the NOE is a common phenomenon for all combinations of
closely spaced nuclear spins, NOEs between pairs of hydrogen atoms are of
prime interest for structural studies. A 1H–1H NOE is related to the “through-
space” distance between a pair of atoms that are either not at all linked by co-
valent bonds (intermolecular NOE), or that may be far apart in the amino
acid sequence of a polypeptide chain. 1H–1H NOEs can be observed in dou-
ble-irradiation 1D NMR experiments as the fractional change in intensity of a
NMR line that results from preirradiation of another resonance (inset in
Figure 13). Although NOE distance measurements had successfully been
used for studies of small organic molecules (20), including oligopeptides
(21), and observation of NOEs in proteins had also been reported (22, 23), it
was not clear whether the desired distance information could actually be ob-
tained in proteins (20, 24, 25). This uncertainty arose because the Brownian
motions of large structures in solution are slow, with long effective correla-

                                                                            243


Figure 13. NOE build-up curves observed with 1D transient [1H,1H]-NOE measurements
(26). The relative intensities, Irel, of the pre-irradiated resonance line (broken curve) and
of the lines experiencing NOEs (solid curves) are plotted versus the duration of the mixing
period, . The experimental scheme used to record transient NOE spectra (inset in the up-
per right) includes a selective 180° radio-frequency pulse applied to the “pre-irradiated” 1H
NMR line, and a non-selective 90°-pulse applied to the entire 1H NMR spectrum. The two
pulses are separated by the mixing period, , and followed by signal acquisition. When
working with the crowded spectra of proteins, one records the difference between two spec-
tra obtained with the pre-irradiation 180°(1H)-pulse applied on- and off-resonance, re-
spectively.




tion times, c, for this stochastic process, and proteins contain a dense net-
work of hydrogen atoms. With the combination of these two features, “spin
diffusion” could partially or fully deteriorate distance measurements based
on 1H–1H NOE experiments (24 – 28).
   In the solution NMR experiments discussed here, spin diffusion arises as a
consequence of the dependence of the NOE on the inverse sixth power of
the internuclear distance, since magnetization transfer between two spins
through multiple short steps may be more efficient than a one-step transfer
over the longer, direct distance (Figure 14). We used 1D transient NOE dif-
ference experiments (inset in Figure 13) (26) and 1D truncated-driven NOE
(TOE) difference experiments (27) to record “NOE build-up curves” (Figure
13), which then provided a basis for 1H–1H distance measurements in macro-
molecules. These studies showed that even more favourable conditions for
NOE distance measurements can be found in macromolecules, which have
long effective correlation times for the modulation of dipole–dipole coup-
lings, than in low-molecular-weight compounds, for which the condition of
“extreme motional narrowing” applies (24, 28).
   Analysis of 1H–1H NOE build-up curves recorded with 1D transient NOE
experiments (Figure 13) is based on the consideration that during the early
phase of the mixing period, direct magnetization transfer from spin 1 to spin
3 (Figure 14) will result in a linear increase of the magnetization on spin 3
with time. In contrast, transfer to atom 3 via an intermediate step through
atom 2 will have a lag period, even though for long mixing periods, , the ex-
tent of the magnetization transfer by such “spin diffusion” may for individual
pairs of hydrogen atoms exceed that of the direct transfer (Figure 13).

244


                                                        Figure 14. Spin diffusion.
                                                        Transfer of magnetization
                                                        between two hydrogen
                                                        atoms 1 and 3 in the pres-
                                                        ence of additional hydrogen
                                                        atoms goes through two
                                                        competing paythways, i.e.,
                                                        the direct NOE across the
                                                        distance r1,3, and two- or
                                                        multiple-step spin diffusion
                                                        via intervening hydrogen
                                                        atoms.



Corresponding considerations apply for the analysis of NOE build-up curves
recorded with truncated-driven NOE experiments (27). With proper selec-
tion of the duration of the mixing period, one can thus measure highly se-
lective 1H–1H NOEs between distinct pairs of hydrogen atoms, or groups of
chemical shift-equivalent hydrogen atoms in proteins in solution.
   There is a second criterion that needs to be satisfied for obtaining selective
NOEs with 1D NMR experiments, i.e., at least one of the two lines that are con-
nected by the NOE must be sufficiently well resolved (i.e, separated from all
other lines in the spectrum) to enable selective radio-frequency pre-irradia-
tion (inset in Figure 13). The previously discussed well-resolved lines in the 1H
NMR spectrum of ferrocytochrome c (Figure 10) thus had again an important
role in enabling us to study the spin physics in the interior of this globular pro-
tein with 1D 1H NMR experiments, as well as to obtain novel structural infor-
mation. The figure 15 shows a series of highly selective 1D truncated-driven
NOE measurements, which were used to determine 1H NMR assignments for
the heme group in a c-type cytochrome (Figure 9) (29).

2. Sequence-specific resonance assignments
Similar to the situation in heme groups (Figure 9), there are closely spaced
pairs of hydrogen atoms in neighbouring residues of a polypeptide chain
(Figure 16). These can be connected by the observation of “sequential
NOEs”. The figure 16 illustrates that NOE-based 1H NMR assignments for a
polypeptide chain can conceptually be considered as a 2-step process. Each
amino acid residue represents a “spin system” (4), i.e., it consists of an array of
hydrogen atoms including an amide proton (HN), an -proton (H), and the
side chain protons, which can be connected by steps over three or less cova-
lent bonds through the observation of scalar spin–spin (“through-bond”)
couplings (see (4) for the exceptions represented by proline and the aromat-
ic side chains). In contrast, hydrogen atoms located in sequentially neigh-
bouring amino acid residues are separated by at least four covalent bonds.
Pairs of neighbouring residues in the sequence can therefore only be con-
nected via NOEs manifesting short through-space distances, such as dN and
dNN. Suitable combinations of intraresidual 1H–1H connectivities established
by scalar spin–spin couplings, and inter-residue connectivities established by
sequential NOEs enable progressive resonance assignments while “walking

                                                                                245


                                             Figure 15. 1H NMR assignments for the
                                             heme group of a c-type cytochrome
                                             using 1H–1N NOEs (see Figure 7).
                                             Bottom trace: 1D 1H NMR spectrum
                                             of ferrocytochrome c-551 from
                                             Pseudomonas aeruginosa (M ≈ 12000).
                                             Upper traces: three 1D truncated-dri-
                                             ven NOE difference spectra obtained
                                             with selective pre-irradiation (indicat-
                                             ed by arrows) on the hydrogen atoms
                                             ,  and  (see Figure 9), respectively
                                             (360 MHz, 35°C, 2H2O-solution). The
                                             NOE peaks are identified with num-
                                             bers indicating the substituents at-
                                             tached to the corresponding por-
                                             phyrin ring carbons (Figure 9).




along the polypeptide backbone”. In other words, the spin systems of two
neighbouring residues can be connected by the intervening H–HN or HN–
HN sequential NOE connectivities (Figure 16). 1D double-resonance experi-
ments with selective irradiation of the well-resolved amide proton resonances
between 8 and 10 ppm in folded BPTI (Figure 5) thus yielded assignments
for most of the residues in the regular secondary structure elements (Figure
17) (30). Further assignments were not possible, because the other regions of
the polypeptide chain were not represented by well-separated 1H NMR lines
that could have been selectively irradiated in 1D NMR experiments.

3. Two-dimensional (2D) NMR
With the introduction of 2D NMR experiments, and subsequently 3D and 4D
NMR experiments, NMR studies of biological macromolecules evolved from
intellectually stimulating science to a practical approach for protein structure
determination. The foundations of multi-dimensional NMR have been pre-
sented in the Nobel lecture by Richard R. Ernst (31). Here, I only want to



                                             Figure 16. Sequential 1H NMR assign-
                                             ment of proteins. The drawing shows
                                             the chemical structure of a
                                             –valine–alanine– dipeptide segment in
                                             a polypeptide chain. The dotted lines
                                             connect groups of hydrogen atoms
                                             that are separated by at most three
                                             chemical bonds and can therefore be
                                             connected using scalar spin–spin
                                             couplings. The broken arrows link
                                             pairs of hydrogen atoms in neighbour-
                                             ing amino acid residues that are sepa-
                                             rated by short through-space dis-
                                             tances, dN and dNN, and can therefore
                                             be connected by “sequential NOEs”.

246


                                                        Figure 17. Sequence-spe-
                                                        cific resonance assign-
                                                        ments for BPTI that
                                                        were obtained using 1D
                                                        1
                                                         H NMR experiments
                                                        (30). The polypeptide
                                                        backbone is shown, and
                                                        the assigned residues
                                                        are identified by indica-
                                                        tion of hydrogen bonds
                                                        with their amide pro-
                                                        tons (the colour code
                                                        indicates variable ex-
                                                        change rates of the
                                                        amide protons with the
                                                        solvent; drawing by Jane
                                                        Richardson, 1980).




comment on two crucial consequences of multi-dimensional NMR for studies
of proteins. First, 2D 1H NMR enables the recording of selective interactions
between pairs of hydrogen atoms, or groups of chemical shift-equivalent hy-
drogen atoms, without selective irradiation of individual resonance lines. It
thus enables a detailed analysis of the entire 1H NMR spectrum of a protein,
which contrasts with the 1D NMR situation of being limited to using only a
small number of resolved lines at the periphery of the spectrum. Second, the
dispersion of the resonances in a two-dimensional frequency plane affords
greatly improved separation of the individual peaks. For example, in Figure
18 the intense lines on the diagonal from the lower left to the upper right
correspond to the 1D NMR spectrum, and the weak “cross peaks” in the
plane outside of the diagonal manifest selective NOEs between pairs of




                                                        Figure 18. Two-dimen-
                                                        sional (2D) [1H,1H]-
                                                        NOE spectroscopy
                                                        ([1H,1H]-NOESY). A
                                                        stacked plot representa-
                                                        tion of a spectrum of
                                                        the small protein bull
                                                        seminal proteinase in-
                                                        hibitor IIA (BUSI IIA,
                                                        M ≈ 6000) is shown
                                                        (500 MHz, 45°C, H2O-
                                                        solution).

                                                                            247


      Figure 19. 2D [1H,1H]-
      NOESY spectrum of the
      plant pathogenesis-related
      protein P14A (M ≈ 15000).
      A contour plot of the spec-
      tral region [1(1H) = 0 – 4.3
      ppm, 2(1H) = 6.3 – 9.5
      ppm] is shown (750 MHz,
      30°C, H2O-solution).




      Figure 20. Measurement of
      NOE build-up curves using
      2D [1H,1H]-NOESY experi-
      ments. (A) Six NOESY spec-
      tra of BPTI recorded with
      different mixing times, as
      indicated on the left. The
      same 1D cross-section along
      the 1 frequency axis
      through the diagonal peak
      of the Phe 33 amide proton
      is plotted for each spec-
      trum. (B) NOE build-up
      curves obtained from the
      analysis of the data in (A);
      same presentation as in
      Figure 13, with the relative
      intensities of the NOESY
      cross peaks plotted versus
      the length of the mixing
      time, m, and the broken
      line representing the decay
      of the magnetization on the
      diagonal peak of the Phe 33
      amide proton.

248


                                                             Figure 21.
                                                             Complete se-
                                                             quence-specific res-
                                                             onance assign-
                                                             ments for BPTI
                                                             obtained using 2D
                                                             NMR experiments
                                                             (34). Assigned
                                                             residues are identi-
                                                             fied by coloured
                                                             patches covering
                                                             their amide pro-
                                                             tons. (The colour
                                                             code indicates vari-
                                                             able amide proton
                                                             exchange rates;
                                                             drawing by Jane
                                                             Richardson, 1982).




hydrogen atoms, which are represented in the NMR spectrum by two distinct
(but not necessarily “resolved”) chemical shift positions along the diagonal.
The greatly improved separation of the individual cross peaks is best seen in
contour plots of 2D NMR spectra (Figure 19), which is the presentation used
for detailed analysis. The 1D decoupling experiments for the identification of
scalar spin–spin couplings were thus replaced by 2D correlation experiments,
such as COSY, SECSY and FOCSY, and the 1D NOE difference experiments
were replaced by 2D [1H,1H]-NOESY, which yielded similar NOE build-up
curves for each NOESY cross peak (Figure 20) as the 1D transient NOE tech-
nique (Figure 13) (4, 32, 33). Using these 2D 1H NMR experiments, com-
plete sequence-specific resonance assignments could be obtained for the pro-
tein BPTI (Figure 21) (34).
   The “NOESY-COSY connectivity diagram” in Figure 22 (4, 35) makes use of
the fact that standard 2D [1H,1H]-COSY and 2D [1H,1H]-NOESY spectra are
symmetrical with respect to the diagonal peaks. Combining the upper left
half of a NOESY spectrum with the lower right half of a COSY spectrum
therefore enables a straightforward visualization of assignments by a succes-
sion of dN sequential NOEs and intraresidual HN–H scalar coupling con-
nectivities. The data were recorded in a freshly prepared solution of BPTI in
2
 H2O, where only the resonances of the slowly exchanging amide protons are
seen (35). The assignments start with the COSY cross peak identified by a
black square and, as indicated by the arrows, go clockwise to the sequentially
preceding isoleucine residue, and counter-clockwise to a sequence of four
residues. It is customary that the data leading to the 1H NMR assignments of
a protein are collected in a plot versus the amino acid sequence (Figure 23).
The figure 23 shows that most of the sequential connectivities are indepen-
dently documented by two or three different sequential NOEs (4, 36), and
that possible remaining gaps in the assignment pathway are readily recog-
nized in this presentation.

                                                                            249


                                                                   Figure 22. NOESY-COSY
                                                                   connectivity diagram for
                                                                   sequential 1H NMR as-
                                                                   signments using the dN
                                                                   sequential NOEs. The
                                                                   data was recorded with
                                                                   BPTI in 2H2O solution.
                                                                   (see text).



4. Structural interpretation of NOE distance constraints
A polypeptide chain with 100 amino acid residues has a length of about
400 Å, whereas NOE-observable distances are shorter than about 5 Å.
Observation of a NOE between a pair of hydrogen atoms with assigned chem-
ical shift positions therefore enforces the formation of a ring-like structure
(Figure 24). A successful structure determination generates three-dimen-
sional arrangements of the polypeptide chain that simultaneously contain all




Figure 23. Standard presentation of 1H NMR data leading to sequence-specific resonance as-
signments and the identification of regular secondary structures in proteins. Experimental
data plotted versus the amino acid sequence are shown for the small pheromone protein Er -1
from Euplotes raikovii (M ≈ 4500). JHN are scalar spin–spin coupling constants, with small
and big values indicated by filled and empty circles, respectively. dNN, dN and dN are dis-
tances manifested in sequential NOEs, where strong and weak sequential NOEs are indi-
cated by a thick or a thin line, respectively. Small values of the distances dN(i,i+3),
d(i,i+3) and dN(i,i+4) are observed by medium-range NOEs linking the given atom types
between residues spaced as indicated in the parentheses, and by the short horizontal lines.
The locations of three -helices are indicated at the bottom.

250


                                              Figure 24. Scheme indicating the rela-
                                              tions between an experimental 2D
                                              [1H,1H]-NOESY spectrum, a polypep-
                                              tide with the chain ends indicated by
                                              N and C, sequence-specific assign-
                                              ments for two hydrogen atoms in the
                                              polypeptide chain indicated by cir-
                                              cles, and the NOE upper distance
                                              constraint derived from the NOESY
                                              cross-peak connecting the chemical
                                              shift positions of the two assigned
                                              hydrogen atoms (see text).


the small and large circular structures imposed by the ensemble of all NOESY
cross peaks.
   Partial structure determination has been be obtained by an empirical ap-
proach for the identification of regular secondary structures in polypeptide
chains, which relies on recognizing distinct patterns of NOEs (4, 37). For ex-
ample, in Figure 23 a succession of strong sequential dNN NOEs in combina-
tion with the observation of medium-range NOEs in the same polypeptide
segment identifies three -helical structures, which are independently also in-
dicated by successions of small values for the scalar spin–spin couplings 3JHN
(4, 38).
   For the calculation of complete three-dimensional protein structures from
NMR data (39), it was quite clear from the outset that an input of quantitative
NOE distance measurements would be difficult to obtain. The observed
NOEs depend on the proton–proton distance, r, as well as on the effective ro-
tational correlation times, c (Equation [1]). Since for each pair of hydrogen
atoms the effective c-value is governed not only by the overall rotational mol-
ecular tumbling (Brownian motions), which depends on the size and shape
of the protein as well as on the viscosity of the solvent, but can also be affect-
ed by intramolecular motions, f (c) may vary for different pairs of hydrogen
atoms in a protein molecule. Additional ambiguities could arise from partial
quenching of individual 1H–1H NOEs by competitive spin relaxation process-
es, for example, spin diffusion (Figure 14), chemical or conformational ex-
change, and interactions with other nuclear or electronic spins. Furthermore,
as a result of rapid intramolecular mobility, a given NOE may be the result of
sampling over a range of distances between the two hydrogen atoms of inter-
est (40). In view of these intrinsic limitations for efficient quantitative NOE
distance measurements, we decided to use a constant value of the correlation

                                                                                 251


                                                          Figure 25. NMR struc-
                                                          ture of BUSI IIA (43).




function, f (c) (Equation [1]), for all 1H–1H combinations in a protein, and
to derive only upper limits on the 1H–1H distances from the NOE measure-
ments. In practice, the input for a structure calculation then consists of al-
lowed distance ranges, which are bounded by a NOE upper limit of 3.0 to 5.0 Å,
depending on the intensity of the NOE, and a lower limit of 2.0 Å, which rep-
resents the sum of the van der Waals radii of the two NOE-connected hydro-
gen atoms. Although each individual entry in the input data thus has only
limited precision, this procedure is robust and can conceptually account for
the influence of intramolecular mobility in most of the situations that are
commonly expected for the structured parts of globular proteins.
    For the initial globular protein structure calculations from NMR data
(Figure 25), we used a metric matrix distance geometry algorithm to search
for molecular geometries that are consistent with the ensemble of all experi-
mentally determined NOE distance constraints (41–43). Each such calcula-
tion ends with the minimization of an error function, and the residual error
function value represents a straightforward measure for the success of having
found a molecular geometry that satisfies the experimental input data. In
view of the aforementioned distance-range format of the input, it is further of
keen interest to evaluate the uniqueness of the calculated structure. To this
end, the structure calculation is repeated with identical input data but differ-
ent boundary conditions, and the uniqueness of the resulting NMR structure
is judged from the tightness of the fit among the resulting ensemble of con-
formers. Typically, about 100 conformers are generated, and a sub-group of
the 20 conformers with the smallest residual error function values is selected
to represent the NMR structure of the protein. The average of the pairwise
root-mean-square distances (RMSD) calculated for this bundle of conformers
(Figure 1) is then taken as a measure for the precision of the structure deter-
mination. Visually, a tight fit of the bundle of conformers indicates regions

252


where the structure is defined with high precision by the NMR data, whereas
structurally disordered polypeptide segments show a large dispersion among
the members of the bundle, as exemplified by the two chain ends of the
Antennapedia homeodomain in Figure 1. In the absence of long-range NOE
distance constraints, a properly functioning algorithm for the structure cal-
culation will sample the entire conformation space that is accessible with the
given length of the polypeptide chain, as exemplified by the “unstructured”
tail of the bovine prion protein in Figure 4.


NMR IN STRUCTURAL BIOLOGY
Standard protocol for NMR structure determination of biological macromolecules
The protocol for NMR structure determination includes the preparation of a
homogeneous protein solution, the recording and handling of the NMR da-
ta sets, and the structural interpretation of the NMR data (Table 1). The tech-
niques used in 1984 for the structure determination of bull seminal pro-
teinase inhibitor IIA are listed in Table 1; the four steps of the structural
interpretation (III in Table 1) were performed separately, although the result
of the first round of constraint collection and structure calculation was sub-
sequently used for additional checks on the sequence-specific resonance as-
signments as well as on the collection of conformational constraints. Since
1984, the protocol outlined in Table 1 has been used in over 3’000 NMR
structure determinations of proteins and nucleic acids, and greatly improved
experimental techniques have been incorporated into this general scheme.
   Major advances in the experimental techniques for NMR structure de-
termination were spurned by the introduction of methods for the produc-
tion of recombinant proteins labelled with stable isotopes, in particular



Table 1. Standard protocol for NMR structure determination of proteins

Step a                                      BUSI IIA b

I        Sample preparation                 Protein isolated from natural source; natural
                                            isotope distribution; 16 mM solutions in H2O
                                            and in 2H2O, respectively
II       NMR spectroscopy                   2D 1H NMR
IIIa     Resonance assignments              Sequential NOEs
IIIb     Conformational constraints         [1H,1H]-NOEs, 3JHN, 3J
IIIc     Structure calculation              Metric matrix distance geometry
IIId     Structure refinement               Restrained energy minimization

a
  The structural interpretation of the NMR data, III, is somewhat arbitrarily divided up into four
  steps; in practice, one goes though multiple cycles of collection of conformational constraints
  (IIIb) and structure calculation (IIIc), and the completion of the sequence-specific assignments
  (IIIa) as well as the structure refinement (IIId) may also be part of this iterative approach.
b
  This column lists the techniques used in the first structure determination of a globular protein
  in 1984 (43).


                                                                                             253


Figure 26. Three-dimensional (3D) 15N-resolved [1H,1H]-NOESY spectrum (600 MHz, 28°C,
H2O-solution) of the DNA-binding domain of the P22 c2 repressor (M ≈ 10000, uniformly
15
  N-labeled).




carbon-13, nitrogen-15 and deuterium (44, 45). For example, this opened the
way for efficient use of heteronuclear NMR techniques with proteins, such
as 3D [1H,13C,15N]-triple resonance experiments, 3D 13C- or 15N-resolved
[1H,1H]-NOESY (Figure 26) (46, 47), and the use of heteronuclear filters
(48). Important advances have also been made with the methods of structure
calculation, where the c.p.u. time needed for the calculation of a small pro-
tein structure has been reduced from about one day in 1984 (41, 42) to a few
seconds (49). Currently, intense work is focused on the automation and com-
bined execution of the individual steps in the structural interpretation of the
NMR data (50, 51). It is beyond the scope of this article to present in detail
the wide range of beautiful novel experimental approaches developed by the
community of macromolecular NMR spectroscopists during the past 15 years,
which now enable studies with ever more complex systems (Figures 1–4).

Globular protein structures in solution
The static picture of a protein molecule obtained from the standard protocol
for structure determination (Table 1) typically shows variable precision of the
structure determination along the polypeptide chain, as manifested by the
variations in the closeness of the fit among the bundle of conformers used to
represent the NMR structure (Figure 1). Even in proteins where the entire
polypeptide chain is part of the global fold, increased disorder is observed to-
ward the periphery of the surface side chains (Figure 27). This pronounced
surface disorder, which typically also involves the ends of the polypeptide
chain, is in most instances the only significant difference between corre-
sponding globular protein structures in single crystals and in solution (5). In
part the increased disorder in solution arises because of a scarcity of packing
constraints, when compared with the protein core, and a concomitant scarci-
ty of NOE distance constraints. With the additional use of NMR spin relax-
ation measurements (24, 28, 33, 52), one can distinguish between static dis-
order, which would then presumably arise from the scarcity of constraints,

254


                                                             Figure 27. NMR
                                                             structure of BPTI
                                                             represented by a
                                                             bundle of 20 con-
                                                             formers superim-
                                                             posed for best fit of
                                                             the polypeptide
                                                             backbone. The
                                                             polypeptide back-
                                                             bone is green, core
                                                             side-chains are blue,
                                                             and solvent-accessi-
                                                             ble surface side-
                                                             chains are red.




and dynamic disorder, with intramolecular motions on the nanosecond and
sub-nanosecond time scale. Overall, quite independent of the dynamics issue,
the observation of partially folded polypeptide chains in solution (Figures 1,
4 and 27) is important complementary information to the data that can be
obtained by studies in crystals. It is also the main reason why the quality of a
NMR structure determination is not usually characterized by a single, global
parameter (4–6).
  An important extension of the characterization of proteins in solution re-
sulted from high resolution NMR studies of protein hydration. Thereby the
location of hydration waters is determined by the observation of NOEs be-
tween water protons and hydrogen atoms of the polypeptide chain (53).
Because of the dependence of the NOE on the inverse sixth power of the
1
 H–1H distance, only one layer of hydration water molecules is observed
(Figure 28). For the hydration studies, the dependence of the NOE intensity




                                                             Figure 28. Molecular
                                                             model of hydrated
                                                             BPTI in H2O solu-
                                                             tion. The drawing
                                                             shows an all-heavy-
                                                             atom-presentation
                                                             of one of the con-
                                                             formers in Figure
                                                             27 (yellow) covered
                                                             with a layer of hy-
                                                             dration water mole-
                                                             cules (dotted blue
                                                             spheres).


                                                                             255


Figure 29. Intramolecular rate processes in BPTI. The polypeptide backbone is represented
by a grey spline function through the -carbon positions, with the thickness of the line rep-
resenting the spread of the bundle of 20 conformers in Figure 27. Individual rate process-
es and their frequencies are indicated with the following colour code: dark blue, magenta
and red: ring flips of phenylalanine and tyrosine; yellow, exchange between the R- and S-
chiral forms of the disulfide bond at the top; cyan, interior hydration water molecules, with
indication of the exchange rates with the bulk water.




on the correlation function describing the stochastic modulation of the di-
pole–dipole coupling between the interacting protons (Equation [1]) has a
key role. The value of f(c) may be governed either by the Brownian rotation-
al tumbling of the hydrated protein molecule, or by interruption of the dipo-
lar interaction through translational diffusion of the water molecules relative
to the protein surface, whichever is faster. On this basis it could be established
that surface hydration of peptides and proteins is characterized by very short
residence times of the water molecules in the hydration sites, in the range
from about 20 to 300 picoseconds at 10°C. This result presents an intuitive ra-
tionale for the generally observed dynamic disorder of the protein surface
structure (Figure 27), and indicates that the dehydration of the polypeptide
surface will hardly ever be a rate-limiting step either in protein folding or in
intermolecular interactions with proteins.
   The BPTI crystal structure contains four interior hydration water mole-
cules. These are an integral part of the molecular architecture and are inac-
cessible to the solvent in a rigid model of the three-dimensional structure
(Figure 29). The chemical shift dispersion anticipated for these four water
molecules on the basis of the considerations in Figures 5–8 was not observed.
This degeneracy of the chemical shifts of bound water and bulk water was
found to be due to rapid exchange of water molecules in and out of the pro-
tein molecule, with an upper limit on the life-time of about 1 millisecond (53;
as indicated in Figure 29 by the number in parentheses, the actual life times

256


for individual waters may be significantly shorter). Rapid exchange of interior
hydration water molecules appears to be a general property of globular pro-
teins, and was also observed for water molecules located in protein–DNA in-
terfaces, for example, in the DNA complex with the Antennapedia home-
odomain (Figure 2).
   Another intriguing NMR observation of internal protein mobility are the
180°-ring flipping motions of phenylalanine and tyrosine (54). Observation of
these “ring flips” on the millisecond to microsecond time scale (Figure 29) was
a genuine surprise for the following reasons: in the refined X-ray crystal struc-
ture of BPTI reported in 1975, the aromatic rings of phenylalanine and tyro-
sine are among the best-defined side chains, with the smallest temperature fac-
tors. In each ring the relative values of the temperature factors for the
individual atoms increase toward the periphery, so that the largest positional
uncertainty is indicated for the peripheral -carbon atom on the symmetry
axis through the C–C bond, rather than for the four - and -ring carbon
atoms, which undergo extensive movements during the ring flips. Theoretical
studies then resolved this apparent contradiction: the crystallographic tem-
perature factors sample multiple rotation states about the C–C bond, but
they do not manifest the ring flips because the populations of all non-equilib-
rium rotational states about the C–C bond are vanishingly small. Although
the flipping motions about the C–C bond have low frequencies (Figure 29),
they are very rapid 180°-rotations connecting two indistinguishable equilib-
rium orientations of the ring. Similar to the exchange of internal hydration
waters, the ring flip phenomenon is a general feature of globular proteins, ma-
nifesting ubiquitous low-frequency internal motions that have activation ener-
gies of 60 to 100 kJM-1, amplitudes larger than 1 Å, activation volumes of about
50 Å3, and involve concerted displacement of numerous groups of atoms.
Combined with sequence-specific NMR assignments, these experiments pro-
vide high spatio-temporal resolution for the description of rate processes in
proteins. In Figure 29 this is illustrated by a mapping of the frequencies for
ring flips and water exchange onto the NMR structure of BPTI.
   In addition to the ring flips and the exchange of internal hydration water
molecules, the figure 29 includes data on the exchange of a disulfide bond
between the R and S chiral states. In contrast to the other two phenomena,
this rate process connects two different molecular structures.
   Although all the data collected in Figure 29 have been known for more
than a decade, and some of them for nearly three decades, no widely accept-
ed functional interpretation of these low-frequency motional processes has
been advanced. The same holds for the conformational equilibria manifested
by the “protection factors” governing the amide proton exchange rates in
folded proteins (Figures 17 and 21). Quite possibly these NMR measure-
ments are ahead of their times, and represent a source for future novel in-
sights into structure–function correlations in proteins.




                                                                             257


Figure 30. NMR structure determination and molecular weight. The horizontal axis covers
the molecular weight-range 0 – 110’000. The left side shows the molecular weight distribu-
tion of the NMR structures in the protein databank (December 2000). On the right, the
structure of the protein OmpX from E. coli (M ≈ 18000) in DHPC micelles (M ≈ 70 000 for
the mixed micelles) indicates along the horizontal axis the approximate molecular weight
range for NMR structure determination of mixed micelles with membrane proteins that is
presently accessible with the NMR techniques of Figures 31 – 33.




OUTLOOK TO NMR APPLICATIONS IN STRUCTURAL AND
FUNCTIONAL PROTEOMICS
With the availability of a rapidly increasing number of completely sequenced
genomes, new challenges arise for the methods used for three-dimensional
structure determination. On the one hand, “structural genomics” initiatives
in several leading research centers focus on the development of technology
for high-throughput structure determination to generate a comprehensive at-
las of protein folds, so that remaining gaps could be filled by structure pre-
diction methods. There is clearly a lot of room to further enhance the effi-
ciency of each step of the NMR structure determination procedure (Table 1).
On the other hand, we face the situation that newly determined protein
structures should enable us to predict novel functions, whereas in classical
structural biology one encounters more typically the challenge of rationaliz-
ing known functions on the basis of the three-dimensional structure. This
section describes some recent work in our laboratory that may eventually con-
tribute to future strategies for the discovery of new physiological functions
from molecular structure data.
   It has been widely recognized that supplementing the determination of
new protein folds with data on intermolecular interactions may provide a key
for the identification of unknown gene functions. Since efficient use of con-
ventional NMR spectroscopy in solution had been limited to particle sizes
with molecular weights up to about 30’000 (Figure 30, left side), a new chal-

258


                                                         Figure 31. Transverse relax-
                                                         ation-optimized [15N,1H]-
                                                         correlation spectroscopy
                                                         (TROSY). A spectrum of
                                                         the uniformly 2H- and 15N-
                                                         labeled membrane protein
                                                         OmpX reconstituted in
                                                         DHPC micelles is shown
                                                         (750 MHz, 30°C, H2O-solu-
                                                         tion).




lenge for solution NMR techniques then arose from the fact that the
supramolecular structures resulting from interactions of two or several pro-
teins, or of other macromolecular components tend to have high molecular
weights. Although a 30’000-Dalton size limit allowed to work with a large pool
of physiologically interesting proteins, it was hardly compatible with extensive
use of NMR for studies of such supramolecular structures. For example, this
size limit would severely narrow down the range of potential receptor systems
accessible to NMR in drug discovery projects (55, 56), restrict studies of pro-
tein–nucleic acid complexes (Figure 2) to a small number of systems with
modest size, and prevent the use of solution NMR for studies of membrane
proteins, since these have to be reconstituted and solubilized in mixed mi-
celles with detergents or lipids (Figure 30, right side). A few years ago this lim-
itation was successfully challenged, since the size-range for applications of so-
lution NMR techniques could be significantly extended through the
introduction of transverse relaxation-optimized spectroscopy (TROSY) (57).
As an illustration, the figure 31 shows a [15N,1H]-TROSY correlation spectrum
of a membrane protein reconstituted in detergent micelles. Sharp, well-sepa-
rated peaks are obtained in spite of the large size of the mixed micelles
(Figure 30, right side). With the use of the TROSY-principle, the more com-
plex NMR experiments needed for a structure determination with
[2H,13C,15N]-labelled proteins can also be obtained with high quality (58), so
that solution NMR can now be used for de novo membrane protein structure
determination (59).
   The improved quality of the NMR spectra of large structures with the use
of TROSY can be qualitatively rationalized by the following considerations. As
has previously been indicated in the discussion on NOEs (Equation [1]), the
appearance of solution NMR spectra is intimately related to the effective cor-

                                                                                 259


Figure 32. Schematic drawing of the free induction decay (FID) for a large protein with and
without the use of TROSY. The period covered along the time axis is of the order of 100
milliseconds. The FID represents the primary recording of the NMR data in the “time do-
main”, from which the frequency domain spectrum (for example, Figures 18, 19 and 31) is
obtained by Fourier transformation (31, 33).



relation time, c, which characterizes the thermal motions of the molecule
considered. The increase of the c-values in larger structures results in line
broadening due to rapid transverse spin-relaxation. For example, if the spec-
trum of Figure 31 had been recorded with conventional NMR techniques,
most of the resonance lines would not be individually resolved due to severe
line broadening, and one would have experienced a severe loss of sensitivity
for detection of the NMR signals. The reduced sensitivity can be readily ap-
preciated by examination of the “free induction decays” (FID) in the time do-
main data. The figure 32 shows that rapid loss of magnetization in a conven-
tional NMR experiment with a large structure can be slowed down by the use
of TROSY, which corresponds to the reduction of the line width in the fre-
quency domain spectrum. The impact on the sensitivity is visualized in Figure
33 with a simplified scheme for a 2D correlation experiment, which includes
two magnetization transfer periods, and the evolution and acquisition periods.
During evolution and acquisition, the system is not subjected to external
perturbations, and loss of magnetization occurs at a rate determined by the
“transverse relaxation time”. It is readily apparent that rapid loss of magneti-
zation in a conventional NMR experiment (upper trace in Figure 32) leads to
weak or even vanishing signal intensity at the end of the evolution period,
and accordingly the sensitivity for detection of the signal during the acquisi-
tion period is very low. In contrast, one can obtain much improved sensitivity
with the use of TROSY (lower trace in Figure 32), since plenty of signal in-
tensity will be preserved at the end of the evolution period, and the signal can
be recorded with high signal-to-noise ratio during a large portion of the ac-

260


Figure 33. Basic features of a 2D [15N,1H]-correlation experiment. On the left, 1H and 15N in-
dicate radio-frequency channels for irradiation of these isotopes. Yellow shading identifies
the 1H→15N and 15N→1H magnetization transfer periods, T, and pink shading the evolution
and acquisition periods, t1 and t2. During t1 and t2 the decay of the magnetization (FID) is
schematically indicated. The overall duration of the experiment, 2T+t1+t2, can be of the or-
der of 10 to 1000 milliseconds, depending on the size of the structure studied and the in-
tended purpose of the measurement.



quisition period. Following such considerations for minimizing the loss of
magnetization during all four time periods indicated in Figure 33, and with
additional optimization of the magnetization transfer techniques (60), solu-
tion NMR spectra have by now been recorded for structures with molecular
weights up to 870’000. In the spectrum of the co-chaperonin GroES bound to
the chaperonin GroEL (Figure 34), resonance lines that provided novel in-




                                                            Figure 34. [15N,1H]-correlation
                                                            spectrum of the co-chaperonin
                                                            GroES (M ≈ 70000) bound to
                                                            the chaperonin GroEL (M ≈
                                                            800 000). The spectrum was
                                                            recorded with a [15N,1H]-
                                                            CRIPT-TROSY experiment (60,
                                                            61). The red and blue colour-
                                                            ing is explained in the text.

                                                                                         261


Figure 35. NMR structure of the membrane protein OmpX reconstituted in DHPC micelles.
Front and back views of a space-filling model of OmpX are shown, with pink and green col-
oring identifying the surface area of the protein that is in contact with DHPC molecules in
the mixed micelles. The two broken horizontal lines indicate the thickness of the lipid
phase in the E. coli cell membrane.




formation on structural and dynamic features of the GroES–GroEL interface
are colored in red and blue (61).
   The principal contributions to the rate of transverse spin-relaxation can be
traced to two different types of interactions, i.e., dipole–dipole coupling of
the observed spin with other, nearby spins, and chemical shift anisotropy
(CSA) (28). These interactions are modulated by the stochastic rotational
motions in solution, and as a consequence the rate of transverse relaxation in-
creases for larger structures with slower Brownian motions. TROSY exploits
constructive interference between the two relaxation mechanisms, and actu-
ally uses CSA-relaxation at high fields to cancel the dipolar relaxation (57). In
this way the appearance of the NMR spectrum is effectively uncoupled from
the Brownian motions, which then enables the recording of solution NMR
spectra with large structures.
   It remains to be seen how these new NMR techniques will be employed
most profitably in the future. Intriguing possibilities include that NMR can
now be employed in drug discovery projects with very large receptors (55,
56). Combined with suitable isotope-labelling strategies, TROSY-based NMR
techniques have also been shown to provide a powerful approach for investi-
gations of intermolecular interactions in supramolecular structures with two
or several macromolecular components (62, 63). In these applications, a de-
tailed structural interpretation of the NMR data will in most instances be de-
pendent on the availability of an independently determined atomic-resolu-
tion structure for one or multiple components, which may have been
obtained either by NMR in solution or by diffraction methods in single crys-

262


Figure 36. My collaborators at the ETH Zürich from 1970 to 2002.




tals. Applications of the new NMR techniques for de novo determination of
large structures appears to be particularly attractive for, but not limited to,
nucleic acid–protein complexes and small membrane proteins reconstituted
in soluble detergent or lipid micelles. The characterization of a membrane
protein structure has also been extended to include the detergents in the
mixed micelles (Figure 35) (64), since the areas of the protein surface in con-
tact with the detergent molecules could be delineated by the observation of
intermolecular NOEs between hydrogen atoms of the protein and the deter-
gent. In these particular mixed micelles this surface area is virtually identical
to the protein surface in contact with the lipid phase in the biological mem-
brane. Since this leaves both ends of the -barrel of OmpX freely accessible
to the aqueous solvent, this reconstitution system should also be suitable for
functional studies of the membrane protein with NMR.
   This last section of my presentation certainly indicates only a narrow range
of potential further developments of solution NMR techniques and their ap-
plications in structural biology and structural proteomics. I look forward with
great expectations to the future evolution of this awesome and beautiful tech-
nique, which has given me so many years of joy and excitement in studies of
the molecules of life.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
From 1970 through 2002, 229 students, postdoctoral research associates, and
technical and administrative staff worked with me at the ETH Zürich. I am
deeply indebted to all of them for their enthusiasm and dedication, which re-
sulted in the work summarized in this article. Their names are collected in
Figure 36, and individual contributions can be recognized in the reference
list. Although human minds stand behind all progress in science, the success

                                                                             263


of our research projects also depended critically on financial resources. I
would like to acknowledge the ETH Zürich, the Swiss National Science
Foundation, the Kommission für Technologie und Innovation (KTI), Bruker-
Biospin AG, and the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, CA, USA, for their
support.


REFERENCES
 1. Qian, Y.Q., Billeter, M., Otting, G., Müller, M., Gehring, W.J. and Wüthrich, K. (1989)
    Cell 59, 573–580. The structure of the Antennapedia homeodomain determined by
    NMR spectroscopy in solution: comparison with prokaryotic repressors.
 2. Otting, G., Qian, Y.Q., Billeter, M., Müller, M., Affolter, M., Gehring, W.J. and
    Wüthrich, K. (1990) EMBO J. 9, 3085–3092. Protein–DNA contacts in the structure of
    a homeodomain–DNA complex determined by nuclear magnetic resonance spec-
    troscopy in solution.
 3. Lopez Garcia, F., Zahn, R., Riek, R. and Wüthrich, K. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
    97, 8334–8399. NMR structure of the bovine prion protein.
 4. Wüthrich, K. (1986) NMR of Proteins and Nucleic Acids, Wiley, New York.
 5. Wüthrich, K. (1995) Acta Cryst. D 51, 249–270. NMR–this other method for protein
    and nucleic acid structure determination.
 6. Wüthrich, K. (1995) NMR in Structural Biology: A Collection of Papers by Kurt Wüthrich,
    World Scientific, Singapore.
 7. Wüthrich, K. (2001) Nature Struct. Biol. 8, 923–925. The way to NMR structures of pro-
    teins.
 8. Saunders, M. and Wishnia, A. (1958) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 70, 870–874. Nuclear mag-
    netic resonance spectra of proteins.
 9. Jardetzky, O. and Jardetzky, C.D. (1958) J. Biol. Chem. 233, 383–387. Proton magnetic
    resonance spectra of amino acids.
10. Kowalsky, A. (1962) J. Biol. Chem. 237, 1807–1819. Nuclear magnetic resonance studies
    of proteins.
11. Mandel, M. (1965) J. Biol. Chem. 240, 1586–1592. Proton magnetic resonance spectra
    of some proteins.
12. McDonald, C.C. and Phillips, W.D. (1967) J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 89, 6332–6341.
    Manifestations of the tertiary structures of proteins in high-frequency nuclear mag-
    netic resonance.
13. Wüthrich, K. (1969) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 63, 1071–1078. High resolution proton
    nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of cytochrome c.
14. Shulman, R.G., Ogawa, S., Wüthrich, K., Yamane, T., Peisach, J. and Blumberg, W.E.
    (1969) Science 165, 251–257. The absence of “heme–heme” interactions in hemoglo-
    bin.
15. Davis, D.G., Lindstrom, T.R., Mock, N.H., Baldassare, J.J., Charache, S., Jones, R.T.
    and Ho, C. (1971) J. Mol. Biol. 60, 101–111. NMR studies of hemoglobins VI: heme
    proton spectra of human deoxyhemoglobins and their relevance to the nature of co-
    operative oxygenation of haemoglobin.
16. Kurland, R.J., Davis, D.G. and Ho, C. (1968) J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 90, 2700–2701.
    Paramagnetic proton NMR shifts of metmyoglobin, methemoglobin, and hemin de-
    rivatives.
17. Wüthrich, K. (1970) Structure and Bonding 8, 53–121. Structural studies of hemes and
    hemoproteins by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
18. Shulman, R.G., Glarum, S.H. and Karplus, M. (1971) J. Mol. Biol. 57, 93–115.
    Electronic structure of cyanide complexes of hemes and heme proteins.
19. Wüthrich, K. (1976) NMR in Biological Research: Peptides and Proteins, North Holland,
    Amsterdam.

264


20. Noggle, J.H. and Schirmer, R.E. (1971) The Nuclear Overhauser Effect, Academic Press,
    New York.
21. Gibbons, W.A., Alms, H., Bockman, R.S. and Wyssbrod, H.R. (1972) Biochemistry 11,
    1721–1725. Homonuclear INDOR spectroscopy as a means of simplifying and analyz-
    ing proton magnetic resonance spectra of peptides and as a basis for determining sec-
    ondary and tertiary conformations of complex peptides.
22. Gupta, R.K. and Redfield, A.G. (1970) Science 169, 1204–1206. Double resonance
    NMR observation of electron exchange between ferri- and ferrocytochrome c.
23. Balaram, P., Bothner-By, A.A. and Dadok, J. (1972) J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 94, 4015–4017.
    Negative nuclear Overhauser effects as probes of macromolecular structure.
24. Solomon, I. (1955) Phys. Rev. 99, 559–565. Relaxation processes in a system of two
    spins.
25. Kalk, A. and Berendsen, H.J.C. (1976) J. Magn. Reson. 24, 343–366. Proton magnetic
    relaxation and spin diffusion in proteins.
26. Gordon, S.L. and Wüthrich, K. (1978) J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 100, 7094–7096. Transient
    proton–proton Overhauser effects in horse ferrocytochrome c.
27. Wagner, G. and Wüthrich, K. (1979) J. Magn. Reson. 33, 675–680. Truncated driven
    nuclear Overhauser effect (TOE): a new technique for studies of selective 1H–1H
    Overhauser effects in the presence of spin diffusion.
28. Abragam, A. (1961) Principles of Nuclear Magnetism, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
29. Keller, R.M. and Wüthrich, K. (1978) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 83, 1132–1139.
    Evolutionary change of the heme c electronic structure: ferricytochrome c-551 from
    Pseudomonas aeruginosa and horse heart ferricytochrome c.
30. Dubs, A., Wagner, G. and Wüthrich, K. (1979) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 577, 177–194.
    Individual assignments of amide proton resonances in the proton NMR spectrum of
    the basic pancreatic trypsin inhibitor.
31. Ernst, R.R. (1992) Angew. Chemie –Int. Ed. 31, 805-823. Nuclear magnetic resonance
    Fourier transform spectroscopy.
32. Wider, G., Macura, S., Anil Kumar, Ernst, R.R. and Wüthrich, K. (1984) J. Magn. Reson.
    56, 207–234. Homonuclear two-dimensional 1H NMR of proteins: experimental pro-
    cedures.
33. Ernst, R.R., Bodenhausen, G. and Wokaun, A. (1987) Principles of Nuclear Magnetic
    Resonance in One and Two Dimensions, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
34. Wagner, G. and Wüthrich, K. (1982) J. Mol. Biol. 155, 347–366. Sequential resonance
    assignments in protein 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectra: basic pancreatic
    trypsin inhibitor.
35. Wagner, G., Anil-Kumar and Wüthrich, K. (1981) Eur. J. Biochem. 114, 375–384.
    Systematic application of two-dimensional 1H nuclear magnetic resonance techniques
    for studies of proteins 2: combined use of correlated spectroscopy and nuclear
    Overhauser spectroscopy for sequential assignments of backbone resonances and elu-
    cidation of polypeptide secondary structures.
36. Billeter, M., Braun, W. and Wüthrich, K. (1982) J. Mol. Biol. 155, 321–346. Sequential
    resonance assignments in protein 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectra: computa-
    tion of sterically allowed proton–proton distances and statistical analysis of
    proton–proton distances in single crystal protein conformations.
37. Wüthrich, K., Billeter, M. and Braun, W. (1984) J. Mol. Biol. 180, 715–740. Polypeptide
    secondary structure determination by nuclear magnetic resonance observation of
    short proton–proton distances.
38. Pardi, A., Billeter, M. and Wüthrich, K. (1984) J. Mol. Biol. 180, 741–751. Calibration
    of the angular dependence of the amide proton–Ca proton coupling constants,
    3
      JHNa, in a globular protein: use of 3JHN for identification of helical secondary struc-
    ture.
39. Wüthrich, K., Wider, G., Wagner, G. and Braun, W. (1982) J. Mol. Biol. 155, 311–319.
    Sequential resonance assignments as a basis for determination of spatial protein struc-
    tures by high resolution proton nuclear magnetic resonance.


                                                                                         265


40. Braun, W., Bösch, C., Brown, L.R., Gō, N. and Wüthrich, K. (1981) Biochim. Biophys.
    Acta 667, 377–396. Combined use of proton–proton Overhauser enhancements and
    a distance geometry algorithm for determination of polypeptide conformations: ap-
    plication to micelle-bound glucagon.
41. Havel, T.F. and Wüthrich, K. (1984) Bull. Math. Biol. 46, 673–698. A distance geometry
    program for determining the structures of small proteins and other macromolecules
    from nuclear magnetic resonance measurements of intramolecular 1H–1H proximities
    in solution.
42. Havel, T.F. and Wüthrich, K. (1985) J. Mol. Biol. 182, 281–294. An evaluation of the
    combined use of nuclear magnetic resonance and distance geometry for the deter-
    mination of protein conformations in solution.
43. Williamson, M.P., Havel, T.F. and Wüthrich, K. (1985) J. Mol. Biol. 182, 295–315.
    Solution conformation of proteinase inhibitor IIA from bull seminal plasma by 1H nu-
    clear magnetic resonance and distance geometry.
44. Wagner, G. (1993) J. Biomol. NMR 3, 375–385. Prospects for NMR of large proteins.
45. Kay, L.E. and Gardner, K.H. (1997) Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7, 564–570. Solution NMR
    spectroscopy beyond 25 kDa.
46. Bax, A. and Grzesiek, S. (1993) Accounts Chem. Res. 26, 131–138. Methodological
    advances in protein NMR.
47. Wider, G. (1998) Prog. Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spectr. 32, 193–275. Technical aspects of NMR
    spectroscopy with biological macromolecules and studies of hydration in solution.
48. Otting, G. and Wüthrich, K. (1990) Q. Rev. Biophys. 23, 39–96. Heteronuclear filters in
    two-dimensional [1H,1H]-NMR spectroscopy: combined use with isotope labelling for
    studies of macromolecular conformation and intermolecular interactions.
49. Güntert, P. (1998) Q. Rev. Biophys. 31, 145–237. Structure calculation of biological
    macromolecules from NMR data.
50. Moseley, H.N.B. & Montelione, G.T. (1999) Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 9, 635–642.
    Automated analysis of NMR assignments and structures for proteins.
51. Herrmann, T., Güntert, P. and Wüthrich, K. (2002) J. Biomol. NMR 24, 171–189.
    Protein NMR structure determination with automated NOE-identification in the
    NOESY spectra using the new software ATNOS.
52. Luginbühl, P. and Wüthrich, K. (2002) Progr. Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spectr. 40, 199–247.
    Semi-classical nuclear spin relaxation theory revisited for use with biological macro-
    molecules.
53. Otting, G., Liepinsh, E. and Wüthrich, K. (1991) Science 254, 974–980. Protein hydra-
    tion in aqueous solution.
54. Wüthrich, K. and Wagner, G. (1975) FEBS Lett. 50, 265–268. NMR investigations of the
    dynamics of the aromatic amino acid residues in the basic pancreatic trypsin inhibitor.
55. Shuker S.B., Hajduk P.J., Meadows R.P. and Fesik S.W. (1996) Science 274, 1531–1534.
    Discovering high-affinity ligands for proteins: SAR by NMR.
56. Pellecchia, M., Sem, D.S. and Wüthrich, K. (2002) Nature Rev. Drug Disc. 1, 211–219.
    NMR in drug discovery.
57. Pervushin, K., Riek, R., Wider, G. and Wüthrich, K. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
    94, 12366–12371. Attenuated T2 relaxation by mutual cancellation of dipole–dipole
    coupling and chemical shift anisotropy indicates an avenue to NMR structures of very
    large biological macromolecules in solution.
58. Salzmann, M., Pervushin, K., Wider, G., Senn, H. and Wüthrich, K. (1998) Proc. Natl.
    Acad. Sci. USA 95, 13585–13590. TROSY in triple-resonance experiments: new per-
    spectives for sequential NMR assignment of large proteins.
59. Fernández, C., Hilty, C., Bonjour, S., Adeishvili, K., Pervushin, K. and Wüthrich, K.
    (2001) FEBS Lett. 504, 173–178. Solution NMR studies of the integral membrane pro-
    teins OmpX and OmpA from Escherichia coli.
60. Riek, R., Wider, G., Pervushin, K. and Wüthrich, K. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
    96, 4918–4923. Polarization transfer by cross-correlated relaxation in solution NMR
    with very large molecules.


266


61. Fiaux, J., Bertelsen, E., Horwich, A. and Wüthrich, K. (2002) Nature 418, 207–211.
    NMR analysis of a 900K GroEL–GroES complex.
62. Pellecchia, M., Sebbel, P., Hermanns, U., Wüthrich, K. and Glockshuber, R. (1999)
    Nature Struct. Biol. 6, 336–339. Pilus chaperone FimC–adhesin FimH interactions
    mapped by TROSY-NMR.
63. Frickel, E.M., Riek, R., Jelesarov, I., Helenius, A., Wüthrich, K. and Ellgaard, L. (2002)
    Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 1954–1959. TROSY-NMR reveals interaction between
    ERp57 and the tip of the calreticulin P-domain.
64. Fernández, C., Hilty, C., Wider, G. and Wüthrich, K. (2002) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
    99, 13533–13537. Lipid–protein interactions in DHPC micelles containing the inte-
    gral membrane protein OmpX investigated by NMR spectroscopy.




                                                                                         267
