                              KURT A     LDER



        Diene synthesis and related reaction types
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1950



                               The Precursors

Since the Nobel Foundation was first established, the Royal Swedish Acad-
emy of Sciences has deemed two advances in the field of organic chemical
synthesis worthy of distinction by the award of a Nobel Prize. These were
V. Grignard’s discovery of the organomagnesium compounds and their ap-
plication for preparative purposes, and P. Sabatier’s discovery of catalytic
hydrogenation, i.e. the addition of elementary hydrogen to unsaturated
compounds by means of contact catalysts. Both methods were very soon
introduced into all laboratories, where they became indispensable for the
everyday preparative work (which would now be unthinkable without
them), and both - especially the latter - have been introduced, in progres-
sively improved form, ever more widely into industrial technology.
   There has also been a third advance in the preparative field, namely diene
synthesis, which is now a routine working method in organic chemistry.
And it is for the discovery and development of this process that my colleague
Diels and I have this year received the highest honour in the form of the
Nobel Prize for Chemistry.
   Two substances and their behaviour seem to me to be particularly suited
for a description of the situation which served as the point of departure for
the developments initiated by Diels and myself in 1927, namely cyclopen-
tadiene and isoprene.
    Cyclopentadiene (I) is characterized, as far as its reactive properties are
concerned, by two factors: the presence of two (conjugated) double bonds,
and the mobility of its hydrogen atoms in the methylene group. This theory
is based on general experience, gained at an early date, in the conversion of
this substance with agents such as bromine and alkali metals. When sub-
sequently (1906) it was discovered that the hydrocarbon derivative quinone
undergoes addition with extreme facility, the most obvious thing was to
 attribute this process to the same factors and to discuss the following pos-
sibilities


268                              1950 K.ALDER




      (1)




                                                            1
   The formula        first recommended by its discoverer is based on the
assumption that a methylenic hydrogen atom is displaced from the cyclopen-
tadiene range to the quinone range, whereas the subsequently suggested
interpretations and assume the interplay between the double bonds of
the two partners to be - each in its own way - a case of straightforward
addition. As there was no proof of the constitution of the addition product,
there was equal justification for all the hypotheses so long as they rested only
on unreliable analogies.
   True, in the light of a further observation on cyclopentadiene the choice
appeared temporarily to lie between reactions α and       The mutual formation
of two double bonds and the formation of a four-membered carbon ring (III)
was proved in the case of an addition product of dimethylketene (II) with
cyclopentadiene2 :


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                       269
   The parallel between these two processes seems obvious, but in fact does
not hold. Only very much later was it shown that this reaction is very
largely confined to ketenes and that it cannot be carried over to the addition
of quinone to cyclopentadiene or to the addition of cyclopentadiene to
similar substances, i.e. to the polymerization of cyclopentadiene.
   This discovery was, however, the fruit of later work. For the time being
the addition of ketene seemed quite obvious as a paradigm for the other
additions accompanied by the formation of C-C bonds. Indeed, even at that
time, other analogies showed that a reaction in accordance with formula
was possible, in particular the addition of azodicarboxylic ester to cyclopen-
tadiene, which can be proved to take place in accordance with formula y
                                                                             3
although it is accompanied by formation not of C-C but of C-N bonds .
   Two observations on isoprene (IV) pointed in the same direction. The
classical dipentene synthesis (V) dating from 18854 requires relatively high
temperatures and gives poor yields. This may account for the fact that for
decades it was regarded as an exceptional case.




   It was not until 19205 that as a second contribution of this kind the addi-
tion of two molecules of isoprene to quinone - in a very smooth reaction -
was described and the process was given the substantially correct although as
yet unproved formula6.




   In view of this situation - three types of reaction side by side, with an
indefinite boundary between them - a need for classification and systematiza-
tion was inevitably felt. There was only one certain way of achieving this
objective, namely by establishing the constitution of the addition products
by direct proofs. Today, now that we have highly developed methods of


270                              1950 K.ALDER

proof and plenty of reliable cases to draw on, it is difficult to imagine that
at that time it was the search for provable cases which necessitated a variation
of the two addenda - cyclopentadiene or isoprene on the one hand and
quinone on the other. The shift of interest to the prototype of the dienes,
butadiene, and the important step from quinone to maleic acid, which was
later followed by those to acrylic acid and acrolein, led so inevitably to the
     7
goal that our principle of a successive structural modification of the com-
ponents remained the "leitmotiv" of our joint work. Subsequently, con-
tributions on the same subject, though occasioned by the widest variety of
causes, have been made on a rapidly increasing scale by many other authors,
and have gradually built up a complete picture of these reactions.



                            The General Formula

The feature common to all these processes is the formation of a six-membered
carbon ring by a direct union, i.e. a union without adjuvant substances, of
two unsaturated partners. One of these, the diene component, is the carrier
of a system of conjugated double bonds whilst the other, the "philodiene",
must have at least one double bond. The addition usually takes place in
accordance with the following scheme:




   This basically uniform picture acquires its undreamed-of wealth of varia-
tions of all kinds thanks to the individual peculiarities of the reaction partner,
in other words: thanks to the different substituents. These substituents are
variables which, with the well-known profusion of forms of organic mol-
ecules, are available in true abundance.
   From the great variety of these possibilities a large number have been
realized by very many different authors in the course of over twenty years’
development. Their results can be summarized by saying that in the over-
whelming majority of cases they follow this basic formula, irrespective of


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                        271

whether they belong to the ideal cases which proceed with absolute ease or
whether they require high temperatures, and irrespective of whether their
addition products are stable or sensitive to heat. For them the 6-ring forma-
tion is undoubtedly a law.


                             The diene component

In this lecture I shall not dwell on the normal cases, for I can scarcely take
up your time with matters which today are learnt by any beginner and have
to a large extent been tested and proved and therefore no longer have the
attraction of novelty.
   However, in order to give at least a very rough idea of the scope of the
basic formula and of the nature and multiplicity of the substituents, I have
summarized in two tables the primary types of the cases hitherto investigated.
In these tables, wherever a representative of the one reacts with a represent-
ative of the other, this reaction is in accordance with the formula of diene
synthesis.
    The range of validity of the basic formula is very wide; it extends from
the simplest case of butadiene and of the acyclic dienes (VI) to the alicyclic
combinations, in which both double bonds are situated in one ring (VII), or
are spread over a ring and a side-chain (VIII) or two rings (IX). In addition
to this, various empirical findings have shown that the basic formula does
not lose its validity even if, as in the case of styrene (X), methylene anthrone
(XI) or other "semi-aromatics", one of the double bonds of the conjugated
system belongs to an aromatic nucleus or if, as in the case of the anthracene
type (XIV), both double bonds be1 ong to an aromatic system. No diene
syntheses have so far been observed with mononuclear benzene derivatives
(XII), and according to very recent findings8 they do not occur in the case
of binuclear derivatives of the naphthalene type, unless at least one of the
 two nuclei is highly alkylated. Heterocyclic dienes of the furan type (XVI)
and of the coumalin type (XV) give diene synthesis, but simple derivatives
of thiophen (XVII) do not. We shall be discussing the behaviour of pyrrole
(XVIII) later on (p. 277).
    Acyclic tri- and tetraenes - in the simplest case hexatriene (XIX) - show
normal behaviour with diene synthesis, i.e. they too add philodienes in ac-
cordance with the formula of the 6-ring formation. The predictable forma-
 tion of higher-membered rings by 1,6- or 1,8-addition has not yet been
 confirmed empirically, at least not with acyclic tri- or polyenes, on which


272                            1950 K.ALDER

                               Table of dienes




extensive experimental data9, 10 are available. Their cyclic analogues such as
cycloheptatriene(XX)11 and cyclooctatetraene (XXI) are likewise capable
                                                       12



of diene synthesis - indeed, to a very impressive extent - thanks to the na-
ture of their double-bond systems.


                            The philodiene partner

The basic formula of addition characterizes the philodiene as a derivative of
ethylene. Precisely in this group, extensive experience has shown that not


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                        273
every olefine bond adds equally rapidly, but that the absorption capacity of
the bonds depends to a large extent on constitutional conditions.
   The α, β-unsaturated carbonyl compounds (XXII-XXX) are at the head
of the entire group. They provide optimum conditions for adaptation to
diene synthesis. Recognition of this fact, especially in the case of the p -qui
none series (XXII), maleic anhydride (XXIII), acrylic acid (XXIV) and
acrolein (XXV), constituted the decisive step in the discovery of the new
method 7. Subsequently these compounds also played a decisive part in the
efforts to arrive at a thorough understanding of diene synthesis, and work
on the adaptation of it to industrial purposes was, and still is, based pri-
marily on them.

                              Table of philodienes




I must confine myself here to a brief survey of the philodiene class, with
a rapid glance at its principal representatives, without attempting to go into
any details.
   Beside the α,β-unsaturated carbonyl compounds there are also the nitriles
of                   carboxylic acids (XXVI). The great tendency of many
dienes to dimerize in accordance with the formula of the "partial 1,4-addi-


274                             1950 K.ALDER

tion" explains why the simple dienes C=C-C=C (XXVII) can also act as
philodienes.
   Vinyl compounds (XXVIII), such as are now being produced industrially
on a large scale for other purposes from acetylene react like allyl compounds
(XXIX) with dienes in accordance with the diene synthesis formula; the
same applies to hydrocarbons such as styrene, indene, propylene, and the
simplest structure of this type, ethylene (XXX) - last but certainly not least
of the series of philodiene components.
  Within this wide range of olefine compounds the ketenes must be spe-
cially mentioned as the only exception so far known. They add dienes with
the mutual elimination of one double bond each and with formation of
derivatives of cyclobutane (XXXIV):

                               R     R




                                                (XXXIV)

This rare case, which is undoubtedly due to the characteristic accumula-
tion of double bonds in the ketene system, was first observed and defined
long before diene synthesis was recognized as a general principle. The forma-
tion of four-membered rings from ketene and dienes has recently been con-
firmed many times over 13. It is clearly an addition form typical of the ke-
tenes, or in other words the ketenes cannot act as philodienes in the above-
defined sense. Whether and to what extent this rule also applies to the allenes
H2C=C=CH 2, which are closely related to the ketenes, is a question which
still remains to be answered.
   On the other hand, the derivatives of acetylene also fit without limitation
into the general formula for diene synthesis:


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                         275
   Acetylene dicarboxylic acid (XXXI), propiolic acid (XXXII), and other
acetylene derivatives have proved themselves to be very productive philo-
dienes. Their doubly unsaturated addition products (XXXV) constitute a
supplement - for many purposes ideal - to the addition products of the ole-
fine series.


                       The role of maleic and fumaric acid

The results obtained from and the problem raised by diene synthesis from
the point of view of general methodology are the subject of my lecture. I
shall therefore not go into details on the many applications - which in course
of time this method has made possible - for the analysis and determination
of the constitution of organic compounds, and for preparative and industrial
purposes. Instead, allow me here to make a brief observation.
   I have already implied that, with regard to method, the step from quinone
to maleic anhydride was of decisive importance in the development of diene
synthesis. The propensity of maleic anhydride, and with it of related sub-
stances, to act as philodienes, which this revealed, is so complete that it could
not escape our attention. The suspicion that this was the case was subse-
quently confirmed, and indeed is continually being strengthened as expe-
rience grows, and I should scarcely be going too far if I said that the suit-
ability of substances of this type for preparative chemistry was discovered
only with diene synthesis - almost exactly a hundred years after maleic acid
and its close relative fumaric acid had first been isolated from plant material.
Several decades after their discovery they became the focus of theoretical
discussions, when the ideas of Van ‘t Hoff and Le Bel on the arrangement of
the atoms in space threw the first light on their hitherto problematic relations
to one another. Having been recognized as examples of cis- and trans-isomer-
ic forms, and accepted as classical types, they ceased to be of immediate
interest, until some decades later, fumaric acid - after being found by Thun-
berg and Wieland to be a transitional product in the metabolism of carbo-
hydrates - attracted the attention of physiologists.
   Despite this importance with regard to theoretical and biochemical prob-
lems, maleic and fumaric acid remained laboratory and academic prepara-
tions, which were more or less difficult to produce, and provided scarcely
any greater incentive to efforts in the field of synthetic organic chemistry
than any other olefine.
   In the history of chemistry there can be few similar cases where sub-


276                             1950 K.ALDER

stances which during a hundred years’ existence were repeatedly in the fore-
front of scientific development and then suddenly revealed a latent capacity
and - so to speak, overnight - attracted the interest not only of a few spe-
cialists but of a wide range of workers in pure and applied organic chem-
istry. Thus, today it is difficult to find a type of unsaturated compound whose
reaction with maleic anhydride has not been investigated, at least provi-
sionally. The interest shown by industry in this development is reflected in
the number of applications for patents based on combinations of maleic and
fumaric acid, their homologues and functional derivatives, with an extreme-
ly wide variety of unsaturated compounds. Present efforts to develop in-
expensive methods of producing maleic and fumaric acid from substances
such as benzene, crotonaldehyde, and furfural originated in the needs which
have arisen from the new applications of these substances.
   After this diversion I should like to turn my attention to the nature of the
reaction. Here, too, the importance of maleic and fumaric acid will re-
peatedly find expression - even in the extreme case of pyrrole, which I shall
now discuss.


                             Substituting Addition

                    Substituting addition to the double bond

One of our series of investigations was concerned with testing the reactions
of the systems




with maleic anhydride. The similarity is obvious: true pentacyclic systems,
all characterized by the presence of a pair of conjugated double bonds, the
first belonging to the isocyclic, the rest to the heterocyclic series.
   It had already been established that cyclopentadiene (XXXVI) adds maleic
anhydride with unusual facility and that this process constitutes the ideal case
of diene synthesis.


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                        277
   Furan (XXXVII), on the other hand, showed only differences of degree.
The product of addition to maleic anhydride was less stable, and a determina-
tion of its constitution left no doubt that in its formation the same principle
was at work as in the case of cyclopentadiene.
   Thiophen (XXXVIII) under the same external conditions does not react
at all with maleic anhydride, a result which it has so far been impossible to
alter even by forcing the experimental conditions. However, thiophen may
not be such an exceptional case as this might suggest. It is well known that
in thiophen interaction between the double bonds and the sulphur atom
brings about an internal equilibrium which can be compared with that of
benzene and which expresses itself in a startling similarity in chemical and
physical behaviour between the two substances. Benzene is likewise in-
capable of diene synthesis. But in the same way as the benzene system assumes
the character of a diene with more highly condensed types, i.e. it acquires a
capacity for attaching maleic anhydride in the 1,4 position, so the arrange-
ment of the thiophen, when embedded in relatively complex systems, at-
tains the same capacity for true diene synthesis.
   The situation with pyrrole (XXXIX) is different14. This substance reacts
very readily with maleic anhydride. These additions, however, are not diene
syntheses, but rather result in the setting-up of only one double bond while
at the same time displacing a hydrogen atom from the range of the one
component to that of the other. According to their products, these, like
diene syntheses, are additions; according to their nature they are undoubted-
ly substitution processes. I have therefore suggested for them the name
"substituting addition".




It was subsequently found that maleic anhydride reacts in accordance with
the formula of substituting addition not only with pyrrole but also with
many other nitrogen-containing heterocyclics, such as pyrazole, glyoxaline,
indole, etc. The study of this vast subject is not yet complete, and we shall
not be examining it in any further detail here. The main result lies in the
proof that maleic anhydride is not only an ideal philodiene in diene syn-
thesis but is also particularly suitable as a hydrogen acceptor in substituting
additions.


278                              1950 K.ALDER

  We describe this category of substituting addition - namely where a hy-
drogen atom of the group C=CH is detached - as "substituting addition at
the double bond", thus distinguishing it from processes of a similar kind,
which will now be discussed.


                   Substituting addition in the allyl position

The beginnings of this development were prompted by statements in the
patent literature, according to which maleic anhydride can be added even to
singly unsaturated hydrocarbons at 150-250°C16. This gives rise to addition
products which contain the components in the molar ratio of 1 : 1, and which
at first were all classified as "substituted succinic acids".
   For an understanding of the phenomenon of substituting addition we con-
sidered it important that these statements should be supplemented by sys-
tematic experiments and that the constitution of the addition products
should be determined for certain.
   We established that ethylene itself is not capable of forming a simple addi-
tion product with maleic anhydride, at least not under the same conditions
as those under which other olefines are transformed more or less easily. The
next higher homologue, propylene (XL), reacts with maleic anhydride and
was found to give allyl succinic acid (XLI) as its typical and only reaction
product.


        DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                              279
   As a result of these experiments, therefore, we found that the additions of
maleic anhydride in these cases were the same as the additions to pyrrole
and other nitrogen-containing heterocyclics in so far as, like them, they con-
stituted "substituting additions", but that they took place not at a carbon
atom of the double bond but at the carbon atom adjacent to it, i.e. in the
allyl position.




Thus, the processes of this class seemed to obey a general rule, namely that
hydrogen atoms in the vicinity of the double bond are "loosened", and that
in the case of substitution reactions - e.g. as a result of the action of Cl 2, O2
and SeO 2 - they usually tend to be eliminated.
   And yet this interpretation of our experiments on the action of maleic
anhydride on mono-olefines is incorrect in one vital respect - a conclusion
to which extension of our experimental work gradually led us. I will antic-
ipate the result in order to avoid unnecessary digressions.
   Our experimental results, which are summarized above, are also suscep-
tible of a different interpretation with the same degree of probability: sub-
stituting addition of maleic anhydride to the olefine need not necessarily
take place at C3, but may also take place at C 1, provided that in this case the
double bond "shifts" from the C 1, C2 into the C2, C3 position. In this case,
too, the hydrogen is detached from C 3:




There is scarcely any need to point out that in the cases so far mentioned
both assumptions, which we distinguish as direct (a) and indirect (b) sub-
stituting addition17, are equally justified. This applies in general to all olefines,
in which the "shift" of the double bond leads to a substance identical with
the original:



Differentiation is possible only where this condition is no longer fulfilled.
  We came upon the first case of this type with allylbenzene (XIII). Here
the structures to be expected in accordance with a or b are different from


280                             1950 K.ALDER

one another. An investigation shows clearly that the reaction proceeds in
accordance with formula b.




We transferred this finding to other olefines of the allylbenzene type, e.g.




In all these cases the process of "indirect substituting addition", which is
accompanied by "shifting" of the double bond, always occurs, even where
it cannot, for formal reasons, be distinguished from the alternative of a
"direct substituting addition", at least in so far as additions of maleic anhy-
dride are concerned17.
   This finding opens up important prospects for our subject and for its future
development. It enables the two processes of diene synthesis and substituting
addition, which appear to be essentially different, to be examined from the
same viewpoint. Diene synthesis is an ideal addition process based on inter-
action between the double-bond systems of two partners. In view of the
migration of the double bond in the substituting addition processes, which
has regularly been observed, it can be concluded that these processes are based
on a similar effect and that here the group C=C-C-H assumes the func-
tion of the conjugated system C=C-C=C in diene synthesis.


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                        281
  A comparison of the two processes:




brings out their similarity: in both cases the double bond remaining after
the addition process occupies the same position, and in both cases three bonds,
i.e. six electrons, change their function. Instead of cyclization, as in diene
synthesis, dislocation of the hydrogen atom occurs in substituting addition.
It is well known that the dualism (addition-substitution) has always aroused
the interest of those whose aim it has been to develop organic chemical
methods and to improve and perfect means of describing them. A first at-
tempt to deal with this dualism was made by Kekulé, who put forward the
theory that every substitution is preceded by an addition. I cannot help
thinking that the substituting addition of maleic anhydride is better suited
than that of the substances previously studied to fit in with this view and to
bring us closer to an understanding of the nature of substitution.



        Combination of Diene Synthesis and Substituting Addition

In view of the existence of two definite forms of reaction of maleic anhydride
it was possible to foresee cases where both would occur jointly with one
another. Two of these seem to me worth special mention - divinylmethane
and styrene.

                           The divinylmethane type

In the first case (XLIII) the maleic anhydride reaction begins, as might be
expected, with a substituting addition (a).


282                             1950 K.ALDER




  The "shift" of the double bond connected with this, leads to the formation
of a conjugation and thus creates the condition necessary for subsequent
diene synthesis (b). Since the first reaction is slower than the second, it is
impossible to isolate the primary product (XLIV). The result18 of this trans-
formation sequence is the addition product (XLV), which constitutes a
combination of acyclic and cyclic succinic acid. The dianhydride (XLV) -
as we have now found - is for its part capable of further characteristic intra-
molecular changes, a discussion of which would be out of place here.
   As prototype of the cyclic divinylmethane types we also investigated 1,4-
dihydrobenzene (XCVI) from the same viewpoints, and with the same
results 18.




The coupling of substituting addition and diene synthesis can, with a donor
of given constitution, take place on a still larger scale. Thus, diallyl (XLVII)
can accumulate up to three, α-allylnaphthalene (XLVIII) as many as four,
molecules of maleic anhydride:


        DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                         283




In the first case there are successively two substituting additions (a and b)
and one diene synthesis (c) ; in the second, one substituting addition (a) and
three diene syntheses (b, c, d).

                                  H




   The successive dissolution of the bond system in the naphthalene of the
side-chain is particularly significant here19.
   The reaction of the simple divinylmethane types with maleic anhydride
also provides the key to an understanding of chemical processes which had
hitherto been carried out on account of their industrial importance20 without
so far having led to defined chemical products; I refer here to the effects of
maleic anhydride on linseed oil and other oils of the same type. Their com-
mon feature is their drying property, i.e. their ability, when in a thin layer,
to form a film under the influence of the oxygen of the air. As is well known,
this property is dependent on the linoleic (XLIX) and linolenic acid (L)
content of these oils.


284                            1950 K.ALDER

A glance at their structural formulae shows that these, too, are derivatives of
divinylmethane. There can therefore be scarcely any doubt about the nature
of their reaction with maleic anhydride. In its basic features it will very
probably be the same as we found it in the simplest type of this reaction.
  The fact that thanks to maleic anhydride these new modifications of
drying oils have acquired, and are about to acquire, industrial importance is
perhaps of less interest here than the fact that the reaction of divinylmethane
with maleic anhydride tells us a great deal about the drying process itself.


                               The styrene type

Diene syntheses can be seriously affected if the diene or philodiene compo-
nent or even both tend to change into pure or mixed macromolecular po-
lymers. Unlike diene syntheses, these processes are chain reactions and are
therefore easily influenced by catalysts. Suitable activators trigger them off,
effective inhibitors will restrain or even completely suppress them. The
boundaries between this kind of process and diene synthesis can be seen very
clearly from the example of styrene, and indeed not only in systems where
the styrene assumes the function of the philodiene but also in those where it
fulfils the role of diene.
   It is well known that the system styrene (LI) and butadiene is changed
into macromolecular compounds under the influence of peroxide catalysts,
these compounds being the basis of a valuable industrial rubber, "Buna S".
There is no need for us to examine these complicated processes in detail in
order to show how they differ from diene synthesis - both in the structural
formula of the reaction products and in the dynamics of the reaction process.
Being a typical chain reaction, polymerization can easily be suppressed, by
the addition of inhibitors, to a point where the system can find its sponta-
neous equilibrium, i.e. the equilibrium no longer forced by catalysts. The
diene synthesis which then occurs, results in a partially hydrogenated diphen-
yl (LII):


286                             1950 K.ALDER

carbon, a process during which the bond structure of the phenyl nucleus is
broken. There are two possible ways in which the unstable primary product
(LIV) can become stabilized. One of these (b) is distinguished by the fact
that the disintegration of the benzene formation which has been initiated is
continued by a second diene synthesis with maleic anhydride. We obtained
here for the first time a basic type of an addition product (LV), many va-
riants of which had long been known thanks to the work of other authors22.
These were obtained from styrene derivatives, in which the tendency to
polymerize is not so pronounced as in styrene itself.
   A second process (c) whereby the primary product (LIV) is stabilized is
based on its tendency towards reclosure of the ring. Ideally this takes place
by attachment of a second molecule of maleic anhydride in accordance with
the formula of "indirect substituting addition". The characteristic "shift" of
the double bond and the formation of (LVI), together result in restoration
of the aromatic state.
   In the case of styrene the second alternative (c) occurs more readily than
the first (b), whereas with α-phenylstyrene the first process is demonstrably
the only one which occurs. With substituting styrenes all conceivable inter-
mediate forms between these two processes exist. A study of the connection
between the rate at which the two processes occur and the nature and posi-
tion of the substituents should help towards a thorough understanding of the
relationships here.
   A detailed examination of the arguments on which our proof is based
would be outside the scope of this survey. Mention of the styrenes reminds
me that, owing to the imperfections of the methods of organic chemistry,
the study of these substances has been a question of patient seeking and cau-
tious groping, and that where styrenes are concerned the clarification of a
single detail often requires much time and effort.
   The nature and extent of this problem become fully evident only when
we remember that it is still not solved even when we have determined the
structure of the addition products. The structural formulae of the molecules
are merely simplified projections symbolizing the succession of the atoms
and the way in which they are linked together. As far as their arrangement
in space is concerned they tell us very little until we apply the principles of
stereochemistry to them.
   In the case of diene synthesis of styrene with maleic anhydride, which we
have just been describing, the problem is then as follows: The addition prod-
uct (LV) has seven asymmetrical carbon atoms which are of unequal valency


          DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                        287
owing to the absence of certain molecular symmetrical forms and which are
therefore capable of giving rise to the full number of N = 27 = 128 stereo-
isomers. These constitute 64 pairs of enantiomorphous forms - racemic com-
pounds. Even when allowance is made for the fact that - in the light of a
special stereochemical experiment*, details of which will not be discussed
here - in our case the number of isomers is again reduced by half, 32 isomers
are still conceivable.
    For the second structural isomer (LVI) with four centres of asymmetry,
similar considerations give the impressive number of 16 isomers. In all, there-
fore, no less than 32 + 8 racemic forms are possible within the framework of
the established structural formula. Experimentally we found three - one
belonging to structural type (LV), and two to (LVI).
    These examples illustrate three-dimensionally a characteristic feature of
diene synthesis, a feature which is linked in the most intimate way with its
nature - namely its pronounced steric selective properties. Of the reaction
 courses which are formally possible, only a few are taken, and frequently
only one.
    This peculiarity is one of the decisive factors determining the value of
 diene synthesis as a method. The fact that it can be used as a means of
 isolating and separating substances from mixtures, and that it is uniquely
 suitable as a means of determining the character of specific types of substance,
could otherwise never have been known, for even the most highly developed
 methods of separating substances would be bound to fail in face of the dif-
 ficulty of the problem to be solved here.



               Diene Synthesis as a Stereochemical Phenomenon

The above examples of the peculiar steric nature of diene synthesis are better
suited - since two successive additions are involved - to a definition rather
than to a solution of the problem in question.
  The steric preference for certain reaction courses among the many nor-
mally left open by the structural formula is a universal characteristic of diene
synthesis, the peculiar nature of which we can see from the basic structural
formula. This representation is simple and at the same time has the merit of
maximum universality:

* Trans-"bridge"-links are out of the question as they could not exist.


288                                1950 K.ALDER




Upon addition of diene and philodiene the four addition centres usually
become asymmetrical carbon atoms, which are of different valencies among
                                                    4
themselves, and which formally can give rise to 2 = 16 stereoisomeric ad-
dition products or eight pairs of enantiomorphous forms (racemic com-
pounds)*.
   These can be symbolized very clearly. The carbon ring formed by diene
synthesis describes very roughly a plane, which we shall represent as a
horizontal line. We then get the following eight possibilities (LX, 1-8) for
the distribution of the substituents X, X’, Y, Y’, R, R’, R” and R”’ on both
sides of the ring plane**:




As is well known, the two components - diene and philodiene - (which
have just formed) occur, in their turn, in various geometrical isomers: the
diene in the most universal case in four (LXI, 1-4), the philodiene in two
(LXII,I-2).



* This number is reduced when substituents are identical with one another. It increases
when the diene and/or the philodiene are carriers of further centres of asymmetry. In
this case the steric problems of diene synthesis touch those of asymmetrical synthesis 24.
* * Owing to the non-existence of a "trans-cyclohexane" the substituents Z and Z’ do
not normally contribute to the formation of steric forms unless they possess their own
centres of isomerism.


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                         289




The problem of the steric course of diene synthesis boils down to the fol-
lowing three questions:
1. Does a relationship exist between the configuration of the philodiene
and the arrangement of its substituents in the addition product?
2. Is there a similar relationship in the case of the diene component?
 3. What relations apply to the mutual orientation of the two partners?




A clear answer to the first question is given by comprehensive factual data.
   The designation cis and trans for configurations in the olefine, characterizes
the position of the substituents R, R’, R” and R”’ relative to the double bond.
By the addition of a diene, this double bond is eliminated and the two carbon
atoms, which it links together, become parts of a ring. Experience shows
that the relative position of the substituents remains unchanged during this
process. It is the same in relation to the ring as previously in relation to the
double bond. One of the forms (LX, 1, 4, 5, 8) regularly arises from the
isomers (LXII, 1), whereas (LXII, 2) can only result in the types (LX, 2, 3,
6, 7), but not vice versa.
   From this unequivocal correlation in the configurations of philodiene and
addition product, it can be inferred that diene synthesis constitutes a pure
cis-addition which takes place at the double bond of the philodiene (cis-
principle) 23,24 .


290                                 1950 K.ALDER

                         Retention of the diene configuration

Considerations similar to those just described in the case of the philodiene
components can be transferred - mutatis mutandis - to the diene. As in the
former case, cis and trans additions are formally possible with the 1,4-addi-
tion in the latter case, just as they are with the 1,2-addition in the former
case, and should result in addition products of different configuration. Our
experiments showed that here, too, the addition of the philodiene to the
diene takes place in accordance with the cis-addition formula, and that there-
fore an analogous steric retention principle applies here:
   The diene enters the addition product with unaltered configuration, i.e.
both cis substituents of the diene and both its trans substituents are situated
on the same side of the ring in the addition product*. In the case of the diene
(LXI, 1), for instance, only the forms (LX, 1-4) of the addition product
satisfy this condition, the rest (LX, 5-8) conflict with it.
   Whereas the cis principle, which was formulated at an early date, is now 24
supported by a vast body of experimental evidence, it is only recently 25 -
owing to the inaccessibility of stereoisomeric dienes - that we have suc-
ceeded in confirming in a few characteristic cases, the "principle of the reten-
tion of the diene configuration".


                          Diene synthesis and free rotation

 In the preceding section we made a tacit assumption which requires some
justification. As is well known, in classical stereochemistry, the principle of
 "free rotation" was postulated in order that the number of asymmetrical
 ethane derivatives demanded by the model might be kept in accord with

* The fact that the position of the substituents X’ and Y’ on the one hand, and that of
X and Y on the other, are spatially equivalent, can probably be seen best if one imagines




  that carbon atoms 2 and 3 of the diene are taken out, and the two remaining parts of
the diene are reunited. Both pairs then assume a cis-position relative to one another. In
this way the analogy of the cis-principle with the principle of retention of the diene
configuration becomes particularly clear.


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                          291
empirical findings. Accordin g to this principle carbon atoms linked singly
with one another can rotate round the C-C axis.
  In the case of the diene component this would mean that between the two
planar configurations - the "bent" one (LXIV) with addition centres as close
together as possible, and the "stretched" one (LXIII) - all possible nonpla-
nar transitions are conceivable:




So far, we have been assuming that diene synthesis takes place from arrange-
ment (LXIV). There are several different arguments for this hypothesis,
some of which we will now cite26.
   By means of constitutional factors it is possible to eliminate "free rotation"
and also to define the "stretched" as well as the "bent" arrangement. It is
found here that the first category, (LXV) and (LXVI), is unable to add
philodienes, whereas compounds such as (LXVII-LXIX) are capable of
diene synthesis:




Significantly the reactivity optimum is with five-membered rings, which,
thanks to their valency angle, by their very nature represent ideally the rigid
planar diene. As the distance increases, so - according to the model - the
mobility, and with it the possibility of deviation from the planar arrange-
ment, increases. At the same time the reactive capacity decreases.


292                              1950 K.ALDER

   From a host of further arguments, I will point out that voluminous sub-
stituents Z and Z’, as well as a blocking X’ (or Y’) are capable of suppressing
approximation to the "bent" planar form (LXIV), which is necessary for
addition, to such an extent that addition no longer occurs.
   In this connection the behaviour of the two series (LXX) and (LXXI) is
informative:
                                               X




 With the cis-diene type (LXX) the capacity for addition declines as the
 branching and space-filling of the substituent X increase. According to em-
 pirical findings to-date it is totally eliminated with tert.-butyl and with phen-
 yl. Significantly the analogous trans-dienes (LXXI) are without exception
 capable of diene synthesis, and the facility with which they react is sub-
 stantially the same in all cases within this group. It is greater than with all
 analogues of the cis-series (LXX). The two hydrogen atoms in the cis posi-
tion of (LXXI) o bviously hinder least the coming into being of the "bent"
 arrangement, which is necessary for the reaction.
    In order to express the formal similarity of the acyclic dienes in their bent
 arrangement to the cyclic dienes, e.g. (LXVIII), we have called the former
 "quasicyclic". The relations existing between free rotation and the course of
 diene synthesis can be reduced to the simple formula: cyclic and acyclic
 dienes show the same behaviour during diene synthesis, since the acyclic
 dienes come to reaction in their "quasicyclic" arrangement26.


                        The universal orientation formula

 In their simplicity, the steric rules so far described may to some extent be


            DIENE    SYNTHESIS    AND     RELATED    REACTION      TYPES   293
apparent if not perfectly obvious. However, this is not the case with the
relationship now about to be discussed, which deals with the question of
whether the two partners are orientated in relation to one another. A long
and difficult journey had to be travelled before this steric law, the "universal
orientation formula", was recognized and proved. Within the framework of
this lecture I can only sketch very briefly a few of the stages on this road.
   Its starting-point was the study of thermal polymerization of cyclopenta-
diene 27. When heated, this hydrocarbon - as had been shown earlier - yields
a polymerically homologous series, to whose formation the following uni-
form law seemed to apply:




Our first contribution consisted of a review of this fascinatingly simple
structural formula. The principle of the formation of four-membered rings
had to be replaced by the formula for diene synthesis. The polymerization
of cyclopentadiene should be formulated as follows:




Here for the first time it was found necessary to include the stereochem-
ical as well as the structural aspect in the study of diene synthesis. This was
occasioned by the isolation of two trimeric cyclopentadienes (LXXIII).
Breakdown of these led to the important conclusion that the two trimers
were already based on two dimers (LXXII), or in other words that process
a must already occur in two directions.
   These two directions (α and β) are foreseen by the model, and this question
could have been regarded as settled with the isolation of a second β-dicy-
clopentadiene in addition to the α-form, which had long since been known,


294                               1950 K.ALDER

and with the correlation of both with the configuration given by the model.
That it was not, is due to one particular circumstance. The transitions which
have been described take place at elevated temperature. The picture is very
much simplified when one studies the changes undergone by monomeric
cyclopentadiene at room temperature. The liquid hydrocarbon changes into
the camphor-like mass of α -dicyclopentadiene within a few days. Structurally
and sterically this process is completely uniform. Structurally it means noth-
ing more than the first phase (a) of the above-described formation of a
polymerically homologous series which at room temperature breaks off
after the first member.
   Its steric uniformity, however, inevitably seemed extremely remarkable,
since it was obvious that only one of the possible courses and was taken
at low temperature.




Experiments soon convinced us that this phenomenon was by no means
confined to dimerization of cyclopentadiene. Thus, addition of cyclopenta-
diene to maleic anhydride proceeds in only one direction sterically, and this
direction is demonstrably the same as that found with dimerization of cyclo-
pentadiene.
   With regard to the question whether α or    was the preferred steric course,
a very precise answer in favour of α could be given from the addition prod-
uct - cyclopentadiene and maleic anhydride.
   A comparison between the addition products formed in accordance with
formula and formula shows quite clearly that the above-explained reten-
tion principles apply in both cases, and that consequently they alone are not
sufficient to account for the observed steric selection.
   On the contrary, a new selection principle must be operating here, a
principle which can with advantage be described with the aid of "orientation
complexe". If one imagines the two partners - diene and philodiene - so
close to one another that the four centres of addition* are situated on a
* Or, to be more accurate, their projection on the drawing-plane.


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                         295
straight line, one recognizes that with α all the double bonds come to lie on
one side of this line, whereas with they are distributed on both sides. To
put it another way: with diene synthesis, addition is entirely or predomi-
nantly steric when it is from an orientation complex with maximum ac-
cumulation of the double-bond systems of both partners (LXXII, α), but is
entirely or predominantly non-steric when it is from the minimum-density
arrangement of these systems (LXXII, β)23.




 This statement holds good in a wide range of cases. We deduced it for
 many diene syntheses, in the first place in very great detail for the additions
 of maleic anhydride, which - for instance, with cyclopentadiene - always
 adds in accordance with formula (LXXIV, α) and not in accordance with
 (LXXIV,        This picture is not materially changed if we go from the cyclic
 to the acyclic dienes, since these, as explained in the preceding section, react
 in their "quasicyclic" arrangement. The same applies if we go from maleic
 anhydride to acrylic acid, or to philodienes of the vinyl acetate type, where
 the uncombined electron pairs obviously assume the function of the double
 bond.
    On the other hand, as was to be expected, the "universal orientation
 formula" ceases to be valid where the demand for maximum accumulation
 of the double-bond systems of both partners ceases to be unequivocal, which
is the case in the diene class, e.g. with the fulvenes (LXXV, α and       and in
 the philodiene series, e.g. with the diene syntheses of fumaric acid (LXXVI,
 α and


296                            1950 K.ALDER




Here neither of the two orientation complexes is distinguished from the
other, and the addition is steric in both directions.


                               An example

1-Phenyl-4-methylbutadiene exists in four forms (a-d), of which three (a-
c) are well known.




As is to be expected from our empirical findings, form (c) can enter into
no diene synthesis, since the phenyl group prevents the necessary approxima-
tion to the planar arrangement. Both forms (a) and (b) are capable of diene
syntheses, and, as we know from experience, (a) participates more readily in
these reactions than does (b).
   Structurally diene synthesis of 1-phenyl-4-methylbutadiene with maleic
anhydride or fumaric acid presents the following picture:


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                         297
  Sterically the forms (1-8) are possible.




   Case I : trans, trans-form (a), and maleic anhydride.
   The cis-principle, which demands retention of the philodiene configura-
tion, rules out (2), (3), (6), and (7); (5), (6), (7), and (8) are incompatible
with the principle of retention of the diene configuration in the addition
product. Of the remaining alternatives (1) and (4), the universal orientation
formula decides in favour of (1). In accord with empirical findings, only
one of the eight possible forms - namely the all-cis form (1) - arises.
   Case II: trans, cis- form (b), and maleic anhydride.
   In this case, by the same reasoning it can be predicted that form (5) will
be the reaction product, in accord with empirical findings.
   Case III: trans, trans-form (a), and fumaric acid ester yield, as predictable,
forms (2) and (3) side by side.


                   Diene syntheses with asymmetrical addenda

The above steric interpretation does not conclude the discussion of the
universal structural formula for diene synthesis. On the contrary, the struc-
tural formula confronts us with a further question: What course do diene
syntheses take when the structural asymmetry of the two partners permits
two alternative reactions? The two following combinations of an asym-
metrical philodiene with a diene substituted in the α- or β-position represent
the simplest processes of this type:


298                              1950 K.ALDER




   The empirical data recently obtained from these and more complex exam-
ples show selectivity again here, in that in the first case ortho-forms (a) and
in the second para-forms (b) tend to arise before formation of meta-types
(a’, b’), since these types occur only as by-products, if at all.
   In the light of our experience to-date, these findings, and this is most re-
markable, are largely independent of the nature of the substituents X and R.
   From the many results to hand I should like to point out one in particular
which is very informative, namely the addition of trans-butadiene-1-carbox-
ylic acid (X = COOH) to acrylic acid (R = COOH). Despite the polar
character of the same substituents, structurally they move in close to one
another and yield the ortho-form (LXXVII). This clustering of two groups
of equal polarity is as complete here as possible, for it is found that - entirely
in accordance with the steric rules described above - the cis-form of the
ortho-series is the main product of this diene synthesis24.


                Observations on the mechanism of diene synthesis

Diene synthesis of butadiene-1-carboxylic acid with acrylic acid is in no way
an exceptional case as far as its course is concerned. On the contrary, we
have encountered other cases where groups of equal polarity crowd in as
close as possible together during addition. I draw particular attention to this
fact here because it provides me with an occasion for a remark on the
mechanism of diene synthesis.
   So far I have confined myself to the means of expression of classical struc-
tural chemistry - valency line, double bond, and asymmetrical carbon atom
- in my descriptions of results. The fascinating simplicity of the new reac-
tion, long ago prompted experiments with a view to a definition of it in the
light of the modern theory of linkage28.


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                         299
   At first it was suggested that diene synthesis was a (crypto-) ionic process.
It was thought that displacements of the charge both in the system of the
diene and also in that of the philodiene, induced polarities, and that the
driving force for their union lay in their intermolecular equilibrium.
   Our experimental results, obtained during a study of asymmetrical ad-
denda, showed this interpretation of diene synthesis to be highly improbable
- at least that it is not the determining factor governing the course of the
addition process. The same nature of substituents X and R and their same
position in the double-bond system of both partners ought to induce the
same charge formula in both, and the equilibrium of this formula ought
inevitably to give the same meta-type. This is obviously at variance with
experimental findings.
   The fact that polar solvents and catalysts have relatively little effect on
diene syntheses likewise points away from an ion reaction mechanism.
   The strongest argument against such a mechanism lies in the fact that it in
no way appears to obey the laws which govern diene synthesis structurally
and sterically.
   Structurally it is the formation of six-membered rings, the laws governing
these being particularly striking where there is an opportunity for rings of
relatively large width to arise. Since first being posed, with regard to the
polyenesa, this problem has been repeatedly examined - on the last occa-
sion10 by means of addition of maleic anhydride to 1, 1, 12, 12-tetraphenyl-
dodecahexaene.




   As is indicated by the sketch of the addition centres in the 3,6- and the
7,10-position on the one hand (a, a’) and in the 5,8-position on the other (b),
the 6-ring formation also dominates the field here. The (crypto-) ionic
interpretation does not account for this phenomenon; on the contrary, the
regular formation of six-membered rings directs our attention to another
relationship.
   From the point of view of the electron theory of valency, the total bal-
ance-sheet of diene synthesis lies in an interplay between the functions of the


300                              1950 K.ALDER

six π-electrons of the two partners. Two of them retain - although in a
changed position - their character as π-electrons, whereas the remaining four
are used in pairs for the formation of two σ-bonds in the 6-ring. Both
factors, i.e. the six π−electrons and the six-membered carbon ring, point to
similarities between the linkage system of benzene and that of the aromatic
hydrocarbons.
   As is well known, compared with a cyclohexatriene with double bonds
visualized as being localized, benzene is a relatively stable structure from the
chemical and the energy aspect. Extensive experimental work has shown
this "aromatic character" to be confined to the number 6, and according to
the quantum theory it can be ascribed to a closed inner sextet of bonding

   An identical - or at least very similar - group of six bonding electrons of
"aromatic resonance" is by all appearances also at work during diene syn-
thesis; indeed it is thought to be the triggering factor. As the two partners -
diene and philodiene - approach one another, the electron sextet forms as a
result of reciprocal decoupling of their π-electron systems, the energy re-
quired for this decoupling being supplied from the gain in resonance energy.
   We can therefore supplement the universal reaction formula for diene
synthesis by inserting an unstable complex-type structure (LXXX) as a
transition between the initial system of the two partners (LXXIX) and the
final stage of the stable product of addition (LXXXI).
   Since the components already occupy spatially well-defined positions in
this structure, we named these intermediate combinations "orientating com-
plexes". The cohesion is effected by a sextet of electrons supplied jointly and
proportionally to both partners. The conversion of this sextet into two σ -
bonds, which complete cyclization, and into a double bond, which occupies
a specific position, brings the addition process to a close.




On the basis of this hypothesis diene synthesis is not a (crypto-) ionic but
a (crypto-) radical process where the course of the reaction is determined by
those factors which are decisive in the decoupling of electron pairs. Inductive


        DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                         301
effects emanating from polar groups and manifesting themselves as charge
displacements through the carbon chains will undoubtedly be present, al-
though, being forces of relatively low magnitude, they will not usually be
decisive - in complete contrast to the resonance forces exerted by multiple
bonds upon one another or in their interplay with non-proportionate elec-
tron pairs of polar groups. I must confine myself here to stating that among
the laws characterizing the picture of diene synthesis, none has yet been
found which conflicts with the interpretation put forward above.
   I am aware that this rough sketch merely suggests the direction in which
an explanation of the peculiarities of diene synthesis is probably to be sought.
Its structural and steric selectivity makes possible an enormous number of
π-electron systems of both partners - and in fact not only of the substituents
participating directly in the addition process but also those of "activating"
substituents. This fact will have to be the starting-point of a detailed discus-
sion of the configuration of the π-electron systems in the orientating com-
plexes.



Diene Synthesis and Substituting Addition as a Special Case among General
                               Reaction Types

Over the 23-year period during which diene synthesis was being developed,
a vast body of experimental data accumulated, but despite the variety and
abundance of individual cases, certain general laws are discernible among all
the results obtained. These laws are clearly the expression of the fact that
these are pure and direct interactions between electron systems of two
partners - in other words, effects which are not complicated by the participa-
tion of accessory agents.
   It is not surprising that processes of this type should not be confined to
pure carbon systems but that other arrangements of atoms with suitable elec-
tron configurations show a tendency towards similar conversions. Cases of
this type have become known in increasing numbers, so far primarily with
the elements oxygen and nitrogen. Thus, instead of the arrangement C=C
-C=C, the groups C=C-C=O and N=C-C=N can also act as dienes,
whereas in addition to the classical philodienes, >C=C< and -C=C-,
combinations such as >C=O, -N=N-, -C=N, and -N=O are
capable of fundamentally the same effects. This second group is rounded off
by molecular oxygen. Developments during the past few years have shown


302                                1950 K.ALDER

ever more clearly the similarity of this substance to maleic anhydride in its
reactions with dienes and olefines. The merging of diene synthesis and of
substituting addition, on the one hand, with the apparently completely
heterogeneous phenomena of autoxidation, on the other, into a homoge-
neous group of processes will presumably be only one stage in this devel-
opment. It is very probable that in the majority of cases the additions of
diazomethane, of diazoacetic acid, of organic azides, etc., to unsaturated sys-
tems, are triggered off and are determined, as far as their course is concerned,
by resonance phenomena between the π-electron systems of the two partners
The task now is to investigate such effects of unsaturated substances upon
one another from aspects which have become evident for the first time
during the study of diene synthesis as the ideal type of this reaction.




These few bibliographical references represent only a minute fraction of the vast liter-
ature on diene synthesis.

 1. W. Albrecht, Ann. Chem., 348 (1906) 31.
 2. H. Staudinger and P. J. Meyer, Helv. Chem. Acta, 7 (1923) 19.
 3. O. Diels, J. H. Blom and W. Koll, Ann. Chem., 443 (1925) 242.
 4. O. Wallach, Ann. Chem., 227 (1885) 295.
 5. H. v. Euler and K. O. Josephson, Chem. Ber., 53 (1920) 822.
 6. K. Alder and G. Stein, Chem. Ber., 62 (1929) 2347.
 7. O. Diels and K. Alder, Ann. Chem., 460 (1927) 98.
 8. M. C. Kloetzel and H. L. Herzog, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 72 (1950) 1991.
 9. R. Kuhn and Th. Wagner-Jauregg, Chem. Ber., 63 (1930) 2662.
10. K. Alder and M. Schumacher, Ann. Chem., 570 (1950) 178.
11. E. P. Kohler et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 61 (1939) 1057; and K. Alder (unpublished
    observations).
12. W. Reppe et al., Ann. Chem., 560 (1948) I.
13. For bibliography see K. Alder and F. Rickert, Ann. Chem, 543 (1940) 15.
14. O. Diels and K. Alder, Ann. Chem., 486 (1931) 211.
15. K. Alder, Die Methode der Dien-Synthese, Handbuck der biologischen Arbeitsmethoden
    (The Diene Synthesis Method, Manual of Biological Working Methods), Sec. I,
    Part 2, 2nd half, Vol. II, Urban & Schwarzenberg, Berlin and Wien, 1933, p. 3171.
16. For bibliography see K. Alder, F. Pascher and A. Schmitz, Chem. Ber., 76 (1943) 27.
17. K. Alder, H. Söll and H. Söll, Ann. Chem., 565 (1949) 73.
18. K. Alder and F. Münz, Ann. Chem., 565 (1949) 126.
19. K. Alder and R. Schmitz-Josten (unpublished investigations.)
20. For bibliography see C. P. A. Kappelmeyer, Kunststoffe, 40 (1950) 81.
21. Th. Wagner-Jauregg, Chem. Ber., 63 (1930) 3213.


         DIENE SYNTHESIS AND RELATED REACTION TYPES                               303
22. Th. Wagner-Jauregg, Ann. Chem., 491 (1931) I.
23. K. Alder and G. Stein, Angew. Chemie, 50 (1937) 510.
24. K. Alder, M. Schumacher, and O. Wolff, Ann. Chem., 564 (1949) 79.
25. K. Alder and M. Schumacher, Ann. Chem., 571 (1951) 99.
26. K. Alder, Ann. Chem., 571 (1951) 157.
27. K. Alder and G. Stein, Angew. Chemie, 47 (1934) 837.
28. Cf: R. Robinson, Versuch einer Elektronen-Theorie organisch-chemischer Reaktionen
    (Testing an electron theory of organic chemical reactions), Enke, Stuttgart, 1932,
    p. 49; M. G. Evans and U. Warhorst, Trans. Faraday Soc., 34 (1938) 618; H. Hen-
    necka, Z. Naturforsch., 4b (1949) 15; K. Alder, M. Schumacher, and O. Wolff, Ann.
    Chem., 564 (1949) 89.
