                              LARS O NSAGER


       The motion of ions: principles and concepts
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1968



Today I shall try to help you grasp the significance of a fairly general principle
which applies to diverse types of irreversible processes. After last night it will
be just as well if we do not go into all fine points of definitions or survey all
possible applications. Rather, I want to talk about progress over a period of
time in one field of research where much has happened (some of this relevant
to the principle I mentioned) and intriguing problems still remain. Before we
survey the progress in our understanding of electrolytes since the days of
Arrhenius, let us take a quick look at what went before.        .
   Gay-Lussac’s rule of combining volumes (1808) led Avogadro to surmise
that under corresponding conditions of temperature and pressure equal vol-
umes of different gases contain equal numbers of molecules (1811). This prin-
ciple was to become the chemist’s primary means to determine molecular
weights, but it was long debated and not in general use until after 1860. By
that time Cannizzaro could muster enough evidence for a strong argument at
the first international congress in Karlsruhe, and within a few years Avoga-
dro’s principle gained wide acceptance.
   We may at least speculate that contemporary developments in the kinetic
theory of gases encouraged the chemists’ change of attitude, although they
rarely if ever admitted that; they preferred to maintain an inductive point of
view in their publications. In 1860, Maxwell obtained his distribution law for
molecular velocities, which implies equipartition of kinetic energy; Avoga-
dro’s principle is an automatic consequence. In the following year Boltzmann
founded a more general theory of specific heats, explaining the empirical rule
of Dulong and Petit; those results had to be exploited with semi-empirical
modifications until the quantum theory accounted for the discrepancies much
later. Guldberg and Waage (1864) formulated the mass-action law and sup-
ported it by experiments. After a while (I 885) Van ‘t Hoff recognized a close
analogy between solutions and gases, so that measurements of osmotic pres-
sure or changes in vapor pressure or freezing point depression could substitute
for vapor densities. Strangely, however, the observations on solutions of salts,
acids and bases in water indicated the presence of more solute particles than


                          THE MOTION OF IONS                                  273
 there could be molecules by any reasonable interpretation ofchemistry known
then or now. Arrheniusr1,2 (1884) recognized that these electrolytes dissociate
largely into free ions, and he could point to a pretty good correspondence
between the Van ‘t Hoff "anomalies" and the degrees of ionization inferred
from the electrical conductivity.
   A greatly simplified picture of electrolyte solutions loomed. At fairly low
but readily attainable concentrations solutions of readily dissociating com-
pounds like hydrochloric acid, potassium hydroxide and a great many salts
like sodium chloride would be completely dissociated and the properties of a
solution would be additive, not just over molecules, but even over the con-
stituent ions. At higher concentrations, admittedly, one would have to allow
for combination to form molecules or compound ions according to the mass-
action law, as suggested by Ostwalds (1888). Nernst developed appropriate
simple theories for the diffusion of electrolytes and for the variation of an
electrode potential with the concentration of the ion discharged.
   Such was the simple picture presented to me as a freshman chemist in 1920.
In spite of some idealization it sufficed for a great many purposes; it eased
many tasks no end and we were eternally grateful for that. However, very
soon the journals rather than the textbooks taught me about numerous obser-
vations which did not quite fit into the picture and of tentative explanations
for the discrepancies. Whether the experimenters studied the electrical con-
ductivities or the equilibrium properties like freezing point depressions and
electromotive forces, significant deviations from the ideal additive behavior
persisted to much lower concentrations than had been predicted according to
the mass-action law from the measurements performed on more concen-
trated solutions. These phenomena became known as the "anomalies" of
strong electrolytes. In many ways the anomalies displayed conspicuous regu-
larities; if one compared salts of the same valence type like NaCl and KNO 3,
the differences were typically small even at concentrations as high as 0.1 mole/
liter. Suspicion centered on the long-range electrostatic forces between the
ions.
   Debye and Hückel4 finally succeeded in predicting the effects of the electro-
static interaction from the general principles of kinetic theory. They pointed
out that the electrostatic field around an ion must be screened by an average
density of compensating charge. As had been found previously by Gouy
(1913) in somewhat different context, the screening distance is given by the
ionic strength (sum of concentrations multiplied by squares of charges), the
dielectric constant of the solvent and the temperature; it varies inversely as the


274                          1968 LARS ONSAGER

 square root of the ionic strength. The resulting effects on the chemical poten-
 tials of electrolytes are proportional to the square root of the ionic strength; to
 compute the coefficient one has to know the magnitude of an elementary
charge, and the measurements of Millikans had already supplied that infor-
 mation (1917). These predictions agreed well enough with previous experi-
ments, and the improved techniques of subsequent decades have only con-
firmed the agreement. The theory of Debye and Hückel was soon routinely
exploited to great advantage. Those stubborn deviations from the laws of
Van ‘t Hoff and Arrhenius and Guldberg and Waage became harmless be-
cause we could compute them, make proper allowance and extrapolate in
comfort to exploit additive relations. To make matters even easier, many
electrolytes turned out to be completely dissociated or nearly so.
    Debye and Hückel also considered the conductivity of electrolytes, a most
important source of information because the measurement is almost always
feasible, and it takes only reasonable care to get accurate results. Kohlrausch
had shown long since that the conductivities of strong electrolytes in water
 decrease linearly with the square root of the concentration. Debye and Hückel
recognized that two effects contribute to this decrease. For one, while the ex-
ternal electric field exerts a force on the ion, an opposing force of equal
magnitude is distributed over the screening cloud of compensating charge. As
a result, every ion is driven against a countercurrent; the speed of this current
is proportional to the charge of the central ion and independent of its own
mobility. This is called the electrophoretic effect, and the theory is closely
related to that of the effect so profitably utilized by Tiselius 6; but there is a
significant difference between small and large particles, and the meaning of
the word "electrophoresis" varies according to context. The so-called "relax-
ation effect" depends on distortions of the screening clouds produced by the
systematic motion of the ions in the external field. As it happened, Debye
and Hückel overestimated that effect and concluded that in computing the
"electrophoretic force" they had extrapolated the macroscopic hydrodynam-
ics too far.
    Fortunately, my own efforts in the summer of 1923 had produced a modest
but firm result. The relaxation effect ought to reduce the mobilities of anion
and cation in equal proportion. Much to my surprise, the results of Debye and
Hückel did not satisfy that relation, nor the requirement that whenever an ion
of type A is 10 Å West of a B, there is a B 10 Å East of that A. Clearly, some-
thing essential had been left out in the derivation of such unsymmetrical re-
sults. The model used was this: one particular ion is constrained to move at a


                            THE MOTION OF IONS                                  275
 constant speed along a straight line in the solution; neighboring ions respond
 to the fields in the distorted screening cloud, and in addition they mill around
 in random fashion according to the laws of Brownian motion. Recipe: Remove
 restraints on the central ion but retain an external force on it, let it execute its
 own thermal motion and respond to the fields of its neighbors, and recognize
 whatever external forces act on them. That done, the result for binary electro-
lytes became very simple: the relaxation effect reduces the migration velocity
 of every ion by a fraction which depends neither on its own mobility nor on
that of the partner species (of opposite, numerically equal charge). Otherwise
 the effect is charge-dependent and proportional to the square root of the
 concentration - just like the corrections to the equilibrium properties, but
with a different coefficient. As to the electrophoretic effect, it was easy to
show that plausible variations of the hydrodynamics near the center of the
countercurrent system driven by a widely distributed force could not matter
enough to affect the limiting law; Debye and Hückel had unjustly impugned
their own result.
    As seen from Fig. 1, the general variation of conductivities with the con-
centration for 1-1 electrolytes was quite well explained; the divergence and
individual variation at higher concentrations was foreseeable, but the theory
was not so far developed that the significance of those features could be
evaluated in detail.
   Fig. 2 displays the difference between a strong acid (HCl) and a weaker
one (HIO3). Clearly, the concept of a dissociation equilibrium was still in-
dispensable.
   In Fig. 3 we see the conductivities of a few ternary electrolytes compared
with the theoretical limiting formulas.
   In Fig. 4 the curves with appropriate limiting tangents are extrapolated ac-
cording to the theory; previous empirical extrapolations are indicated too.
The point was that the new extrapolation for MgSO 4 agreed with the limiting
value expected from the additivity rule while the old one did not. It became
clear that MgSO4 was incompletely dissociated (as well as CdSO 4), a con-
clusion confirmed by later studies of the chemical reaction kinetics (Eigen9).
   In Fig. 5 we see some deviations from Kohlrausch’s rule of independent
mobilities, first computed by Bennewitz, Wagner and Küchler10 (1929), then
demonstrated by Longsworth (1930). Solutions containing HCl and KCl in
varying proportion are compared at constant total concentration. The fast
hydrogen ions are delayed as they overtake the slower potassium ions and de-
tour around them; the potassium ions are speeded up by the same interaction.


276                         1968 LARS ONSAGER




Fig. 1. Conductivities of I-I electrolytes in water. equivalent conductivity; con-
centration in equiv./I. From Physik.Z., 28 (1927) 277. Reproduced by permission of
                            S.Hirzel Verlag K.G., Stuttgart.


The resultant net decrease of the total conductivity had been observed in a
similar case before (Bray and Hunt, 1912) and pronounced a baffling mystery.
   Going back to the time when I revised the theory of Debye and Hückel,
the task was by no means easy. The key was a principle of superposition ap-
plied to the ion cloud around a pair. To begin with, it was a bit confusing that
the force exerted by the external field on an ion as well as the interaction
between the ions were proportional to the charge. In order to gain perspective
I decided to ignore the relation between the charge and the driving force, and
took a look at a more general problem. One constant field of force is acting on
each kind of ion; what are the effects of the Coulomb interaction? The prob-
lem is in fact equivalent to that which arises in the most general case of diffu-


                           THE MOTION OF IONS                                   277




Fig. 2. Conductivities of hydrochloric acid and iodic acids in water. Same notation
as Fig. 1. From Physik.Z., 28 (1927) 277. Reproduced by permission of S.Hirzel K.G.,
                                       Stuttgart.


sion and electrical conduction combined; the gradients of chemical potentials
are equivalents of forces :



where         k,... stand for                . for chemical "potentials of ions",
    . . for charges and for the electrostatic potential. A measure of ambiguity
in the definition         induces a corresponding ambiguity in             . but the
combination                known as the "electrochemical potential", is uniquely
defined for the purpose in hand. If the result of the computation was written
in terms of transport J 1,J2,...



the coefficients LJI were invariably symmetrical. It was soon evident that this
did not depend on any mathematical approximations. For the relaxation effect
I could depend on Newton’s principle of action and reaction; for all the com-
plications of hydrodynamics a "principle of least dissipation" derived by
Helmholtz assured the symmetry. Admittedly, I did assume some consistent
scheme of Brownian motion kinetics; but even that seemed not essential. The
symmetry relation itself was equivalent to a principle of least dissipation; in -
verting the equations:


278                           1968 LARS ONSAGER




Fig. 3. Conductivities of 1-2 electrolytes in water. Same notation as Fig. I. From Physik.
    Z., 28 (1927) 277. Reproduced by permission of S.Hirzel Verlag K. G., Stuttgart.



then




equals the degradation of free energy, and it is a minimum in a case of station -
ary flow.
   An unusual problem in chemical kinetics attracted my attention at the same
time. C. N. Riiber was studying the mutarotation of various sugars by several
precise methods: optical rotation, refractive index (interferometer) and vol-
ume changes (dilatometer). He discovered that there were (at least) three


                             THE MOTION OF IONS                                       279
modifications of galactose, and the possibility that any one of these might
transform into either of the others gave rise to a little problem in mathematics.
In analyzing it I assumed, as any sensible chemist would, that in the state of
equilibrium the reaction         would occur just as often as        I, etc., even




Fig. 4. Conductivities of 2-2 electrolytes in water. Same notation as Fig. 1. From Physik.
   Z., 28(1927)277. Reproduced with permission of S.Hirzel Verlag K. G., Stuttgart.




Fig. 5. The variation of cation mobilities with mixing ratio for aqueous solutions con-
taining varying proportions of HCl and KC1 at constant total concentration of 0.1 mole/
liter. Measurements by Bennewitz, Wagner and Küchler10 (1929). Figure from H.S.
Harned and B.B. Owen, The Physical Chemistry of Electrolyte Solutions, ACS Monograph
No.95, Reinhold, New York, 1943, p.143. Reproduced by permission of the authors and
                        of Van Nostrand/Reinhold, New York


280                         1968 LARS ONSAGER

 though this is not a necessary condition for equilibrium, which might be
 maintained by a cyclic reaction - as far as the mathematics goes; the physics
 did not seem reasonable. Now if we look at the condition of detailed balan-
 cing from the thermodynamic point of view, it is quite analogous to the
 principle of least dissipation.
    I developed a strong faith in the principle of least dissipation, and recognized
 that it had been used somehow by Helmholtz in his theory of galvanic diffu-
 sion cells and by Kelvin in his theory of thermoelectric phenomena. Some
years later in Zürich in a conversation with P. Scherrer, I found that he had
 been strongly impressed by the ideas of G. N. Lewis about detailed balancing.
 This made me put the cart behind the horse. Now I looked for a way to apply
 the condition of microscopic reversibility to transport processes, and after a
while I found a handle on the problem: the natural fluctuations in the distri-
bution of molecules and energy due to the random thermal motion. Accord-
ing to a principle formulated by Boltzmann, the nature of thermal (and
chemical) equilibrium is statistical, and the statistics of spontaneous deviations
is determined by the associated changes of the thermodynamic master func-
tion; that is the entropy - or at constant temperature, equally well the free
energy. Here was a firm connection with the thermodynamics, and we con-
nect with the laws of transport as soon as we may assume that a spontaneous
deviation from the equilibrium decays according to the same laws as one that
has been produced artificially. When this reasoning was exploited by appro-
priate mathematics, the long-suspected reciprocal relations did indeed appear
among the results, which were first announced in 1929. In view of the very
general claims I felt that concepts and conditions ought to be defined with
great care, and a complete exposition11,12 did not appear until 1931.
   One consequence of the principle is that the removal of a constraint will
never decrease the rate of dissipation of energy. For example, closing an elec-
tric contact allows a current to flow; that is one way to remove a constraint.
In this sense the principle was applied as a hypothesis by Kelvin in his theory of
thermoelectric phenomena. By the same route Helmholtz arrived at a relation
between streaming potentials and electrophoresis in capillaries (an inside-
out variation of the effect utilized by Tiselius) ; he also derived a formula for
the electromotive force of a concentration cell, which was later generalized by
MacInnes and Beattie13 (1920). The most important application of the dis-
sipation principle not yet suggested in 1931 was a general relation between the
cross-coefficients for diffusion of different solutes. This was announced for
electrolytes in a joint paper with Fuoss14 (1932), where of course the relation


                         THE MOTION OF IONS                                 281

of MacInnes and Beattie was implied as well. By now there is a fairly extensive
literature on the subject. A comprehensive review of varied applications and
significant experimental tests was given some years ago (1960) by D. C. Mil-
ler’s; he concluded that the relations are generally confirmed within the limits
of error of the measurements.
   Possibly the most important as a tool of research is the relation of Helm-
holtz, MacInnes and Beattie. The thermodynamic properties of electrolyte
solutions can be determined from the measurements of the voltage between
electrodes reversible to both ions. Largely through the efforts of H. S. Har-
ned, methods of preparing reversible electrodes for several kinds of anions
(halide, sulfate) and cations (hydrogen, silver, alkali metals and some others)
have been perfected; but for a great many ions this has not been achieved and
the prospects look poor.
   Following MacInnes and Brown16 (1936), the voltage of a concentration cell
is measured between electrodes reversible to the same ion; and when in addi-
tion the transference number (fraction of the current carried by one ion) is
known, the free energy of dilution can be computed. MacInnes and Longs-
worth17 had shown (1932) how the transference numbers can be determined
quite accurately by observing the displacement of a boundary between two
solutions (with one common ion) by the passage of an electric current.
   In 1932 Fuoss and I14 computed the effects of the interaction between the
ions on transport processes (conduction and diffusion, even viscosity) in mix-
tures of general composition. The algebraic techniques which enabled us to
cope with a complicated system of equations were improved many years later
(Onsager and Kim18, 1957). Precision methods for the study of diffusion were
not developed until the decade 1940-50. Then Kegeles and Gosting19 (1947)
showed that Gouy’s optical fringe method gives excellent results when the
principles of physical optics are properly applied; meanwhile Harned and co-
workers 20,21 developed a relaxation method which depends on measurements
of electrical conductivity for analysis in situ. The two methods supplement
each other very nicely: at low concentrations of electrolytes, where Gouy’s
method fails for lack of fringes, the resistivities of the solutions suffice for
easy measurement. Thus at long last Nernst’s relation between the coefficient
of diffusion and the electrolytic mobilities was verified to about 0.1%.
   I have indicated already that the theory of long-range interaction by no
means eliminated the need to consider a mass-action equilibrium with un-
dissociated species. As was pointed out by Bjerrum22 (1927), when the ions are
highly charged or very small, or where the dielectric constant is not 80 but


282                           1968 LARS ONSAGER

just 20 or less, the electrostatic interaction at close range will be so strong that
 pairs of ions will stay together for a long time and act pretty much like ordi-
 nary molecules. For that matter, recent kinetic studies have revealed (Eigen9,
 1967) that replacements in the innermost shell of solvent molecules and anions
 around a cation may be fairly infrequent - once in a microsecond, say, or even
 longer - so that molecules are reasonably well defined in the sense of chemical
 kinetics. However, even when the recombination kinetics is too fast for a
 sharp definition, it is often convenient to distinguish between "free ions" and
 "associated pairs" by some arbitrary but reasonable convention. Bjerrum 21
 suggested (1927) that we draw the line at a distance where the work of sepa-
 ration against the coulomb force is twice the thermal energy (kT) per mole-
 cule; in water that distance is 3.5 Å for KCl, 7 Å for MgCl2, 14 Å for MgSO4,
 etc., and in a solvent of dielectric constant 20 at room temperature the "Bjer-
 rum distance" is 14 Å for KCl. In solvents of very low dielectric constant only
 the salts of big complex ions dissolve and exhibit appreciable conductivity.
 Fig. 6 exhibits the effect of the dielectric constant. Fuoss 23 (with Kraus, 1933)




                      0.0




Fig. 6. The equivalent conductivity of tetraisoamylammonium nitrate in mixtures of
water and dioxane, as a function of the salt concentration c. From C. A. Klaus and R. M.
Fuoss, J. Am. Soc., 55(1933)21. Reproduced by permission of the surviving author and
                           of the American Chemical Society.


                           THE MOTION OF IONS                                  283
measured the conductivities of solutions of tetraisoamyl ammonium nitrate
over a wide range of concentrations in mixtures of water and dioxane, cover-
ing a range of dielectric constants from 78 to 2.25.
   The descending branches of the curves represent a mass-action equilibrium
between neutral pairs and individual ions. The minima and the increasing
branches indicate that at higher concentrations the current is carried mostly
by charged aggregates of several ions in mass-action equilibrium with smal-
ler neutral aggregates and simple pairs, inflexions in the rising branches sug-
gest ring-shaped neutral aggregates. Tentative estimates indicated that the
coulomb forces could be held largely responsible for the variations of the
various equilibrium constants. The long-range effects entail relatively small
corrections compared to the enormous range of variation displayed in Fig. 6.
Similar results are found quite often in solvents of low dielectric constants, but
by no means always; we know a good many examples where strong specific
interactions of the ions with each other or with the solvents are indicated. The
accumulation of more and better data have motivated efforts to refine our
original computations. Fuoss and I undertook such a computation24 (1955);
in Fig. 7 the predictions are compared with Shedlovsky’s excellent measure-
ments25 (1932). In form our computed results agreed substantially with those
of Pitts26 (1953); but certain differences in the models entail differences of
interpretation in terms of short-range interactions. In this context we might
seek at least a partial answer to the question how closely the effects of short-
range interactions on the conductivity may correspond to the effects on the
thermodynamic properties in the sense of Arrhenius. That task begins to look
feasible.
   The theoretical developments of the nineteen twenties inspired a search for
additional symptoms of long-range interaction, and several were found. For
example, in a rapidly alternating field the ion can be caused to change its
direction of motion before the relaxation force is fully developed. As a result
the conductivity increases somewhat through a range of frequencies which
corresponds to the (Maxwell) relaxation time, and the phase of the voltage
lags a little behind that of the current. Alternatively, a very strong field causes
an ion to move so fast that a screening cloud of the normal type has no time
to form; in the limit of high speeds the screening is performed by a deficiency
of other ions moving with the same speed (M. Wien; Onsager 29, 1934; Wil-
sonso, 1936; Eckstrom and Schmelzer31, 1939). Attempts to exploit this effect
as a means to eliminate the complications of long-range interactions for weak
electrolytes met with a surprise (Schiele32, 1932).


284                         1968 LARS ONSAGER




Fig. 7. Conductivities of chlorides in water. Measured points by Shedlovsky25 (1932);
computed curves by Onsager and Fuoss24 (1955). Reproduced by concurrence of co-
                                        author.


                           THE MOTION OF IONS                                  285




Fig. 8. Deviations from Ohm’s law in aqueous solutions of weak acids. Points from
                                    Schiele 32.

Fig. 8 actually displays the excess field effects for two weak acids over the
field effect for a strong one (HCl). The straight lines represent my own com-
putations 29 (1934). The field disturbs the dissociation equilibrium because it
helps pairs of ions to separate for good once they have reached the fringes of
the coulomb field. The assistance is nearly proportional to the absolute value
of the field. The negative intercepts represent mainly a decrease in the rate of
recombination by the screening clouds of ions, effective in the absence of a
strong external field. In the light of such analysis, the Wien effect seemed to
hold promise as a good tool for the study of fast recombination kinetics;
recent work-particularly by Eigen and DeMaeyer - has shown that this was
not a vain hope (Eigen9).
   Many solids exhibit electrolytic conduction, and symptoms of reaction
kinetics, Wien effect and so forth have been observed. Impurities and other
defects often play a decisive role, and these factors are none too readily con-
trolled, so that the standard of precision has to be rather modest; but it is often
possible to divine the mechanism. Arrhenius had to fight for his faith; but
those days are long past. We now realize quite clearly that it takes excess
charges moving somewhere to produce an electrolytic conductor. In a salt
crystal such an excess charge can be an additional ion in an abnormal "inter-
stitial" position (Frenkel defect) or a vacancy (Schottky defect) at a place
normally occupied by an ion. The position of the vacancy is changed when-
ever a neighboring ion moves in to fill it. In KCl, for example, Schottky de-
fects predominate as "ions" of both signs; but in AgCl some silver ions leave
their normal sites for interstitial positions to produce positive Frenkel and
negative Schottky defects. Schottky defects of opposite signs can combine to


286                         1968 LARS ONSAGER

form neutral vacancy pairs, and various complications which involve more
extensive defects can occur too. In any event, in well-ordered crystals we
generally expect that the ions will carry undivided elementary charges.
   Nevertheless, we have come to realize that in certain disordered crystals
elementary charges can be transported in installments by point defects. We
don’t have to go far. Ice is a good example! In that solid almost all current is
carried by mobile protons - excess or defect. First, let me explain the essentials
of the structure. Each molecule is surrounded by four neighbors at a distance
of 2.76 Å. Each hydrogen is placed near the line through the centers of two
oxygens and closer to one than to the other; the distances are about 1 Å and
1.76 Å. Two neutrality rules are normally satisfied: each oxygen carries two
near hydrogens, so that the water molecules are intact and neutral. The other
neutrality rule requires that one and only one hydrogen connects any two
neighboring oxygens : the hydrogen bonds are intact. Any violation of either
neutrality rule produces an electrically active defect.

(Animated cartoon)

A chance rotation of a molecule produces a pair of bonding defects; these
separate and move through the crystal by successive rotations of the partic-
ipating molecules. Other bonding defects enter the picture and wander
through it. A chance transfer of a proton from one molecule to its neighbor
produces a pair of ionic defects: positive hydronium H3O+, negative hydrox-
yl OH-. The positive ion moves by donating a proton, the negative by steal-
ing one. The motion of the ions leave molecules oriented against the field; the
drift of the bonding defects turns them into the field again.

(End of cartoon)

Estimates of the ionic mobilities vary over a considerable range; but in any
event the positive ionic defect is much more mobile in the solid than in the
liquid, and its mobility varies very little with the temperature. The mobilities
of the bonding defects are more like those of ordinary ions in the liquid, and
the temperature coefficients are similar. Nevertheless, the bonding defects
determine the direction of polarization in pure ice, because they are much
more numerous, possibly several pairs for each million molecules. As to the
task of transporting a direct current, that is about equally distributed between
bonding and ionic defects; each type carries about half an elementary charge.
One kind of current may get out of step with the other for a short time; but
this produces a polarization which equalizes the number currents.


                   Fig. 9. H-Bond chains and electrically active defects.

   If you apply the principle of least dissipation to this hind of coupling you
may be stretching some thermodynamic concepts just a little bit; but it is a
good safeguard against greater errors, Jaccard33 (1964) found it quite helpful.
   Many of the things I have told you have a bearing on problems in biology.
For example, how do ions get through in cell membrane? Observations on
poisoning suggest fixed facilities for such transport. Let me just toss on the
screen what I think might be an essential element of such a facility (Onsager 34,
1967; Fig. 9).
   This is a speculation, but one which is not yet refuted by observations and
seems generally compatible with physical principles. The hope that it might
be right adds interests to the exploration of ice and other protonic semi-
conductors.




 1.   S. Arrhenius, Svenska Vetensk.Akad.Handl.Bih., 8(1884)13-14.
 2.   S.Arrhenius, Z.Physik.Chem.(Leipzig), 1(1587)631.
 3.   W.Ostwald, Z.Physik.Chem.(Leipzig), (1888).
 4.   P.Debye and E.Hückel, Physik.Z., 24(1923)185,305.
 5.   R.A.Milikan, Nobel Lectures, Physics 1922-1941, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1965, p. 54.


288                         1968 LARS ONSAGER

 6. A.W.K.Tiselius, Nobel Lectures, Chemistry, 1942-1962, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1964,
     p. 195.
 7. L. Onsager, Physik.Z., 27 (1926) 382.
 8. L. Onsager, Physik.Z., 28 (1927) 227.
 9. M.Eigen, Nobel Lectures, Chemistry, 1963-1970, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1972, p.170.
10. K.Bennewitz, C.Wagner and K.Küchler, Physik.Z., 30(1929)623.
11. L. Onsager, Beret. 18e Skand. Naturforskermode, Copenhagen, 1929, pp. 440-441.
12. L.Onsager, Phys.Rev., 37(1931)405; 38(1931)2265.
13. D.A.MacInnes and J.A.Beattie, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 42(1920)1117.
14. L.Onsager and R.M.Fuoss, J.Phys.Chem., 36(1932)2689.
15. D.G.Miller, Chem.Rev., 60(1960)15.
16. D.A.MacInnes and A.S.Brown, Chem.Rev., 18(1936)335.
17. D.A.MacInnes and L.G.Longswortb, Chem.Rev., 9(1932) 171.
18. L.Onsager and S.K.Kim, J.Phys.Chem., 61(1957)215.
19. G.Kegeles and L.J.Gosting, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 69(1947)2516.
20. H.S.Harned and R.L.Nuttall, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 69(1947)736.
21. H.S.Harned, Chem.Rev., 40(1947)461.
22. N.Bjerrum, Kgl.Danske Videnskab. Selskab, Mat.-Fys. Medd., 7(1927)9.
23. C.A.Krausa and R.M.Fuoss, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 55(1933)21.
24. L.Onsager and R.M.Fuoss, Proc. Natl.Acad.Sci. (U.S.), 41(1955)274.
25. T.Shedlovsky, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 54(1932)1411.
26. E.Pitts, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A, 217(1953)43.
27. P.Debye and H.Falkenbagen, Physik.Z., 29(1928)401.
28. H.Falkenhagen, Rev.Mod.Phys., 3(1931)412.
29. L.Onsager, J.Chem.Phys., 2(1934)599.
30. W. S. Wilson, Dissertation, Yale, 1936.
31. H.Eckstrom and C.Schmelzer, Chem.Rev., 24(1939)367.
32. J.Schiele, Ann.Physik, [5]13(1932)811.
3 3. C.Jaccard, Physik. Kond.Materie, 3(1964)99.
34. L.Onsager, The Neurosciences, Rockefeller University Press, New York, 1967, p. 78.
