                            LINUS PAULING


                 Modern structural chemistry
                     Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1954



A century ago the structural theory of organic chemistry was developed.
Frankland in 1852 suggested that an atom of an element has a definite capacity
for combining with atoms of other elements - a definite valence. Six years
later Kekulé and Couper, independently, introduced the idea of valence
bonds between atoms, including bonds between two carbon atoms, and
suggested that carbon is quadrivalent. In 1861 Butlerov, making use for the
first time of the term "chemical structure", stated clearly that the properties
of a compound are determined by its molecular structure, and reflect the
way in which atoms are bonded to one another in the molecules of the com-
pound. The development of the structure theory of organic chemistry then
progressed rapidly, and this theory has been of inestimable value in aiding
 organic chemists to interpret their experimental results and to plan new
experiments.
    A most important early addition to organic structure theory was made
 by the first Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, Van ‘t Hoff, who in 1874 rec-
 ognized that the optical activity of carbon compounds can be explained by
 the postulate that the four-valence bonds of the carbon atom are directed
 in space toward the corners of a tetrahedron.
    The structure theory of inorganic chemistry may be said to have been
 born only fifty years ago, when Werner, Nobel Laureate in Chemistry in
 1913, found that the chemical composition and properties of complex in-
 organic substances could be explained by assuming that metal atoms often
 coordinate about themselves a number of atoms different from their valence,
 usually four atoms at the corners either of a tetrahedron or of a square co-
 planar with the central atom, or six atoms at the comers of an octahedron.
 His ideas about the geometry of inorganic complexes were completely veri-
 fied twenty years later, through the application of the technique of X-ray
 diffraction.
    After the discovery of the electron many efforts were made to develop
  an electronic theory of the chemical bond. A great contribution was made
 in 1916 by Gilbert Newton Lewis, who proposed that the chemical bond,


430                            1954 L.PAULING

such as the single bond between two carbon atoms or a carbon atom and
a hydrogen atom represented by a line in the customary structural formula
for ethane, consists of a pair of electrons held jointly by the two atoms that
are bonded together. Lewis also suggested that atoms tend to assume the
electronic configuration of a noble gas, through the sharing of electrons with
other atoms or through electron transfer, and that the eight outermost elec-
trons in an atom with a noble-gas electronic structure are arranged tetra-
hedrally in pairs about the atom. Applications of the theory and additional
contributions were made by many chemists, including Irving Langmuir and
Nevil Vincent Sidgwick.
   After the discovery of quantum mechanics in 1925 it became evident that
the quantum mechanical equations constitute a reliable basis for the theory
of molecular structure. It also soon became evident that these equations,
such as the Schrödinger wave equation, cannot be solved rigorously for any
but the simplest molecules. The development of the theory of molecular
structure and the nature of the chemical bond during the past twenty-five
years has been in considerable part empirical - based upon the facts of chem-
istry - but with the interpretation of these facts greatly influenced by quan-
tum mechanical principles and concepts.
   The solution of the wave equation for the hydrogen molecule-ion by Ø.
Burrau (Kgl. Danske Videnskab. Selskab, Mat. Fys. Medd., 7, (1927) 14) com-
pletely clarified the question of the nature of the one-electron bond in this
molecule-ion. Two illuminating quantum mechanical discussions of the
shared-electron-pair bond in the hydrogen molecule were then simulta-
neously published, one by Heitler and London (Z.Physik, 44 (1927) 455),
and the other by E. U. Condon (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 13 (1927) 466).
In the approximate solution of the wave equation for the hydrogen molecule
by Heitler and London a wave function is used that requires the two elec-
trons to be separated, each being close to one of the two nuclei. The treat-
ment by Condon permits the electrons to be distributed between the two
nuclei independently of one another, each occupying a wave function similar
to Burrau’s function for the hydrogen molecule-ion. Condon’s treatment
is the prototype of the molecular-orbital treatment that has been extensively
applied in the discussion of aromatic and conjugated molecules, and Heitler
and London’s treatment is the prototype of the valence-bond method. When
the effort is made to refine the two treatments they tend to become identical.
   These early applications of quantum mechanics to the problem of the
nature of the chemical bond made it evident that in general a covalent bond,


                   MODERN STRUCTURAL CHEMISTRY                              431
involving the sharing of a pair of electrons between two atoms, can be
formed if two electrons are available (their spins must be opposed, in order
that the bond be formed), and if each atom has available a stable electronic
orbital for occupancy by the electrons.
   The equivalence of the four bonds formed by a carbon atom, which had
become a part of chemical theory, was not at first easily reconciled with
the quantum mechanical description of the carbon atom as having one 2s
orbital and three 2p orbitals in its outer shell. The solution to this difficulty
was obtained when it was recognized that as a result of the resonance phe-
nomenon of quantum mechanics a tetrahedral arrangement of the four bonds
of the carbon atom is achieved’. The carbon atom can be described as
having four equivalent tetrahedral bond orbitals, which are hybrids of the
s and p orbitals. Further study of this problem led to the discovery of many
sets of hybrid bond orbitals, which could be correlated with bond angles,
magnetic moments, and other molecular properties2. In particular it was
found that sp 3, dsp2, and d2sp3 hybrid orbitals correspond respectively to the
tetrahedral, square planar, and octahedral configurations of inorganic com-
plexes that had been discovered by Werner. Conclusions as to the utilization
of atomic orbitals in bond formation can be drawn from experimental values
of magnetic moments. For example, the theory of the dsp 2 square complexes
of bipositive nickel, palladium, and platinum requires that these substances
be diamagnetic. The square complexes of bipositive palladium and platinum
had been recognized by Werner and their structure verified by Dickinson
(J. Am. Chem. Soc., 44 (1922) 2404); but the assignment of the square config-
 uration to the complexes of nickel which are diamagnetic had not been
 made until the development of the new theory.
    Further detailed information about the chemical bond resulted from a
 consideration of the energy of single bonds in relation to the relative elec-
 tronegativity of the bonded atoms 3. It was found that the elements can be
 assigned electronegativity values such as to permit the rough prediction of
 the heats of formation of compounds to which chemical structures involving
 only single bonds are conventionally assigned, and that many of the prop-
 erties of substances can be discussed in a simple way with the use of the
 electronegativity values of the elements.
    The idea that the properties of many organic compounds, especially the
 aromatic compounds, cannot be simply correlated with a single valence-
 bond structure, but require the assignment of a somewhat more complex
 electronic structure, was developed during the period 1923 to 1926 by a


432                           1954 L.PAULING

number of chemists, including Lowry, Lapworth, Robinson, and Ingold in
England, Lucas in the United States, and Arndt and Eistert in Germany. It
was recognized that the properties of aromatic and conjugated molecules can
be described by the use of two or more valence-bond structures, as reflected
in the names, the theory of mesomerism and the theory of intermediate
states, proposed for the new chemical theory. In 1931 Slater, E. Hückel, and
others recognized that these theories can be given a quantum mechanical
interpretation: an approximate wave function for a molecule of this sort can
be set up as the sum of wave functions representing the hypothetical struc-
tures corresponding to the individual valence-bond structures. The molecule
can then be described as having a structure that is a hybrid of the individual
valence-bond structures, or as resonating among these structures, and the
theory itself is now usually called the resonance theory ofchemical structure.
Very many quantitative calculations, approximate solutions of the wave
equation, for aromatic and conjugated molecules have been made, with re-
sults that are in general in good agreement with experiment. Perhaps more
important than the quantitative calculations is the possibility of prediction
by simple chemical arguments. For example, the amide group, an important
structural feature of proteins, can be described as resonating between two
structures, one with the double bond between the carbon atom and the
oxygen atom, and the other with the double bond between the carbon atom
and the nitrogen atom4:




General arguments about the stability of alternative structures indicate that
the structure with the double bond between carbon and oxygen should
contribute somewhat more to the normal state of the amide group than the
other structure; experience with other substances and acquaintance with the
results of quantum mechanical calculations suggest the ratio 60% : 40% for
the respective contributions of these structures. A 40% contribution of the
structure with the double bond between the carbon atom and the nitrogen
atom would confer upon this bond the property of planarity of the group
of six atoms; the resistance to deformation from the planar configuration
would be expected to be 40% as great as for a molecule such as ethylene,
containing a pure double bond, and it can be calculated that rotation of one
end by 3° relative to the other end would introduce a strain energy of 100
cal/mole. The estimate of 40% double-bond character for the C-N bond


                   MODERN STRUCTURAL CHEMISTRY                              433
is supported by the experimental value of the bond length, 1.32 Å, inter-
preted with the aid of the empirical relation between double-bond character
and interatomic distance5. Knowledge of the structure of amides and also
of the amino acids, provided by the theory of resonance and verified by
extensive careful experimental studies made by R. B. Corey and his co-
workers, has been of much value in the determination of the structure of
proteins.
   In the description of the theory of resonance in chemistry there has been
a perhaps unnecessarily strong emphasis on its arbitrary character. It is true,
of course, that a description of the benzene molecule can be given, in quan-
tum mechanical language, without any reference to the two Kekulé struc-
tures, in which double bonds and single bonds alternate in the ring. An
approximate wave function for the benzene molecule may be formulated
by adding together two functions, representing the two Kekulé structures,
and adding other terms, to make the wave function approximate the true
wave function for the molecule more closely, or it may be constructed with-
out explicit introduction of the wave functions representing the two Kekulé
structures. It might be possible to develop an alternative simple way of dis-
cussing the structure of the amide group, for example, that would have
permitted chemists to predict its properties, such as planarity; but in fact no
simple way of discussing this group other than the way given above, involv-
ing resonance between two valence-bond structures, has been discovered,
and it seems likely that the discussion of complex molecules in terms of
resonance among two or more valence-bond structures will continue in the
future to be useful to chemists, as it has been during the past twenty years.
   The convenience and usefulness of the concept of resonance in the discus-
sion of chemical problems are so great as to make the disadvantage of the
element of arbitrariness of little significance. Also, it must not be forgotten
that the element of arbitrariness occurs in essentially the same way in the
simple structure theory of organic chemistry as in the theory of resonance
- there is the same use of idealized, hypothetical structural elements. In the
resonance discussion of the benzene molecule the two Kekulé structures have
to be described as hypothetical: it is not possible to synthesize molecules with
 one or the other of the two Kekulé structures. In the same way, however,
 the concept of the carbon-carbon single bond is an idealization. The benzene
molecule has its own structure, which cannot be exactly composed of struc-
tural elements from other molecules. The propane molecule also has its own
structure, which cannot be composed of structural elements from other


434                            1954 L.PAULING

  molecules - it is not possible to isolate a portion of the propane molecule,
 involving parts of two carbon atoms and perhaps two electrons in between
  them, and say that this portion of the propane molecule is the carbon-carbon
 single bond, identical with a portion of the ethane molecule. The description
 of the propane molecule as involving carbon-carbon single bonds and car-
 bon-hydrogen single bonds is arbitrary; the concepts themselves are ideal-
 izations, in the same way as the concept of the Kekulé structures that are
 described as contributing to the normal state of the benzene molecule. Chem-
 ists have found that the simple structure theory of organic chemistry and
 also the resonance theory are valuable, despite their use of idealizations and
 their arbitrary character.
    Other extensions of the theory of the chemical bond made in recent years
 involve the concept of fractional bonds. Twenty-five years ago it was discov-
 ered that a simple theory of complex crystals with largely ionic structures,
 such as the silicate minerals, can be developed on the basis of the assumption
 that each cation or metal atom divides its charge or valence equally among
 the anions that are coordinated about it6. For example, in a crystal of topaz,
 A12SiO4F2, each silicon atom is surrounded by a tetrahedron of four oxygen
 atoms, and each aluminum atom is surrounded by an octahedron of four
 oxygen atoms and two fluorine atoms. The valence of silicon, 4, is assumed
 to be divided among four bonds, which then have the bond number 1 - they
are single bonds. The valence of aluminum, 3, is divided among six bonds,
each of which is a half bond. A stable structure results when the atoms are
arranged in such a way that each anion, oxygen or fluorine, forms bonds
equal to its valence. In topaz each oxygen atom forms one single bond with
silicon and two half bonds with aluminum, whereas each fluorine atom
forms only two half bonds with aluminum. The distribution of the valences
hence then corresponds to the bivalence of oxygen and the univalence of
fluorine. It was pointed out by W. L. Bragg that if the metal atoms are
idealized as cations (Si++++ and Al+++) and the oxygen and fluorine atoms
as anions (O-- and F-), this distribution corresponds to having the shortest
possible lines of force between the cations and the anions - the lines of force
need to reach only from a cation to an immediately adjacent anion, which
forms part of its coordination polyhedron. Occasionally ionic crystals are
found in which there are small deviations from this requirement, but only
rarely are the deviations larger than one quarter of a valence unit.
    Another application of the concept of fractional valence bonds has been
made in the field of metals and alloys. In the usual quantum mechanical


                  MODERN STRUCTURAL CHEMISTRY                            435
discussion of metals, initiated by W. Pauli (Z. Physik, 41 (1927) 81) and
Sommerfeld (Naturwiss.,15 (1927) 825), the assumption was made that only
a small number of electrons contribute significantly to the binding together
of the metal atoms. For example, it was customary to assume that only one
electron, occupying a 4s orbital, is significantly involved in the copper-cop-
per bonds in the metal copper. Sixteen years ago an analysis of the magnetic
properties of the transition metals was made that indicated that the number
of bonding electrons in the transition metals is much larger, of the order of
magnitude of six7. Iron, for example, can be described as having six valence
electrons, which occupy hybrid d3sp2 orbitals. The six bonds, corresponding
to these six valence electrons, resonate among the fourteen positions connect-
ing an iron atom with its fourteen nearest neighbors. The bonds to the eight
nearest neighbors have bond number approximately              and those to the
six slightly more distant neighbors have bond number           In gamma iron,
where each atom is surrounded by twelve equally distant neighbors, the
bonds are half bonds. The concept that the structure of metals and inter-
metallic compounds can be described in terms of valence bonds that resonate
among alternative positions, aided by an extra orbital on most or all of the
atoms (the metallic orbital), has been found of value in the discussion of the
properties of these substances 8 . The resonating-bond theory of metals is
supported especially strongly by the consideration of interatomic distances
in metals and intermetallic compound9.
   The iron atom has eight electrons outside of the argon shell of eighteen.
Six of these electrons are assumed, in the resonating-valence-bond theory,
to be valence electrons, and the remaining two are atomic electrons, oc-
cupying 3d orbitals, and contributing two Bohr magnetons to the magnetic
moment of the atom. A theory of the ferromagnetism of iron has recently
been developed10, in which, as suggested by Zener (Phys. Rev., 81 (1951)
440), the interaction producing the Weiss field in the ferromagnetic metal
is an interaction of the spin moments of the atomic electrons and uncoupled
spins of some of the valence electrons. It has been found possible to use
spectroscopic energy values to predict the number of uncoupled valence elec-
trons, and hence the saturation magnetic moment for iron: the calculation
leads to 0.26 uncoupled valence electrons per atom, and saturation magnetic
moment 2.26 Bohr magnetons, which might be subject to correction by two
 or three percent because of the contribution of orbital moment. The exper-
 imental value is 2.22. A calculated value of the Curie temperature in rough
agreement with experiment is also obtained.


436                                            1 9G5 4                   L.PAULIN

   The valence theory of metals and intermetallic compounds is still in a
rather unsatisfactory state. It is not yet possible to make predictions about
the composition and properties of intermetallic compounds with even a
small fraction of the assurance with which they can be made about organic
compounds and ordinary inorganic compounds. We may, however, hope
that there will be significant progress in the attack on this problem during
the next few years.
   Let us now return to the subject of the structural chemistry of organic
substances, especially the complex substances that occur in living organisms,
such as proteins. Recent work in this field 11 has shown the value of the use
of structural arguments that go beyond those of the classical structure theory
of organic chemistry. The interatomic distances and bond angles in the po-
lypeptide chains of proteins are precisely known, the bond distances to with-
in about 0.02 Å and the bond angles to within about 2°. It is known that the
amide groups must retain their planarity; the atoms are expected not to
deviate from the planar configuration by more than perhaps 0.05 Å. There
is rotational freedom about the single bonds connecting the alpha carbon
atom with the adjacent amide carbon and nitrogen atoms, but there are
restrictions on the configurations of the polypeptide chain that can be
achieved by rotations about these bonds: atoms of different parts of the chain
must not approach one another so closely as to introduce large steric repul-
sion, and in general the N-H and O atoms of different amide groups must
be so located relative to one another as to permit the formation of hydrogen
bonds, with N-H··· O distance equal to 2.79 0.10 Å and with the oxygen
atom not far from the N-H axis. These requirements are stringent ones.
Their application to a proposed hydrogen-bonded structure of a polypeptide
chain cannot in general be made by the simple method of drawing a struc-
tural formula; instead, extensive numerical calculations must be carried out,
or a model must be constructed. For the more complex structures, such as
those that are now under consideration for the polypeptide chains of collagen
and gelatin, the analytical treatment is so complex as to resist successful
execution, and only the model method can be used. In order that the prin-
ciples of modern structural chemistry may be applied with the power that
their reliability justifies, molecular models must be constructed with great
accuracy. For example, molecular models on the scale 2.5 cm = 1 Å have
to be made with a precision better than 0.01 cm.
   We may, I believe, anticipate that the chemist of the future who is in-
terested in the structure of proteins, nucleic acids, polysaccharides, and other


                    MODERN STRUCTURAL CHEMISTRY                                 437
complex substances with high molecular weight will come to rely upon a
new structural chemistry, involving precise geometrical relationships among
the atoms in the molecules and the rigorous application of the new structural
principles, and that great progress will be made, through this technique, in
the attack, by chemical methods, on the problems of biology and medicine.




 1. L. Pauling, The Shared-Electron Chemical Bond, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 14
    (1928)359-362.
 2. L. Pauling, The Nature of the Chemical Bond. Application of Results Obtained
    from the Quantum Mechanics and from a Theory of Paramagnetic Susceptibility
    to the Structure of Molecules, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 53 (1931) 1367-1400.
 3. L. Pauling, The Nature of the Chemical Bond. IV. The Energy of Single Bonds
    and the Relative Electronegativity of Atoms, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 54 (1932) 3570-
    3582.
 4. L. Pauling, Interatomic Distances in Covalent Molecules and Resonance between
    Two or More Lewis Electronic Structures, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 18 (1932)
    293-297.
 5. L. Pauling, L. O. Brockway, and J. Y. Beach, The Dependence of Interatomic
    Distance on Single Bond-Double Bond Resonance, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 57 (1935)
    2705-2709.
 6. L. Pauling, The Principles Determining the Structure of Complex Ionic Crystals,
    J Am. Chem. Soc., 51 (1929) 1010-1026.
 7. L. Pauling, The Nature of the Interatomic Forces in Metals, Phys. Rev., 54 (1938)
    899-904.
 8. L. Pauling, A Resonating-Valence-Bond Theory of Metals and Intermetallic Com-
    pounds, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, A 196 (1949) 343-362.
 9. L. Pauling, Atomic Radii and Interatomic Distances in Metals, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
    69 (1947) 542-553.
10. L. Pauling, A Theory of Ferromagnetism, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 39 (1953)
     551-560.
11. L. Pauling and R. B. Corey, Two Hydrogen-Bonded Spiral Configurations of the
    Polypeptide Chain, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 72 (1950) 5349; L. Pauling, R. B. Corey,
    and H. R. Branson, The Structure of Proteins, Two Hydrogen-Bonded Helical
    Configurations of the Polypeptide Chain, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 37 (1951)
    205-511; L. Pauling and R. B. Corey, Stable Configurations of Polypeptide
    Chains, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, B 141 (1953) 21-33.
