                                 M   ANFRED      EIGEN


                     Immeasurably fast reactions*
                          Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1967



                                1. "Prejudice and Pride"

"The rate of true neutralization reactions has proved to be immeasurably
fast". I found this quotation in Eucken’s Lehrbuch der Chemischen PhysikI while
I was preparing for my doctor’s examination. Although as a student of
Eucken, this book was for me the "bible of physical chemistry", I was then at
the age when one accepts practically nothing unquestioned, and so I started to
reflect on just how fast an "immeasurably fast" reaction might be.
   Clearly, the two reagents - the H+ and OH- ions in the case of neutrali-
zation - must come together before they can combine to form the reaction
product: the H2O molecule. The maximum rate will be determined by the
frequency of such encounters or collisions, and this in turn will depend only
on the diffusion rate and the mean separation of the reaction partners. This
problem had already been analysed by Langevin2, von Smoluchowski3, Ein-
stein 4, Onsager5, and Debye6, all of whom had derived expressions for the
frequency of ionic collisions. It was fortunate that I was unable at that time to
find in Göttingen Debye’s paper in which this problem is solved in general
form, for this meant that I had to sit down and derive again for myself the
expression for the rate constant of diffusion-controlled reactions. The result
was a theory which also applies to the mechanism of reactions in which not
every encounter is successful. In such reactions the "lifetime of the collision
complex" i. e. the time after which the partners diffuse apart once more if the
encounter has not resulted in reaction, plays an important part. This time
worked out as



* The investigation of fast reactions particularly the more recent applications in biologi-
cal chemistry, has been dealt with in more detail in a number of recently published
reviews 55,56,66,72,75 . The present lecture is not intended to duplicate these papers, but
represents an attempt to record the development of a scientific idea from a personal point
of view.


                  IMMEASURABLY FAST REACTIONS                                 171
where R is the separation at closest approach, D + and D - are the diffusion
coefficients of the reagents, and is the energy of electrostatic interaction
divided by kT (ref. 15).
   If in this expression we expand the exponential term for the electrostatic
interaction of the reaction partners, which is generally relatively small, and
use Einstein’s correlation between the diffusion coefficient and the "mean
square displacement", we find that the encounter time is simply the time re-
quired by the reaction partners to diffuse a distance corresponding to their
separation at closest approach. Using the known values for D
sec) , this time works out at




If the actual "chemical" change takes place more quickly than this, the reaction
rate is determined entirely by the collision frequency, and if it takes place
more slowly, the reaction rate is independent of the rate of diffusion of the
reaction partners (and hence of the viscosity of the solvent). It is then simply
given by the rate of the chemical change (determined by a frequency factor
and an exponential term containing the activation energy) multiplied by the
statistical probability of the formation of the reaction complex.
    At that time a reaction time of the order of magnitude of 10-10 set did in fact
seem "immeasurable".
   We generally describe as "fast" anything that takes place quickly compared
to the rate of resolution of our sense perceptions. However, since our per-
ceptions are in turn based on chemical processes - including the charge neutra-
lization reactions that have just been mentioned - these processes must neces-
sarily be "fast" - indeed "extremely fast".
    But what does "immeasurable" mean? If we wish to measure the rate of a
chemical reaction, we must do two things: (1) induce the reaction; and (2)
follow the course of the reaction in time.
    Chemists generally induce a reaction by mixing the reagents with each
other. This must be done very quickly, and here the first difficulty appeared:
in many cases the mixing takes longer than the entire reaction under investi-
gation. Attempts were therefore made to reduce the mixing time, and
Hartridge and Roughton7 succeeded by using a flow method in which the
partners flow together at high velocity and are mixed together within about
one-thousandth of a second. At the same time, Hartridge and Roughton
also solved the second problem, that of the rapid observation of the course


172                       1967 MANFRED EIGEN

of the reaction. In the observation tube the time sequence of the reaction
appears as a sequence in space, since the mixture flows at a constant velocity.
The distance from the mixing chamber (in which the reaction is induced)
is a measure of the age of the reaction mixture. This method was undoubt-
edly a great step forward, and it was subsequently refined and developed
into an extremely effective instrument, especially for the enzyme chemist,
by Britton Chance and his school in particular, but the reaction times were
restricted to the range of milliseconds. Neutralization reactions thus still
proved to be "immeasurably fast". If, as has just been shown, we had to
assume that the shortest reaction time that might have to be observed was
of the order of 10-10-10 -11 sec, there was a gap here of some 7 or 8 orders of
magnitude. On a logarithmic scale, this is the same span as between a milli-
second and a day or between a second and the duration of the studies for a
doctor’s degree, or again the span between the duration of the shortest "meas-
urable" reaction at that time and the time spent in the laboratory to carry
out the experiment. This was the situation around 1950, and in this sense
neutralization reactions would still have to be regarded as "immeasurably
fast" today.
   However, there are always two possible courses when one is faced by an
obstacle. One can either attempt to overcome the obstacle, as was done by
Hartridge and Roughton, or to get around it.
   In this case, the second course achieved our objective more quickly: we
tried to get around the obstacle. This can be done in the following way: We
know that chemical reactions are never entirely completed, and that an
equilibrium between the various reagents is always established. Such chemical
equilibrium is not static - it does not imply that the individual changes comes
to a halt. The situation is, rather, that an opposing reaction sets in and ensures
that eventually the number of products formed in unit time becomes equal to
the number breaking down in that time. The number of units of the various
partners will then on average remain constant. In the case of neutralization,
    "equilibrium" this means that H 2O molecules are continually breaking down
into H+ and OH- ions, but that these ions very rapidly combine again to form
water molecules, so that on average there are very few H+ and OH-ions "in
  equilibrium" with very many H 2O molecules. In pure water the ratio of the
number of H2O molecules to be number of H+ ions is almost 10 9. Unfortu-
nately, it is not generally possible to see the rapid "to and fro" occurrence of
these reactions in equilibrium, even if one attempts to "observe" the processes
with "rapid resolution" methods. The individual reaction signals average out


                   IMMEASURABLY           FAST    REACTIONS                      173
precisely*. It would be necessary to seek to "align" or "synchronize" these
mutually compensating individual signals. This can be done by rapidly
disturbing the equilibrium, thus producing an "excess reaction" in one par-
ticular direction for a brief period (this reaction naturally vanishes when
equilibrium is re-established). The only further requirement is that we must
look quickly enough to see the decay of the excess reaction. We are therefore
once again faced with the problem of inducing the reaction and observing it,
but it is no longer necessary for us to mix the reaction partners. We need only
transmit the inducing signal into the reaction system and then receive the
reaction signal from the system. Since the signal must act through a large
number of molecules, it must always travel a certain distance, and since there
is a limit to the velocity of the signal it is not possible to measure "infinitely"
short times. Where then does the limit lie?
   The inducing signal can be either mechanical or electrical. A mechanical
signal, for instance a pressure wave such as is observed in an explosion, propa-
gates at about the velocity of sound, i.e. at about 10 5 cm/sec in condensed
phases. An electric signal, for example a travelling electric wave, is about one
hundred thousand times as fast, and its rate of propagation (in condensed
phases) is only slightly less than the velocity of light in vacuum. If such signals
are made to travel distances of 1-10 mm (the diameter of a measurement cell),
we can attain "resolution times" of 1            in the case of mechanical signals and
of less then 10 set with electrical signals. It is naturally also necessary to use
                -10



inertia-free, i.e. optical or electrical, signals to observe the reaction. We shall
see that the main difficulty will lie in recording such signals. In the case of
chemical equilibrium reactions, the signals emitted are so weak that they are
only slightly above the "thermal noise". However, we can see that in principle
we have already solved our problem, namely that of following chemical re-
actions down to within the time range of 10-10 sec. "Immeasurably" fast reac-
tions should therefore be measurable after all.
   However, I must now make two reservations: (1) When a problem has
been solved in principle it is still far from having been solved specifically. (2)
New discoveries are not generally made in this deductive manner, even if it
appears so in retrospect.
   First, chance had to come to our aid.


* We shall for the moment omit from consideration a fairly new class of methods in
which the line width of resonance signals emitted by the reaction partners provides a
certain amount of information about these individual processes.


174                       1967 MANFRED EIGEN

                            2. A Trip to the Seaside

At the Third Physics Institute of the University of Göttingen, my colleagues
Konrad Tamm and Günther Kurtze had investigated the absorption of sound
by aqueous electrolyte solutions. Behind these investigations there was a
technical problem, that of measuring distances in sea water by means of
acoustic probes. When an acoustic signal is emitted in the sea, it does not
travel far; it is absorbed. Now, it was found that in certain frequency ranges
sea water absorbs sound even more strongly than distilled water.
    What was the reason for this phenomenon?
    Tamm and his colleagues - and also some groups of workers in the United
States 9,10 - had found that it is the magnesium sulphate present in the sea water
which is essentially responsible for the absorption. However, it was not clear
to what interaction the energy loss of the sound waves was due. Was it the
hydrodynamic properties of the ions, was it their interaction with the water,
i. e. hydration of the ions, or was it some interaction between the ions them-
selves? Since I had considered such interactions in some detail in my disser-
tation, Tamm and Kurtze turned to me, and we started a joint programme of
measurements. It was very quickly found that the absorption could not be
caused solely by the interaction between the Mg2+ and SO42- ions and the
water, for neither magnesium chloride nor sodium sulphate dissolved on their
own produced comparable effects. On the other hand, neither could a simple
inter-ionic interaction be the explanation, either in terms of the Debye-
Hückel ion clouds, for which we would expect a broad continuum of ab-
sorption at high frequenciesII, or in terms of ionic association as described by
Nernst12a or Bjerrum 12b , which should give a single absorption maximum.
Two separate maxima were in fact found in the ultrasonic region, one at about
105 Hz and the other at about 108 Hz, which had to be in some way related to
each other because of the way in which they were found to depend on con-
centration 13. In short, it appeared that there was an interaction between mag-
nesium ions, sulphate ions, and water molecules in the form of a sequence of
linked reactions. Here I should anticipate what will be said in a later section
(Section 8a, p. 193) by stating that this was in fact the correct explanation: the
interaction involves a stepwise substitution of the water molecules bound in
the coordination shells of the magnesium-aquo complex by the sulphate ion,
with the absorption continuum of the ion-cloud interactions appearing only
at higher frequencies (which could not be reached at that time).


                   IMMEASURABLY FAST REACTIONS                                   175
                                3. Back to Physics

At this point I feel I should interrupt my account of the historical course of
events, and show how chemical interactions can cause the absorption of sound
in the first place.
   A sound wave represents an adiabatic pressure change progressing period-
ically in space and time. In water, as a result of the density maximum at 4ºC,
the simultaneously appearing temperature wave is very small in magnitude
compared to the pressure wave. Thus, in the present case essentially we have
to consider only the effect of the pressure change on the chemical equilibrium.
A chemical equilibrium is always pressure-dependent whenever the reaction
partners (in equilibrium with each other) differ in volume. When this is the
case, a pressure change will induce a chemical excess reaction which takes
place at a finite rate and leads to adaptation to the particular equilibrium state
concerned. If the periodic pressure change takes place very rapidly in relation
to the chemical reaction, the system will practically not "notice" these changes:
the rapid positive and negative disturbances average out before the onset of
any appreciable reaction (cf. Fig. 1a).
   On the other hand, if the pressure change takes place very slowly compared
to the chemical reaction, the system follows these changes with practically no
lag. The sound then merely propagates at a slightly lower velocity, for the
compressibility of the medium contains a contribution from the state of the
chemical equilibrium (cf. Fig. 1b). Now, the interesting case is that in which
the rate of re-establishment of equilibrium is comparable to the rate of the
pressure change (i. e. when the time constant for the establishment of chemical
equilibrium is of the same order of magnitude as the period of the acoustic
wave). In this case the system tries to adapt continuously to the pressure change
but does not quite succeed, so that it lags behind the pressure change by a finite
phase difference. The chemical state is characterized by the concentrations of
the reaction partners or the reaction variable. Because of the finite volume
difference between the reaction partners in equilibrium, a volume increment
characteristic of the chemical change follows the pressure change with a cer-
tain phase lag. In all fields of physics where there is this kind of phase difference
between "conjugate" variables there is a transfer of energy (in this case a re-
duction in the amplitude of the sound waves). For a finite phase difference, the
integral           different for the compression and dilatation periods.
   The physical situation just described can also be given mathematical ex-
pression. The essential steps in the calculation are shown in Tables 1A and 1B.


176                           1967 MANFRED EIGEN




Fig. 1a. Periodic disturbances of a chemical equilibrium. Continuous line, disturbing
parameter (e.g. sound pressure, affinity). Broken line, instantaneous value of an "inter-
nal" system parameter (e.g. concentration, reaction variable, volume increment of the
chemical change). (I) The disturbance occurs slowly in relation to the chemical change.
(2) The period of the        disturbance and the reaction time are of the same order of magni-
              tude. (3) The disturbance is rapid in relation to the reaction.

Fig. 1b. Amplitude and phase of the equilibrium disturbance and the energy absorption
during one period, all as functions of the angular frequency =       in the relaxation
                                         range.


The starting point is the reaction rate of a particular system. For small distur-
bances the relevant differential equation can always be reduced to linear form.
The concentration variable is then       i.e. the deviation of the concentration at
any instant from a given reference value (e.g. the mean in the case of periodic
disturbances) ; is then the deviation of the hypothetical-equilibrium value
(relative to the instantaneous value of the pressure) from the same reference
value. The deviation of the instantaneous value of the concentration from its
equilibrium value is then             This difference is proportional to the rate of
the chemical change. In the case of periodic disturbances, the differential
equation has a complex solution. The imaginary part ultimately re-appears in
the absorption coefficient ( cf. also Table 1B and Fig. 2). The decreases in am-
plitude, phase difference, and energy absorption per wavelength (2              are
shown as functions of frequency in Fig. 1b. The chemical contribution to


                  IMMEASURABLY            FAST    REACTIONS                         177
                                      Table 1
        Dispersion and absorption of sound as a result of chemical relaxation
    (A comprehensive theoretical treatment with bibliography is given in ref. 32)




compressibility has been assumed to be small compared to the contribution of
the solvent.
   The calculations shown in Table 1 formed the starting point for our investi-
gations on fast chemical reactions . It can be seen that the relaxation time of
                                  14,15



the chemical equilibrium state can be read off directly from the variation of
the absorption with frequency e.g. as the reciprocal of the frequency at the
maximum absorption per wavelength. This relaxation time is simply related
to the kinetic constants of the reaction system, as shown by the example in
Fig. 3. This gives us a direct approach to the kinetics of fast reactions - even
reactions that were hitherto "immeasurably" fast.
   Of course this simple theory of single-stage relaxation processes cannot be
applied directly to magnesium sulphate, but a sufficiently simple system was


178                          1967 MANFRED EIGEN




Fig. 2. Schematic representation of a plane propagating sound wave. Top, undamped
                       (U real); below, damped (U complex).


                                                              --




Fig. 3. Reciprocal of the relaxation time of a dissociation equilibrium as a function of the
equilibrium concentration of the reaction partners. The gradient and the intercept on the
          ordinate give the rate constants for recombination and dissociation.


                    IMMEASURABLY FAST REACTIONS                                     179
soon found: the hydrolysis equilibrium of ammonia in aqueous solution. A
predictive calculation of the absorption and relaxation time (assuming diffu-
sion-controlled recombination of NH4+ and OH-) gave full agreement with
the experimental data15,16 (Fig. 4.).




Fig. 4. Absorption of sound as a result of chemical relaxation in a system consisting of
NH, in aqueous solution. Q. (absorption cross-section x wavelength) as a function of
frequency (Q corresponds to the energy absorption coefficient related to the total
number of NH, molecules per unit volume). Parameter, molar concentration of NH,.


At the same time it was also possible to solve a problem which had interested
chemists for a long time. It was shown that in alkaline solution the reaction
does not proceed via dissociation of the cationic acid (cf. the reaction scheme
given in Fig. 5). In the reverse reaction, the dissociation of H2O is accelerated
by about ten orders of magnitude by the vicinity of NH3:




The situation was much more complicated in the case of magnesium sulphate.
Here it was first necessary to assume a scheme of stages for the stepwise for-
mation of an aquo complex between the magnesium and sulphate ions (see
Section 8a, p. 193). For the reaction rates of the different stages we get a system
of linked differential equations from which, after reduction to linear form, the


180                         1967 MANFRED EIGEN




Fig. 5. Equilibrium state in the ammonia-water system. The direction of the reaction
depends on the pH of the solution. There are three coupled reactions: ( 1) neutralization
of the cationic acid NH.,+ and splitting of water in the complex NH 3· H2O; (2) depro-
tonation of the cationic acid and protonation of the anhydro base NH3; (3) dissociation
of the solvent water and recombination of the H+ and OH- ions originating from the
                                        solvent.

relaxation times are found as (negative, reciprocal) eigenvalues18,19 . They
cannot in general be attributed to individual stages of the reaction, as with the
normal frequencies of a system of coupled oscillators, but the rate constants
ofindividual stages of the reaction can be determined from the relaxation time
spectrum with the aid of suitable transformations.



                                4. Historical Review

The principle of the method described above is quite well-known to physi-
cists. Albert Einstein20 had already shown in 1916 that relaxation effects ap-
pear in a dissociating gas subjected to the periodic temperature variations of a
sound wave, and that these effects result in a dispersion of the velocity of
sound. At about the same time, Walter Nernst and his associates attempted to
detect this effect experimentally in the 2                    system21. However,
these measurements were unsuccessful because the techniques of sound trans-
mission were still insufficiently developed. Later, i.e. at about the beginning of
the thirties, and following investigations by K.F. Herzfeld 22 and H.O.Kneser
(ref.23), the interest of physicists and physical chemists turned to the relax-
ation effects which result from a lag in the establishment of equilibrium in
"internal" temperature, i.e. to lags in energy transfers between the different
degrees of freedom (translation, rotation, and vibration). It was only after
these investigations that the "chemical" relaxation effects were detected and
analysed. At about the same time, John Iamb and his school were studying
the absorption of sound by rotation isomers24,25 . The detection of chemical


                  IMMEASURABLY FAST REACTIONS                                181

relaxation effects in gases by means of sound absorption measurements was
eventually achieved for the classic example of the dissociation of N 2O4, but
only after a delay of about 40 years26. In the meantime, the theory of the
dispersion of sound based on the thermodynamics of irreversible processes 27,28
had also been developed in very general form, especially by J. Meixner , .
                                                                           29 30



   Today we know the relaxation spectra of many chemical reactions, but
very few of them derive from sound absorption measurements. The sound
absorption method is generally too insensitive for studying chemical relax-
ation effects. One of the reasons for this is the high background absorption of
the solvent. Since this increases with the square of the frequency, very different
methods are required to cover a wide frequency range. Thus, at 100 kHz the
amplitude of sound in pure water falls by about 37% (1/e) over a distance of
4 km, while at 100 MHz the same percentage reduction takes place over a
distance of only 4 mm.
   At low frequencies (< 100 kHz) resonance or reverberation techniques are
generally used, and at very high frequencies (> 10 MHz) mainly pulse-echo
methods are preferred. Several methods are available in the intermediate fre-
quency range: interferometric methods and direct measurement of the damp -
ing from observations on the amplitude of the sound from the refraction of
light waves in the acoustic field (after Debye and Sears). A review of the
various techniques of measurement can be found in refs. 31 and 32. Because of
the long wavelengths at low frequencies, large volumes of liquid and hence
relatively large amounts ofsubstances are required at such frequencies. At high
frequencies it is necessary to work with very high concentrations because of
the strong background absorption of the solvent. Even if it has by now by and
large proved to be possible to adapt various sound absorption methods to the
requirements of chemical relaxation studies33 - e.g. by considerably reducing
the liquid volume while at the same time increasing the sensitivity by using
difference methods - the application of this method, particularly to the more
interesting multi-stage reaction mechanisms of biochemistry, remains very
limited.



                                 5. New Paths

Our first thoughts were along the lines of developing new relaxation methods
in which the pressure of the sound waves was replaced by another variable,
possibly electric field strength. It is of course impossible to carry out such


182                          1967 MANFRED EIGEN

measurements in travelling electromagnetic waves, for the wavelengths are
larger than those of sound waves of comparable frequency by a factor of 105.
On the other hand, it should be relatively easy to determine dielectric dis-
persion and absorption directly by means of capacitance measurements using
tuned circuits. On examining the literature, we found that although there was
here a highly developed measurement technique and a great wealth of experi-
mental data, it related exclusively to the relaxation of dipole orientation and
not to chemical effects. The reason for this can be seen immediately from
Fig. 6: the equilibrium constant for a chemical change of polar molecules is a
quadratic function of the electric field. Small amplitudes are generally used in
determining the dielectric constant (ε) or the energy loss (tan δ ), so that the
chemical increment does not appear in the linear field terms measured. It was
but a short step from recognizing this to going on to develop an appropriate
non-linear method34, even if this left a whole series of technical problems to
be solved. In a resonant circuit of high efficiency (with sharp resonance line),
a strong steady field is superimposed on a low-amplitude alternating field.
The associated chemical reaction leads to a broadening of, and shift in, the
resonance line, which can be measured as a function of the field strength
         concentration (corresponding to a second-order reaction) and fre-




Fig. 6. Dependence of the equilibrium constant K of a chemical change on the electric
field. (Example : the base pairing reaction adenine [A] + uracil [U].) In dilute solution
the "reaction moment" ∆ M varies as shown with the dipole moments of the individual
          reaction partners. E, electric field strength; kT, Boltzmann factor.


                     IMMEASURABLY FAST REACTIONS                                         183




Fig. 7. Dielectric absorption in strong fields as a result of chemical relaxation. (Increment
in the loss angle        as a function of frequency.) The two maxima are the result of a
relaxation of the coupled chemical reactions indicated. A,                       B, 2-amino-
                      pyrimidine, in cyclohexane, 22ºC. 200 kV/cm.




quency                   In contradistinction to the simple orientation relaxation
of dipoles (which generally occurs in the microwave range), the relaxation
time of the chemical change is concentration-dependent in accordance with
the order of the reaction. This enables the chemical effects to be distinguished
from other relaxation effects relatively easily - once they have been made
accessible to measurement in the first place. The main factor responsible for
the technical difficulties of such measurements is that the effect is very small.
Field strengths of up to 3.105 V/cm (the breakdown limit) were required,
and tan (the loss angle) had to be accurate to fractions of 10-6. My colleagues
Klaus Bergmann and Leo De Maeyer developed a method of this accu-
                    35                       36



racy. Fig. 7 shows some absorption curves           as a function of the frequency
of the alternating field) obtained by Julian Suarez37. The curves are for two
coupled association reactions of hydrogen-bridge-forming substances in
non-polar solvents. Unfortunately, the method cannot be applied directly
to polar solvents (because their conductivity is too high), but pulse methods
are available in this case, as will be shown later in Section 6 (p.184).


184                       1967 MANFRED EIGEN

   The dielectric method has attained great importance because it enables
direct investigation of the kinetics of hydrogen bonding. This method thus
enables the kinetics of the individual stages of base pairing in nucleic acids to
be followed directly 38. With long-chain macromolecules it can happen that
orientation requires a longer time than the chemical reaction, and in this case
the chemical relaxation appears in the linear terms as well. Gerhard Schwarz
used a method like this (which does not require a strong steady field to be
superimposed) to investigate the kinetics of structural changes in polypep-
tides39.




Periodic relaxation methods have added greatly to our knowledge of the
kinetics of chemical reactions, particularly in the time range from micro-
seconds to nanoseconds, but their use has always been confined to specific
individual cases. In many cases the contribution of a chemical change to the
thermodynamic parameters of the solution as a whole (e.g. its compressibility
or dielectric permittivity) is so small that precise measurement is impossible.
This is particularly so when we are concerned with multi-stage reactions, in
which the relaxation spectrum could give detailed information on the inter-
mediate stages and hence on the mechanism of the reaction. Here the approach
to adopt was to follow the chemical change directly by means of specific
properties of the reaction partners. This principle has now become familiar to
us: in its simplest form, it can be formulated as follows:
   The equilibrium constant must be rapidly changed by a constant (small)
amount and the establishment of the new equilibrium followed immediately.
   We then obtain a system of homogeneous linear differential equations for
the reaction rates. The solutions are exponential functions with real, negative
arguments.
   However, it is not always simple to carry out in practice what appears to be
simple in mathematical terms or in its physical principle.
   Although we have now learned how to produce such step-like disturbances
(with steep rising and descending branches), we initially attempted to use
sinusoidal single pulses. As the disturbing parameter for investigating electro-
lytic dissociation equilibria we used the electric field strength. M. Wien40 had
already shown at the beginning of the thirties that binary electrolytes exhibit
increased dissociation in strong fields. Lars Onsager41 gave a complete theo-


                     IMMEASURABLY FAST REACTIONS                                          185




    Fig. 8. Relaxation behaviour following pulse-like disturbance of equilibrium.




Fig. 9. Dispersion of the dissociation field effect in the systems ammonia andacetic acid in
aqueous solution. The (normalized) change in the amplitude of the shift at equilibrium
( cf. Fig.8) is plotted as a function of the reciprocal of the pulse duration (relative to the
relaxation time). is the angular frequency of the critically damped sinusoidal pulse;
                                      cf. ref. 42.) t, 20ºC.


186                          1967 MANFRED EIGEN




Fig.10. 200 kV high-voltage apparatus, pulse circuit, and impedance bridge with which
the first chemical relaxation measurements using the dissociation field effect were carried
                               out in 1953/1954 ( cf. Fig.9).



retical interpretation of this "dissociation field effect". Fig. 8 shows how the
dispersion of this effect can be measured with the aid of short-duration field
pulses, and hence used to determine the relaxation time for the chemical
equilibrium state. The amplitude of the shiftin equilibrium - measured as a
change in conductivity - was determined directly with the help of a null
method specially developed for this purpose in collaboration with Josef
Schoen 42. Fig. 9 shows the dispersion of the amplitude of the field effect as a
function of pulse duration (or the frequency of a strongly damped harmonic
vibration). The high-voltage apparatus used at that time is shown in Fig. 10.
   A fairly large number of individual measurements with different pulse
lengths were required to obtain a dispersion curve, but in contrast the relax-
ation time could be measured in a single experiment using a rectangular pulse.
This advantage appeared to us decisive in determining the rate of a neutrali-
zation reaction. In this case it is possible to obtain a measurable disturbance in
the equilibrium only by starting with "very pure" water, in which 10-7 moles
of H+ and OH- ions are in equilibrium with about 55 moles of H 2O. A change
in the equilibrium concentration of the ions can easily be followed by means
of the electrical conductivity provided no contaminating ions get into the


                   IMMEASURABLY FAST REACTIONS                                       187

solution. But this is precisely what happens when the highly purified water is
subjected to too many high-voltage pulses. A single rectangular pulse - pro-
duced by a double spark circuit17- made it possible for the first time to measure
the chemical relaxation of the dissociation of H2O and hence the neutralization
kinetics. At the same time, a stationary field method made possible the direct
measurement of dissociation rates (e.g. in ice crystals)43, thus enabling the
kinetic parameters of the transport and neutralization of proton charges in
hydrogen-bridge systems to be finally established.




Today we use step-type disturbances, which are the most suitable for study-
ing complex, multi-stage reaction mechanisms (see Fig. 11), almost exclu-
sively. This procedure enables the relaxation spectrum to be followed directly
by means of discrete steps (with logarithmic time scale). Fig. 12 shows the
relaxation spectrum of a biochemical reaction. With a closely packed se-
quence of steps (a relaxation continuum) we obtain clearly defined mean
values, either from the integral or from the initial gradient of the relaxation
curve (mean values oft and       respectively44).




Fig. II. Relaxation resulting from the disturbance of an equilibrium by a temperature
jump. (1) A single relaxation process on a linear time scale. (2) Relaxation spectrum on a
                                 logarithmic time scale.


                              1967 MANFRED EIGEN




Fig. 12. Oscillogram of a relaxation spectrum with 3 time constants (the system glyceral-
dehyde-3-phosphate                                  The spectrum describes the reaction
mechanism of an allosteric enzyme. The relaxation measurements yielded important
information on the nature of allosteric control ( cf. refs. 66-68, see also Figs. 22 and 23).
pH, 8.5; 40ºC; D0= 6.10 -4(M). (a) 0.2 msec/cm,              = 7000sec-1. (b) 1.0msec/cm,
                       = 690sec . (c) 500 msec/cm,
                                 -1
                                                               = 0.2 sec-1.


The time resolution depends on the steepness of the step and also on the
signal-to-noise ratio that can be attained. Fig. 13 shows as example the field
effect of oxyhaemoglobin, measured by Georg Ilgenfritz45 with a time reso-
lution of about 50 nsec. In this case, the rectangular field pulse was obtained in
the form of a travelling wave by discharging a high-tension cable across two
spark gaps (Fig. 14)46.
   Pressure waves with very steep ascending and descending branches can also
be produced in a shock tube on a similar principle. The shock tube is now a
standard instrument for studying fast reactions in gas kinetics 47. Fig. 15 shows




Fig. 13. Oscillogram of the dissociation field effect in oxyhaemoglobin (time scale 10-6
sec/cm, relaxation time ~ 50 nsec). The measurement was made by the method de-
scribed in Fig. 14. System: oxyhaemoglobin (sheep), conc. 10-4 M, pH 8.9,      577
                 field strength 75 kV/cm, time constant 10-7 sec.


                     IMMEASURABLY FAST REACTIONS                                          189




method for studying chemical relaxation. The (rectangular) electric pulse is produced by
discharging a coaxial high-tension cable (time of travel about 3                  The cable is
connected through one spark gap (on the left in the figure) with a resistance matched to
the impedance of the cable and through the other spark gap (above, right) to the (high-
resistance) measuring cell. Depending on which of the two spark gaps is triggered first,
it is possible to produce pulse durations that are fractions or multiples of the time of
travel (in the former case the energy is dissipated in the matched resistance, and in the
latter multiple reflection occurs at the measuring cell). The field effect is recorded spectro-
photometrically. (The apparatus was constructed by Georg Ilgenfritz, Dissertation,
                                       Göttingen, 1966.)


the principle of a shock tube for liquids developed by Alexander Jost for
studying fast reactions in solutions 4 8. Simple pressure jump methods have
been given by Hans Strehlow48, among others.
   However, particular mention should be made here of temperature jump
methods. Very simple in principle, these methods are especially wide-ranging
in their applicability to the study of fast reactions.
   There are two ways of producing temperature jumps: firstly by adiabatic
compression or dilatation, and secondly by heating by means of electrical
impulses in electrolyte systems. The first method is not suitable for aqueous
solutions, because of the maximum in the density of water at 4ºC. Electrical
heating can be achieved in two ways: (1) simply with a current impulse in
solutions having a finite electrolytic conductivity; and (2) with microwave
impulses in the X-band range (dispersion of H2O orientation) for any con-
ductivity. Strong fields (~ 100 kV/cm) are required in both cases. In the case of
microwave heating, this means radar impulses with powers of the order of
megawatts. The chemical change is best followed by optical methods (spec-
 trophotometry, fluorimetry, polarimetry). After initial difficulties (inho-


190                                      1 9 6 7   M A N F R E D           E I G E N




Fig. 15. Mechanical pressure wave method for studying chemical relaxation effects in
liquids. The method is a mechanical analogue of the electrical impulse method shown in
Fig. 14 (although in this case the time of travel is limited by the velocity of sound which
is about 5 orders of magnitude slower). The thickwaled shock tube is completely filled
with liquid. The shock wave originates when the metal membrane bursts following the
production of a pressure of about 1000-1500 atm in the upper part of the tube. The
measurement is made using the reflected shock wave (time of travel from the measure-
                                                          -2
ment chamber to the top end of the tube and back: about 10 sec; steepness of ascending
                                -6
and descending branches < 10 sec). The solution in the measurement chamber (at
the bottom end of the tube) is separated from the liquid filling the tube by a plastic
membrane "transparent" to the pressure wave. The chemical reaction is followed
spectrophotometrically. The apparatus was constructed by Alexander Jost, Dissertation,
                                            Göttingen, 1966, ref. 48.




mogeneous     heating         in    "electric      lenses",           cavitation   resulting          from    pressure
waves,   "cross-talk"        of    the     high-voltage           impulse     on    the          electrical   measure-
ment equipment, unfavourable signal- to-noise ratio in the short time range)
had been overcome, the temperature jump method was eventually developed
into a standard procedure, which now has an extremely wide range of appli-
cations extending from inorganic to biological chemistry. This is particularly
                                                                                       50                                51
due to the development work of Leo de Maeyer , Georg Czerlinski ,
                        52                                    5   3                         54
H a r t m u t D i e b l e r , G o r d o n H a m m e s , R o l a n d R a b l , and others. Fig. 16
shows a T-jump apparatus developed by Leo de Maeyer and now available
commercially. Fig. 17 is a schematic representation of the circuit of a micro-
                                                                                                                         54
wave T-jump apparatus developed by Roland Rabl and Leo de Maeyer .


                          I M M E A S U R A B L Y          F A S T      R E A C T I O N S                         191

Two important improvements considerably extend the possible range of ap-
plications : (1) A flow arrangement is used instead of a static measurement cell,
so that it is also possible to carry out relaxation measurements on systems
which are not in equilibrium (but have reached a stationary state). This im-
provement is of decisive importance in investigating many biochemical re-
a c t i o n m e c h a n i s m s . (2) T h e s t a t i o n a r y - s t a t e r e a c t i o n m i x t u r e f l o w i n g
through the observation capillary can be heated periodically with the aid of
repeated microwave impulses. A "ime sampling" procedure can be used to
obtain an average over many individual measurements, thus considerably
i m p r o v i n g t h e s i g n a l - t o - n o i s e r a t i o . The desicive limitation on previous
methods in their application to chemical reaction systems concerned the sensi-
tivity of recording rather than the time range involved. The greater the
precision and sensitivity of our measurements, the more reaction stages be-
come accessible to direct analysis ( cf. also ref. 55).
                                                                   32
   Present-day methods of measurement cover without a gap the time
range between fractions of a nanosecond and several seconds, and thus bridge




Fig. 16. Photograph of a standard present-day temperature jump instrument, developed
by Leo de Maeyer and built by Messanlagen Studiengesellschaft, Göttingen. The lower
part contains the high-tension generator, impulse circuit, lamps and multiplier power
source and amplifier. The upper part consists of a spectrophotometer with the T-jump
cell set up in its beam. This part contains interchangeable units which can also be com-
                       bined to make a fluorimeter or polarimeter.


192                           1 9 6 7   M A N F R E D   E I G E N




9.35 GHz, power 0.6 MW, pulse duration 0.5-3.0                temperature jump 3-15ºC).
The optical measurement cell, which is matched to the impedance of the hollow con-
ductor, is either a static microcell (volume 30    for simple T-jump studies or a capillary
for relaxation studies on flowing reaction mixtures in a stationary state. In the latter case,
the temperature jump can be repeated with a frequency < 300 Hz. Measurements by
spectrophotometry. (Developed by Carl-Roland Rabl, Dissertation, in preparation.)



the gap between the time ranges of classical kinetics and molecular spectros-
copy ( cf. Fig. 18). It has therefore been possible to elucidate the individual
steps in many of the reactions previously considered to be "immeasurably
fast". Some examples of this will be discussed in the following sections.




Fig. 18. The time scale of the chemist (see also ref. 56). Hatched part from left to right:
proton transfer, electron transfer, formation and rupture of H bridges, isomerization,
substitution in coordination compounds, secondary structure changes in proteins, en-
zymatic changes, elementary processes in biology. T E , elementary time (dimension of
the nucleus/velocity of light) ; T A, time constant for processes in the atomic shell (exci-
tation); T C , time limit for chemical changes (~ h/kT); tR , present lower time limit for
direct measurements of reaction rate; tS, time limit for flow methods; tK , classical time
limit for reaction rate measurements; tD , time to obtain a doctor’s degree; T W , age of the
                                            world.


                         I M M E A S U R A B L Y         F A S T    R E A C T I O N S                              193




We have already learned some of the applications of relaxation spectrometry
from individual examples. Charge neutralization in the reaction H+ +
H 2O     does   in    fact   take    place    almost      "instantaneously".           Every        encounter       be-
                                                                                               II            -1.   -1
t w e e n t h e s o l v a t e d i o n s r e s u l t s i n c o m b i n a t i o n ( k = 1 . 4 ·1 0 m o l e s e c a t
25ºC). In this process the proton "tunnels" through a whole chain of hydrogen
                                                                                                        43
bonds, as has been shown directly by measurements on ice cyrstals . Are all
reactions involving a neutralization of charges then diffusion-controlled?
   Let us first have a look at inorganic chemistry. Here we find many reac-
tions in which a positively charged metal ion combines with a negatively
charged ligand to form a neutral complex. It is precisely this kind of reaction
that is frequently described in the literature as "immeasurably fast". The for-
                                                                   2+             2-
m a t i o n o f a n a q u o c o m p l e x b e t w e e n M g a n d S O4 , m e n t i o n e d a t t h e
beginning of this lecture, is a typical example of this class of reaction.
   A metal ion in aqueous solution is surrounded by one or more shells of co-
ordinated water molecules. If it is to combine with another ion of opposite
charge, the latter must penetrate the hydration shells, substituting successive
water molecules in the different shells. Since the water molecules in the inner
coordination shell are bound most strongly, their substitution will be the
slowest step of the process. Relaxation studies on very widely differing metal
ions have confirmed this assumption. The mechanism of the stepwise sub-
                                                                                                                        57
stitution reveals itself in a relaxation spectrum with several time constants .
The chemist is primarily interested in substitution in the inner coordination
shell. The specific properties of the metal ion, such as charge, radius, coordi-
nation number, and electronic structure should be expressed directly at this
stage.
   Fig. 19 summarizes the measured values of the rate constants for substitution
in the inner coordination shell. With a few exceptions, these values are typical
of the metal ion alone, i. e. they are practically independent of the nature of the
substituting ligand. (A more detailed compilation of measurements can be
found in ref. 58 and a discussion of the mechanisms involved in ref. 59). Metal
ions with an electronic configuration similar to that of the noble gases exhibit
the expected dependence on charge and radius. The smaller the radius and the
higher the charge the more strongly are the H 2 O molecules to be substituted
bound, and hence the more slowly does the substitution take place. An in-


194                                       1 9 6 7   M A N F R E D   E I G E N




                                                            -I
Fig. 19. Characteristic rate constants (in sec ) for HzO substitution in the formation of
metal complexes. Most of the values are specific to the metal ion and relatively indepen-
dent of the nature of the ligand (cf. refs. 57-59), which also discuss in particular detail the
exceptions to this rule). The rate constants for the alkali metal ions and alkaline earth
metal ions are essentially determined by radius and charge Among the alkaline earth
metal ions - and especially among the rare earths - the coordination number has an
additional specific effect. The ions of the transition metals also reflect the specific prop-
erties of their electronic structure (ligand field stabilization and the Jahn-Teller effect.)



crease in coordination number makes the coordination shell more labile and
therefore accelerates the reaction ( cf. the lanthamides). Specific effects of elec-
tronic structure are revealed only in the case of the transition metals (filling
                       2+                 2+
of the d shell). V and Ni ions have strikingly slow rates of substitution, as
                                                                                            59
a result of particularly strong ligand field stabilization in the transition state ,
              2+                2+
whereas Cr a n d C u ions are extremely labile to substitution because of
distortion of the octahedral structure in consequence of the Jahn-Teller
      59
effect . Fig. 19 shows that most of the rate constants for substitution lie in the
                   3        9        -1
range from 1 0 to 10 s e c . The mechanism of many inorganic reactions was
thus inaccessible to experimental elucidation until the introduction of relax-
ation methods.




The method proved even more successful in measuring the rates of protolytic
reactions. The kinetics of proton transfer have been studied exhaustively with
                                                                                60
reference to a large number of organic acids and bases . These studies have
resulted in the elucidation of the reaction mechanism of acid-base catalysis
                                                                                     61
and enabled the Bronsted relations to be extended and generalized .


                        I M M E A S U R A B L Y              F A S T   R E A C T I O N S                      195

     We shall now consider one example: the keto-enol transformation in
                                                                       62
heterocyclic compounds, e.g. barbituric acid .
                                                                                                               (-)
     The anion of this acid (enolate, E-) can acquire a proton either at the O
                    (-)
atom or at the C atom. The first reaction results in the enol (E H) and the
second in the ketone (KH). T he reaction scheme is as shown in Fig. 21. Both
reactions take place so quickly that they cannot be followed by classical meth-
ods. When barbituric acid                                 4 . 0 ) is dissolved in water, the ionization
equilibrium    (conductivity)         is           established   "at    once".      Relaxation     measure-




ments using the electric field method showed that enol formation, like most
protolytic recombination processes, is entirely a diffusion- controlled reaction
(k          mole-                    Direct determination of the rate of this step is difficult
when there is only a small amount of enol in the presence of a large excess of
ketone. If we measure the relaxation time in such a system, then at low con-
                    +            -
centrations of H a n d E we find a reaction of second order, namely the for-
                             -                 +                                -
m a t i o n o f K H f r o m E a n d H . The second step, E +                                   H, is negligible
                                                                            -         -
in this case. However, at high concentrations of E a n d H we eventually reach
a state in which the enol concentration becomes very much higher than the
enolate concentration. What we then find is practically only the conversion
                                 -         +
of KH into EH (with E + H as a stationary intermediate state), i.e. a first-
                                                                                           -
order reaction (which can, however, be base-catalysed by E ). The transition
from a second-order type of reaction                              increases linearly with
to a first-order type of reaction                           = constant) is shown in Fig. 21. Relax-
ation measurements by the temperature jump confirmed that this shape of
                                                     62
curve applied to barbituric acid .
     It was found that in the case of rapid keto-enol transformations this method
enables small amounts of enol to be determined quantitatively in the presence
of a large excess of ketone. The gradient of the linear part of the curve in


196                          1 9 6 7   M A N F R E D   E I G E N




gives a relaxation spectrum with two time constants. The establishment of the enol
equilibrium is very rapid compared to the establishment of the keto equilibrium. The
shorter relaxation time is therefore of the form shown in Fig. 3 :     =
The longer relaxation time is also of this form (see Fig. 3) as long as  and     are small
compared to           (there is then so little EH present that the keto equilibrium may
establish itself independently). However, at high concentrations of E- and       the quickly
established enol equilibrium is always coupled with the keto reaction.            ultimately
tends to a constant limiting value-behaviour characteristic of a first-order reaction
(namely EH         KH (In the case of base catalysis by E-, the limiting value can be found
by extrapolation.) This method permits the determination of all the kinetic constants
and also a very precise determination of both equilibrium constants (and hence also of
the keto/enol ratio, even when one form is present in large excess and both reactions are
                                taking place quickly).


Fig. 21 and its intercept on the ordinate give the kinetic constants of the keto
reaction. The plateau value contains the equilibrium constant of the enol.
Other methods generally fail when the dissociation constant of the enol
becomes very much larger than that of the ketone and the equilibrium between
ketone and enol is rapidly established.




The main field of application of relaxation spectrometry is now in biology.
Many methods of measurement have been developed solely for the purpose of
studying complex sequences of biological rections or single specific elemen-


                         I M M E A S U R A B L Y         F A S T     R E A C T I O N S                       197

tary steps in such reactions. The slight disturbance to which the system is
subjected enables us to "listen in" on the natural course of processes without
going beyond the relatively narrow limits imposed by the "conditions of life".
   Naturally enough, it was the enzymes, the key substances in the whole mass
and energy balance of the cell, that first attracted our interest. Where pre-
viously only the gross, overall rates of enzymatic catalysis had been accessible
to the biochemist, it was now possible to come to grips with the "fine struc-
ture" on the reaction mechanisms.
  This opens up an entirely new world: a world of well-"planned", econom-
ically-functioning       molecular          "machines".      The        molecules       of    the      inorganic
chemist can say only "yes" or "no" -by reacting or not reacting. They may
also   occasionally      exchange      a    "perhaps"      by       temporarily    entering     into    a    "non-
specific"    interaction,      but   this    achieves     little,     for   they   "forget"    everything      as
soon as they are parted. The molecules of the biochemist are quite different;
they   can     "read",    "program",        "control",     "correlate"      different    functions       -   and
even "learn". Here is an example.
  For a long time biochemists were uncertain how to interpret the fact that
certain enzymes do not bind their substrates in accordance with the law of
mass action (as any proper molecule should), but exhibit a cooperative behav-
iour, even though the individual binding groups are so far apart from each
other that there is no possibility of a direct interaction between them.
  In this case, it is evident that the affinity (or "attraction") of the enzyme for
its substrate is initially only moderate, i.e. the first molecules of the substrate
are bound with only a relatively low affinity but they succeed in arousing the
"attraction" of the enzyme. This increases with the supply of substrate mole-
cules, so that finally - close to saturation point - all substrate molecules are
bound with high affinity. The interaction of haemoglobin with oxygen is such
a case. In the lung, when there is a large supply of O 2 , there is a complete
(cooperative) saturation, but if the partial pressure of O 2 drops below a cer-
tain threshold value the haemoglobin suddenly becomes disinterested and
once more gives up all its oxygen. If the saturation of the enzyme with sub-
strate is measured as a function of substrate concentration, a sigmoid curve is
obtained instead of the hyperbola expected from simple application of the
                          63
law of mass action .
                                                  64
  M o n o d , W y m a n a n d C h a n g e u x have proposed a model to explain this
cooperative interaction. Their starting point is that an enzyme consisting of
several subunits can occur in two different spatial conformations - one with
affinity for the substrate or activator (or of high catalytic efficiency) and one


198                                   1 9 6 7     M A N F R E D     E I G E N


with low affinity (or low catalytic efficiency). In Fig.22, the two different
conformations are indicated schematically by squares and circles; their fre-
quency in the population at the various stages is indicated by the boldness of
type used for the lines. In a given conformation all the subunits bind with the
same affinity; the sites of binding are so widely separated that they have no
direct influence on each other. The arrangement of the subunits is sym-
metrical. It is assumed that all the subunits are present in the same form, and
that this can change only according to an "all-or-none" law. Hybrids are
excluded, for the transformation of a single subunit would have a marked
effect on the pattern of the interactions between the subunits. Such a model
can be described by three parameters and can be made to fit the measured
sigmoid binding curves perfectly. These three parameters describe the binding
of the substrate by both forms and their isomerization. The Monod model
makes a number of assumptions whose justification can be tested experimen-
                                        65
t a l l y . D . E . K o s h l a n d et al. p u t f o r w a r d a n a l t e r n a t i v e m o d e l , w h i c h a l s o
enabled the binding curves to be reproduced exactly with the aid of 3 param-
eters.   One     such     alternative        is   the   "induced-fit"    mechanism,        shown      in        the
diagonal of Fig. 22, in which the change in the structure of a subunit is always
associated with the uptake of substrate or activator by that subunit. A decision
between the different models can be made with the aid of relaxation measure-
ments. The individual stages of the reaction can be analysed in detail in the
                                                                                                                66
relaxation time spectrum, and inappropriate models can be eliminated .
   My colleague Kasper Kirschner was able to show that the mechanism
postulated by Monod, Wyman and Changeux applies for the enzyme glyc-
                                                                                                           67
eraldehyde-phosphate dehydrogenase, a key enzyme in glycolysis . It was
possible to give all the values for the rate and equilibrium constants of the
                         68
individual stages . The relaxation spectrum obtained has already been shown
in Fig. 12. This mechanism dies not apply so simply in the case of haemo-
globin, and there are deviations in the direction of the alternative mechanism
                                         69
proposed by Koshland et al. . It has been found that the two models represent
the two possible limiting cases of a single, more general reaction scheme
(Fig. 22), and that it is possible to state the conditions under which the system
                                                               66
will approximate to one case or the other .
   These investigations have proved to be very important, for, as Fig.23
shows, such a mechanism can explain properties which we meet nowhere else
on the plane of molecules and which we have only come to know through the
man-made circuit and control elements of electronics and transistor technol-
ogy. It has been known for a long time that such properties occur in biology,


                        I M M E A S U R A B L Y   F A S T   R E A C T I O N S            199




identical subunits. The squares and circles indicate two different conformations, only one
of which (circle) is capable of transforming the substrate, i.e. exhibits catalytic activity;
this is indicated by "opening" a site of binding which is "closed" in the square form. The
change in conformation is "regulated" by the binding of an activator A. Two alternative
mechanisms are shown here: (I) The change in conformation of both forms. which have
different affinities for A, always takes place cooperatively according to an "all-or-none"
law, but with the square form being preferred in the absence of A and the circular form
                                                                     64
preferred when A is present at saturation concentration (Monod et al. ). (2) The change
in conformation of the subunits takes place independently of each other, but must first
be "induced" in the subunit concerned by the binding of A. A can thus be bound only in
one conformation. The induced change in conformation affects the behaviour of adja-
                                                                                 65
cent units and thus also brings about cooperative binding (Koshland et al. ). The two
                                                                                          66
alternatives are naturally only idealized limiting cases of a more general reaction scheme .



but it is a new discovery, confirmed by quantitative analysis of molecular
mechanisms, that such properties are possessed by single - indeed program-
med - molecules, and are not the consequence of a complex of mutually
coupled reactions.
  Many enzymes have been analysed in this way in various laboratories in
               70-72
recent years           . Here I should like in particular to mention the work of
                   73                                                              74
B r i t t o n C h a n c e and his school and that of H. T. Witt and his school on the
                                      72
mechanism of photosynthesis .


200                               1 9 6 7 M A N F R E D E I G E N




Fig. 23, Comparison of an allosteric enzyme (after Fig. 22) with an electronic circuit
element. The activator has the role of a control lattice. Conversion of the substrate into
a reaction product corresponds to the current to be regulated. T and R indicate the
different conformations of the enzyme (e.g. T = squares, R = circles in Fig. 22). Enzyme
activity is restricted to the R-form, i.e. there is no conversion of the substrate in the T-
                                   form (see also ref. 66).



Other classes of biological macromolecules have also been investigated in
detail, for example nucleic acids and lipids. The dynamics of code translation
                    66,75,76
in nucleic acids               are of particular interest. Here again we encounter
extremely fast reactions. The lifetime of a base pair is measured in fractions of
a microsecond. The reading of a code sequence makes use of these reaction
steps. Replication, with many correlated individual steps per code unit (such
as reading, linking, transporting), takes place in fractions of a millisecond.




We are just beginning to understand how molecular reaction systems have
found a way to <<organize themselves>>. We know that processes of this nature
ultimately led to the life cycle, and that (for the time being?) Man with his
central nervous system, i.e. his memory, his mind, and his soul, stands at the


                   I M M E A S U R A B L Y   F A S T   R E A C T I O N S              201

end of this development and feels compelled to understand this development.
For this purpose he must penetrate into the smallest units of time and space,
which also requires new ideas to make these familiar concepts from physics
of service in understanding what has, right into our century, appeared to be
beyond the confines of space and time.




This description has perhaps failed to do justice to some things that were
essential to the development of the main idea. I remember with gratitude
those who taught and encouraged me: Arnold Eucken, Ewald Wicke, Karl
Friedrich Bonhoeffer and Carl Wagner, who showed me the way and self-
lessly encouraged and helped my work. Karl Friedrich Bonhoeffer who
turned my path from physical chemistry to biology. Much that I have de-
scribed is based on the fundamental work of Lars Onsager, Josef Meixner, and
many others I was unable to mention. Much was achieved by named and un-
named colleagues and associates, to two of whom I should like to give special
mention as representing the others: Konrad Tamm and Leo de Maeyer.




 1. A. Eucken, Lehrbuch der chemischen Physik, Vol. II/2, Akad.Verlagsges., Leipzig,
     1949, p.1135.
 2. P. Langevin, Ann. Chim. Phys., 28 (1903) 433.
 3. M. von Smoluchowsky, Physik. Z., 17 (1916), 557, 585.
 4. A. Einstein, Ann. Physik., 17 (1905) 549, 19 (1906) 289, 371.
 5. L. Onsager, J. Chem. Phys., 2 (1934) 599.
 6. P. Debye, Trans. Electrochem. Soc, 82 (1942) 265.
 7. H. Hartridge and F. J. W. Roughton, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser. A, 104 (1923) 376.
 8. B. Chance, in A. Weisberger (Ed.), Technique of Organic Chemistry, Vol. S, Part II,
     Interscience, New York, 1963, p. 728.
 9. L. Liebermann, Phys. Rev., 76 (1949) 1520.
10. O.B. Wilson and R.W. Leonhard, ]. Acoust. Soc. Am., 26 (1954) 223.
11. L. Hall, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 24 (1952) 704.
12. (a) W. Nernst, Z. Elektrochem, 33 (1927) 428; (b) N. Bjerrum, Dansk. Mat. Fys.
    Medd., 7 (1926) 9.
13. K. Tamm and G. Kurtze, Nature, 168 (1951) 346; Acustica, 3 (1953) 33.
14. M. Eigen, G. Kurtze and K. Tamm, Z.     Elektrochem., 57 (1953) 103.


202                             1 9 6 7   M A N F R E D   E I G E N


15.     M.Eigen, Z.Physik.Chem. (Frankfurt), 1(1954)176.
16.     K.Tamm, G.Kurtze and R.Kaiser, Acustica, 4(1954)380.
17.     M.Eigen and L.de Maeyer, Z.Elektrochem., 59(1955)986.
18.    M.Eigen, Discussions Faraday Soc., 24(1957)25.
19.    M.Eigen and K.Tamm, Z.Elecktrochem., 66(1962)107.
20.     A.Einstein, Sitz,ber.Preuss.Akad.Wiss.,Physik.-math.Kll    (1920)380.
21.     W.Nernst, see F.Keutel, Dissertation, Berlin, 1910; E.Grüneisen and E.Goens, Ann.
       Physik, 72(1923)193.
22.    K.F.Herzfeld and F.O.Rice, Pkys.Rev., 31(1928) 691; see also G.W.Pierce, Proc.
       Am. Acad. Arts Sci., 60(1925)271.
23.    H.O.Kneser, Am.Phys., 11(1931)761,777.
24.    J.Lamb and J.Sherwood, Trans.Faraday Soc., 51(1955)1674.
25.    R.O.Davies and J.Lamb, Quart.Rev. (London), 11,No.2(1957)134.
26. H.J.Bauer, H.O.Kneser and E.Sittig, Acustica, 9(1959)181; G.Sessler, Acustica, 1 0
    (1960)44.
27. L.Onsager, Phys.Rev., 37(1931)405; 38(1931)2265.
28. I.Prigogine, Etude Thermodynamique des Phénoménes Irreversibles, Dunod, Paris,
     1947; S.R. de Groot and P.Mazur, Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics, North-Hol-
       land, Amsterdam, 1962.
29. J.Meixner, Am. Phys., 43(1943)470.
30. J.Meixner, Kolloid-Z., 134(1953)3.
31. K.Tamm, Z.Elektrochem., 64(1960)73.
32. M.Eigen and L. de Maeyer, in A. Weissberger (Ed.), Technique of Organic Chemistry,
    Vol. 8, Part II, Interscience, New York, 1963, p.895.
3 3. F.Eggers, Acustica, in the press.
34. K.Bergmann, M. Eigen and L. de Maeyer, Ber.Bunsenges. Physik. Chem., 67(1963)
     819.
35. K.Bergmann, Ber.Bunsenges. Physik.Chem., 67(1963)826.
36. L. de Maeyer, Methods in Enzymology, Academic Press, New York, 1968.
37. J.Suarez, Dissertation, T.H.Braunschweig, 1967; L. de Maeyer, M.Eigen and J.Su-
    arez, J.Am.Chem.Soc., in the press.
3 8.   M.Eigen and T.Funck, in preparation.
39.    G.Schwarz and J.Seelig, Biopolymers, in the press.
40.    M.Wien and J.Schiele, Z.Physik, 32(1931)545.
41.    L.Onsager, J.Chem.Phys., 2(1934)599.
42.    M.Eigenand J.Schoen, Z.Elektrochem., 59(1955)483.
43.    M.Eigen and L.de Maeyer, Proc.Roy.Soc. (London), Ser. A, 247(1958)505; see also
       M.Eigen, L. de Maeyer and H.Ch.Spatz, Ber.Bunsenges. Phys.Chem., 68(1964)19.
44. G.Schwarz, Rev.Mod.Phys.,         40(1968)206.
45. G.Ilgenfritz, in preparation.
46. G.Ilgenfritz and L. de Maeyer, in preparation.
47. E.F.Greene and J.P.Toennies, Chemical Reaction in Shock Waves, Arnold,       London,
    1964.
48. A.Jost, Ber.Bunsenges.Physik.Chem., 70(1966)1057.
49. H.Strehlow and H.Wendt, Inorg.Chem., 2(1963)6.


IMMEASURABLY FAST REACTIONS   203
