POLAR OZONE DEPLETION
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1995

by
M A R I O J. M O L I N A
Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, and Department
of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139,
USA



         In On the rigor of Science
         In that Empire, the Art of Cartography achieved such Perfection that the map
         of a single Province occupied an entire City, and the map of the Empire an enti-
         re Province. With time, those unwieldy maps did not satisfy and the
         Cartographers raised a Map of the Empire, with the size of the Empire and
         which coincided with it on every point . . .
                                                                     Jorge Luis Borges



INTRODUCTION

The ozone layer acts as an atmospheric shield which protects life on Earth
against harmful ultraviolet radiation coming from the sun. This shield is fra-
gile: in the past two decades it has become very clear that it can be affected
by human activities.
   Roughly 90% of the Earth’s ozone resides in the stratosphere, which is the
atmospheric layer characterized by an inverted - that is, increasing - empera-
ture profile that rises typically from -210 K at its base at 10-15 km altitude,
to roughly 275 K at 50 km altitude. The maximum concentration of ozone is
several parts per million; it is continuously being produced in the upper
stratosphere by the action of solar radiation on molecular oxygen, and con-
tinuously being destroyed by chemical processes involving free radicals.
Work by Paul Crutzen in the early 1970’s [1] established that nitrogen oxi-
des of natural origin, present at parts per billion levels in the stratosphere,
are responsible for most of this chemical destruction, which occurs by means
of catalytic cycles. Harold Johnston pointed out in 1972 [2] that the large
fleets of supersonic aircraft which were being considered at that time could
have seriously affected the ozone layer through their emissions of nitrogen
oxides.
   In early 1974 F. Sherwood (Sherry) Rowland and I proposed that chloro-
fluorocarbons (CFCs) would decompose in the stratosphere, releasing chlo-
rine atoms which would catalytically destroy ozone [3]. The CFCs are indus-
trial compounds which have been used as refrigerants, solvents, propellants
for spray cans, blowing agents for the manufacture of plastic foams, etc. The


                                 Mario Molina                              251


two important properties which make these compounds very useful are (1)
they can be readily transformed from a liquid into a vapor under mild tem-
perature and pressure conditions, as can be seen in Table 1, which displays
vapor pressures and boiling points for some of the most common CFCs; and
(2) they are chemically very inert, and hence are non-toxic, non-flammable,
and do not decompose inside a spray can or a refrigerator.

Table 1. Physical Properties of Some Common CFCs




   Measurements reported by James Lovelock and coworkers [4] had indica-
ted that the CFCs were accumulating throughout the Earth’s atmosphere. In
our 1974 paper we suggested that the CFCs will not be destroyed by the com-
mon cleansing mechanisms that remove most pollutants from the atmos-
phere, such as rain, or oxidation by hydroxyl radicals. Instead, the CFCs will
be decomposed by short wavelength solar ultraviolet radiation, but only after
drifting to the upper stratosphere - above much of the ozone layer - which is
where they will first encounter such radiation. Upon absorption of solar
radiation the CFC molecules will rapidly release their chlorine atoms, which
will then participate in the following catalytic reactions [3,5]:




  These free radical chain reactions are terminated by reactions forming
temporary reservoirs, the three most important ones being hydrogen chlori-
de, chlorine nitrate, and hypochlorous acid:




  The free radicals are regenerated by reactions such as the following:

                                                                           (7)
                                                                           (8)
                                                                           (9)

There are other reactions which affect the chlorine balance in the stratos-
phere; a schematic representation of the most important ones is shown in


252                                          Chemistry 1995


Figure 1. The net effect of this chemistry is that the inorganic chlorine pro-
duced by the decomposition of the CFCs exists in free radical form - i.e., as
“active chlorine” - only a few percent of the time. We have published more
detailed reviews of stratospheric halogen chemistry; see, e.g., Abbatt and
Molina [6] and Shen et al. [7]
   In the decade following the publication of our Nature paper, field obser-
vations corroborated many of the predictions based on model calculations
and on laboratory measurements of reaction rates. However, the effects on
ozone were unclear, because the natural ozone levels have relatively large
fluctuations.




 Fig I: Schematic representation of chlorine chemistry in the stratosphere at mid and low latitudes.



POLAR OZONE LOSS

The rapid seasonal decline of stratospheric ozone over the South Pole - the
so called “Antarctic ozone hole” - is a startling phenomenon: a large fraction
of the total column ozone - more than a third - disappears in the spring
months over an area coinciding largely with the Antarctic continent (see
Figure 2). In recent years it has become more severe: in October 1992 and
1993 more than 99% of the ozone disappeared at altitudes between about
14 and 19 km [8], where concentrations of this species are usually largest;
and in 1995, in mid-September, the ozone hole was the largest ever recorded
that early in the austral spring.
   Significant ozone depletion over Antarctica started in the early 1980’s, but


                                 Mario Molina                              253


it was not until 1985 that Farman et al. [9] announced their discovery of the
ozone hole, suggesting furthermore a possible link with the growth of active
chlorine in the stratosphere released by the decomposition of CFCs. Satellite
data subsequently confirmed Farman et al’s findings. This discovery was sur-
prising, not only because of the magnitude of the depletion, but also becau-
se of its location. We had originally predicted that chlorine-initiated ozone
loss would occur in regions of efficient ozone production, that is, predomi-
nantly in the upper stratosphere at middle and low latitudes; it is only there
that the concentration of free oxygen atoms is large enough for catalytic
reactions such as (1) and (2) to occur efficiently. Furthermore, the expecta-
tion was that at high latitudes active chlorine would be relatively less abun-


254                                          Chemistry 1995


dant, because the reservoir species would be more stable - reactions such as
(7) and (8) slow down as a consequence of the decrease in temperature as
well as the decrease in solar radiation at the higher zenith angles, that is, the
lower sun elevation.
   The initial question was, thus, whether the observed polar ozone loss was
of human origin, or else merely a periodic natural phenomenon, only never
before noticed. A prominent early theory put forth to explain this pheno-
menon had as a principal cause atmospheric dynamics driven by extreme
cold temperatures: the hypothesis was that upon first sunrise in the spring,
warming of the Antarctic stratosphere would lead to a net upward lifting of
ozone-poor air from the troposphere or lower stratosphere. If so, no ozone
destruction would be taking place; it would merely be redistributed periodi-
cally. Another theory suggested that the 11 year solar cycle was responsible
for the effect: chemical destruction of ozone involving catalytic NOx cycles
would occur, with the catalysts being generated in the upper stratosphere by
high energy particles or by ultraviolet radiation following enhanced solar
activity. A third theory suggested that chlorine and bromine free radicals
were the catalysts for the chemical destruction of ozone, the source of these
radicals being compounds of industrial origin-CFCs and halons (these are
compounds containing bromine which are used as fire extinguishers). This
third theory is discussed next in more detail. It is based on our original CFC-
ozone depletion hypothesis, but it is modified and extended to take into
account the peculiar conditions prevailing over Antarctica: Figure 3 displays
schematically the most important reactions of the modified theory (compa-
re to Figure 1, the original chemistry).




Fig. 3: Schematic representation of chlorine chemistry in the polar stratosphere.


                                Mario Molina                             255


GAS PHASE CHEMISTRY OF THE POLAR STRATOSPHERE




  Measurements of the abundance of HOCl in the Antarctic stratosphere
indicate, however, that this cycle does not make a major contribution to
ozone depletion. McElroy et al. [11] proposed another cycle involving bro-
mine:




  The reaction between ClO and BrO regenerates the free atoms in this
cycle, but the reaction has actually three channels:

                                                                        (15)
                                                                        (16)
                                                                        (17)

   Laboratory investigations have shown that the first and third channels are
approximately equally fast, whereas production of BrCl is relatively slow.
   In 1987 we proposed a mechanism involving the self reaction of ClO to
form chlorine peroxide [12], a compound which had not been previously
characterized:


256                                            Chemistry 1995


  The reaction of ClO with itself has three bimolecular channels, as is the
case for the ClO + BrO reaction:




   These bimolecular reactions are too slow to be of importance in the
atmosphere. However, the termolecular reaction that leads to the formation
of chlorine peroxide can occur efficiently in the lower stratosphere at high
latitudes, as it is facilitated by the lower temperatures and higher pressures
prevailing in those regions.
   The structure of the product formed in the termolecular ClO self reaction
has been shown by both theory [13] and experiment [14] to be indeed
ClOOCl, rather than ClOClO (see Figure 4). Furthermore, photodissocia-
tion of ClOOCl yields predominantly Cl atoms, rather than ClO radicals, as
we and others have shown in laboratory experiments [15, 16]. Formation of
ClOO is also possible; however, even under polar stratospheric conditions
ClOO rapidly decomposes to yield free chlorine atoms, since the Cl-OO
bond strength is only about 5 kcal/mole.




Fig. 4: Structure of chlorine peroxide [14].


                                  Mario Molina                               257


POLAR STRATOSPHERIC CLOUDS

In contrast to the troposphere, the stratosphere is extremely dry and practi-
cally cloudless - the concentration of water vapor is measured in parts per mil-
lion, and is, in fact, comparable to that of ozone. Normally, there is a thin
layer of aerosol throughout the lower stratosphere - a haze - first described in
1961 by Junge and co-workers [17]. The aerosols droplets are mostly liquid
and consist of supercooled aqueous sulfuric acid solutions - about 75%
H 2SO 4 by weight at mid and low latitudes, with radius roughly 0.1 µm. The
“background” number density falls typically in the 1-10 cm -3 range, but it
may increase between one and two orders of magnitude following the injec-
tion of SO2 directly into the stratosphere by major volcanic eruptions, such
as El Chichon in 1982 and Mount Pinatubo in 1991. The SO2 is oxidized in
the stratosphere to form H2S O4 on a time scale of months, and the excess
particles decay over a period of a few years. SO2 emitted at the earth’s sur-
face by processes such as the combustion of coal is mostly oxidized and remo-
ved from the atmosphere (as acid rain) before reaching the stratosphere.
The background aerosols arise mainly from COS, which is also emitted at the
earth’s surface but is sufficiently stable to reach the stratosphere, where it
photooxidizes to yield SO 2 and subsequently H 2SO 4.
   Polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) form seasonally over the polar regions.
Satellite-based instruments have been monitoring these clouds long before
the discovery of the ozone hole by observing the attenuation of sun light,
which is scattered at wavelengths characteristic of the size of the cloud partic-
les. In the winter and spring months, sharp increases in the attenuation
resulting from the presence of PSCs are evident, followed by a decrease in
the summer after the cloud particles evaporate or sediment out.
   The PSC particles form by condensation of vapors on the pre-existing sul-
furic acid aerosols. Observations have also indicated the existence of diffe-
rent types of clouds, the two most common ones being often referred to as
Type I and Type II PSCs. The later ones are present only when the tempera-
tures fall below the frost point of water, which is typically about 185-187 K
the particles are roughly 10 micrometer in diameter and are composed prin-
cipally of water-ice crystals. These Type II clouds are more prevalent over
Antarctica, because of its lower temperatures compared to the Arctic. Type I
PSCs are observed more frequently, forming at temperatures above the frost
point of water but below 190-195 K, with particle diameters of roughly one
micrometer. Thermodynamic considerations coupled with laboratory exper-
iments indicate that Type I PSC particles consist most likely of nitric acid tri-
hydrate (NAT), which is the most stable condensed phase under the condi-
tions which lead to the formation of these clouds. However, more recent
laboratory experiments indicate that the aerosol particles are not likely to
freeze at temperatures above the water frost point [18]. Furthermore, invest-
igations performed in the field [19] and in the laboratory [20, 21] indic-
ate that the liquid sulfuric acid droplets should absorb significant amounts of
nitric acid and of water vapors under polar stratospheric conditions, with a


258                              Chemistry 1995


very rapid change in composition - and hence size - occurring over a narrow
temperature range [22, 23], thus explaining the formation of Type I clouds
below a certain temperature threshold. Hence, it appears that Type I PSCs
are sometimes liquid - particularly over the Arctic - and sometimes solid.


CHEMISTRY ON CLOUD PARTICLES

Laboratory experiments, field observations and atmospheric modeling
calculations have now established that chemical reactions occurring on
PSC particles play a central role in polar ozone depletion. These reactions
have two separate effects, referred to as chlorine activation and nitrogen
deactivation: first, chlorine is transferred from the relatively inert reservoir
compounds HCl and ClONO 2 into forms that can be readily photolyzed
(mostly Cl2); and second, nitrogen oxides are removed from the gas phase,
through incorporation of nitric acid into the PSCs, thus preventing the for-
mation of ClONO2, a species that interferes with the catalytic chlorine cycles
which destroy ozone. In fact, some PSC particles grow large enough to pre-
cipitate, permanently removing nitric acid from the stratosphere; this is the
process labeled denitrification.
   The following are the key chlorine activation reactions:




   The most important reaction is (23), the first one among these three. Our
early laboratory experiments indicated that this reaction does not occur in
the gas phase at significant rates [24a]. However, we noticed in those expe-
riments that this and other reactions involving chlorine nitrate are very sen-
sitive to surface effects; similar observations had been reported by Sherry
Rowland’s group [24b]. In 1986 Solomon et al. [10] suggested that reactions
(23) and (24) would be promoted by PSCs, setting the stage for efficient
ozone depletion over Antarctica. In 1987 we carried out a series of laborato-
ry measurements showing that indeed reaction (23) is remarkably efficient,
requiring only a few collisions of the reactant ClONO2 with ice exposed to
HCl vapor [25]. This peculiar chemical reactivity of ice was surprising; in
contrast to liquid water - and the well-established chemistry of aqueous
ions - reactions promoted by ice at temperatures down to 180 K were unpre-
cedented. Our results were subsequently corroborated by several other
groups (for a review, see Kolb et al. [26]).


MECHANISM FOR CHLORINE ACTIVATION REACTIONS

The net effect of reactions (24) and (25) occurring sequentially is reaction
(23), suggesting that the mechanism for this last reaction involves two


                                   Mario Molina                               259


steps-reactions (24) and (25). Also, while the high efficiency of reaction (24)
on ice is understandable - the reactant H 2 O is already in condensed
phase-both reactants for reaction (23) are originally in the gas phase; hence,
it proceeds most likely through sequential, rather than simultaneous colli-
sions of the reactants with the surface. This implies that at least one of the
reactants - most likely HCl - has a high affinity for the condensed phase.
Previous measurements had shown, though, that HCl is only sparingly solu-
ble in ice; more recent investigations have indicated, however, that monolay-
er amounts of HCl are taken up by the ice surface under temperature and
HCl partial pressure conditions similar to those prevailing in the polar stra-
tosphere [26, 27].
   Physical adsorption of HCl is expected to incorporate only negligible
amounts of HCl on the ice surface [28], even allowing for a very strong
hydrogen bond. These expectations led early on to the suggestion that reac-
tion (23) should not occur on ice under stratospheric conditions of tempe-
rature and HCl partial pressure, and the results of laboratory measurements
were considered to be artifacts resulting from grain boundary effects.
   The high affinity of HCl for the ice surface can be explained, however, by
assuming that the HCl solvates, forming hydrochloric acid, as is the case with
liquid water. This process is exothermic by -18 kcal/mole; in contrast, a
hydrogen bond of HCl with ice is estimated to be only 5 kcal/mole. Solvation
can occur because the surface layers of ice are disordered, with the water
molecules there having much larger mobility than in the bulk crystal. This
behavior leads to the formation of a quasi-liquid layer on the ice surface
which can be experimentally observed at temperatures down to about 240 K.
The presence of HCl strongly depresses the freezing point (a 9-molal HCl
solution freezes at ~190 K), so that formation of a quasi-liquid HCl solution
layer appears plausible under polar stratospheric conditions [28].
Furthermore, the large reaction probabilities for reactions (23) and (25) can
be understood with the quasi-liquid layer model: the mechanism for these
reactions most likely involves aqueous-like ions. In contrast, adsorbed mole-
cular HCl is expected to behave rather similarly to gaseous HCl, and hence
should react only very slowly with ClONO2, as noted above.
   Laboratory measurements of the uptake of HCl by NAT have also been
conducted. For NAT, however, an additional parameter that needs to be
taken into account is its H2O vapor pressure: at any given temperature it can
have a range of values, whereas for water-ice it has, of course, only one value.
Observations show that when the H 2O vapor pressure of NAT approaches
that of ice its surface takes up as much HCl as ice, whereas the amount decre-
ases by more than two orders of magnitude as the H2O vapor pressure drops.
The reaction probabilities for reactions (23) and (25) behave accordingly:
they have large values when the H2O vapor pressure of NAT is within a fac-
tor of ~3 of that of ice [26, 29]. It appears that the uptake as well as the reac-
tion probabilities are controlled by the availability of water at the surface.
   The chlorine activation reactions (23-25) occur rather slowly on sulfuric


260                                 Chemistry 1995


acid aerosols at mid-latitudes, because HCl is only very sparingly soluble in
relatively concentrated H 2S O4 solutions, and because the water in those
solutions is not available for reaction with ClONO2. However, as the tempe-
rature drops towards high latitudes and the sulfuric acid solution becomes
more dilute, the HCl becomes more soluble, and the efficiency of these reac-
tions increases dramatically over a relatively narrow temperature range:
under conditions of thermodynamic stability for type I PSCs, chlorine acti-
vation occurs rapidly on both liquid and solid particles [20].


MEASUREMENTS OF KEY SPECIES OVER ANTARCTICA

Beginning in 1986, a series of field experiments were designed to test the
various hypothesis which had been put forth to explain the Antarctic ozone
hole. For example, observations of upward flow in the polar stratosphere
would have verified the “dynamics only” theory. The solar cycle theory
would have been supported by observations of high NOx levels in regions
where ozone was being depleted; furthermore, according to this theory in
years of low solar activity the polar stratosphere would recover to normal pre-
ozone hole conditions. In contrast, expectations from the halogen theory
were low levels of nitrogen oxides, and high levels of active chlorine.
   The first observational campaign designed to test these theories - the
National Ozone Experiment (NOZE) - was mounted in the winter of 1986.
The NOZE scientists, based on McMurdo, Antarctica, and led by Susan
Solomon, performed remote sensing measurements of key stratospheric spe-
cies such as NO2,O 3, and chlorine free radicals. Their findings provided the
first evidence that the chemistry of the Antarctic stratosphere was highly per-
turbed, with the halogen chemistry mechanism appearing most likely. A
second NOZE campaign, a s w e l l a s t h e A i r b o r n e A n t a r c t i c O z o n e
Experiment (AAOE) were conducted in 1987. This expedition was based on
Punta Arenas, Chile: the results from flights conducted over a six week peri-
od largely confirmed and extended the results from the NOZE experiment.
The observations provided very clear evidence of a strong downward flow
within the Antarctic polar vortex, which is the region of the stratosphere
where the ozone hole develops: contrary to predictions based on the dyna-
mics only theory, the levels of tracers such as the CFCs, CH 4 and N 2O were
typical of air coming from higher altitudes - “aged” air which had been expo-
sed to short-wavelength ultraviolet radiation. Furthermore, the concentra-
tion of NOx was remarkably low, in contrast with expectations from the solar
cycle theory.
   The chemical CFC-halogen hypothesis received strong support from the
results of the field experiments. The measurements conducted by James
Anderson and co-workers [31] showed that the ClO concentrations in the
polar vortex were greatly enhanced (see Figure 5), showing that more than
half of the chlorine was present there as a free radical-chlorine that had
been released in the stratosphere at lower latitudes by the decomposition of


                                  Mario Molina                              261




the CFCs. These measurements, coupled with the observations of the rate of
disappearance of ozone, indicated that the chlorine peroxide cycle that we
had suggested (reactions 1, 18, and 19) was responsible for more than two
thirds of the ozone loss, with most of the rest of the loss resulting from bro-
mine chemistry.
   The unique instruments required for all these experiments - as well as the


262                                     Chemistry 1995


halogen hypothesis itself - were developed in a relatively short amount of
time’: the community was well prepared for these new developments, since it
had vigorously continued for over a decade the pursuit of scientific research
on the stratospheric ozone issue.


CONCLUSIONS

Much remains to be learned about stratospheric chemistry - and, in more
general terms, about the physics and chemistry of the global atmosphere.
On the other hand, the cause-effect relationship between human-produced
chemicals and ozone depletion is rather well established now: the signals
connected with the Antarctic ozone hole are very large indeed. The stratos-
pheric ozone issue has shown us that mankind is quite capable of signifi-
cantly affecting the atmosphere on a global scale: the most striking effects of
CFCs, which are emitted mostly in the north, are seen as far away as possible
from the sources, namely over the South Pole. This global problem has also
shown us that different sectors of society can work together - the scientific
community, industry, environmental organizations, government representa-
tives and policy makers - to reach international agreements: the Montreal
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer has established a very
important precedent for the solution of global environmental problems.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Many colleagues and collaborators have contributed to the work described
above; while only some of them have been mentioned here, I would like to
express my appreciation to all of them. I am grateful to my past and present
students and associates for their dedication in carrying out research in my
laboratory. I am especially indebted to my wife, Luisa, who has been my clo-
sest collaborator for many years. I also want to acknowledge the sponsors of
our research, which have included the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration and the National Science Foundation.



REFERENCES
 1.   Crutzen, P.J., The Influence of Nitrogen Oxides on Atmosphere Ozone Content, Q. J. R.
      Meteorol. Soc., 96, 320-325 (1970).
 2.   Johnston, H.S., Reduction of Stratospheric Ozone by Nitrogen Oxide Catalysts from
      Supersonic Transport Exhaust, Science, 173, 517-522 (1971).
 3.   Molina, M.J., and F.S. Rowland, Stratospheric Sink for Chlorofluoromethanes: Chlorine
      Catalysed Destruction of Ozone , Nature, 249, 810-814 (1974).
 4.   Lovelock, J.E., R.J. Maggs, and R.J. Wade, Halogenated Hydrocarbons in and over the
      Atlantic, Nature, 241, 194-196 (1973).
 5.   Stolarski, R.S., and R. Cicerone, Stratospheric Chlorine: A Possible Sink for Ozone, Can. J.
      Chem., 52, 1610-1615 (1974).
 6.    Shen, T.-L., P.J. Wooldridge, and M.J. Molina, Stratospheric Pollution and Ozone
      Depletion, in “Composition, Chemistry, and Climate of the Atmosphere”, ed. H.B.
      Singh, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York (1995).


                                                       Mario Molina                                                     263



7.    Abbatt, J.P.D. and M.J. Molina, Status of Stratospheric Ozone Depletion, Ann. Rev, Energy & Environ., 18, 1-29
      (1993).
8.    World Meteorological Organization, Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1994. WMO Global Ozone
      Research and Monitoring Project Report No. 37 (1994).
9.    Farman, J.C., B.G. Gardiner and J.D. Shanklin, Large Losses of Total Ozone in Antarctica Reveal Seasonal ClOx/NOx
      Interactions, Nature, 315, 207-210 (1985).
10.   Solomon, S., R.R. Garcia, F.S. Rowland and D.J. Wuebbles, On the Depletion of Antarctic Ozone, Nature, 321,
      755-758 (1986).
11.   Mc Elroy, M.B., R.J. Salawitch, S.C. Wofsy, and J.A. Logan, Reduction of Antarctic Ozone due to Synergistic
      Interactions of Chlorine and Bromine, Nature, 321, 759-762 (1986).
12.   Molina, L.T., and M.J. Molina, Production of the Cl2O2 from the Self-Reaction of the ClO Radical, J. Phys. Chem., 91,
      433-436 (1987).
13.   McGrath, M.P., K.C. Clemitshaw, F.S. Rowland, and W.G. Hehre, Structures, Relative Stabilities, and Vibrational
      Spectra of Isomers of Cl2O2: The Role of Chlorine Oxide Dimer in Antarctic Ozone Depleting Mechanism, J. Phys.
      Chem., 94, 6126-6132 (1990).
14.   Birk, M., R.R. Friedl, E.A. Cohen, H.M. Pickett, and S.P. Sander, The Rotational Spectrum and Structure of
      Chlorine Peroxide, J. Chem. Phys., 91, 6588-6597 (1989).
15.   Molina, M.J., A.J. Colussi, L.T. Molina, R.N. Schindler, and T.-L. Tso, Quantum Yield of Chlorine-Atom
      Formation in Photodissociation of Chlorine Peroxide (ClOOCl) at 308 nm, Chem. Phys. Lett., 173, 310-315 (1990).
16.   Cox, R.A. and G.D. Hayman, The Stability and Photochemistry of Dimers of the ClO Radical and Implications for
      Antarctic Ozone Depletion, Nature, 332, 796-800 (1988).
17.   Junge, C.E., C.W. Chagnon, and J.E. Manson, Stratospheric Aerosols, J. Meteorol., 18, 81-108 (1961).
18.   Koop, T., U.M. Biermann, W. Raber, B. Luo, P.J. Crutzen, and T. Peter, Do Stratospheric Aerosol Droplets Freeze
      Above the Ice Frost Point? Geophys. Res Lett. 22, 917-920 (1995).
19.   Arnold, F., Stratospheric Aerosol Increases and Ozone Destruction: Implications from Mass Spectrometers
      Measurements, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 96, 339-350 (1992).
20.   Zhang, R., P.J. Wooldridge, and M.J. Molina, Vapor Pressure Measurements for the H2SO4/HNO3/H2O and H2SO4/
      HCl/H2O Liquid Systems, Incorporation of Stratospheric Acids into Background Sulfate Aerosols, J. Phys. Chem., 97,
      8541-8548 (1993).
21.   Molina, M.J., R. Zhang, P.J. Wooldridge, J.R. McMahon, J.E. Kim, H.Y. Chang, and K.D. Beyer, Physical
      Chemistry of the H2SO4/ HNO3/H2O System: Implications for Polar Stratospheric Clouds, Science, 261, 1418-1423
      (1993).
22.   Beyer, K.D., S.W. Seago, H.Y. Chang, and M.J. Molina, Composition and Freezing of Aqueous H2SO4/HNO3
      Solutions under Polar Stratospheric Conditions, Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 871-874 (1994).
23.   Carslaw, K.S., B.P. Luo, S.L. Clegg, Th. Peter, P. Brimblecombe, and P.J. Crutzen, Stratospheric Aerosol Growth
      and HNO3 Gas Phase Depletion from Coupled HNO3 and Water Uptake by Liquid Particles, Geophys. Res. Lett., 21,
      2479-2482 (1994).
24.   (a) Molina, L.T., M.J. Molina, R.A. Stachnick, and R.D. Tom, An Upper Limit to the Rate of the HCl + ClONO2
      Reaction, J. Phys. Chem., 89, 3779-3781 (1985).
      (b) Rowland, F.S., S. Sato, H. Khwaja, and S.M. Elliott, The Hydrolysis of Chlorine Nitrate and its Possible
      Atmospheric Significance, J. Phys Chem., 90, 1985-1988 (1986).
25.   Molina, M.J., T.L-. Tso, L.T. Molina, and F.C.-Y. Wang, Antarctic Stratospheric Chemistry of Chlorine Nitrate,
      Hydrogen Chloride and Ice: Release of Active Chlorine, Science, 238, 1253-1257 (1987).
26.   Kolb, C.E., D.R. Worsnop, M.S. Zahniser, P. Davidovits, C.F. Keyser, M.-T. Leu, M.J. Molina, D.R. Hanson,
      A.R. Ravishankara, L.R. Williams, and M.A. Tolbert, Laboratory Studies of Atmospheric Heterogeneous Chemistry,
      in Advances Series in Physical Chemistry: “Progress and Problems in Atmospheric Chemistry, ed. J.R. Barker,
      World Scientific Publishing (1995).
27.   Abbatt, J.P.D., K.D. Beyer, A.F. Fucaloro, J.R. McMahon, P.J. Wooldridge, R. Zhang, and M.J. Molina,
      Interaction of HCl Vapor with Water-Ice: Implications for the Stratosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 15819-15826 (1992).
28.   Molina, M.J., The Probable Role of Stratospheric ‘Ice’ Clouds: Heterogeneous Chemistry of the Ozone Hole, in
      “Chemistry of the Atmosphere: The Impact of Global Change”, ed. J.G. Calvert, Blackwell Scientific
      Publications, Oxford, U.K. (1994).
29.   Abbatt, J.P.D., and M.J. Molina, Heterogeneous Interactions of ClONO2 and HCl on Nitric Acid Trihydrate at 202 K,
      J. Phys. Chem., 96, 7674-7679 (1992).
30.   Farman, J.C., What Hope for Ozone Layer Now? New Scientist, 116, No. 1586, 50-54 (1987).
31.   Anderson, J.G., W.H. Brune, and M.H. Proffitt, Ozone Destruction by Chlorine Radicals within the Antarctic
      Vortex: The Spatial and Temporal Evolution of ClO-O3 Anticorreltaion based on In Situ ER-2 Data, J. Geophys. Res.,
      94, 11,465-11,479 (1989).
