GFP: LIGHTING UP LIFE

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2008
by
Martin Chalfie
Department of Biological Sciences, 1012 Fairchild, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10027, USA.




                                              “You can observe a lot by watching.”
                                                                        Yogi Berra

   “My companions and I then witnessed a curious spectacle… The Nautilus
 floated in the midst of… truly living light[,]… an infinite agglomeration of
                                    colored… globules of diaphanous jelly…”
                         Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea – Jules Verne

    “Now it is such a bizarrely improbable coincidence that anything so mind-bogglingly
 useful could have evolved purely by chance that some thinkers have chosen to see it as a
                                  final and clinching proof of the nonexistence of God.”
                             The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy – Douglas Adams

I want to thank the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the Nobel
Foundation for this amazing and surprising honor. At first I wondered why I,
a biologist and a person with less than enviable college grades in Chemistry,
had been selected. Then I realized that this prize had actually been given to
the GFP molecule, and I am one of its assistants. Thank you for letting me be
part of the celebration of a wonderful tool for visualizing life.
  Scientific inquiry starts with observation. The more one can see, the
more one can investigate. Indeed, we often mark our progress in science by
improvements in imaging. The first Nobel Prize, the Physics prize of 1901,
was an imaging prize, given to Wilhelm Röntgen for his discovery of X-rays
and their astonishing ability to allow the noninvasive viewing of the human
skeleton. A few years later the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was
awarded for the development of silver nitrate staining to visualize nerve cells
by Camillo Golgi and its improvement and use by Santiago Ramón y Cajal to
demonstrate the cellular nature of the nervous system. This research laid the
groundwork of modern neurobiology.
  Over the years several other imaging techniques and their developers
have been honored with the Nobel Prizes including x-ray crystallography
(William and Lawrence Bragg, Physics, 1915), the ultramicroscope (Richard
Zsigmondy, Chemistry, 1925), nuclear magnetic resonance (Felix Bloch and
E. M. Purcell, Physics, 1952), the phase contrast microscope (Frits Zernike,

150


Physics, 1953), large-array radio telescopes (Martin Ryle, Physics, 1974), the
electron microscope (Ernst Ruska, Physics, 1986), the scanning tunneling
microscope (Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer, Physics, 1986), computer as-
sisted tomography (Allan M. Cormack and Godfrey N. Hounsfield, Physiology
or Medicine, 1979), and, most recently, magnetic resonance imaging (Paul
C. Lauterbur and Sir Peter Mansfield, Physiology or Medicine, 2003).
   My road to imaging was not direct. I had been interested in science from
when I was very young, but after a disastrous summer lab experience in which
every experiment I tried failed, I decided on graduating from college that I
was not cut out to be a scientist. Instead I did a series of somewhat random
jobs including teaching high school chemistry. During the summer break
from teaching, I tried laboratory research one more time, working with José
Zadunaisky at Yale Medical School (Figure 1). The successful experiments
of that summer and his support gave me confidence to apply to graduate
school, and I entered the Physiology Department at Harvard in 1972 where
I did my thesis with Bob Perlman. Bob and I had a wonderful relationship,
which continues to this day. He is one of the warmest, kindest, and smartest
people I know, and a great person to talk over ideas with.




Figure 1. Influences on my career. The success I had working for José Zadunaisky convinced
me that maybe I could be a scientist. Bob Perlman was an outstanding Ph.D. advisor who
always had time to listen to my (often crazy) ideas. Working with Sydney Brenner, John
Sulston, and Bob Horvitz during my postdoctoral years started me on my continued
research with C. elegans. I am convinced that working with this transparent animal was a
major reason why I was excited about the possibilities of GFP as a biological marker. Photo
of José Zadunaisky from Bronner, F. (2006) Obituary: José A. Zadunaisky. J. Exp. Zool. 305A:
103; reprinted with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Photo credits for the remaining
photos are M. Chalfie for Bob Perlman, the Nobel Foundation for Sydney Brenner, John
Sulston, and Bob Horvitz, and Adam Antebi for C. elegans.



                                                                                       151


My current studies, however, started when I was accepted as a postdoctoral
fellow by Sydney Brenner at the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology and
began working on the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. In 2002 Sydney, Bob
Horvitz, and John Sulston won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
for their work on C. elegans. All three shaped the direction of my research.
Sydney gave me the opportunity to work with him and an amazingly gifted
group of scientists, Bob, a friend since high school, gave me several crucial
pieces of advice, collaborated on several projects, and served as an example
of what one can achieve in science (I am still following in his footsteps), and
John, with whom I collaborated the most and who taught me most about how
to act honorably as a scientist, started me on the project that still occupies
most of my time: the study of mechanosensation.
   My colleagues and I often call their Nobel Prize the first worm prize. The
second went in 2006 to Andy Fire and Craig Mello for their discovery of
RNA interference. I consider this year’s Prize to be the third worm prize,
because if I had not worked on C. elegans and constantly told people that one
of its advantages was that it was transparent, I am convinced I would have
ignored GFP when I first heard of it. These three prizes speak to the genius
of Sydney Brenner in choosing and developing a new organism for biological
research.
   The year before I learned about GFP, my lab had begun looking at gene
expression in the C. elegans nervous system. We were studying the dif-
ferentiation and function of nerve cells needed for mechanosensation.
Mechanosensors respond to physical perturbation; they underlie many of
our senses, including touch, hearing, and balance. These senses are poorly
understood; in particular the transduction molecules, the molecules that
detect the mechanical signal, are virtually unknown. The genetic studies
that I had done with John Sulston were directed, in part, at discovering such
transduction molecules. We thought that by obtaining mutants that were de-
fective in touch, which was sensed by six cells in the animal, we could identify
genes that were needed both for the production and differentiation of these
particular cells and for transduction. In the late 1980’s my lab began cloning
several touch sensitivity genes and testing whether they were expressed in the
animal’s touch receptor neurons. At this time three general methods were
used to look at gene and protein expression. The first was the use of labeled
antibodies, whose specificity created outstanding protein-specific markers.
The second was the use of B-galactosidase from the Escherichia coli lacZ gene,
which could be expressed as transcriptional and translation fusions and vi-
sualized by the cleavage and subsequent oxidation of X-gal to an insoluble
blue product. The third was in situ hybridization to mRNA. We used all three
methods to monitor gene expression (Figure 2).




152


           A




           C



           D




Figure 2. Gene expression methods used before (and after) GFP. A. Positions of the six
touch receptor neurons in C. elegans. B. Antibody staining to the MEC-7 B-tubulin (taken
from Savage et al., 1994). C. B-galactosidase expression of a transcriptional fusion for mec-9
(taken from Du et al., 1996). D. In situ hybridization to mec-7 mRNA (Shohei Mitani).


All three methods had considerable limitations; they required extensive and
time-consuming tissue preparation. The animals had to be fixed and then
permeabilized so either the antibody, the X-gal substrate, or the DNA probe
could enter the tissue. This preparation, which needed to be done with each
batch of animals, meant that we could only look at dead tissues, giving us a
static picture of expression. If we wanted to understand changes during de-
velopment, we had to compare images from many different individuals.
   I first had the idea to put GFP into worms a little after noon on Tuesday,
April 25, 1989. My department has a lunchtime seminar series on Tuesdays
for those of us interested in neurobiology, and the speaker that day was Paul
Brehm, who at the time was at Tufts University. He began his talk with a
description of light production by jellyfish and similar animals, work that I
subsequently learned had been begun by my co-Laureate Osamu Shimomura
(Shimomura et al., 1962; Johnston et al., 1962) and then by Jim Morin and
Woody Hastings (Morin and Hastings, 1971a, b). He first spoke about ae-
quorin, which I had heard of as a calcium indicator. But then he talked
about a protein new to me that fluoresced and allowed the jellyfish to pro-
duce green light instead of blue. Being primed from years of talking about
the transparency of C. elegans and having just seen the work involved using
antibodies and lacZ fusions, I immediately started to fantasize about how

                                                                                         153


this Green Fluorescent Protein, GFP, could be used as a biological marker.
I must admit that I didn’t pay any attention to the rest of the seminar; I was
too excited.




Figure 3. Notes I took as I was tracking down the people who were working on GFP.


I recently found my notes from that time and they have allowed me to recon-
struct what happened next (Figure 3). I spent the next day on the phone,
learning about GFP and eventually talking with Douglas Prasher (Figure 4),
who was at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute and who was cloning
the cDNA for gfp. We had a wonderful conversation, found we had similar
ideas about what to do with GFP, and decided to collaborate – as soon as
Douglas had finished cloning the gene.




154


Figure 4. The GFP team. Douglas Prasher cloned the gfp cDNA, Ghia Euskirchen expressed
the cDNA in E. coli, Yuan Tu expressed the cDNA in C. elegans, and Bill Ward compared
the excitation and emission spectra of the native and recombinant GFP. (Photo credits:
Douglas Prasher and Bill Ward for their own photos, M. Chalfie for the photos of Ghia
and Yuan.)


During that day I learned that GFP had several features that made it a very at-
tractive candidate for a biological marker. 1) It was a relatively small protein
of only 238 amino acids. 2) It was active as a monomer. 3) It could be excited
by ultraviolet or blue light. 4) It was a stable protein that had high quantum
efficiency and did not photobleach easily. And 5) the active protein did not
need a cofactor or other small molecule to fluoresce.
   GFP had one feature, however, that might make it unsuitable for expres-
sion in organisms other than the jellyfish: the chromophone was formed by
the cyclization of the peptide backbone between Ser65 and Tyr66 (Figure 5).
No one knew how this cyclization occurred, but the prevailing hypothesis
was that one or more converting enzymes were needed to change what was
referred to as apoGFP to the fluorescent product (Cody et al., 1993). If other
proteins were needed, GFP would not be a very good marker.




                                                                                 155


Figure 5. Formation of the GFP fluorophore. A. The primary amino acid sequence of GFP.
B. Sequence after cyclization. Data from Cody et al. (1993).

The next important event in this story was my marriage in late 1989 to Tulle
Hazelrigg, a scientist who lived and worked 2000 miles away from New York
City at the University of Utah. Given the distance, I felt fortunate to be eligible
for a sabbatical leave, which I took to work in her lab. Unfortunately, while
I was away, Douglas finished cloning the gfp cDNA, tried to contact me, but
failed to do so. He concluded that I had dropped out of science. For my part,
having not heard from Douglas, I imagined that he had not found the cDNA.
   We remained in mutual ignorance until September, 1992. At that time one
of the new graduate students, Ghia Euskirchen (Figure 4), decided to do a
rotation project with me. I was particularly happy about her joining the lab,
because she had just finished a Masters degree in our Engineering School
working on fluorescence. I told her about my idea of using a fluorescent
protein to mark cells, and then bemoaned the fact that I had not heard from
Douglas. But when we searched for “fluorescent protein” in the Medline da-
tabase that the University had just installed on our computers, the first paper
we saw was Douglas’ February, 1992 paper describing the isolation of the gfp
cDNA (Prasher et al., 1992). We ran down to the library, found the journal
with the paper, discovered that the article included his phone number, and

156


rushed back to my office to call him. After we cleared up our misconceptions
of each other’s careers, Douglas and I renewed our collaboration.
   Six days later Douglas sent the DNA to us. At this point, we had two choices
as to how to do the experiment. Douglas had cloned the cDNA as an EcoRI
fragment into a lambda vector. We could either obtain the fragment by cut-
ting it out of the vector with the same restriction enzyme but this would give
us additional non-coding jellyfish DNA, or we amplify only the coding se-
quence using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which was risky because
it tended, at that time, to introduce base changes. I decided we should use
the latter strategy, a decision that turned out to be fortunate, since we latter
learned that other labs using the restriction enzyme strategy failed to get
fluorescence. Presumably, the extraneous jellyfish DNA interfered with the
expression. Given the prevailing assumption that GFP needed one or more
converting enzymes to fluoresce, the failure of bacteria to fluoresce could be
interpreted as a need for other jellyfish components.




Figure 6. The first expression of GFP in heterologous organisms. A. The page in Ghia
Euskirchen’s laboratory notebook where she noted that E. coli expressing GFP fluoresced.
The microscope she used was not in our laboratory. B. A picture of those first fluorescing
bacteria taken by Ghia. C. GFP expressed in the C. elegans touch receptor neurons from
Chalfie et al. (1994). Reprinted with permission from AAAS.

In any event, one month after receiving the DNA from Douglas, Ghia had E.
coli that fluoresced green (Figure 6), although we had to use the microscope
in her previous lab to see them. We were ecstatic. No other protein from the
jellyfish was needed to convert the protein to the fluorescent form. Ghia took
several pictures of the bacteria and I quietly started to show them to people.
I couldn’t contain my excitement. Soon afterward Ghia left my lab to do
another lab rotation, and I asked Yuan Tu (Figure 4), my technician at the

                                                                                     157


time, to put GFP into C. elegans. Again the experiment succeeded, and for the
first time we had GFP expressed in the touch receptor neurons of C. elegans
(Figure 6). Bill Ward (Figure 4), a biochemist who had studied GFP for sev-
eral years, then joined the project and showed that the protein produced in
E. coli had the same optical properties as the native protein (Figure 7).




Figure 7. Excitation (left) and emission (right) spectra for native (dotted line) and recom-
binant (solid line) GFP (from Chalfie et al., 1994). Reprinted with permission from AAAS.


We had one problem doing these experiments, as indicated by that note in
Ghia’s lab notebook that the bacteria were viewed in her previous laboratory:
we did not have a working fluorescence microscope. This problem continued
to plague us. I solved this problem by using the departmental confocal micro-
scope and when I could not use that, by asking microscope sales representa-
tives to bring demonstration microscopes to our lab, so that I could test them
before purchasing them. In reality we were using the microscopes to do the
experiments.
   From the late 1970s through the 1990s C. elegans researchers had a tradi-
tion of notifying each other of research progress before publication, so the
first written description of our work with GFP was in the October, 1993 issue
of the C. elegans newsletter, The Worm Breeders Gazette (Chalfie et al., 1993). This
article started the flood of requests for the GFP vectors. Approximately 50
people asked for them before our official publication in Science in February,
1994 (Chalfie et al., 1994).
   Publication, however, was not without its difficulties. The first problem was
the title. When we submitted the paper for the editors’ consideration, the
title proclaimed that we had found “A New Marker for Gene Expression.”
The editors told us that we had to change the title by removing that word
“new” because every paper published in Science reported novel results. We
were also asked to make the title more descriptive of the results. Partly in an-

158


noyance, I changed the title to a much longer one for the manuscript sent
to the reviewers (“The Aequorea victoria Green Fluorescent Protein Needs
No Exogenously-Added Component to Produce a Fluorescent Product in
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells”). After the paper was accepted, however,
the copy editor asked us to shorten the title. We submitted a new title that
was almost identical to the original (“Green Fluorescent Protein as a Marker
for Gene Expression”), and it was accepted.
   We had a second problem, this time with the cover art. I had sent in a
picture that I was quite proud of, since it showed a neuronal growth cone in
a living animal. The art director, however, informed me that green was the
color most difficult to reproduce on the cover, and asked if the color could
be changed. Luckily, I convinced her that a color change in this instance
would not be appropriate (Figure 8).




Figure 8. The cover of Science for February 11, 1994 showing GFP in C. elegans neurons.
From Science volume 263, number 5148. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.

The third problem was that I had difficulty with one of the people who had
already used GFP and whose unpublished data I had wanted to cite. Most
people were happy to have their results discussed, but this person put special
conditions on our use of her data (Figure 9). The fact that she was my wife
may have had something to do with the added requirements. She is shown
with our daughter Sarah, who is prize enough for anyone. Both have made
me a better person and a very happy one.

                                                                                  159


Figure 9. Conditions set by my wife, Tulle Hazelrigg, if I wanted to cite her unpublished
work on GFP in my paper. We still debate whether these conditions were actually met. She
is shown with our daughter Sarah (Photo credit: Roger Tsien).


The work that Tulle finally allowed me to cite was actually the next really
important advance in the use of GFP because she and her graduate student
Shengxian Wang made the first protein fusion with GFP, showed that it could
functionally replace the original protein, and demonstrated that it could
be used to show where in the cell the normal protein resided (Wang and
Hazelrigg, 1994). Typical of her modesty, Tulle didn’t use the words “green
fluorescent protein” or “GFP” in her title.
   These papers demonstrated the usefulness of GFP as a biological marker
for both gene expression and protein localization. And GFP had several
distinct advantages over past markers. First, GFP, like β-galactosidase, was
heritable. Because organisms could be transformed with DNA encoding
GFP, strains could be established that could be studied at latter times. This
property not only allowed repeated observations without extensive tissue
preparation, but also the strains, with particular cells or proteins labeled
could be used for a variety of studies. Second, visualizing GFP was essentially
non-invasive; the protein could be detected by simply shining blue light on
to the specimen. Third, GFP was a relative small and inert molecule that did
not seem to interfere with the biological processes that were being studied.
Moreover the active protein was a monomer, which allowed it to diffuse read-

160


ily throughout cells, particularly nerve cells, and outline their entire shape.
In contrast, β-galactosidase monomers are four times larger than GFP mono-
mers and enzymatic activity requires the formation of a tetramer, making
diffusion difficult. Fourth, the fluorescence from GFP could be observed in
living organisms, allowing a dynamic view of biological events. In addition,
biological activities could be monitored for proteins outside as well as inside
the cell (a property not shared by β-galactosidase).
   Although native GFP was very useful for a variety of experiments, for it
to be really established as a useful tool for biological studies, its properties
needed to be improved. The person who started improving GFP and who
continued to lead its development was my co-Laureate Roger Tsien. The first
things he and his laboratory did were to devise ways to change the emission
color and to greatly enhance the fluorescence output of the protein when
irradiated by blue light. But these and the other inventive adaptations that
his laboratory produced are the subjects of his talk, and I want to turn to how
researchers reacted to our paper.
   After the publication of our paper, people requested and we sent out ap-
proximately 1500 sets of the GFP vectors we had produced before turning
over the distribution to others. Two aspects of the early requests for GFP
struck me as interesting. First, more often than not an investigator asking for
the GFP vectors would say that he or she had heard about GFP from one of
their graduate students or postdocs, an indication that these people were the
real drivers of innovation in the laboratories. Second, several people would
start their requests by asking if I knew if GFP had been used in their favorite
organism. I expected that they asked because they wanted to be first to use
this method, so I was surprised that when I said “no,” that some would say
they would wait until someone else had worked out the method. I am still
somewhat dismayed by this reaction, although I suspect it does mean that we
have fewer real competitors than I would have assumed.
   In any event GFP was soon put into a staggering array of organisms from all
three domains of life: archaea, bacteria, and eukarya (Figure 10). Moreover,
a search of PubMed using the terms GFP or green fluorescent protein nets
over 30,000 publications, a number that has been increasing exponentially
since 1994 and is undoubtedly a lower bound. GFP has also entered the art
world with Eduardo Kac’s GFP bunny Alba and even the movies as evident
by the opening credits of the film Hulk by the director Ang Lee that was
released in 2003. The implication is that the Hulk is the first human GFP
transgenic.




                                                                            161


Figure 10. A gallery of GFP images. Photo credits by columns left to right: C. elegans
(John Kratz), Drosophila (Ansgar Klebes, Freie Universitaet, Berlin), Alba the GFP bunny
(Eduardo Kac), canola [M.D. Halfhill (St. Ambrose University) and H.A. Richards,
R.J. Millwood, and C.N. Stewart, Jr. (University of Tennessee)], mice (Ralph Brinster,
University of Pennsylvania), zebrafish (Brant Weinstein, NIH), cultured HeLa cells (Jerry
Kaplan and Michael Vaughn, University of Utah), Drosophila embryonic cells (Jennifer
Lippincott-Schwartz, NIH), Arabidopsis thaliana hypocotyl cells (David Ehrhardt, Carnegie
Institution of Washington), mouse Purkinje cell (National Center for Microscopy and
Imaging Research, University of California, San Diego).


After publishing our GFP paper, I went back to the work on mechanosen-
sation, thus turning from a developer to a user of GFP. For the next few
paragraphs I want to describe how we use GFP in our research to provide
examples of the many ways this protein can aid scientific discovery.
   First, of course, we use GFP in transcriptional fusions to characterize the
expression pattern of genes (Figure 6). Second, we used GFP translational
fusions to examine both gene expression and protein localization (Figure
11). With the advent of different colored fluorescent proteins, we could also
test for the co-expression of different genes. By studying mutants that are
defective in touch, we have found that touch sensitivity in C. elegans requires
a channel complex of at least four proteins and specialized extracellular ma-
trix and microtubules. Using a MEC-4::GFP translational fusion, we showed
that the channel complex is localized to discrete spots along the length of
the neuronal process (Figure 11D).




162


Figure 11. Uses of fluorescent protein translational fusions. A. Diagram of the six touch
receptor neurons (green). B. The six touch receptor neurons are completely filled with
a MEC-17::GFP fusion (taken from Zhang et al., 2002). C. GFP protein fusions for the
transcription factors EGL-44 and EGL-46 both localize to the nucleus of an FLP neuron (Ji
Wu cited in Wu et al., 2001). D. Localization of MEC-4::YFP to puncta along the length of a
touch receptor neuron process (taken from Chelur et al., 2002).


Once cells have been labeled with GFP they can be put to a wide variety of
uses. Because of the strong genetics available in C. elegans, we have used such
animals as the basis of screens for mutants defective in several aspects of
cellular development. For example, mutating animals in which expression
of GFP has labeled the entirety of the touch receptor neurons, we found
mutants with more or fewer fluorescing cells (allowing us to study genes
needed to control cell fate and number), mutants with cells in abnormal
locations (allowing us to study genes that influence the positioning of cells),
and mutants with cells (Figure 12A) with additional processes or abnormal
branches (allowing us to study genes involved in neuronal outgrowth and
morphology).




                                                                                      163


Figure 12. Using GFP for gene discovery and characterization. A. Mutations in the genes
unc-51 and mec-7 affect process outgrowth of touch receptor neurons labeled with MEC-
2::GFP (from Du and Chalfie, 2001). B. Mutations in mec-15 reduce synapses, visualized
by GFP::RAB-3, in touch receptor neurons (A. Bounoutas, M. Nonet, and M. Chalfie,
unpublished data). C. Touch receptors neurons can be cultured from embryos, iso-
lated by cell sorting, and used to identify cell-specific genes (e.g., Zhang et al., 2002). D.
Electrophysiology of touch neurons from wild type and mutants is possible because the
cells can be identified by their fluorescence (taken, in part, from O’Hagan et al., 2005).


By using animals making GFP fused to proteins that localize to particular re-
gions of the cells, one can obtain mutants with even more specific defects. For
example, Michael Nonet at Washington University in St. Louis is interested in
genes needed for the formation of the chemical synapses that connect nerve
cells. He has created fusions of GFP with proteins found at synapses that label
these connections (Figure 12B). These fusion proteins label the two regions
in touch receptor neurons that contain chemical synapses. We are collaborat-
ing with him to study a gene needed for touch neuron synapses.
   Mutageneses are not the only uses for animals with labeled cells. The ani-
mals can also be used to isolate and study the labeled cells. For example, we
have disrupted embryos and grown the embryonic cells in culture. The touch
receptor neurons can be detected among all the other cells because of their
fluorescence (Figure 12C). Remarkably, these cells have the same morph-
ology they do within the animal; other labeled nerve cells look entirely dif-
ferent. The cells can be isolated using a fluorescence-activated cell sorter and
used to identify messenger RNAs that are specific to the cells. Using these
methods, we have identified 200 additional genes that are overexpressed in
these cells.
   Labeling the cells has also allowed us to study the electric properties of the
touch receptor neurons, and to my particular joy identify the first transduc-
tion molecules for a eukaryotic mechanical sense. C. elegans is a wonderful

164


organism for a wide range of studies, but one of its disadvantages is that
its nerve cells are tiny. Fortunately, Miriam Goodman working with Shawn
Lockery at the University of Oregon developed a GFP-based method to make
electrophysiological recording from C. elegans (Goodman et al., 1998), which
she then adapted to the touch receptor neurons as a postdoctoral fellow in
my lab (Figure 12D). Using this method Bob O’Hagan, a graduate student in
my lab, Miriam, now at Stanford, and I found that specific mutations affect-
ing the channel subunits in the touch neurons change the normal inward
current elicited by touch to an outward current, a demonstration that these
channel proteins are directly required for transduction.
   None of the results that I have mentioned would have been possible with-
out the use of GFP in living animals. Despite my enthusiasm, however, GFP
does have some limitations that have led us to devise modified proteins. One
problem is that GFP expression is dependent on gene regulatory elements.
We have been fortunate in studying the touch neurons because we know of
genes that are expressed only in these cells and we can use their regulatory
sequences. But such cell-specific expression is not common in C. elegans or
other organisms, so specific labeling with GFP can be difficult. We have
taken advantage, however, of a remarkable finding by Lynne Regan of Yale
University to overcome this difficulty.
   Lynne’s lab found that GFP split into two pieces could be reconstituted if
the two parts were linked by interacting peptides (Ghosh et al., 2000; Figure
12A). Her lab and others have used this property to study protein interac-
tions. Two members of my lab (Shifang Zhang and Chuck Ma) realized that
this two component GFP, which we named recGFP, could help solve the
specificity problem, if the two parts were expressed from different promot-
ers. This two-component system should enable the labeling of 80% rather
than 20% of the existing neuronal cell types in C. elegans (Figure 13).




                                                                         165


Figure 13. Use of recGFP to label the C. elegans FLP neurons (modified from Zhang et al.,
2004).


Another feature of GFP that can be both an advantage and a disadvantage is
that the protein is very stable. This feature is wonderful when accumulation
of GFP can give a brighter signal, but we wanted to study situations when
gene expression was turned off rather than on, and stable GFP is a hindrance
in these instances. We have found that fusions of GFP with the RING finger
domains of certain E3 ubiquitin ligases creates an unstable GFP. We have
used unstable GFP to learn how disruption of microtubules in the touch
receptor neurons causes a generalized reduction in protein levels in the
cells. Untreated animals fluoresce as adults, whereas animals treated with the
anti-microtubule drug colchicine, which selectively causes touch insensitivity
do not (Figure 14). We have identified several genes needed for this down
regulation by mutating these animals and then looking for adults with visible
fluorescence. These genes include members of the p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway and one putative transcription
factor. I find these experiments exciting for two reasons. First, axonal out-
growth, neuronal branching, and synapse formation are dependent on the
state of nearby microtubules. The connection of microtubule state and MAP
kinase activity may help explain the role of microtubules in these events.
Second, we now have a means of investigating the down-regulation of gene
activity. We have identified other instances where gene expression is reduced
in post-mitotic cells, and we are using the unstable GFP as in this example to
identify genes that regulate that reduction.



166


Figure 14. Gene discovery using a rapidly degrading GFP (praja::GFP). GFP fluorescence is
absent in adult touch receptor neurons grown in the presence of colchicine. Mutation of
wild-type animals yields some animals with adult fluorescence. One gene identified by this
type of genetic screen is dlk-1, which encodes a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
kinase (A. Bounoutas, C. Ma, L. Emtage, and M. Chalfie, unpublished data).


In closing I would like to mention two reasons I am appreciative of this Prize,
in addition to the obvious reasons for feeling so honored. First, this award
is a Prize for basic science. GFP was discovered by Osamu Shimomura in a
quest to answer a fascinating question: how can some organisms produce
light? And the tools that Roger Tsien and I have developed enable additional
investigations in cell biology, developmental biology, neurobiology, in fact
throughout the life sciences. I would also add that the study of C. elegans, a
nematode, has also taught us so much about life, as evident, as I mentioned,
by this its third Nobel. These days one hears much talk about how science
should be directed more toward translational research, research that ap-
plies understanding gained in the laboratory to problems in human health.
Although the application of knowledge to human health and well-being is
obviously important, I feel that many statements urging a switch from basic
to translational research are based on two false premises. The first is that sci-
entists are either uncaring or ignorant of the implications of their research
for human disease. I find this attitude ironic and false, since virtually every
scientist I know thinks deeply about the meaning and implications of his or
her research. Second, I feel that some people who promote translational
research act as if we have already learned all that we need to know to cure
human diseases. A look at any sequenced genome, whether worm, fly, mouse,
or human puts a lie to this assumption, since most of the predicted genes
encode products described as “proteins of unknown function.” We have so


                                                                                     167


much more to learn. Not only what these proteins do, but also how they in-
teract together to sustain life and development. As many people have said,
one needs to have material to translate to have translational research. And
when we consider how few organisms scientists have studied, the mystery that
surrounds us becomes even greater. What will be the A. victoria and C. elegans
of the future? Indeed, what will be the GFP of the future?
   Second, by awarding this Prize to the three of us, the Royal Swedish
Academy of Sciences and the Nobel Foundation have recognized that sci-
entific progress is not a solitary event, but a process. Each of us has been
a step in the very large development of GFP, and we have not been alone.
Hundreds of others have adapted and varied fluorescent proteins forming a
wide array of rather spectacular research tools. I have been astonished by the
ingenuity and creativity of my colleagues from around the world. In a real
sense, GFP is a wonderful metaphor for our work as scientists. Just as GFP
and other fluorescent molecules absorb light of one wavelength and convert
it to light of a different wavelength, we, too, take in what others have learned
about the world, add our observations and insights, and produce additional
gains in human knowledge.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I dedicate this lecture to three people with whom I would truly have loved
to share this honor, but who are no longer alive: my maternal grandmother,
Madeline Friedlen, a kind, intelligent, and remarkable woman who started
her own business in the Depression and who, when I was ten or so, wanted
me to become a chemist or, more particularly, a metallurgist; my mother,
Vivian Chalfie, who always claimed that intelligence had skipped a genera-
tion in our family but was wrong, and my father, Eli Chalfie, from whom I
inherited my sense of humor and my love of the guitar.
   Finally, I want to thank all the past and present members of my laboratory
on whom I have relied for many years for their intelligence, hard work, and
companionship. You’ve kept me on my toes. Thank you.
   Research in my lab has been funded by grants from the National Institutes
of Health.




168


REFERENCES
Chalfie, M., Tu, Y., Euskirchen, G., Ward, W. W., and Prasher, D. C. (1994), “Green fluores-
     cent protein as a marker for gene expression,” Science 263: 802–805.
Chalfie, M., Tu, Y., and Prasher, D. C. (1993), “Glow Worms – A New Method of Looking
     at C. elegans Gene Expression,” Worm Breeder’s Gazette 13: 19 (www.wormbase.org/
     db/misc/paper?name=WBPaper00014747;class=Paper).
Chelur, D. S., Ernstrom, G. G., Goodman, M. B., Yao, C. A., Chen, L., O’Hagan, R., and
     Chalfie, M. (2002), “The mechanosensory protein MEC-6 is a subunit of the C. elegans
     touch-cell degenerin channel,” Nature 420: 699–673.
Cody, C. W., Prasher, D. C., Westler, W. M., Prendergast, F. G., and Ward, W. W. (1993),
     “Chemical structure of the hexapeptide chromophore of the Aequorea green-fluores-
     cent protein,” Biochemistry 32: 1212–1218.
Du, H., and Chalfie, M. (2001), “Genes regulating touch cell development in C. elegans,”
     Genetics 158: 197–207.
 Du, H., Gu, G., William, C., and Chalfie, M. (1996), “Extracellular Proteins Needed for C.
     elegans Mechanosensation,” Neuron 16: 183–194.
Ghosh, I., Hamilton, A.D., and Regan, L. (2000), “Antiparallel Leucine Zipper-Directed
     Protein Reassembly: Application to the Green Fluorescent Protein,” J. Am. Chem. Soc.
     122: 5658–5659.
Goodman, M. B., Hall, D. H., Avery, L., and Lockery, S.R. (1998), “Active currents regulate
     sensitivity and dynamic range in C. elegans neurons,” Neuron 20: 763–772.
Johnson, F. H., Shimomura, O., Saiga, Y., Gershman, L. C., Reynolds G. T., and Waters,
     J. R. (1962), “Quantum efficiency of Cypridina luminescence, with a note on that of
     Aequorea,” J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 60: 85–103.
Morin, J. G., and Hastings, J. W. (1971a), “Biochemistry of the bioluminescence of colonial
     hybrids and other coelenterates,” J. Cell. Physiol. 77: 305–312.
Morin, J. G., and Hastings, J. W. (1971b), “Energy transfer in a bioluminescent system,” J.
     Cell. Physiol. 77: 313–318.
O’Hagan, R., Chalfie, M., and Goodman, M. B. (2005), “The MEC-4 DEG/ENaC channel
     of C. elegans touch receptor neurons transduces mechanical signals,” Nature Neurosci.
     8: 43–50.
Prasher, D. C., Eckenrode, V. K., Ward, W. W., Prendergast, F. G., and Cormier, M. J.
     (1992), “Primary structure of the Aequorea victoria green-fluorescent protein,” Gene
     111: 229–233.
Savage, C., Xue, Y., Mitani, S., Hall, D., Zakhary, R., and M. Chalfie (1994), “Mutations in
     the C. elegans β-tubulin gene mec-7: Effects on microtubule assembly and stability and
     on tubulin autoregulation,” J. Cell Sci. 107: 2165–2175.
Shimomura, O., Johnson, F. H., and Saiga, Y. (1962), “Extraction, purification, and prop-
     erties of aequorin, a bioluminescent protein from the luminous hydromedusan,
     Aequorea,” J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 59: 223–239.
Wang, S., and Hazelrigg, T. (1994), “Implications for bcd mRNA localization from spatial
     distribution of exu protein in Drosophila oogenesis,” Nature 369: 400–403.
Wu, J., Duggan, A., and Chalfie, M. (2001), “Inhibition of touch cell fate by egl-44 and egl-
     46 in C. elegans,” Genes Develop. 15: 789–802.
Zhang, S., Ma, C., and Chalfie, M. (2004), “Combinatorial marking of cells and organelles
     with reconstituted fluorescent proteins,” Cell 119: 137–144.
Zhang, Y., Ma, C., Delohery, T., Nasipak, B., Foat, B. C., Bounoutas, A., Bussemaker, H. J.,
     Kim, S. K., and Chalfie, M. (2002), “Identification of genes expressed in C. elegans
     touch receptor neurons,” Nature 418: 331–335.
Portrait photo of Martin Chalfie by photographer Ulla Montan.




                                                                                        169
