             Development of Multiscale Models
             for Complex Chemical Systems
             From H+H2 to Biomolecules
             Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2013

             by Martin Karplus
             Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Harvard University, U.S.A.
             and
             Laboratoire de Chimie Biophysique, ISIS, Université de Strasbourg, France.




                   “Do not go where the path may lead, go instead where there is no
                   path and leave a trail.”
                                                                                   Ralph Waldo Emerson




             P   araphrasing Ralph Waldo Emerson, a 19th century New England philoso-
                 pher and essayist, I shall try to show in this lecture how I have gone where
             there was no path and left a trail. It leads from trajectory studies of the reactions
             of small molecules to molecular dynamics simulations of macromolecules of
             biological interest.
                 In developing computational methods to study complex chemical systems,
             the essential element has been to introduce classical concepts wherever possible,
             to replace the much more time-consuming quantum mechanical calculations.
             In 1929 [1] Paul Dirac (Nobel Prize in Physics, 1933) wrote (Fig. 1) the now
             familiar statement:

                   The underlying physical laws necessary for the mathematical
                   theory of a large part of physics and the whole of chemistry are thus

                                                                                                         63




ok.indb 63                                                                                                    11/4/14 2:25 PM


      64                                                                The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 1. Quote from P.A.M. Dirac in 1929 (reference 1).


             completely known, and the difficulty is only that the exact application
             of these laws leads to equations that are much too complicated to be
             soluble.

             However, the paragraph goes on to a less familiar part (Fig. 2):

             It therefore becomes desirable that approximate practical methods of
             applying quantum mechanics should be developed, which can lead




      Figure 2. Continuation of quote from P.A.M. Dirac in 1929 (reference 1).




ok.indb 64                                                                                  11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems65


                 to an explanation of the main features of complex atomic systems
                 without too much computation.

                  This statement could be regarded as the leitmotif of this year’s Nobel Prize in
             Chemistry, but actually Dirac’s paper refers not to introducing classical mechan-
             ics, but rather to simplifying the quantum mechanical approaches.
                  To develop methods to study complex chemical systems, including biomol-
             ecules, we have to consider (Fig. 3) the two elements that govern their behavior:
             (1) The potential surface on which the atoms move; and (2) the laws of motion
             that determine the dynamics of the atoms on the potential surfaces.
                  The Nobel Prize focused on the development of models for the potential
             surface. When I visited the Lifson group in 1969, there was considerable excite-
             ment about developing empirical potential energy functions primarily for small
             molecules. The important “new” idea was to use a functional form that could
             serve not only for calculating vibrational frequencies, as did the expansion of
             the potential about a known or assumed energy minimum, but also for deter-
             mining the molecular structure at the minimum. This approach gave rise to
             molecular mechanics or force fields, as they are now called, in which the energy
             is expanded in terms of empirical functions that are easy to calculate; the groups
             of Allinger [2], Scheraga [3], and Lifson [4] all made important contributions
             to the development. The possibility of using such energy functions for larger
             systems, such as proteins, struck me as very exciting, though I did not work on
             this for a while.
                  Since Michael Levitt and Arieh Warshel of the Lifson group are here, I will
             leave further discussion of potential surfaces to them (Fig. 4). In what follows




             Figure 3. Essential elements for calculating the behavior of complex chemical systems.




ok.indb 65                                                                                            11/4/14 2:25 PM


      66                                                                    The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 4. Aspects of potential surface for complex chemical systems.



      I will focus on the classical treatment of the atomic motions, whether in small
      molecules or large (Fig. 5). Although the laws governing the motions of atoms
      are quantum mechanical, the key realization that made possible the simulation
      of the dynamics of complex systems, including biomolecules, was that a classical
      mechanical description of the atomic motions is adequate in most cases.




      Figure 5. Laws of Motion: Quantum vs Classical




ok.indb 66                                                                                      11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems67


                  From my own perspective, this realization was derived from calculations
             that my group did in the 1960s, when we studied a very simple reaction, the
             symmetric exchange reaction, H+H2 → H2+H. As shown in Fig. 6 (upper part),
             this involves the atom HC colliding with the molecule HA–HB with the result
             that a new molecule HB–HC is formed and the atom A escapes. To determine the
             trajectories describing the reaction, it is necessary (Fig. 3) to know the poten-
             tial surface governing the interactions between the three atoms. What Richard
             Porter and I used was a semi-empirical valence-bond surface [5]. This is not
             surprising since I had been a student of Linus Pauling (Nobel Prize in Chemis-
             try, 1954; Nobel Prize for Peace, 1962), who believed that valence bond theory
             was the best approach for understanding chemical bonding. When compared
             with high-level quantum mechanical calculations [6], the Porter-Karplus (PK)
             surface, as it has come to be called, has turned out to be surprisingly accurate,
             in spite of the simplicity of the approach. The PK surface has been used by sev-
             eral groups in testing calculational methods for studying the H+H2 reaction, as
             described below [7].
                  The energy as a function of the reaction coordinate for a collinear collision,
             which corresponds to the lowest energy reaction path, is shown in the lower
             part of Fig. 6. The essential feature of the surface is that there is a high activation
             barrier for the reaction. Although Fig. 6 shows the collinear surface, the actual
             trajectories describing the reaction were determined by solving Newton’s equa-
             tion of motion in the full three-dimensional space [8].




             Figure 6. H+H2 Reaction. Upper: collinear reactive collision; Lower: PK potential sur-
             face for a collinear reaction (see ref. 5).




ok.indb 67                                                                                             11/4/14 2:25 PM


      68                                                                    The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 7. H+H2 Reactive Collision. Upper: non-collinear reactive collision; Lower-left:
      atom distances during reactive collision with yellow box indicating the strong interaction
      region; Lower-right: snapshot of a reactive collision (from Film 1) (see refs. 8 and 36).




           Since there are only three atoms, their relative positions can be described
      in terms of the three distances between the three pairs of atoms. On the lower
      left of Fig. 7 are shown the distances between the atoms as a function of time
      in femtoseconds, which is the appropriate timescale for the collision. In this
      figure, which represents a reactive collision, the distances RAC and RBC decrease
      as atom HC collides with molecule HA-HB, which is vibrating before the reaction
      takes place; after the reaction, the newly formed molecule, HB-HC, vibrates and
      atom HA escapes. The yellow box in the figure indicates the time during which
      strong interactions between the atoms are present; it corresponds to about 10
      femtoseconds.
           Figure 8 (lower left) shows a nonreactive collision in the same way as the
      reactive collision is shown in Fig. 7. Again, the interaction time (yellow box)
      is on the femtosecond timescale. In this case, the internuclear distance RA–RB
      continues as a molecule vibration and the colliding atom HC escapes.
           Soon after the calculations were done, Lee Pedersen and Keiji Morokuma,
      postdoctoral fellows in my group, discovered that there was a graphics labora-
      tory at Harvard and obtained permission to make a film, which shows a series of
      reactive and non-reactive collisions. A snapshot from the film segments show-
      ing a reactive and a nonreactive trajectory are on the lower right of Figs. 7 and
      8, respectively. A brief description of each of the films is given in the Appendix.
      The films are available via the links given in the Appendix.




ok.indb 68                                                                                         11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems69




             Figure 8. H+H2 Nonreactive Collision. Upper: non-collinear non-reactive collision;
             Lower-left: atom distances during nonreactive collision with yellow box indicating the
             strong interaction region; Lower-right: snapshot of a nonreactive collision (from Film 1)
             (see refs. 8 and 36).




                 Even though an individual reaction takes place on the femtosecond times-
             cale, the macroscopic rate is much slower. This difference in timescales arises
             from the fact that the reaction rate is determined by averaging over a large num-
             ber of trajectories with an energy distribution corresponding to the Boltzmann
             Law. Even at 1000K, a temperature high enough for the reaction to be easily
             measured [9], most of the collisions do not have enough energy to get over the
             barrier. Consequently, although an individual event is very fast, the overall rate
             is many orders of magnitude slower.
                 The classical trajectory calculations of the H+H2 reaction were in approxi-
             mate agreement with the available experimental data [9,10]. However, it seemed
             to me important to ascertain that the details of the classical results were correct.
             For this purpose, it was necessary to have a full quantum mechanical calcula-
             tion for the H+H2 reaction, which was not available at the time. A significant
             theoretical development and much more computer time were required. It was
             only ten years later that a good friend of mine, Aron Kuppermann [11], and also
             Bob Wyatt [12] were able to do such a calculation (Fig. 9).
                 Since we had used the approximate PK potential for the classical mechanical
             calculation, both groups also used the PK potential; i.e., they were testing not
             whether the results agreed with Nature but whether the classical calculations
             were valid. As stated in the figure, they found that the classical results were as




ok.indb 69                                                                                               11/4/14 2:25 PM


      70                                                             The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 9. Importance of an accurate quantum treatment for validating the classical
      treatment (see refs. 8 and 11).



      accurate as the quantum mechanical results that they obtained with much more
      work.
          The comparison showed that the reaction of hydrogen atoms, for which you
      would expect the largest quantum effects, can be described classically in most
      cases. At low temperatures, significant tunneling can occur, so that quantum
      corrections are required [13]. Consequently, for heavier atoms, as well as for
      hydrogen atoms, classical mechanics should be valid for studying the dynamics
      at ambient temperatures. Since biomolecules are composed mainly of carbon,
      nitrogen and oxygen, with hydrogen atoms bonded to them, I concluded that
      classical mechanical molecular dynamics simulations would be meaningful.
          Before focusing on the dynamics of larger molecules, I will discuss some
      work related to one of the papers mentioned in the “Scientific Background” to
      the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. I had become interested in the chemistry of vi-
      sion as an undergraduate at Harvard and did research with Ruth Hubbard and
      George Wald (Nobel Prize in Physiology in 1967). After I returned to Harvard
      in 1966 as a Professor, I came across an article by Ruth Hubbard and George
      Wald in a volume dedicated to Linus Pauling for his 65th birthday [14]. It was
      entitled, “Pauling and Carotenoid Stereochemistry.” In it, Hubbard and Wald
      reviewed Pauling’s contribution to the understanding of polyenes with emphasis
      on the visual chromophore, retinal. The article contained a paragraph, which I
      reproduce here because it describes an element of Pauling’s approach to science
      that greatly influenced my research:




ok.indb 70                                                                                 11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems71


                 One of the admirable things about Linus Pauling’s thinking is that he
                 pursues it always to the level of numbers. As a result, there is usually
                 no doubt of exactly what he means. Sometimes his initial thought
                 is tentative because the data are not yet adequate, and then it may
                 require some later elaboration or revision. But it is frequently he who
                 refines the first formulation.

                 On looking through the article, it was clear to me that the theory of the elec-
             tronic absorption spectrum of retinal and its geometric changes on excitation,
             which play an essential role in vision, had not advanced significantly since my
             discussions with Hubbard and Wald during my undergraduate days at Harvard.
             I realized, in part from my time in Oxford as a postdoctoral fellow with Charles
             Coulson, that polyenes, such as retinal, were ideal systems for study by the avail-
             able semi-empirical approaches; that is, if any biologically interesting system in
             which quantum effects are important could be treated adequately, retinal was it.
             Barry Honig, who had received his PhD in theoretical chemistry working with
             Joshua Jortner, joined my research group at that time. He was the perfect candi-
             date to work on the retinal problem.




             Figure 10. Retinal Conformers. (a) all-trans: the stable conformer after absorption of
             light and photoisomerization; (b) 11-cis,12-s-cis: one possible photoactive conformer;
             (c) 11-cis,12-s-trans: the other possible photoactive conformer (from ref. 15).




ok.indb 71                                                                                            11/4/14 2:25 PM


      72                                                                The Nobel Prizes


           Figure 10 shows the important conformations of retinal. The active chro-
      mophore is 11-cis; i.e., the C11–C12 double bond is in a cis configuration (see
      Fig. 10b and 10c). When retinal is photoisomerized, the initial step of vision, it
      is transformed to 11-trans; i.e., the C11–C12 double bond is isomerized from cis
      (Fig. 10b and 10c) to trans (Fig. 10a). In the 11-cis state, it is possible to have
      the two isomers: 11-cis,12-s-cis (i.e., the C12–C13 single bond is cis, Fig. 10b) and
      11-cis, 12-s-trans (Fig. 10c). From looking at the two conformers, one would
      guess that the 12-s-cis conformer would be significantly lower in energy, be-
      cause the H10 and H14 hydrogens, which appear close enough to repel each other
      are smaller (see Fig. 10b) than H10 and (CH3)13 (see Fig. 10c), which would be
      expected to have a greater repulsion.
           However, when Barry Honig and I calculated the energies in the first paper
      [15] that used a quantum mechanical model for the π-electrons and a pairwise
      nonbonded van der Waals interaction energy for the σ-bond framework, we
      found that the two conformers are very close in energy because the larger ex-
      pected repulsion in 12-s-trans can be reduced significantly by twisting around
      the single bonds; the difference is only about 1.5 kcal/mol, with 12-s-cis lower.
      Since these and other results in the paper had significant implications for the
      visual cycle, we submitted the paper describing them to Nature. It received ex-
      cellent reviews, but came back with a rejection letter stating that because there
      was no experimental evidence to support our results, it was not certain that the
      conclusions were correct. This was my first experience with Nature and with
      the difficulty of publishing theoretical results related to biology, particularly in
      “high impact” journals. The problem is almost as prevalent today as it was then;
      i.e., if theory agrees with experiment it is not interesting because the result is
      already known, whereas if one is making a prediction, then it is not publishable
      because there is no evidence that the prediction is correct. I was sufficiently
      upset by the editorial decision that I phoned John Maddox, the Editor of Nature,
      and explained the situation to him. Apparently, I was successful, as the paper
      was finally accepted. Fortunately for Maddox and for us, about six months later,
      an X-ray structure by Jerome Karle (Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1985) and co-
      workers [16] was published which confirmed our results. In a review of studies
      of the visual chromophore [17], we noted that “Theoretical chemists tend to use
      the word ‘prediction’ rather loosely to refer to any calculation that agrees with
      experiment, even when the latter was done before the former; the 12 s-cis geom-
      etry was a prediction in the true meaning of the word.”
           While Arieh Warshel was a postdoctoral fellow in my group, we extended
      the mixed quantum/classical mechanical method introduced in ref. [15] to cal-
      culations of the spectrum and vibrations of retinal [18] and similar molecules.




ok.indb 72                                                                                    11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems73


             This was followed by the use of classical trajectories of the type employed for
             H+H2 with a simple surface crossing model treatment of the photoisomeriza-
             tion process [19]. Figure 11 (bottom left) illustrates the case that was studied. It
             was the photoisomerization of 2-butene from the cis configuration with the two
             methyl groups on the same side of the double bond to the trans configuration
             with the two methyl groups on opposite sides of the double bond.
                 From looking at Fig. 11 (top), it is clear that the photosiomerization of reti-
             nal from 11-cis to all-trans, involves a large displacement of the two ends of the
             molecule relative to each other for both 12-s-cis and 12-s-trans. Shortly after
             Warshel left my group, he published a paper [20] based on the idea that when
             bound to the protein rhodopsin in the rods of the eye, the ends of the molecule
             would be restricted from moving significantly during the isomerization. As in-
             dicated in Fig. 11 (lower right), the model used fixed end groups. To allow the
             retinal to isomerize without movement of the end groups, he proposed the so-
             called “bicycle pedal” model. Of course, the rhodopsin was not included in the
             calculation (i.e., no protein was present) since its structure was not known at
             the time. Recent studies [21] have shown that the actual isomerization is more




             Figure 11. Photoisomerization Dynamics. Bottom-left: transformation from cis to trans
             2-butene; Bottom-right: suggested constraints on retinal in protein rhodopsin (adapted
             from refs. 19 and 20).




ok.indb 73                                                                                            11/4/14 2:25 PM


      74                                                                 The Nobel Prizes


      complicated than proposed by Warshel and that relaxation of rhodopsin plays
      a significant role.
          In the same year (1976), J. Andrew (Andy) McCammon, Bruce Gelin, and
      I did the first calculation applying the classical trajectory methodology to a
      protein, the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI). We chose this protein
      because it was small (only 58 residues and only 458 (pseudo) atoms in the ex-
      tended atom model) and because it was one of the few proteins for which a high
      resolution crystal structure was available [22]. In the mid-1970s, it was difficult
      to obtain the computer time required to do such a simulation in the United
      States; the NSF centers did not yet exist. However, CECAM (Centre Européen
      de Calcul Atomic et Moléculaire) in Orsay, France, directed by Carl Moser, a
      person with an unusual vision for the future of computations in science, had
      access to a large computer for scientific research. In the summer of 1976, a two-
      month workshop was organized at CECAM by Herman Berendsen. Realizing
      that the workshop was a great opportunity, perhaps the only opportunity, to do
      the required calculations, Andy McCammon and Bruce Gelin worked very hard
      to prepare and test a program to do the molecular dynamics simulation of BPTI
      (Fig. 12). Because of their intense preparatory work, Andy was able to start run-
      ning the molecular dynamics simulation as soon as he arrived. It was essentially
      completed at the workshop and published in 1977 [23]. It is worth mentioning
      that during this workshop, stimulated by the description of the BPTI simula-
      tion, a number of groups began to use molecular dynamics for studying bio-
      molecules. They include W. F. van Gunsteren and H.J.C. Berendsen, J. Hermans
      and A. Rahman, and M. Levitt (see CECAM Workshop Report on “Models of
      Protein Dynamics,” Orsay, May 24–July 17, 1976).




      Figure 12. Methodology of BPTI simulation (see text and ref. 23).




ok.indb 74                                                                                   11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems75


                 We used a potential function developed by Bruce Gelin [24] that was a com-
             bination of the Scheraga and Lifson group potential functions. The molecular
             dynamics simulation of BPTI was an extension of what we had done for H+H2
             from a system of 3 atoms to one of 458 (pseudo) atoms. As mentioned earlier, it
             was a very natural generalization since the classical equations of motions should
             be applicable, regardless of the number of atoms. It is also important to remem-
             ber that the BPTI simulation was not the first simulation for a many-particle
             system with a realistic potential function for the interactions. In particular, An-
             eesur Rahman, a pioneer in the simulation field who unfortunately died young,
             had studied liquid argon in 1964 [25] and liquid water, in a collaboration with
             Frank Stillinger in 1974 [26]. They seem not to have been concerned with the
             validity of classical mechanics for these systems; perhaps I was overly cautious.
                 The 9.2 ps simulation of BPTI [23] gave results concerning the fluid-like
             internal motions of proteins that contrast sharply with the rigid view inferred
             from the X-ray structures. The extent of the protein mobility was, in fact, a great
             surprise to many crystallographers [27] and is an early example of the concep-
             tual insights concerning molecular properties that have been derived from mo-
             lecular dynamics simulations.




             Figure 13. BPTI simulation. Left: Initial structure; Right: Structure after 3.2 ps. The Cα
             carbons are indicated by circles, the sulfurs in disulfide bonds by stippled circles, the
             Cα carbons are connected by rods (from ref. 23).




ok.indb 75                                                                                                11/4/14 2:25 PM


      76                                                                  The Nobel Prizes


          Obviously, the best way to illustrate the motions would have been a film of
      the trajectory. However, the computer graphics facilities available to us were not
      advanced enough to treat a 458 (pseudo)-atom system in a finite time. Instead,
      Bruce Gelin made two drawings of the structure of BPTI (Fig. 13), one at the
      beginning of the simulation (left) and the other (right) after 3.2 picoseconds. If
      you look carefully at the figure, you can see that although the two structures are
      very similar, every residue has moved by a small amount. Given that computer
      graphics can now make the desired film of the trajectory very easily, Victor
      Ovchinnikov, a postdoctoral fellow in my group, produced a film for the Nobel
      Lecture using the corresponding representation (see Fig. 14 and Film 2)
          In an oral history that Andy McCammon recorded in 1995 [28], he made
      the prescient statement (Fig. 15): “There was a sense, even at the time, of some-
      thing truly historic going on, of getting these first glimpses of how an enzyme
      molecule, for example, might undergo internal motions that allow it to function
      as a biological catalyst.”
          Today, when thousands of molecular dynamics simulations of biomolecules
      are being done by hundreds of scientists, it is clear that what we felt at that
      time was indeed the beginning of a new era in the understanding of biological




      Figure 14. BPTI simulation. Image for Film 2. Same as Fig. 13, except that the disulfide
      bonds are indicated with yellow circles and connecting rods and light/dark Cα connec-
      tors represent the result of light shining on the image. (Drawing made by Victor Ovchin-
      nikov with VMD.)




ok.indb 76                                                                                       11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems77




             Figure 15. Based on an interview with J. A. McCammon in 1995, after he received the
             1995 Cray Research Leadership Award for Breakthrough Science from the Computer
             World Foundation (see ref. 28).




             systems. As computers became faster, one could improve the results, not only
             by refining the potentials, but also by doing longer simulations of more realistic
             model systems. At the same CECAM workshop where the first BPTI simulation
             was done, Peter Rossky and I [29,30], in a collaboration with Aneesur Rahman,
             did a simulation of the alanine-dipeptide (Fig. 16) in a box of water molecules
             and showed that the water around the hydrophobic methyl groups behaved dif-
             ferently from the water interacting with the polar C=O and N–H groups.




             Figure 16. Drawing of Alanine Dipeptide for the Solution Simulation. Top: Conforma-
             tion used in simulation; Bottom: Chemical formula (ref. 29).




ok.indb 77                                                                                         11/4/14 2:25 PM


      78                                                             The Nobel Prizes


          In 1988 Michael Levitt and Ruth Sharon [31] published a simulation of BPTI
      (see Fig. 17) that was more than twenty times longer than the original simula-
      tion and very importantly, the simulation was done in a box of water molecules.
      The Levitt-Sharon simulation confirmed the water behavior observed in the
      Rossky et al. papers [29,30]. Further, the simulation was qualitatively in agree-
      ment with the original BPTI vacuum simulation results, although the motions
      of the residues were somewhat smaller and because of the water friction, they
      were also slightly slower. Recent work [32,33] has elaborated our understanding
      of the role of the water environment in protein dynamics.
          In 2010 Shaw and his coworkers [34] (Fig. 17) performed a 1 millisecond
      simulation of BPTI described by a standard force field using a specially designed
      computer. The paper analyzed the long time dynamics in detail, but for me the
      most important aspect of the simulation is that they found that BPTI was stable
      on the millisecond timescale. I had always wondered, perhaps been “scared” is
      a better word, whether with the relatively crude potentials we were using the
      protein would fall apart (denature) if the molecular dynamics simulations were
      extended to such long times, the timescales that are of interest for many biologi-
      cal processes.
          In relation to such considerations, I would like to remind the audience
      that a very difficult problem in the field of molecular dynamics simulations of




             • So far, no all-atom simulation of BPTI folding exists,
              though smaller protein folding simulations with all-atom
              models in explicit solvent have been performed (Shaw
              et al. 2011)


      Figure 17. Summary of BPTI Solution Simulations (see text).




ok.indb 78                                                                                 11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems79


             biomolecules is to have a way of checking that the results are correct. Experi-
             mental data (e.g. NMR measurements) that can be used for validation of the
             results are important but limited; i.e., they do not provide enough information
             for a quantitative test. Despite what the Nobel Prize press citation implies (“The
             computer is just as important as the test tube”), experiments are essential to
             verify that what we are doing is meaningful. It is often possible to verify that the
             statistical error is sufficiently small that the simulations can be used to under-
             stand the phenomenon being studied [35], but the systematic error due to the
             approximations in the potentials is difficult to quantify.
                 In addition to the dynamics of the native proteins like BPTI, how the poly-
             peptide chain folds to the native state is of great interest [36]. No folding simula-
             tion of BPTI is available as yet (Fig. 17), though such simulations have been per-
             formed for smaller proteins [37]. The present status of our knowledge of BPTI
             folding, which was first studied by Levitt and Warshel with an ultra-simplified
             model [38], is summarized in ref. [39].
                 An early example of “multiscale” modeling, in the sense emphasized by the
             Nobel Prize citation, is the diffusion-collision model for protein folding, which
             was developed in 1976 by David Weaver and me [40]. It used a coarse-grained
             description of the protein with helices as the elementary particles, and it showed
             how the search problem for the native state could be solved by a divide-and-
             conquer approach. Formulated by Cy Levinthal, the so-called Levinthal Paradox
             points out that to find the native state by a random search of the astronomically
             large configuration space of a polypeptide chain would take longer than the age
             of the earth, while proteins fold experimentally on a timescale of microseconds
             to seconds. In addition to providing a conceptional answer to the question
             posed by Levinthal, the diffusion-collision model made possible the estimation
             of folding rates. The model was ahead of its time because data to test it were not
             available. Only relatively recently have experimental studies demonstrated that
             the diffusion-collision model describes the folding mechanism of many helical
             proteins [41], as well as some others [42].
                 In the lecture so far, I have focused on the history of molecular dynamics
             simulations of proteins and the qualitative insights about protein motions that
             were obtained from them. An essential conclusion from the early work, as al-
             ready mentioned, is that fluid-like internal motions occur in proteins at room
             temperature. Like so many things that occur naturally, Nature is likely to have
             made use of them by evolutionary developments. The importance of the internal
             motions is encapsulated in the now very well-known statement (Fig. 18): “. . .
             everything that living things do can be understood in terms of the jigglings and
             wigglings of atoms” [43]. However, I was amazed when I first found that 2000




ok.indb 79                                                                                           11/4/14 2:25 PM


      80                                                                The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 18. Top: Quote from “Feynman Lectures” (see ref. 43); Bottom: Richard Feyn-
      man (Nobel Prize in Physics, 1965) playing bongo drums (from http://www.richard-
      feynman.net/index.htm).


      years earlier, a Roman poet, Titus Lucretius, who is known for only one poem,
      De Rerum Natura, made the following statement (Fig. 19):

             The atoms are eternal and always moving. Everything comes into
             existence simply because of the random movement of atoms, which
             given enough time, will form and reform constantly experimenting




      Figure 19. A rendition by Stephen Greenblatt of Titus Lucretius “The Way Things Are:
      De Rerum Natura” (Vol. 1:1023ff), based on the translation of the poem by Martin Fer-
      guson Smith (Hacket Publishing Co., Cambridge, 2001).




ok.indb 80                                                                                    11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems81


                 with different configurations of matter from which will eventually
                 emerge everything we know . . .

                  Titus Lucretius based his poem on the detailed atomic theory of matter de-
             veloped by the Greek philosopher Democritus (about 400 BC). It distinguishes,
             for example, the bonding between atoms in liquids and solids. The atomic the-
             ory of matter apparently was lost for hundreds of years and revived in Europe
             only in the 1800s by John Dalton.
                  These quotations raise the question as to how Nature through evolution has
             developed the structures of proteins so that their “jigglings and wigglings” have
             a functional role. As Fig. 20 indicates, there are two aspects to this. First, evolu-
             tion determines the protein structure, which in many cases, though not all, is
             made up of relatively rigid units that are connected by hinges. They allow the
             units to move with respect to one another. Second, there is a signal, usually the
             binding of a ligand, that changes the equilibrium between two structures with
             the rigid units in different positions.
                  As an example, I will briefly discuss adenylate kinase, an enzyme which has
             two major conformations (Fig. 21). Its function is to transfer one phosphate
             group from adenosine diphosphate (A-P-P) to another A-P-P to produce ad-
             enosine triphosphate (A-P-P-P) and adenosine monophosphate (A-P). On the
             left of the figure is shown the open structure, which permits the substrates to




             Figure 20. How the “Jigglings and Wigglings” in the Feynman quote are used by Nature
             (as interpreted in this lecture).




ok.indb 81                                                                                           11/4/14 2:25 PM


      82                                                                The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 21. Cartoon of Adenylate Kinase. Left: Open structure with no bound substrate
      showing the hinges; Right: Closed structure with two bound adenosine diphosphates (A-
      P-P) (prepared by Victor Ovchinnikov with VMD).


      come in and the product to go out, and on the right is shown the closed struc-
      ture. The closed structure creates a reaction “chamber,” which is isolated from
      the solvent and has the catalytic residues in position for the reaction to take
      place. Figure 22 (top) shows a series of snapshots from a cartoon movie (see
      Film 3) with the substrate coming in and the enzyme closing; Fig. 22 (bottom)
      shows the reaction taking place and the enzyme opening up to allow the prod-
      ucts to escape.
          This type of conformational change occurs in many enzymes as an essential
      part of their mechanism. Moreover, in adenylate kinase and many other en-
      zymes, the chemistry has been optimized such that it is not the rate-limiting step
      for the overall reaction [44,45]. Jeremy Knowles [46] has called such enzymes
      “perfect” since there is no rationale for evolution to further optimize the chem-
      istry when the opening of the enzyme to let the products escape is rate-limiting.
          Molecular motors are the prime example of how the “jigglings and wig-
      glings” are put to work to do something that is essential for life (see Fig. 23).
      My group has studied several different motors, including myosin V [47,48], F1
      ATPase [49,50,51], and kinesin [52,53]. I will talk just about one of them, ki-
      nesin, because of its relation to this year’s Physiology or Medicine Prize, which
      was awarded for the “discoveries of machinery regulating vesicle traffic, a major
      transport system in the cell.” The work was concerned with genetic analyses of




ok.indb 82                                                                                    11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems83




             Figure 22. Snapshots from Adenylate Kinase film (Film 3). (a) Closing of enzyme as
             substrates bind; (b) Reaction of substrates and opening for product release (prepared by
             Victor Ovchinnikov with VMD and FFMPEG).



             how vesicles open to discharge their cargo at the right time in the right place.
             Although not all vesicles need to be moved from one place to another, the ki-
             nesins, which were discovered in 1982 in the giant squid axon [54], are very
             important in the function of many vesicles. The kinesins transport the vesicles
             large distances along the microtubule cytoskeleton of the cell.
                 Figure 24 shows a set of snapshots from a film (see Film 4) that illustrates
             how kinesin functions. The two globular “feet” are visible. Actually there are two
             molecules, each with a globular foot, and they are joined together by a protein
             strands one from each molecule (see also Fig. 25), to form a coil-coil at the
             top of which the vesicle is carried. We know very little about the structure of
             the vesicles or how they are attached at the top of the coiled-coil. Our research
             is concerned with understanding the mechanism by which the kinesin dimer
             walks along the microtubule cytoskeleton. If you look carefully at Film 4, you
             can see that kinesin walks in the same way as we do: it puts the left foot forward,
             then the right foot forward, and so on. However, as the film shows the molecules
             do not walk “normally.” The way they walk is like a person who has artificial legs.
             When you consider the complex muscular and nervous system involved in our
             walking, how kinesin walks still appears amazing, at least to me.
                 To understand the walking mechanism, Wonmuk Hwang, Matt Lang and
             coworkers, and I [52] have been doing molecular dynamics simulations. The




ok.indb 83                                                                                              11/4/14 2:25 PM


      84                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 23. Cartoon of different types of molecular motors (see R. D. Vale, Cell 112, 467–
      480 (2003) for details concerning the image).




      snapshots from the film (Fig. 24) show that the molecule ATP and its hydrolysis
      products, ADP and Pi are involved in the stepping mechanism. It is the binding
      of ATP that trigger the motion by which the back “foot” is “thrown” forward
      to take a step on the microtubule. To examine the mechanism in more detail,
      the X-ray structure of a kinesin dimer shown in Fig. 25 was used as the basis
      for the simulations [56]. Calculations showed that the β-strand, labeled β10 in
      the figure, which serves as the connector, is not sufficiently rigid to be able to
      perform the so-called “power stroke,” in which the back foot is thrown forward.




ok.indb 84                                                                                        11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems85




             Figure 24. Kinesin walking. Snapshots from Film 4 (created by Graham Johnson for
             R. D. Vale and R. A. Milligan, 2000; see ref. 55). (a) View of two globular domains (the
             “feet”) bound to a microtubule; ADP has been released and ATP is binding to the front
             foot, triggering the power stroke (see Fig. 26 and text); (b) release of rear foot; (c) partly
             complete power stroke; (d) completed step.




             Figure 25. X-ray structure of rat brain kinesin dimer. The β10 strand of each monomer
             connecting to the coiled-coil and the β0 strand which is the CS are evident (from ref. 56).




ok.indb 85                                                                                                    11/4/14 2:25 PM


      86                                                                 The Nobel Prizes


      We noticed that there was another β-strand, labeled β0, at the N-terminus of
      the molecule. It is disordered in certain structures, but in others it forms a two-
      stranded β-sheet with β10. We called β0 the “cover strand” (CS) and the two-
      stranded β-sheet, the “cover-neck bundle” (CNB).
          Figure 26 shows a pictorial representation of the simulation results. In each
      of the three diagrams on the left we can see the two feet with a model of the mi-
      crotubule below. In the top diagram (A) the forward foot has a disordered cover
      strand in blue. When ATP binds, the simulations show (middle panel (B)) that
      the two-stranded cover-neck bundle is formed. It looks very much like a spring
      and appears to be a high-energy construct. Simulations suggest that, in fact, it
      acts like a spring with a forward bias that generates the power stroke by propel-
      ling the back foot forward (bottom panel (C)) in readiness for the next step.
          To test the model based on the simulations, optical trapping experiments
      in the presence of an external force were performed for a wild-type kinesin and




      Figure 26. Schematic representation of the generation of the power stroke based on the
      simulations. (A) Before ATP binding; (B) After ATP binding; (C) Power stroke; (D) Dia-
      gram highlighting the major molecular events leading to CNB formation and the power
      stroke (see ref. 53 and text).




ok.indb 86                                                                                     11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems87




             Figure 27. Mutant Data for Testing the Power Stroke Mechanism (from ref. 53).




             for two mutants [53]. One set of mutations introduced two glycines (G2), which
             are expected to make the CNB more flexible and the other completely deleted
             the cover strand (DEL) (Fig. 27a). Figure 27b shows a cartoon of the experi-
             ment. Figure 27c presents one set of results, namely the decrease of the stall
             force required for the G2 mutant and the almost zero stall force required for
             DEL, which appears at best to “limp” along the microtubule; more details of
             the experimental studies that support the CNB model are described separately
             [53]. Additional simulations are in progress to increase our understanding of
             how kinesins function. An essential element that is being investigated concerns
             the role of the interactions between kinesin and the microtubule in the walking
             mechanism.
                  Kinesin motors, like other molecular motors, are very important in making
             life possible [57]. As indicated in Fig. 28, mitosis and cell division are inhib-
             ited when kinesins do not function due to deleterious mutations. Their impor-
             tance in cell division makes them a target for cancer chemotherapy. Kinesins
             are also essential for axonal transport where material has to be delivered over
             long distances. Some viruses have learned that if they attach themselves to ki-
             nesins where the normal cargo would be located, they are transported along the




ok.indb 87                                                                                       11/4/14 2:25 PM


      88                                                              The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 28. Importance of Kinesin Motors.



      microtubules from one part of the cell to another in a few minutes instead of
      the ten or so hours that would be required by diffusion in the complex cellular
      medium.
           What does the future hold (Fig. 29)? All of us know that real predictions
      are hard, so I have included relatively conservative ones in the figure. The first,
      which was mentioned in the introduction, has been a dream of mine since I
      began to do biomolecular simulations. It is not that simulations can replace all
      experiments, as the Nobel press announcement seems to imply, but rather that
      experimentalists would use simulations as a tool like any other (such as X-rays
      or NMR) in their work to get a better understanding than they could derive
      from either experiments or simulations alone. That experimentalists are begin-
      ning to employ simulations in this way is evidenced by the literature [58]. The
      respectability for molecular dynamics simulations provided by the Nobel Prize
      is likely to increase their utilization by the scientific community.
           In terms of actual simulations, people are studying more complicated sys-
      tems. They are beginning to use molecular dynamics simulations for viruses,
      ribosomes, and even cells so as to gain insights into how they function. If I were
      thirty years younger I would be simulating the brain. About twenty years ago, I
      spent a couple of years learning what was known about the brain and concluded
      that not enough data were available to permit me to contribute significantly by
      making studies on the molecular level. I do not regret the time spent in this
      way since I learned much of interest and my research group continued to focus
      on problems that we could solve. Our knowledge of the brain has increased




ok.indb 88                                                                                  11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems89




             Figure 29. Future of Molecular Dynamics Simulations.



             sufficiently that I would now urge young scientists to work at this exciting fron-
             tier, which is beginning to be probed by initiatives in both Europe and America.
                  However bright the future, I want to caution the audience (as I always do
             with my students) that simulations have limitations, just as do experiments. In
             particular, when you appear to have discovered something new and exciting,
             you should be doubly careful to make certain that there is no mistake in what
             you have done. Moreover, the example of my exploration of brain research per-
             mits me to make an important point. In working at the interface of chemistry
             and biology with simulation techniques, it is essential to realize that of the many
             exciting systems that are being studied experimentally, only relatively few pose
             questions for which molecular dynamics simulations can provide useful insights
             at their present stage of development.
                  Figure 30 lists the people to whom this lecture is dedicated. They are the Kar-
             plusians: 244 people who have worked in my “laboratory” in Illinois, Columbia,
             Harvard, Paris and Strasbourg. Without them, I would not be here today. Over
             the last forty years, many of them have contributed to the methodology and ap-
             plications of molecular dynamics simulations. In writing this, I find it curious
             that molecular dynamics simulations were not mentioned in the description of
             the “Scientific Background” of the Nobel Prize. The large community involved in
             molecular dynamics simulations, which includes all of this year’s Nobel Laure-
             ates in Chemistry, has transformed the field from an esoteric subject of interest




ok.indb 89                                                                                          11/4/14 2:25 PM


      90                                                                 The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 30. List of Karplusians (2013). These are collaborators who have worked with me
      in Illinois, Columbia, Harvard, Paris, and Strasbourg.


      to only a small group of specialists into a central element of modern chemistry
      and structural biology. Without molecular dynamics simulations and their ex-
      plosive development, no Nobel Prize would have been awarded in this area.
           There is perhaps a parallel here between the fact that molecular dynamics
      was not mentioned in the Nobel Prize citation and the citation for Einstein’s No-
      bel Prize in Physics (1921). He was awarded the Nobel Prize for the theory of the
      photoelectric effect and not for his most important work, the general theory of
      relativity, which had already been verified by experiment and was the origin of
      his worldwide fame as a scientist. Interestingly, when he gave his Nobel Lecture,
      it was on relativity, even though he knew that he was supposed to talk about the
      photoelectric effect. Correspondingly, I traced the history of molecular dynam-
      ics simulations and their development in my lecture and did not emphasize the
      development of potential functions for simulations, the focus of the Chemis-
      try Nobel Prize citation. The complex deliberations of the Physics Committee




ok.indb 90                                                                                     11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems91


             in reaching its decision concerning Einstein’s Nobel Prize are now known be-
             cause his prize was awarded more than fifty years ago [59]. The public will again
             have to wait fifty years to find out what motivated the Chemistry Committee in
             awarding this year’s Nobel Prize.
                 I very much want to mention one other person, my wife Marci, who was
             willing to live with me, someone “who spent all his time working,” in her words.
             Even more than just living with me, she was brave enough to be my laboratory
             administrator. Among many aspects of our life, it made possible our working in
             both the U.S. and France over many years. Moreover, in preparing to come to
             Stockholm, the complexity of arranging to be in the right place at the right time
             would have been overwhelming if she had not been there to take care of what
             was needed.


             References
              1. P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Royal Soc. of London, Series A 123, 714–733 (1929).
              2. N. L. Allinger, M. A. Miller, L. W. Chow, R. A. Ford and J. C. Graham, J. Amer.
                 Chem. Soc. 87, 3430 (1965).
              3. G. Némethy and H. Scheraga, Biopolymers 4, 155 (1965)
              4. S. Lifson and A. Warshel, J. Chem. Phys. 49, 5116 (1968)
              5. R. N. Porter and M. Karplus, J. Chem. Phys. 40, 1105–1115 (1964).
              6. P. Siegbahn and B. Liu, J. Chem. Phys. 68, 2457 (1978).
              7. G. C. Schatz, Theor. Chem. Acc. 103, 270–272 (2000).
              8. M. Karplus, R. N. Porter, and R. D. Sharma, J. Chem. Phys. 45, 3871–3873 (1966).
              9. A. Farkas and L. Farkas, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A152, 124 (1935).
             10. S. Datz and E. H. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 39, 1896 (1963).
             11. A. Kuppermann and G. C. Schatz, J. Chem. Phys. 62, 2502 (1975).
             12. A. B. Elkowitz and R. E. Wyatt, J. Chem. Phys. 62, 2504 (1975).
             13. M. Garcia-Viloca, J. Gao, M. Karplus, and D. G. Truhlar, Science 303, 186–195
                 (2004).
             14. R. Hubbard and G. Wald in “Structural implications of reaction kinetics,” in Struc-
                 tural Chemistry and Molecular Biology: a Volume dedicated to Linus Pauling by his
                 Students, Colleagues, and Friends, ed. A. Rich, N. Davidson, pp. 837–47. San Fran-
                 cisco: Freeman
             15. B. Honig and M. Karplus, Nature 229, 558–560 (1971).
             16. R. Gilardi, I.L. Karle, J. Karle, W. Sperling, Nature 232, 187–189 (1971).
             17. B. Honig, A. Warshel, and M. Karplus, Acc. Chem. Res. 8, 92–100 (1975).
             18. A. Warshel and M. Karplus, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 94, 5612–5625 (1972).
             19. A. Warshel and M. Karplus, Chem. Phys. Letters 32, 11–17 (1975).
             20. A. Warshel, Nature 260, 679–683 (1976).
             21. V. R. I. Kaila, R. Send, and D. Sundholm, J. Phys. Chem. B 116, 2249–2258 (2012).
             22. J. Deisenhofer and W. Steigemann, Acta Crystallogr. B 31:238–250 (1975).
             23. J. A. McCammon, B. R. Gelin, and M. Karplus, Nature 267, 585–590 (1977).




ok.indb 91                                                                                             11/4/14 2:25 PM


      92                                                                     The Nobel Prizes


      24.    B. R. Gelin and M. Karplus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72, 2002–2006 (1975).
      25.    A. Rahman, Phys. Rev. 136:A405–11 (1964).
      26.    F. H. Stillinger and A. Rahman, J. Chem. Phys. 60:1545–1557 (1974).
      27.    D. C. Phillips, in Biomolecular Stereodynamics, II, R. H. Sarma, ed. (Adenine Press,
             Guilderland, New York 1981), p. 497.
      28.    The Computer World Information Technology Foundation, Oral History Collec-
             tion Archives, 1995.
      29.    P. J. Rossky, M. Karplus, and A. Rahman, Biopolymers 18, 825–854 (1979).
      30.    P. J. Rossky and M. Karplus, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 101, 1913–1937 (1979).
      31.    M. Levitt and R. Sharon, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 7557–7561 (1988).
      32.    D. Vitkup, D. Ringe, G. A. Petsko, and M. Karplus, Nature Struc. Biol. 7, 34–38
             (2000).
      33.    A. L. Tournier, J. C. Xu, and J. C. Smith, Biophys. J. 85, 1871–1875 (2003).
      34.    D. E. Shaw, P. Maragakis, K. Lindorff-Larsen, et al., Science 330, 341–346 (2010).
      35.    W. Yang, R. Bitetti-Putzer, and M. Karplus, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 2618–2628 (2004).
      36.    C. M. Dobson, A. Sali, and M. Karplus, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 37, 868–893 (1998).
      37.    K. Lindorff-Larsen, S. Piana, R. O. Dror, and D. E. Shaw, Science 334, 517–520
             (2011).
      38.    M. Levitt and A. Warshel, Nature 253, 694 (1975).
      39.    J. C. Smith and B. Roux, Structure 21, 2102–2105 (2013).
      40.    M. Karplus and D. L. Weaver, Nature 260, 404–406 (1976).
      41.    M. Karplus and D. L. Weaver, Biopolymers 18, 1421–1437 (1979).
      42.    M. Karplus and D. L. Weaver, Protein Science 3, 650–668 (1994).
      43.    R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands (1963), The Feynman Lectures in Phys-
             ics (Addison-Wesley, Reading), Vol. I, Chapter 3.
      44.    K. A. Henzler-Wildman, V.Thai, M. Lei, M. Ott, M. Wolf-Watz, T. Fenn, E. Pozhar-
             ski, M. A. Wilson, G. A. Petsko, M. Karplus, C. G. Hübner, and D. Kern, Nature 450,
             838–844 (2007).
      45.    K. A. Henzler-Wildman, M. Lei, V. Thai, S. J. Kerns, M. Karplus, and D. Kern, Na-
             ture 450, 913–916 (2007).
      46.    A. L. Wendell, R. J. Raines, and J. R. Knowles, Biochemistry 27, 1158–1167 (1988).
      47.    M. Cecchini, A. Houdusse, and M. Karplus, PLoS Computational Biology 4,
             e1000129:1–19 (2008).
      48.    V. Ovchinnikov, B. L. Trout, and M. Karplus, J. Mol. Biol. 395, 815–833 2010).
      49.    W. Yang, Y. Q. Gao, Q. Cui, J. Ma, and M. Karplus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100,
             874–879 (2003).
      50.    Y. Q. Gao, W. Yang, and M. Karplus, Cell 123, 195–205 (2005).
      51.    J. Pu and M. Karplus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 1192–1197 (2008).
      52.    W. Hwang, S. Zhang, R. D. Kamm, and M. Karplus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101,
             12916–12921 (2004).
      53.    A. S. Khalil, D. C. Appleyard, A. K. Labno, A. Georges, M. Karplus, A. M. Belcher,
             W. Hwang, and M. J. Lang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 19246–19251 (2008).
      54.    S. T. Brady, R. J. Lasek, and R. D. Allen, Science 218, 1129–1131 (1982).
      55.    R. D. Vale and R. A. Milligan, Science 288, 88–95 (2000).
      56.    F. Kozielsky, S. Sack, A. Marx, et Cell 91, 985–994 (1997).




ok.indb 92                                                                                          11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems93


             57. E. Mandelkow and E. M. Mandelkow, Trends in Cell Biology 12, 585–591 (2002).
             58. M. A. Young, S. Gonfloni, G. Superti-Furga, B. Roux, and J. Kuriyan Cell 105, 115–
                 126 (2001).
             59. M. Friedman, The Politics of Excellence, Chapter 7 (Henry Holt and Company, New
                 York, 2001).

             Portrait photo of Martin Karplus by photographer Alexander Mahmoud.



             Appendix: Background of Films

             The film shows two trajectories, the first reactive (Film 1a) and the second non-
             reactive (Film 1b). In the non-reactive trajectory, it is evident that one of the
             atoms in the molecule comes out in front of the plane of the reaction and the
             other goes into the back of the plane. This is done by introducing perspective;
             i.e., by having an atom grow larger as it comes forward toward you and become
             smaller as it goes away from you.
                   In making the film, a question arose as to how to represent the perspective.
             If the radius of the atomic circles was varied linearly with the distance in front or
             in back, the perspective was difficult to perceive. So we had to find a better way
             of showing the perspective.
                   What I did was to look at the paintings of Canaletto in visits to Venice, and
             compare the actual distances with how he presented them in his paintings. I
             found that he seemed to use an approximate exponential law, E αR, where R is
             the distance out of the plane and α is a coefficient, whose value I do not remem-
             ber. If I had published this result (There are many things that I did, which were
             not published.) perhaps there would be a Karplus Law in art theory, as well as
             the Karplus Equation in nuclear magnetic resonance.




                                                      

             See Nobelprize.org for the films.
             Film 1a and 1b. H+H2 Collisions




ok.indb 93                                                                                            11/4/14 2:25 PM


      94                                                               The Nobel Prizes


          It is also worth remembering the film is of historical interest for several rea-
      sons. Made in 1967, it is the first film to show pictorially the results of an accu-
      rate calculation of the motions of the atoms involved in a chemical reaction. The
      film was made in the laboratory of Professor Sutherland, who was developing
      the first computer ray-graphics machine. It was a prototype of the devices now
      manufactured by Evans and Sutherland, which are used, for example, for air
      traffic control.
          The film shows the dynamics of BPTI over about 10 ps, in correspondence
      with Fig. 14. The film was made by Victor Ovchinnikov with FFMPEG based on
      the images drawn with VMD.




      See Nobelprize.org for the film.
      Film 2. BPTI Dynamics



          Film 3a shows the closing of adenylate kinase by the hinge-bending motions
      as the two A-P-P substrates bind, and Film 3b shows the reaction to form A-P-P-
      P and A-P in the closed molecule followed by opening through hinge-bending
      motions as the products escape. The film was made by Victor Ovchinnikov with
      FFMPEG using images prepared with VMD.




ok.indb 94                                                                                   11/4/14 2:25 PM


             Development of Multiscale Models for Complex Chemical Systems95




                                                    

             See Nobelprize.org for the films.
             Film 3a and 3b. Cartoon: Adenylate Kinase Dynamics



             The film shows kinesin taking several steps on the microtubule (see Fig. 24 and
             text). It was made by the group of R. D. Vale and R. A. Milligan [55].




             See Nobelprize.org for the film.
             Film 4. Cartoon: Kinesin Walking on Microtubules




ok.indb 95                                                                                     11/4/14 2:25 PM
