                           M   ELVIN   CALVIN


           The path of carbon in photosynthesis
                     Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1961



                                Introduction

It is almost sixty years since Emil Fischer was describing on a platform such
as this one, some of the work which led to the basic knowledge of the struc-
ture of glucose and its relatives 1 . Today we will be concerned with a de-
scription of the experiments which have led to a knowledge of the principal
reactions by which those carbohydrate structures are created by photo-
synthetic organisms from carbon dioxide and water, using the energy of
light.
    The speculations on the way in which carbohydrate was built from carbon
dioxide began not long after the recognition of the basic reaction and were
carried forward first by Justus von Liebig and then by Adolf von Baeyer and,
finally, by Richard Willstätter and Arthur Stall into this century. Actually,
the route by which animal organisms performed the reverse reaction, that is,
the combustion of carbohydrate to carbon dioxide and water with the utili-
zation of the energy resulting from this combination, turned out to be the
first one to be successfully mapped, primarily by Otto Meyerhof 2 and Hans
Krebs 3.
    Our own interest in the basic process of solar energy conversion by green
 plants, which is represented by the overall reaction




began some time in the years between 1935 and 1937, during my post-
doctoral studies with Professor Michael Polanyi at Manchester. It was there
I first became conscious of the remarkable properties of coordinated metal
compounds, particularly metalloporphyrins as represented by heme and
chlorophyll. A study was begun at that time, which is still continuing, on
the electronic behavior of such metalloporphyrins. It was extended and gen-


              THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                         619
eralized by the stimulus of Professor Gilbert N. Lewis upon my arrival in
Berkeley. I hope these continuing studies may one day contribute to our
understanding of the precise way in which chlorophyll and its relatives ac-
complish the primary quantum conversion into chemical potential which is
used to drive the carbohydrate synthesis reaction.
   Even before 1940 the idea that the reduction of carbon dioxide to carbo-
hydrate might be a dark reaction separate from the primary quantum conver-
sion act was already extant, stemming most immediately from the compar-
ative biochemical studies of Cornelius van Niel and the much earlier work of
F. F. Blackman and its interpretation by Otto Warburg. The photo-induced
production of molecular oxygen had been separated chemically and phys-
ically from the reduction of carbon dioxide by the demonstration of oxygen
evolution by illuminated chloroplasts. This was done by Robert Hill 4 using
ferric iron as oxidant in the place of carbon dioxide.
   We are thus able to represent in a diagrammatic way (Fig. 1) the overall
conversion of light energy into chemical energy in the form of carbohydrate
and oxygen. The light energy first absorbed by chlorophyll and related
pigments is converted into chemical potential in the form of high-energy
containing compounds, represented by B in Fig. 1. These, in turn, lead to
the production of oxygen from water and the simultaneous generation of
high-level reducing agents which can be used, together with whatever col-
laborators are required, to carry out the carbon dioxide reduction.




                   Fig.1. Elementary photosynthesis scheme.

   One of the principal difficulties in such an investigation as this, in which
the machinery which converts the CO, to carbohydrate and the substrate
upon which it operates are made with the same atoms, namely, carbon and
its near relatives, is that ordinary analytical methods will not allow us to


620                           1961 M. CALVIN

distinguish easily between the machinery and its substrate. However, the
discovery of the long-lived isotope of carbon, carbon-14, by Samuel Ruben
and Martin Kamen5 in 1940 provided the ideal tool for the tracing of the
route along which carbon dioxide travels on its way to carbohydrate, rep-
resented in Fig.1 by the series of unknown materials, X, Y, Z, etc.
   In 1945 it became apparent to us that carbon-14 would be available cheap-
ly and in large amounts by virtue of the nuclear reactors which had been
constructed. With the encouragement and support of Professor Ernest O.
Lawrence, the Director of the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley, we under-
took to study that part of the energy-converting process of photosynthesis
represented by the carbon-reduction sequence, making use of 14C as our
principal tool.



                          Design of the experiment

The principle of the experiment was simple. We knew that ultimately the
CO2 which enters the plant appears in all of the plant materials but primarily,
and in the first instance, in carbohydrate. It was our intention to shorten the
time of travel to such an extent that we might be able to discern the path of
carbon from carbon dioxide to carbohydrate as the radioactivity which en-
ters with the CO2 passes through the successive compounds on its way to
carbohydrate.
   Preliminary experiments confirmed the idea that the absorption of CO2
and its incorporation in organic material was indeed a dark reaction. This
was easily established by exposing plants which had first been illuminated in
the absence of carbon dioxide so as to store some of the intermediate high-
energy containing compounds, and then noting that these compounds could
be used in the dark to incorporate relatively large amounts of CO2. How-
ever, the products did not proceed very far along the reduction scheme
under these conditions, and so we undertook to do the experiment in what
we call a steady state of photosynthesis.


                                Plant material

As the precision of our experiments increased, the need for more repro-
 ducible biological material also increased, and very soon we found it nec-
essary to grow our own plant material in as highly reproducible manner as


           THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                       621




                     Fig. 2. Photomicrograph of Chlorella.

possible. A very convenient green plant that had already been the subject of
much photosynthetic research was the unicellular green alga, Chlorella, a
photomicrograph of which is shown in Fig. 2. We developed methods of
growing these organisms in a highly reproducible fashion, both in inter-
mittent and continuous cultures, and it is with organisms such as these that
most of our work was done. I hasten to add, however, that the essential
features of the cycle with which we finally emerged were demonstrated on
a wide variety of photosynthetic organisms, ranging from bacteria to the
higher plants.

                                  Apparatus

The exposures were initially performed in a simple apparatus (called a
"Lollipop" because of its shape, Fig. 3) which contained a suspension of the
algae undergoing photosynthesis with normal CO2. The initiation of our
tracer experiment was accomplished by injecting into the non-radioactive
carbon dioxide stream, or substitution for it, some 14C-labeled CO2 for a
suitable period of time, ranging from fractions of a second to many minutes.
At the end of the preselected time period, the organisms were killed by va-


622                               1961 M. CALVIN




Fig. 3. "Lollipop", the apparatus in which the photosynthesis experiments are per-
                                        formed.

rious methods, but principally by dropping the suspension into approxi-
mately four volumes of alcohol. This stopped the enzymic reactions and, at
the same time, began the extraction of the materials for analysis.


                             Early analytical methods

In the early work, the classical methods of organic chemistry were applied
in our isolation and identification procedures, but it soon became apparent
that these were much too slow and would require extremely large amounts
of plant material to provide us with the identification of specific labeled com-
pounds. Here, again, we were able to call upon our experience during the
war years in which we had used ion exchange columns for the separation of
plutonium and other radioactive elements. We made use of both anion and
cation exchange columns, and soon discovered that the principal compounds
in which we were interested, that is, those which became 14C radioactive in
the shorter exposure times, were, indeed, anionic in character.
   Because of the peculiar difficulty we found in eluting the principal radio-
active components from anion exchange resins, it became apparent that this
radioactive material was a strongly acidic material and very likely had more
than one anionic point of attachment to bind to the resin. Among these


             THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                            623
peculiarities was the fact that an ordinary carboxylic acid could be eluted
relatively easily while the principal radioactive material would require either
very strong acid or very strong base to bring it off. This, taken together with
a number of other chromatographic properties, led to the idea that these
early products might very well be phosphate esters as well as carboxylic acids.
   A more detailed analysis of the precise conditions required to elute the
material off the ion exchange columns suggested phosphoglyceric acid as a
possibility. To a relatively large amount of algae was added as indicator a
small amount of the purified radioactive material obtained from a small
sample of algae exposed to radioactive carbon for a few seconds. This led
to the direct isolation of slightly over nine milligrams of a barium salt which
by classical organic procedures we were able to show to be the barium salt
of 3 -phosphoglyceric acid6.


                         Paper chromatographic methods

About this time Martin and Synge7 had developed their method of partition
chromatography which was particularly well adapted for amino acid anal-
ysis because of the sensitivity of the calorimetric detection method. We
turned to this as our principal analytical tool. It was particularly suited to our
needs because, having spread our unknown material from the plant onto a
sheet of filter paper by two-dimensional chromatography, we could then
find the particular components which we sought, namely, the radioactive
ones, without knowing their chemical nature beforehand. This was done by
placing the paper in contact with photographic film, thus exposing the film
at those points of the paper upon which were located the very compounds
in which we were interested.
   The result of such an experiment in which the algae were exposed to
radioactive CO2 for thirty seconds under what we then thought were steady
state conditions is shown in Fig. 4. The blackened areas on the film indicate
the presence of radioactive compounds on the paper at those points. Such a
chromatogram and film as shown in Fig. 4 constituted our principal primary
source of information.
   It should be noted that this information resides in the number, position
and intensity, that is, radioactivity of the blackened areas. The paper or-
dinarily does not print out the names of these compounds, unfortunately,
and our principal chore for the succeeding ten years was to properly label
those blackened areas on the film.


624                             1961 M. CALVIN




Fig. 4. Chromatogram of extract from algae indicating uptake of radiocarbon during
                  30 seconds of photosynthesis, using Chlorella.


  The techniques for doing this were many and varied. It was already clear
that the coordinates of a particular spot in a particular chromatogram already
could be interpreted in terms of chemical structure in a general way, but this
was far from sufficient for identification. Our usual procedure was to seek
other properties of the material on the paper, such as fluorescence or ultra-
violet absorption if there was enough of it. More commonly it was necessary
to elute the material from that part of the paper, as defined by the black area
of the film, to perform chemical operations on the eluted material and then
rechromatograph the product to determine its fate.
   From a succession of such operations the chemical nature of the original
material could gradually be evolved, and final identification was usually
achieved by co-chromatography of the tracer amount of unknown material
with carrier, or macroscopic, amounts of the authentic, suspected com-
pound. A. suitable chemical test was then performed on the paper to which
the authentic material alone would respond since it was the only material
present in sufficient amount. If the response produced by the authentic mate-


              THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                             625




Fig. 5. Chromatogram of extract from Chlorella indicating uptake of radioactive car-
bon during 30 seconds of photosynthesis. UDPG = Uridine diphosphoglucose; PEPA
            = Phosphoenolpyruvic acid; PGA = Phosphoglyceric acid.

rial coincided exactly with the radioactivity on the paper in all its details, we
could be quite confident of the identity of the radioactive compound with
the added carrier.
   In this way after some ten years of work by many students and collab-
orators, beginning with Dr. Andrew A. Benson, we were able to place
names on a large number of black spots on Fig. 4, as shown in Fig. 5. It is
perhaps worth noting that these two chromatograms are duplicate chro-
matograms of the same extract and are not identical chromatograms, and the
degree of reproducibility of the procedure is thus established*.



                 Development of the Carbon Reduction Cycle

                     Phosphoglyceric acid as the first product

It was thus already clear that in only thirty seconds the carbon has passed
into a wide variety of compounds and that we would have to shorten the


626                            1961 M. CALVIN




Fig. 6. Chromatogram of extract from Chlorella indicating uptake of radiocarbon
                      during 5 seconds of photosynthesis.


exposure time in order to get some clue as to the earliest compounds into
which CO2 is incorporated. This we did in a systematic way, and the result
of a five-second exposure is shown in Fig. 6. Here we began to see the
dominance of the sugar- and sugar-acid phosphates. In shortening the expo-
sure time still further, it became quite clearly apparent that a single com-
pound dominated the picture in fractions of a second, amounting to over
eighty or ninety per cent of the total fixed radioactive carbon. This com-
pound was phosphoglyceric acid. That the phosphoglyceric acid was not the
result of the killing procedure but was actually present in the living organism
is demonstrated by the fact that when CO2 is fixed by pre-illuminated algae
in the dark under conditions in which not much of the phosphoglyceric acid
can be reduced to the sugar level, a good fraction of the three-carbon frag-
ment appears as alanine, as is shown in Fig. 7. Alanine is a stable compound
and is not likely to be formed from precursors by merely dropping the algae
into the alcohol, and we can be confident that it was present in the living
algae. In addition, a wide variety of killing procedures gave the same result.


              THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                             627




Fig. 7. Chromatogram of extract from Chlorella indicating uptake of radiocarbon, 20
                   seconds dark fixation after pre-illumination.

Thus the presence of phosphoglyceric acid itself in the living plant can be
confidently presumed.


                               Labeling of hexose

Among the earliest sugar phosphates which are shown in Fig. 6 are the triose
phosphate and the hexose phosphate, and thus the succession from phospho-
glyceric acid to hexose was immediately suggested. Now, the phospho-
glyceric acid being a three-carbon compound (and the hexose with its six
carbon atoms) required further examination to determine which of the
three-carbon atoms were radioactive and in what order they became so. The
same information was, of course, required for the hexose as well.
   The PGA (phosphoglyceric acid) is readily taken apart following the
hydrolysis of the phosphate group, usually with acid, by oxidation, first with
periodic acid under conditions which will produce the beta-carbon as form-
aldehyde and which can be separated as the dimedone compound. The re-
sidual two-carbon fragment may be further oxidized with the same reagent,


628                               1961 M. CALVIN

or better with lead tetra-acetate, to produce CO2 from the carboxyl group
and formic acid from the alpha-carbon atom. These are separately collected
and counted.
  We were thus able to show that in the very shortest time most of the
radioactivity appears in the carboxyl group of the PGA and that radioactivity
appears in the alpha- and beta-carbon atoms very nearly equally at later
times.
   A degradation of the hexose sugar showed that the earliest carbon atoms
to be labeled were 3 and 4 (and these approximately equally, although not
necessarily exactly so) followed by labeling in carbon atoms 1 and 2, and 5
and 6. The obvious relationship, then, between phosphoglyceric acid and
the hexose was the one shown in Fig. 8 : after reduction of PGA to phospho-




      Fig. 8. Path of carbon from carbon dioxide to hexose during photosynthesis.


glyceraldehyde and its conversion to the ketone, the two are condensed by
an aldolase reaction to give fructose diphosphate. This places the labeling of
the hexose in the center of the molecule.
   It is interesting to note that rather early in the furation sequence a com-
pound appeared which moved extremely slowly in both solvents (that is,
remained near the origin particularly in the acid solvent) and which upon
extremely mild hydrolysis produced only labeled glucose. This ease of hy-
drolysis was even greater than that of glucose-1-phosphate, but the material
was not glucose-r-phosphate. It was much later shown to be the nucleoside
diphosphoglucose, uridine diphosphoglucose, (UDPG in Fig. 5) and its part
in the synthesis of sucrose itself deduced from the presence of traces of sucrose


             THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                         629
phosphate, later searched for and found. The relationship, then, between
phosphoglyceric acid and sucrose is illustrated in Fig. 9.


                        Origin of phosphoglyceric acid

We now are ready to return to the question of the origin of the PGA itself.
Here we were led, by what appeared to be an obvious kind of arithmetic,
to seek a compound made of two carbon atoms as a possible acceptor for the
radioactive CO2 to produce the carboxyl-labeled three-carbon compound,
phosphoglyceric acid. This search was a vigorous one and extended over a
number of years. (Again, a considerable number of students and laboratory




           Fig. 9. Relationship between fructose phosphate and sucrose.


visitors were involved.) While free glycolic acid was found under certain
very special conditions, these did not correspond to what would be required
of the so-called carbon dioxide acceptor. A good many other compounds
were identified in the course of this search; particularly among them were a
five-carbon sugar, ribulose as its mono- and diphosphate, and a seven-carbon
sugar, sedoheptulose as its mono- and diphosphate.


630                             1961 M. CALVIN

   While the relationship of the trioses and hexoses to PGA in a time se-
quence seemed clear, the sequential relationship of the five-carbon and seven-
carbon sugars was not readily determined. In fact, attempts to establish this
relationship by ordinary kinetic appearance curves of these two sugars re-
sulted in conclusions on the order of appearance of the pentose, hexose,
and heptose which varied from day to day, experiment to experiment, and
person to person.


              Radioactivity determination of pentose and heptose

The distribution of radioactivity in the pentose and heptose was next deter-
mined and that distribution is indicated in Fig. 10 by the number of asterisks
on each atom. Thus the No. 3 carbon atom of the ribulose is the first to be
labeled, followed by carbon atoms I and 2 and finally carbon atoms 4 and 5.
In the sedoheptulose, the center three carbon atoms (Nos. 3,4,5) were the
first to be labeled, followed by carbon atoms 1 and 2, and 6 and 7. Extremely
short experiments, of the order of fractions of a second, did show a low
value for carbon atom No. 4 in sedoheptulose.




           Fig. 10. Distribution of radioactive carbon in certain sugars.


   The peculiar labeling in sedoheptulose and the absence of any single one
carbon atom as dominating over the others, clearly indicates that it is not
formed by a C6 + C1 addition, that is, not directly from the hexose by the
addition of a single carbon atom. The only other alternatives for the forma-
tion of the sedoheptulose are the combinations of Cs +           or     +
Again, we call on the apparent nearly equal distribution of the center three


             THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                           631
carbon atoms of sedoheptulose to indicate that there is no intact element of
the five-carbon ribulose present in the sedoheptulose since there is no intact
group of five carbon atoms which has the same labeling pattern as we see in
the ribulose.
  We are therefore forced to seek a           +     method for construction of
sedoheptulose. The availability of the        fragments is clear enough for the
phosphoglyceric acid. The hexose seems, therefore, a possible source of the
    fragment which, when combined with a              fragment directly related
to PGA, will give rise to a         sugar, sedoheptulose, labeled in the way
shown.
  This can be done by taking a four-carbon sugar made of carbon atoms No.
3, 4, 5, and 6 (that is, the lower four carbon atoms) of fructose, in which
the first two (No. 3 and 4), then, would have the label, and condensing it in
an aldol type condensation with the phosphodihydroxyacetone as shown in
Fig. II. If the pool sizes of the tetrose and triose are very small it should be
possible to arrive very quickly at a heptose in which the center three carbon
atoms are very nearly equally labeled, although one might expect some dif-
ferences in the shortest times, as we have seen.
   The top carbon atoms of the hexose, Nos. 1 and 2, would be combined




             Fig. 11. Formation of a heptose from triose and hexose.


632                            1961 M. CALVIN

with another triose in the same reaction to produce number j-labeled
pentose.



Accepting this as the source of the heptose, we are now left with the prob-
lem of the source of the pentose with its peculiar and unsymmetric labeling
pattern. Again, we call on our simple arithmetic, and discover that the pen-
tose can be made by losing a carbon atom from the hexose, or by building it
up from smaller fragments, i.e., by adding a      to a    fragment, or by ad-
ding a     to a    fragment. Here, again, we can call upon the lack of rela-
tionship between the pentose labeling and any five-carbon sequence in the
hexose to eliminate from further consideration the construction of the pen-
tose by loss of a terminal carbon from the hexose. Furthermore, of course,
this would be a step backwards in our construction program.
   We are left, then, with the only remaining alternative for the construction
of the pentose, namely, the combination of a C, with a       fragment. Again,
the source of     fragments is clear enough, but the question of the source of
the     fragment to go with it requires some discussion.
   At this point it should be remembered that we have already made a
fragment labeled in the No. 3 carbon atom. The ribulose labeling scheme,




as shown in Fig. 10, indicates that the next label to appear was in carbon
atoms No. 1 and 2. Thus it was not until the realization occurred to us that
the ribulose which we were degrading and which we obtained from the
ribulose diphosphate actually had its origin in two different reactions that it
became possible for us to devise a scheme for its genesis.


             THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                                  633




      Fig. 13. Effect of light and dark on activities of phosphates and sucrose.


   By taking the two-carbon fragment off the top of the sedoheptulose we
could make two five-carbon compounds which, taken together with the
five-carbon compound already formed, would produce the labeling scheme
finally observed in ribulose diphosphate. This is shown in Fig. 12. The en-
zyme which performs this two-carbon transfer is transketolase and is the
same one we have already used to generate the tetrose required for heptose
synthesis.
   We have thus devised ways of generating from phosphoglyceric acid all
of the sugars which appear on our early chromatograms: the triose, the
variose pentoses, the various hexoses, and the heptose. The earlier failure to
succeed in selecting a specific sequence amongst these compounds is now
understandable since all of them, that is, pentose, hexose, and heptose, appear
simultaneously following triose. As yet we had not discovered the com-
pound originally presumed to be the          compound, to which the carbon
dioxide may be added in order to produce carboxyl-labeled phosphoglyceric
acid.


                                 1961 M.CALVIN




Fig. 14. Appearance of carbon-14 in phosphoglyceric acid and sugar phosphates vs.
                        time of photosynthesis with




Fig. 15. Light-dark changes in concentrations of phosphoglyceric acid and ribulose
                                   diphosphate.


             THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                        635
     Carbon-fourteen Saturation Experiments: Changes in Steady State
                               and Transients

In order to do this we devised a different type of experiment. We recognized
quite early that most of the compounds which we have so far mentioned,
aside from sucrose, saturate with radioactivity very quickly, and yet the
amount of these materials present in the plant at any one time is small and
does not change. This suggested to us a method for discovering not only
how the light might operate on the PGA, but also how the PGA might arise.
We could use the radioactivity saturation levels for these compounds through
which carbon was flowing to measure the total amount of active pool size
of these compounds in the plant. We could then change one or another
external variable and follow the resultant changes in the pool size of these
compounds through which we knew the carbon to be flowing.
    The first, most obvious and easiest external variable to be changed was
the light itself. Fig. 13 shows the first set of data taken by Peter Massini
which not only demonstrates the early saturation but also the effect of the
light on the pool transients9 . Here you can see that the PGA and the sugar
phosphate are indeed very quickly saturated but that the sucrose is not. It is
apparent that upon turning off the light there is an immediate and sudden
 rise in the level of PGA accompanied by a corresponding fall in the level of
 the diphosphate area which was primarily ribulose diphosphate.
    Here we had our first definitive clue as to the origin of the phospho-
glyceric acid. It would appear that it came as a result of a dark reaction be-
tween the ribulose diphosphate and carbon dioxide. Figs. 14 and 15, based
upon the work of Dr. James A. Bassham10,11 , show what can be done with
this technique when we know what we are doing. Here you can see the
 large number of points obtainable and the very much smoother curves with
 their clear saturation points well defined. On Fig. 15 we see again very
 sharply shown the transient rise in the PGA pool size and the disappearance
 of ribulose diphosphate when the light is turned off, clearly defining the
 relationship between these two compounds.
    We can now formulate the cyclic system driven by high-energy com-
 pounds produced in the light, acting upon phosphoglyceric acid which, in
 turn, is made as a result of a reaction between ribulose diphosphate and
 carbon dioxide as shown in Fig. 16. The triose phosphate then undergoes a
 series of condensations and sugar rearrangements, represented by the letters
 A and B and including the pentose and heptose rearrangement which we


636                             1961 M.CALVIN


         A




       Fig. 16. Formation of five-carbon sugars from ribulose diphosphate.


have just discussed, leading back again to a ribulose monophosphate which
is then phosphorylated to ribulose diphosphate, thus completing the cycle.
   By turning off the light we have, in effect, blocked the easy conversion of
phosphoglyceric acid to triose without any reduction in the rate of formation
of PGA from ribulose diphosphate. This should result in an immediate rise
in the amount of PGA and an immediate fall in the amount of ribulose since
it no longer can be produced in the dark.
   Such a scheme allows us to predict another transient, namely, the one
which would result if, in the presence of light, that is, in the presence of the
high-energy compounds required to drive the cycle, we suddenly diminished
the availability of carbon dioxide, putting a block between ribulose and the
phosphoglyceric acid. The prediction, which resulted here in the first tran-
sients, would be the accumulation of ribulose and the disappearance of PGA.
These two transients would then make their way back through the cycle,
the fall in PGA in a clockwise direction, the rise in ribulose in a counterclock-
wise direction, thus making for oscillating transients. The result of such an
experiment performed by Dr. Alexander T. Wilson is shown in Fig. 17.
Here it is quite clear that the sudden reduction in the CO, results in a drop
in the size of the PGA pool associated with a rise in the ribulose. It is in-
teresting to note that the triose is the last to rise and the first to fall, as
predicted from its position in the cycle.



                      The Photosynthetic Carbon Cycle

We can now arrange all of the individual steps we have separately discussed
in a sequence to produce the photosynthetic carbon cycle as shown in Fig.


            THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                       637




                 Fig. 17. Transients in the regenerative cycle.


18. One compound is shown therein as an intermediate lying between ribu-
lose diphosphate and phosphoglyceric acid. This is a branched chain alpha-
hydroxy-beta-keto sugar acid. As yet this compound has not been isolated
as a separate entity. The enzyme system catalyzing the reaction of ribulose
diphosphate to PGA has been isolated and purified, but as yet we have been
unable to break its reaction down into two step13. If this intermediate is
present, it is present in extremely small amounts as the free compound, if
 any at all, and its hydrolysis to produce two molecules of phosphoglyceric
acid takes place extremely rapidly in the isolated enzyme system and even
in the living plant itself.
   The mechanism for the carboxydismutase (the enzyme responsible for the


638                             1961 M.CALVIN




                    Fig. 18. The photosynthetic carbon cycle.


formation of PGA from ribulose diphosphate) reaction is formulated in Fig.
19. Here the intermediate is split by hydrolysis to two molecules of phospho-
glyceric acid. However, in our earlier work the possibility of a reductive
fission at the same point to give one molecule of triose and one molecule of
phosphoglyceric acid was considered. It was rejected in favor of the hydro-
lytic splitting because of our failure to find any evidence of the intermediate.
However, more recent, very careful kinetic analysis of the carbon flow rates
by Dr. James A. Bassham 11,14 has suggested that the reductive split may in-
deed participate in the reaction to some extent while the light is actually on.
This path is indicated in Fig. 20 by the dotted line from the presumed C6
keto acid.



                   Quantum Conversion in Photosynthesis

As you can see from the various levels of the schematic drawing of the pho-
tosynthetic carbon cycle (Figs. 18 and 20), the energy required to drive the
synthetic sequence from carbon dioxide to carbohydrate and the many other


              THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                              639




               Fig. 19. Mechanism of the carboxydismutase reaction.

 reduced carbon materials which can be derived from the cycle is delivered
 to it in the form of a number of compounds of relatively high chemical
 potential in the aerobic aqueous system in which the plant operates. The
 particular ones with which we can actually drive the photosynthetic carbon
 cycle in the absence of light but in the presence of all the initial enzymes and
 substrates’s are triphosphopyridine nucleotide (TPNH) and adenosine tri-
phosphate (ATP) wh ose structures are shown in Fig. 21. The primary quan-
 tum conversion of the light absorbed by chlorophyll will result in materials
 which can ultimately give rise to such substances as these.
    That light energy might be readily converted into chemical potential as
 ATP independent of CO2 reduction and its re-oxidation was clearly in-




 Fig. 20. The photosynthetic carbon cycle and its relation to quantum conversion and
                               to succeeding biosynthesis.


640                              1961 M.CALVIN




Fig. 21. Structure of TPNH and ATP, the two compounds which are used to drive
the photosynthetic carbon cycle in the absence of light and the presence of enzymes.

dicated in whole-cell experiments of Goodman and Bradley16 and first dem-
onstrated as independent of oxygen by Frenkel17 with bacterial chromato-
phores. A corresponding anaerobic demonstration of ATP production by
green plant chloroplasts was made by Arnon . The ability of chloroplasts to
                                              18



photoreduce pyridine nucleotide was demonstrated by Ochoa and Vish-
niac19. But the precise nature of the primary quantum conversion act whose
products ultimately give rise in a dark reaction to ATP and TPNH is still a
matter of speculation20,21.
   The apparatus which performs the quantum conversion act in the plant,
together with all of the carbon reduction enzymes we now know, can be
isolated from the intact chloroplasts in the higher plants. The carbon reduc-
tion enzymes are very easily washed off the chloroplasts by water, leaving
behind only the chlorophyllous quantum conversion equipment. This has a
highly ordered structure in which the lamellae are alternating electron-dense
and electron-thin materials, as has been shown in many election micrographs,
a few examples of which are shown in Fig. 22 for various organisms.
   The next level of structure within the lamellae is only now beginning to
be visible to us, and an example is shown22 for a spinach chloroplast in Fig.


              THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                             641




Fig. 22. Electron micrographs of chloroplasts from a unicellular green alga, from a
       blue-green alga, from tobacco, and mitochondria from guinea pig pancreas.



23. Here we can see the lamellae on its flat side showing a granular struc-
ture, made up of fairly uniform oblate spheroids which we have called
"Quantasomes"; this work was performed by Drs. Roderic B. Park and
Ning G. Pon. Within these Quantasomes the chlorophyll itself is highly
organized, as we have been able to demonstrate, particularly by electric
dichroism experiments performed by Dr. Kenneth H. Sauer23.
   We are now in the midst of trying to determine precisely what happens
after the chlorophyll has absorbed the quantum and has become an excited
chlorophyll molecule, a problem that involves the physicist and physical
chemist, as well as the organic and biochemists. The determination of the
next stage in the energy-conversion process is one of our immediate con-
cerns. Either it is an electron transfer process20, and thus comes close in its


642                              1961 M.CALVIN




Fig. 23. Quantasomes from spinach chloroplasts. The white spot at lower left is a
polystyrene latex marker 880 A in diameter. The ordered array of quantasomes within
                         a single granum is clearly evident.


further stages to the electron transfer processes which are being explored in
mitochondria 24 or it is some independent non-redox method of energy con-
version 21. This remains for the future to decide.
  Chemical biodynamics, involving as it does, the fusion of many scientific


               THE PATH OF CARBON IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS                                    643
disciplines, will play a role in this problem, as it has in the elucidation of the
carbon cycle. It can be expected to take an increasingly important place in
the understanding of the dynamics of living organisms on a molecular level.




 1. E. Fischer, Les Prix Nobel, 1902
 2. O. Meyerhof, Les Prix Nobel, 1923.
 3. H. A. Krebs, The Citric Acid Cycle, Les Prix Nobel, 1953; Nobel Lectures Physiology
     or Medicine 1942-1962, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1964, p. 393.
 4. R. Hill, Oxygen Evolved by Isolated Chloroplasts, Nature, 139 (1937) 881.
 5. S. Ruben and M. D. Kamen, Radioactive Carbon of Long Half-Live, Phys. Rev.,
     57 (1940) 549.
 6. M. Calvin and A. A. Benson, The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis, Science, 107
     (1948) 476.
 7. A. J. P. Martin, The Development of Partition Chromatography, Les Prix Nobel,
     1952; This Volume, p. 359. R. L. M. Synge, Applications of Partition Chromatog-
    raphy, Les Prix Nobel, 1952; This Volume, p. 374.
 8. The details of the mapping of the path of carbon in photosynthesis may be found
    in the following references :
    (a) M. Calvin, The Photosynthetic Carbon Cycle, J. Chem. Soc., (1956) 1895.
     (b) J. A. Bassham and M. Calvin, The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis, Prentice-
           Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1957.
    (c) M. Calvin, Photosynthesis, Radiation Biology and Medicine, (Ed. W. D. Claus),
           Addison-Wesley Publ. Co., Reading, Massachusetts, 1958, Ch. 31.
    (d) M. Calvin, et al., Photosynthesis, Proc. 2nd Intern. Conf: Peaceful Uses At. En-
           ergy, Geneva, Switzerland, 24 (1958) 24.
     (e) M. Calvin and J. A. Bassham, The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis, Hand-
           buck der Pflanzenphysiologie, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1960, Vol. V, Part I,
           884-922.
     (f) J. A. Bassham and M. Calvin, The Photosynthesis of Carbon Compounds, W. A.
           Benjamin Co., New York, N.Y., 1962.
 9. M. Calvin and P. Massini, The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XX. The Steady
     State, Experientia, 8 (1952) 445.
10. J. A. Bassham et al., The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI. The Cyclic
    Regeneration of Carbon Dioxide Acceptor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 76 (1954) 1760; M.
     Calvin and J. A. Bassham, Photosynthesis, Proc. 1st Intern. Conf: Peaceful Uses At.
    Energy, Geneva, Switzerland, 1955, Paper No. A/Conf. 8/P/259.
11. J. A. Bassham and M. R. Kirk, Dynamics of the Photosynthesis of Carbon Com-
    pounds. I. Carboxylation Reactions, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, 43 (1960) 447.
12. A. T. Wilson and M. Calvin, The Photosynthetic Cycle: CO, dependent Tran-
    sients, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 77 (1955) 5948.
13. N. G. Pon, Studies on the Carboxydismutase System and Related Materials, Thesis,
     University of California, Berkeley, 1960.


644                                1961 M.CALVIN

14. J. A. Bassham and M. Calvin, The Way of CO, in Plant Photosynthesis, 5th Intern.
    Biochem. Congr., Moscow, 1961, Symposium VI, Preprint 48.
15. E. Racker, Synthesis of Carbohydrates from Carbon Dioxide and Hydrogen in a
     Cell Free System, Nature, 175 (1955) 249.
16. M. Goodman, D. F. Bradley, and M. Calvin, Phosphorus and Photosynthesis. I.
     Differences in Light and Dark Incorporation of Radiophosphate, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
     75 (1953) 1962.
17. A. Frenkel, Light Induced Phosphorylation by Cell-Free Preparations of Photo-
     synthetic Bacteria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 76 (1954) 5568.
18. F. R. Whatley, M. B. Allen, and D. I. Amon, Photosynthetic Phosphorylation as
     an Anaerobic Process, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, 16 (1955) 605.
19. W. Vishniac and S. Ochoa, Reduction of Pyridine Nucleotides in Photosynthesis,
     Phosphorus Metabolism, Vol. II, (Eds. W. D. McElroy and H. B. Glass), Johns
     Hopkins Press, Baltimore, Maryland, (1952) 467.
20. M. Calvin, Quantum Conversion in Photosynthesis, J. Theoret. Biol., I (1961) 258.
21. M. Calvin, Evolution of Photosynthetic Mechanisms, Perspectives Biol. Med., 5
     (1962) 147.
22. R. B. Park and N. G. Pon, Correlation of Structure with Function in Spinacea
     olerocea Chloroplasts, J. Mol. Biol., 3 (1961) I.
23. K. Sauer and M. Calvin, Molecular Orientation in Quantasomes. I. Electric
     Dichroism and Electric Birefringence of Quantasomes from Spinach Chloroplasts,
     J. Mol. Biol., 4 (1962) 451.
24. D. E. Green, Structure and Function of Subcellular Particles, 5th Intern. Biochem.
     Congr., Moscow, 1961, Preprint 176.
