              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling
              for Macromolecular Systems
              Nobel Lecture, 8 December 2013

              by Michael Levitt
              Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Structural Biology, Stanford, USA.




              Introduction

              Being awarded the Nobel Prize is a unique and marvelous experience that no
              one can prepare for or in any way know what to expect. The instantaneous trans-
              formation from an ordinary human, toiling away to solve the problems that
              come before us, into being a symbol, a celebrity, is a remarkable phenomenon.
              On the one hand, a mature person is likely to be pretty happy with the way they
              have been living until the moment of transformation and thus wants things to
              continue as they were before. On the other hand, any scientist appreciates just
              how important role models were for their entire career and thus want to con-
              tinue the tradition and be just such an example for future generations. This is a
              quandary that is with me now and is likely to require decades to solve.
                  The Nobel Lecture is different from other lectures in that it combines past,
              present and future along with being given to a diverse audience ranging from in-
              terested school child to expert colleague. Writing such a lecture tends to follow
              the centuries-long tradition of scientific paper writing that can miss some of the
              freshness of the actual lecture. Faced with the challenge, I have decided to base
              this written lecture closely on my Nobel talk, using the slides as the figures. The
              figures legends provide a simple narrative, while the main text facilitates deeper
              comments and discussion.



                                                                                                         113




ok.indb 113                                                                                                    11/4/14 2:26 PM


      114                                                                   The Nobel Prizes


      Standing on the shoulders of giants
      An obvious requirement for doing ground-breaking work that come to fruition
      decade later—Nobel Prize awarded research—is to start off on high ground and
      climb onto the shoulders of giants, so as to see as far as possible into the future.
      In my case, these giants had discovered a new way to think about all of biology,
      a way that lent itself to computer modeling on many scales.
          Francis Crick (Fig. 1) was easy to appreciate as being a brilliant scientist with
      a passion for science and indeed life in general. Thinking back to my earliest
      memories of our encounters, I cannot help but be impressed by the fact that he
      owned a fancy sports car, a white Lotus Elan. What I think was most surprising




      Figure 1. Francis H. C. Crick may well be one of the two or three best known scien-
      tists of the 20th century, a period that seems to have overflowed with great minds who
      changed the course of human thought. His contributions to our story are many and var-
      ied. I met Crick in 1968 aged 21 and worked with him closely for the following decade.
      He taught me to think carefully by asking and then trying to answer simple questions.
      With James Watson, Crick used molecular modeling to combine diverse data into a
      three-dimensional structure DNA that proved to be sufficiently correct so as to explain
      how genetic information is kept error-free as copied. This earned them the 1962 Nobel
      Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Their ability to combine partial data from many sources
      to give a correct answer seemed like magic [1, 2]. It provided a paradigm that all non-
      experimental theoretical structural biologists would aim to imitate for the next 60 years.




ok.indb 114                                                                                        11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems115


              about this is how it enabled me, as a 21 year-old boy, to relate to the obvious boy
              in him.
                  A few years after Crick and Watson solved the structure of DNA, John Ken-
              drew (Fig. 2) also provided the three-dimensional structure of a living molecule,
              in this case myoglobin isolated from whale muscle, readily available back then.
              The approach of Crick and Kendrew to determining the three-dimensional
              shapes of living molecules could not have been more different. Kendrew re-
              placed Crick and Watson’s brilliant inspiration with a painstaking method,
              which could be applied to any protein that could be crystallized. The method
              was invented by Kendrew’s PhD supervisor, Max Perutz (Fig. 3), who also su-
              pervised Francis Crick and was the leader of the lab where they all worked to-
              gether in Cambridge. The method, known as Heavy Atom Replacement [5], is
              what made crystallographic protein structure determination possible and ap-
              plicable broadly. For this Perutz shared the 1962 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with




              Figure 2. John C. Kendrew used X-ray crystallography to solve the three-dimensional
              structure of the protein myoglobin [3]. This structure, as presented on the cover of Sci-
              entific American in 1961 [4], was drawn from a wire model hand-built to fit the electron
              density by the artist Irving Geis. It showed a complex structure built from 153 amino
              acids and over 2600 atoms that had a precise three dimensional shape that seemed to be
              determined by the forces between the atoms. This shape seemed to explain how the heme
              group, shown in red, could store oxygen in whale muscle, setting the stage for molecular
              biology, where molecular function depends on structure in a precise manner. The fact
              that biology works like a clock made our work possible.




ok.indb 115                                                                                               11/4/14 2:26 PM


      116                                                                 The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 3. Max F. Perutz is shown working on his brass wire model of hemoglobin, which
      was four times bigger than myoglobin; it was also much harder to solve, as the crystals
      were not sufficiently ordered. Thus, at a time when Kendrew knew where every atom
      was in myoglobin, Max Perutz had to be content with a balsa wood model illustrated
      above showing the general shape of the four globin chains [6]. With PhD students like
      Crick and Kendrew, it was Perutz who established the field of structural biology. He was
      a wonderful leader and a warm, clever human being who knew how to get the best out
      of all who worked with him.



      Kendrew and their work led to the explosive growth of protein three-dimen-
      sional structure from one structure in 1959 to almost one hundred thousand
      structures today, 55 years later.
          Another important influence on my career who was the biophysicist David
      Phillips from Oxford. He solved the first enzyme structure, the protein lyso-
      zyme, in 1966, and like Kendrew published this in Scientific American with its
      color figures (Fig. 4). Lysozyme is an enzyme, a protein that can catalyze a reac-
      tion, the cleavage of the sugar chains that provide the armor around bacteria.
      Together with myoglobin, lysozyme features prominently in setting the stage for
      the future of computation in structural biology (see below).
          Another giant of that period, on whose shoulders we stood and still stand is
      Linus Pauling, who in 1951 correctly predicted the structure of the alpha-helix
      and beta-sheet, the two major modules reused in the many different protein




ok.indb 116                                                                                      11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems117




              Figure 4. David C. Phillips used X-ray crystallography to solve the three-dimensional
              structure of the enzyme lysozyme [7]. This structure allowed him to model the substrate
              in the enzyme active site and to speculate about the nature of enzyme action. He pro-
              posed that the six-membered sugar ring was distorted by its steric interaction with the
              enzyme active site [8]. This was wrong but led to development, with Arieh Warshel, of hy-
              brid QM/MM quantum/classical models showing the strain was electrostatic, not steric.



              structures. I did not know Pauling until much later, but in 1990 did have the
              pleasure and privilege of lecturing to him about simulation of alpha-helix dy-
              namics in water and showing him a movie of how the alpha-helix comes apart
              at high temperature [S1].

              The birth of computational structural biology
              In 1967, there were two seemingly different raging torrents of scientific discov-
              ery and technological advances. Science had revealed in the preceding 10 years
              the x-ray structures of myoglobin (Fig. 2) and lysozyme (Fig. 4), which showed
              that the molecules carrying out all the key functions of living systems are in-
              credibly complicated, precisely detailed structures. This detail is not baroque
              or incidental; rather it is essential for carrying out crucial biological functions.
              Technology had revealed in the preceding 15 years that computers could be




ok.indb 117                                                                                               11/4/14 2:26 PM


      118                                                              The Nobel Prizes


      flexibly programmed to carry out all manner of calculations. These machines
      were just becoming commercial and developments were proceeding rapidly.
      Computational structural biology was born when these two torrents joined in
      a huge and powerful stream that is still propelling the field forward almost 50
      years later.
           Like many interesting events in history, this occurred by a rare coming
      together of three individuals with very different talents, backgrounds and ap-
      proaches. Even more remarkable, another individual was responsible for this
      meeting and planned it carefully. It started with a philosophical idea concern-
      ing the nature of the model used to represent a molecule. The man who had
      this idea was Professor Shneior Lifson, a professor of Chemical Physics at the
      Weizmann Institute in Rehovot, Israel. He argued that the energy function and
      its first derivative, the force field, had to be consistent. This meant that there
      should be a small number of atom types for each element and that the energy
      parameters should not depend on the local environment of the atom. For ex-
      ample, there could be two types of carbon, aromatic and aliphatic, but once this
      distinction had been made, the same parameters should define the energy of the
      atom. This consistency means that there are a small number of parameters that
      are be transferable from one situation to another.
           Implementing this idea was not simple. One needed to compute diverse prop-
      erties of small molecules including their geometry, their strain energy and their
      vibration frequencies, compare these calculated values with the corresponding
      measured experimental values and then change the parameters to get the best
      agreement between calculated and measured properties. The implementation
      was designed by the second person, Arieh Warshel, Lifson’s PhD student, who
      also decided which systems to study and which properties to calculate. I arrived
      on the scene in October 1967 aged 20 and just as this work was gearing up (Fig.
      5). My initial role as the third person was to be their computer programmer,
      writing a program to calculate the potential energy, its first derivative, the force
      vector, and its second derivative, the curvature of the energy surface.
           This occurred remarkably quickly and within six months useful calculations
      were being run on the very powerful Golem A computer at the Weizmann Insti-
      tute. Golem A was a home-built, second-generation machine that followed on
      from the Weizac built in the mid 1950s using the architecture developed by John
      von Neumann at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. The Golem A
      was in operation from 1964–74 and had a memory capacity of 32,768 words of
      75 bits (~300,000 bytes). It was programmed in the FORTRAN language with
      programs written on punched cards.




ok.indb 118                                                                                  11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems119


                   One man, John Kendrew brought this unlikely trio (Lifson, Warshel & Lev-
              itt) together and he did it with remarkable foresight. As mentioned above and
              in Fig. 2, Kendrew shared the 1962 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Max Pe-
              rutz. About a year later, Kendrew delivered a series of lectures on BBC television
              (Fig. 6) that caught my attention as a 17-year-old boy just arrived in London.
              The new discoveries in what was termed “molecular biology” were so exciting
              that I decided to study Physics at King’s College in London, home to Maurice




              Figure 5. In 1967, John Kendrew insisted that I spend a year with Shneior Lifson in Is-
              rael before I would be allowed to begin a PhD at the Laboratory of Molecular Biology in
              Cambridge. Arriving in Israel in October 1967, I met Shneior Lifson and his PhD student
              Arieh Warshel and began a journey that would eventually bring me to Stockholm. The
              key to the work that led to the 2013 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was Lifson’s philosophical
              concept that was known as the “Consistent Force Field.” Energy calculations had been
              done on small molecules, mainly for the purpose of calculating vibrational spectra. In
              these calculations there were energy parameters that described the force between atoms
              but the forces were not consistent, in that different parameters were used for the same
              atom type, e.g. carbon, in different environments. Lifson wanted there to be very few
              atom types and to have the different energy terms define the influence of the environ-
              ment, Using computer programs that I wrote, Arieh Warshel was able to define a consis-
              tent set of parameters for a series of small organic hydrocarbon molecules, as published
              in their 1968 landmark paper [9].




ok.indb 119                                                                                              11/4/14 2:26 PM


      120                                                                  The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 6. John Kendrew had a greater influence on my career than anyone else, but this
      influence was indirect. One year after being awarded the 1962 Nobel Prize, Kendrew
      wrote and presented a BBC television program entitled “The Thread of Life.” I had ar-
      rived from South Africa two months before the program began to be aired on 4 January
      1964. I was living with my aunt and uncle, both scientists in London, and had never seen
      TV before. Although the screen was small, the resolution low and the color more black
      & yellow than black & white, I was immediately addicted to the little screen. Thankfully,
      I got to watch Kendrew’s program, which no longer exists, and got the most amazing
      introductory course in molecular biology imaginable. The topics dealt with could be the
      backbone of a modern course in molecular biology, starting as they did with “The Revo-
      lution in Biology” on 4 Jan. and ending with “The Way Ahead” on 7 Mar. 1964. As a result
      of this program, I decided to study physics at Kings College in London where there was a
      biophysics option and a strong basis of molecular biology through Maurice Wilkins, who
      shared the 1962 Nobel Prize for DNA structure with Crick and Watson. I then wanted to
      do my PhD in Cambridge but was refused (see text).




      Wilkins and where there was a third-year biophysics option. In 1967, towards
      the end of my BSc degree I applied to Kendrew and Perutz to do a PhD and the
      Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, but
      they turned me down for lack of space. Persuaded by friends (who went on to
      be very successful at business), I asked to be considered for 1968. This time they
      invited me for an interview but their decision to consider me in 1968 left me
      at loose ends. Again my friends worked on me and I drove up to Cambridge,




ok.indb 120                                                                                       11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems121


              accosted Max Perutz in the corridor and when he agreed to discuss my case with
              Kendrew, I beat a hasty retreat. I was overjoyed when I heard a few days later
              that I had definitely been accepted for 1968. Kendrew went on to insist that I
              spend the intervening year with Lifson at the Weizmann Institute, and made his
              suggestion very attractive by getting me, just after I had finished my BSc, a Royal
              Society Exchange postdoctoral fellowship at the Institute.




              Figure 7. The form of the energy function of any molecule is classical, both in that it
              does not use quantum mechanics and also because it relies on a classical description of
              the molecule as a collection of balls connected by springs. The terms shown here have
              been used with little alteration since 1970. They account for bond length stretching and
              bond angle bending as harmonic springs. Both degrees of freedom b and θ have an equi-
              librium length given by energy parameters bo and θo. The potential energy of a single
              bond length or bond angle increases if the bond (or angle) is compressed or extended.
              The stiffness of the spring is given by other energy parameters, Kb and Kθ. The other en-
              ergy terms are a little more complicated but they follow the simple bond and angle terms
              in that they depend on the types of interacting atoms and each interaction contributes to
              the total potential energy, which is a simple additive fashion. Different terms use different
              energy parameters, which must be determined by least-squares refinement of calculated
              molecular properties against those observed. Lifson and Warshel started this process in
              1968 and it is still used to refine the most modern classical molecular potential energy
              functions. The newest force fields are based on high-order quantum calculations [10]
              rather than experimental data.




ok.indb 121                                                                                                   11/4/14 2:26 PM


      122                                                                  The Nobel Prizes


          The consistent force field description of the potential energy function of en-
      ergy molecule (Fig. 7) is very powerful, as it can be used to compute all the prop-
      erties of any molecular system by a combination of the methods shown in Fig. 8.
      Relying on the transferability of the energy parameters, I realized that although
      Lifson and Warshel had not included amino acids in their parameter determina-
      tion, they had determined energy parameters for all the atom types that occur
      in amino acids. This made me realize that I could start to do calculations on
      protein molecules that had many hundreds of atoms compared to the few tens




      Figure 8. Given the molecular potential energy function of any molecular system, all
      static, dynamic and thermodynamic properties can be calculated by simple methods.
      Energy Minimization (EM) is simplest in that one moves over the energy surface (il-
      lustrated in one and two dimensions) to reach a local minimum, where all net forces on
      every atom are zero and the system is at equilibrium. Normal Mode Dynamics (NMD)
      focuses on the energy surface around the minimum, where the surface is basin-like and
      the system will vibrate about the equilibrium following an analytical path. Molecular
      Dynamics (MD) is a more general method for simulating molecular motion that does
      not depend on being in an energy basin. Algorithmically, it is a simple variant of en-
      ergy minimization. The conformation is changed to follow the net forces towards a local
      minimum; the loss of potential energy is converted into kinetic energy, which gives every
      atom a velocity to allow it to move over energy barriers. While the three methods EM,
      NMD & MD, all arose centuries ago, the fourth method known as Monte Carlo (MC) is
      much more recent, originating as it did with the simulated neutron diffusion in hydrogen
      bombs. It is the simplest method but also of most general application (Fig. 14).




ok.indb 122                                                                                       11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems123


              of atoms in the molecules studied by Warshel and Lifson [9]. My idea was to
              energy minimize the atomic structure of an entire protein by moving the atoms
              in Cartesian coordinates (x,y,z). Such a calculation was feasible even though the
              Golem A had so little memory, because one did not require first derivatives for
              energy minimization: it was sufficient to follow the forces downhill by a method
              called steepest descents. Consider a small molecule with 30 atoms. Its second
              derivative matrix requires (3 × 30)2/2 = 4,050 memory words. This space suffices
              for the first derivative vector of a protein with 1,350 atoms, more than enough
              for lysozyme with 964 heavy atoms or myoglobin with 1,120 heavy atoms.
                  The issue was where to get the x-ray determined atomic coordinates for
              these two proteins. Fortunately, Prof. Nathan Sharon and his PhD student Yuval
              Eshdat had obtained printouts of the coordinates of these proteins from David
              Philips and John Kendrew, respectively, so that they could build a brass wire
              model with what are known as ‘Watson-Kendrew’ components. I had volun-
              teered to help Yuval build the model of lysozyme (Fig. 9). This allowed me to get




              Figure 9. As seen in Figs. 2 & 3, the first protein structures were physical models built
              from brass components, known as Kendrew Models. In 1968, together with Yuval Esh-
              dat, I built this model of hen egg white lysozyme using coordinates determined by David
              Phillips (Fig. 4) and sent on a computer printout to Nathan Sharon, Yuval’s PhD supervi-
              sor. Such manual modeling was slow and difficult but it provided me the impetus to do
              the first energy calculations on an entire protein (Fig. 10).




ok.indb 123                                                                                               11/4/14 2:26 PM


      124                                                                  The Nobel Prizes


      the printout typed onto punched cards and run the first energy minimization on
      an entire protein structure (Fig. 10).
          This was the start of the multiscale modeling of complex macromolecules
      recognized by the Nobel Committee for Chemistry. The key problem was one
      of simplification, as attributed to Einstein (Fig. 11). Our calculations had to be
      simple if they were to run in reasonable time but they had to still provide useful
      results. The first energy minimization of a protein with all heavy atoms pub-
      lished in 1969 was followed in 1975 by a model that simplified the structure to
      have just one interaction center per residue Fig. 12). This enabled us to fold up
      an extended polypeptide chain in the first simulation of protein folding [14, 15].
      The methods used on these simpler systems were actually more complicated,




      Figure 10. Steepest descent energy minimization was used to move all non-hydrogen at-
      oms by changing the Cartesian coordinates of the two proteins, myoglobin and lysozyme.
      This reduced the net forces and moved the structure towards an equilibrium. Note how
      a restraint on atom positions was used to correct for limitations of the energy function,
      principally the omission of the coulombic electrostatic term. Our paper [11] reports 50
      steps of minimization, which is totally trivial by today’s standards; these 50 steps took
      about 1000 secs. on the Golem A computer. The same calculation of forces used for en-
      ergy minimization could also be used to simulate molecular dynamics (Fig. 8), which
      had previously been applied by Annesur Rahman to liquid argon [12] and then together
      with Frank Stillinger to more complicated liquid water [13].




ok.indb 124                                                                                       11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems125




              Figure 11. Key to useful multiscale models is proper simplification of the complex
              chemical systems under study. In our work, simplicity was needed for three reasons.
              Firstly, the calculations had to be feasible with the very limited computational resources
              available to us on the Golem I, one of the most power computers in the world in 1967.
              Secondly, the parameterization had to be possible, so the number of parameters had to
              be small and transferable (see text). Thirdly, the conformational space associated with
              the model needed to simple enough to allow adequate exploration of different structures.




              changing as they did the torsion angles as Scheraga had pioneered [16] and also
              using normal modes to calculate low-energy paths out of the local minima. This
              enabled energy minimization to change conformation a lot (Fig 12).
                  The next use of mutiscale models depended on Arieh Warshel’s knowledge
              of quantum mechanics (Fig. 13) and led to the QM/MM method that Arieh has
              continued to improve. Next, together with Ruth Sharon, we developed a model
              for a protein with all atoms in a box of explicit water molecules (Fig. 14). This
              greater realism allowed the simulation to remain much closer to the known x-
              ray structure than had earlier in vacuo simulations. With this greater realism,
              Dr. Valerie Daggett and I were able to simulate alpha helix unfolding (Fig. 15).
                  The period from 1967 to 1976 were my golden years with my first 13 pa-
              pers, six that were sole-author and five more that were co-authored with Arieh




ok.indb 125                                                                                                11/4/14 2:26 PM


      126                                                                    The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 12. The first application of energy calculations to protein folding required a dras-
      tic simplification through the use of what are now known as coarse-grained energy func-
      tions. In protein folding, we aim to explore conformation space thoroughly so as to find
      the low energy conformations that are not just local energy minima. We did this by sim-
      plifying the polypeptide chain by collapsing all the side chain atoms into a single interac-
      tion center and collapsing all the main chain atoms into a second interaction center. We
      sometimes used a simpler model that had one interaction center per amino acid residue.
      Torsion angles were varied to reduce the number of degrees of freedom by about 30-fold
      and cut the time to compute a single energy value about 100-fold. Energy minimization
      was converged to a true local minimum. The trajectory was then continued by fitting
      the local minimum energy basin by an analytical function and using it to predict how to
      jump out of the minimum with least increase in energy. 1000 cycles took 600 secs. on an
      IBM 370/165 computer.



      Warshel and in two cases Shneior Lifson. Although focused on multiscale mod-
      els, this body of work also dealt with tRNA structure, folding of RNA, secondary
      structure prediction and analysis of structural patterns in globular proteins.

      Present: Multiscale dynamics of huge systems
      Much of biology is now seen to be driven by large molecular machines consist-
      ing of hundreds of thousands of atoms. Unlike smaller globular proteins, these
      machines are made up as complexes of many different protein chains and have




ok.indb 126                                                                                          11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems127




              Figure 13. When Philips solved the x-ray structure of lysozyme, he proposed that its
              catalytic action is due to using binding energy to distort the substrate. Specifically, the six
              member sugar ring adjacent to the bond to be cleaved was thought to be deformed from a
              chair to a half-boat. Calculations done in my thesis [X:17] and published in a conference
              proceedings volume [X:18] showed that the enzyme was too soft to cause such a defor-
              mation and led us to propose electrostatic rather than steric strain. With Arieh Warshel,
              we added quantum mechanical orbitals to a small part of the system, while the rest was
              still treated classically in what has become known as QM/MM. The calculations now pos-
              sible showed that the substrate is indeed electrostatically strained [X:19].




              moving parts and fixed parts just like the machines we are familiar with from
              the world around us. Studying these systems by the same sort of atom-based
              molecular dynamics is impractical, as 100,000 atoms are defined by 300,000
              Cartesian coordinates and 1,000,000,000 iterations would be needed to simu-
              late just 1 microsecond (simulation time-steps are typical 1 femtosecond apart).
              Even if the calculations could be done, analysis would mandate some sort of
              simplification. Simplification can be done in two ways. Firstly, keep the same
              degrees of freedom but reduce the number of interacting centers. This is like
              what we did for our coarse-grained model (Fig. 12). Secondly, keep the same
              interaction centers—the atoms—but move them with collective degrees of free-
              dom rather than atomic Cartesian coordinates. Both tricks can be combined as




ok.indb 127                                                                                                     11/4/14 2:26 PM


      128                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 14. The first molecular dynamics simulation of a protein [20] was done in a
      vacuum. While this simplification greatly speeded the simulation, it omitted a very im-
      portant part of the system, namely the solvent. Running simulation of proteins in a pe-
      riodic box of explicit water molecules is much more difficult, as the force field used for
      the protein must match that used for the water. Efficiency is paramount, as each energy
      evaluation is some 10 to 20 times slower. The first simulation of the small protein BPTI in
      water showed that the protein remained much closer to the known x-ray structure than
      for a comparable simulation in vacuo [21]. As a result, almost all current simulations use
      this protocol and include thousands of water molecules.




      we did for simulation of protein folding (Fig. 12). The same sorts of shortcuts are
      used in modern studies of the dynamics and large molecular machines. Here we
      illustrate this with three examples.
           RNA Polymerase II is an essential macromolecular machine transcribing the
      library copy of DNA in the cells nucleus to a working copy of RNA to be used
      for protein synthesis and in its own right as functional RNA of different types. It
      has been studied extensively by my close friend and colleague, Prof. Roger Ko-
      rnberg, who characterized the system, purified it and solved the detailed three-
      dimensional structure of the complex in action [25]. After he received the Nobel
      Prize for Chemistry in 2006, many in my group wanted to collaborate with him
      and his group (we are in the same tiny department at Stanford). For me the at-
      traction was that this is a huge molecular complex, but also one where a close




ok.indb 128                                                                                         11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems129




              Figure 15. SIMULATION OF TEMPERATURE UNFOLDING. By 1992, computer
              power had advanced sufficiently to enable simulation of the unfolding a short alpha helix
              of 13 Alanine residues in a large box of water molecules [22]. At room temperature, the
              alpha helix is perfectly stable whereas as the temperature increases it becomes progres-
              sive less stable. We also showed that in vacuo the alpha helix is unexpectedly stable. This
              is expected but such common-sense tests were essential in the early days of simulation.
              In the two decades since then, computer have become much more powerful and simula-
              tions of much larger systems are possible with social computing [23] or special purpose
              hardware [24].




              colleague has immense knowledge about all aspects of the system. RNA PolII is
              a large system with 10 protein chains, the DNA template strand and the growing
              RNA chain. It is also a machine with fixed and moving parts.
                  Working with Prof. Xuhui Huang, then a postdoc and now a faculty member
              at Hong Kong University, we set up the system in a huge box of explicit water
              molecules (Fig. 16). We then ran many independent relatively short molecular
              dynamics simulations starting from conformations generated by morphing the
              structure along a path between end-points [27] that characterize its biological
              function. Then we used the Markow State Model or MSM model [26] to cluster
              the conformations along the trajectories into “states.” If we observed a transition
              between two states, they were linked to form a graph of states. Long time-scale
              motion is then simulated by randomly jumping from one connected state to the




ok.indb 129                                                                                                 11/4/14 2:26 PM


      130                                                                  The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 16. MARKOV STATE DYNAMICS OF RNA POLYMERASE II. A long simula-
      tion of the molecular dynamics of a large system in water can be done very efficiently
      with Markov State Models [X:26]. Here with Xuhui Huang and Daniel Silva, we simulate
      the action of the large molecular machine, RNA Polymerase II, as it moves one base of
      the template DNA strand over the bridge helix so that it can be recognized by the correct
      incoming nucleoside triphosphate. Simulations lasting microseconds are easily achieved
      for a system with almost 500,000 atoms, as illustrated in the supplementary video [S2].



      next. This is beautifully illustrated in the movie [S2] made by Dr. Daniel Silva
      working with Prof. Huang and is from a paper in press [28].
          The second project involved an even larger system, the complete ribosome
      (Fig. 17), whose structure won the 2010 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for Ramak-
      rishnan, Steitz, and Yonath. The as yet unpublished work was done together with
      Junjie Zhang, two recent postdocs now at LinkedIn and on the faculty at Texas
      A & M, respectively. We used torsion angle normal modes to calculate how the
      system would move. This was done with two different models of atomic interac-
      tion, (a) a coarse-grained model termed 1pt, which used one point of interac-
      tion center per amino acid or nucleotide, and (b) all atoms except for non-polar
      hydrogen atoms. The calculations were very quick taking no more than one day
      on a laptop. This speed-up resulted from using Monique Trion’s trick [33], in
      which an artificial energy function is used to ensure that the starting x-ray con-
      formation is indeed a local minimum. This approach, also known a quasi-elastic
      model treats all pairwise interactions as springs whose equilibrium distance is




ok.indb 130                                                                                       11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems131




              Figure 17. COARSE-GRAINED & ALL-ATOM NORMAL MODE DYNAMICS OF
              ENTIRE RIBOSOME. Together with Jenelle Bray & Junjie Zhang, the torsional angle
              normal mode method we developed in 1985 [29] has been improved so that it can han-
              dle any number of independent bodies each with its own rotational and translational
              degrees of freedom. Although the entire ribosome is large, with 4,500 nucleotides in 7
              RNA chains and 6,000 amino acids in 49 protein chains [30–32], we can represent its
              low-frequency motion by just 538 degrees of freedom, 6 for each of 56 chains and an
              additional 202 for internal degrees of freedom. The motion is simulated with all 167,000
              atoms as well as with 11,062 interaction centers in a coarse-grained representation like
              that we introduced [14]. The motions of the four lowest frequency modes are very simi-
              lar for the two models. The video of these modes shows functionally suggestive relative
              motion of the heavy (30S) and light (16S) particles that include jaw closing, rotational
              grinding and rocking.



              the actual distance in the starting structure. Our programs can use any energy
              function and minimize in torsion angle space; this work awaits publication.
                  The degrees of freedom we use are special in that every protein or RNA
              chain moves as a rigid body with a few additional internal degrees of freedom.
              The choice of these degrees of freedom is arbitrary but we used the simplest pos-
              sible, allowing an additional torsion angle degree of freedom for every stretch
              of 50 amino acids or nucleotides along each chain. In spite of this simplicity, the
              movie [S3] showed in its four lowest frequency modes motion that may help
              explain how the ribosome moves as it functions.
                  The third project involved another of the methods to simulate motion
              shown in Fig. 8, namely Monte Carlo random moves. Because of its simplicity,
              this method can be used to rapidly prototype energy function without needing
              the cumbersome analytical derivatives I programmed as a 20-year-old (Fig. 5).




ok.indb 131                                                                                              11/4/14 2:26 PM


      132                                                                 The Nobel Prizes


      It can also be used with any set of degrees of freedom, which can perturb the
      system in a totally arbitrary manner. The key thing is to find degrees of freedom
      that allow the conformation to change a good deal without increasing the total
      energy so much as to make the proposed move totally unacceptable. For this,
      Dr. Peter Minary, then a postdoc with me and now a faculty member at Oxford,
      UK, developed a new method called Natural Move Monte Carlo or NM-MC
      [34], which is an extension of another pioneering study [35]. The idea was to
      allow a degree of freedom to deform the structure in any way. This deforma-
      tion could include breaking of bonds that normally carries with it a huge en-
      ergy penalty. Minary’s new algorithm called Recursive Stochastic Chain Closure
      would then correct the broken bond locally while the leaving the natural move
      perturbation in effect.
          Together with Adelene Sim, my then PhD student and now a postdoc at
      the Bioinformatics Institute in Singapore, Minary and I showed that carefully




      Figure 18. NATURAL MOVE MONTE CARLO OF RNA. This new method, developed
      with Peter Minary [34] and tested by Adelene Sim [36], allows one to move a molecular
      system though any arbitrary degrees of freedom. Unlike torsion angle variable (Fig. 15),
      these ‘natural moves’ break the bonded chain which would normally cause unacceptably
      high energy values leading to rejection of all moves. We use stochastic chain closure to
      quickly close chain breaks and then proceed to accept or reject the move by the normal
      Monte Carlo criterion (see Fig. 7). Our scheme can be used to combine any set of natural
      moves leading to very rapid sampling of conformational space. Here it is tested on RNA,
      a class of molecules with a conformational space that is difficult to sample normally.




ok.indb 132                                                                                      11/4/14 2:26 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems133


              chosen ‘Natural Moves’ allow the Monte Carlo method to sample the conforma-
              tional space of large RNA hairpins very efficiently [Fig. 18]. This work has many
              future applications, including the prediction of the location of nucleosomes by
              calculating the DNA deformation energy from first principles, namely the same
              consistent force field used for much of our work. This approximation to what
              localizes the nucleosome on DNA ignores the interaction of the DNA with the
              nucleosome but does as well as predicting nucleosome location as knowledge-
              based methods. In this study, the bent DNA is relaxed by NM-MC before deter-
              mining its average deformation energy [37].


              Future: Diverse studies in computational biology
              Although my group of four is much smaller than its normal size, this is deliber-
              ately intended to help more NIH funding go to younger scientists. It also allows
              me to focus on my diverse interests, as I did in those ‘golden years’ between
              1967 and 1977. There are four projects encompassing aspects of computational
              biology.
                   Dr. Andrea Scaiewicz is working on a project that is involved with genomics
              and protein function without concern for detailed three-dimensional protein
              structure. She classifies all sequences of a genome by recognizing function mo-
              tifs and then uses this to compare all known genomes. The method scales well,
              allowing tens of thousands of complete genomes to be compared.
                   Dr. Ivan Ufimtsev is applying his PhD-derived expertise on the Density
              Functional quantum methods (DFT) to a longstanding very difficult problem,
              namely determination of macromolecular crystal structures from the scattered
              X-ray intensities. Obviating the needs for phases normally still generally de-
              termined by Perutz’s heavy atom method would dramatically speed structure
              determination, especially when used with the super-intense x-ray beams created
              by Free-Electron Lasers.
                   Dr. Yana Gofman is developing methods to solve and refine membrane pro-
              tein structures by cryo-electron microscopy. She is working independently with
              co-workers who have experimental expertise in a project that will benefit from
              the new generation of microscopes have higher-resolution.
                   Dr. Nir Kalisman, (now a young faculty member at the Hebrew Univer-
              sity, Jerusalem), is using chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry com-
              bined with low-resolution X-ray and cryo-EM structural data to determine the
              structures of large complexes with less data. He has published studies on eu-
              karyote chaperonin (CCT) [38] as well as eukaryote transcript pre-imitation
              complex (PIC) [39]. In both cases, his methods were able to fix the incorrect




ok.indb 133                                                                                       11/4/14 2:26 PM


      134                                                                The Nobel Prizes


      chain assignment of previous studies and gave models that explained molecular
      function.


      Applications to biomedicine
      Moving experimental chemistry into cyberspace should be of clear importance
      to biomedical science, as it allows one to accelerate the testing of hypotheses.
      Of course, this is only useful if the calculation is an accurate prediction of what
      an experiment is likely to show. The required level of accuracy is very problem-
      dependent. One of the most obvious applications of computational method to
      biomedicine is the design of better binding drugs that are more specific for a
      particular therapeutic target protein. This task is actually very difficult, for three
      independent reasons: (a) empirical energy functions do not include all the atom
      types encountered in drug molecules, (b) binding strength depends on the free
      energy of interaction of drug and protein compared to the energy of each alone
      in solution requiring broad conformational sampling, and (c) a small free en-
      ergy change can have a large effect on binding energy (1 kcal results in a 5-fold
      change in affinity). New quantum mechanical force fields [40] offer hope of
      more accurate engines.
          Fortunately, some problems need less computational accuracy. Thus, in 1987
      I was asked to consult for a startup company, Protein Design Labs (PDL), and
      help them engineer better antibodies. Specifically, they wanted me to make a
      three-dimensional model of an arbitrary antibody sequence so that they could
      visualize which amino acids were most important (Fig 19). The task at hand was
      to design an antibody drug against a cancer cell or natural receptor involved in
      cancer. Antibodies could be easily raised in mice inoculated with the particular
      target cell or molecule but these antibodies were then unsuitable as they were
      deemed foreign by human cells and caused a severe immune reaction. What
      needed to be done was obvious: take the mouse antibody sequence as a start-
      ing point and modify its sequence so that it not foreign to human cells but still
      maintains its ability to recognize and destroy the cancer cells. This had been
      pioneered by Winter, who grafted the parts of the mice antibody recognizing the
      cancer onto a human antibody framework [44]. Sadly, the resulting ‘humanized’
      antibodies were not as potent as the original mouse antibodies. Cary Queen
      at PDL used the computer models I built for them, to decide which additional
      framework residues to change (Fig. 19). This eventually led to a series of suc-
      cessful anti-cancer drugs, made with the PDL patent, the most well-known of
      which are Herceptin and Avastin, but it took many decades and tens of billions
      of dollars to follow a tortuous path from pure research to a clinically useful drug.




ok.indb 134                                                                                    11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems135




              Figure 19. COMPUTER MODELING HUMANIZES ANTIBODIES. Antibodies are
              the body’s defense force, but they sometimes need help recognizing threats. Work that
              started out as an academic exercise [41, 42] led to an automatic method for modeling the
              structure of any antibody sequence 43]. More than two decades later this work, when
              combined with genetic engineering, thorough patenting, marketing prowess, and mas-
              sive investment in manufacturing, led via a tortuous path to one of the most successful
              anti-cancer therapies. More details are given in the text but this goes to show the poten-
              tial power of computer methods in medicine. The example also shows how long is the
              road is from basic research to practical treatment.




              Some General Thoughts

              Soon after the good news woke me in California at 2:16 AM on 9 October, I
              mentioned in an interview that had the prize been awarded to four rather than
              three, the 4th recipient should be the computer industry, whose massive re-
              search and development efforts led to unimaginable gains in computer power
              (Fig. 20). This growth in power, which has been so important in giving value to
              the multiscale models pioneered 45 years ago, was fueled by popular demand
              for computer power and not by scientific needs. The Cray X-MP supercomputer
              was essential for the first simulation of protein molecular dynamics in water
              in 1986 (Fig. 14), but a decade later, Linus Torvald’s Linux operating system
              opened up the power of home and office computers for science. This dropped
              prices as chip development is hugely expensive and needs to be offset by making




ok.indb 135                                                                                                11/4/14 2:27 PM


      136                                                                     The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 20. PUSHED AHEAD BY TECHNOLOGY. It is difficult to imagine how much
      computers have developed since our first calculations in 1967. Surprisingly, there has
      been a 10,000-fold improvement in each of four aspects: cost, speed, memory size, physi-
      cal size. This means that the cost of a particular calculation is 100,000,000 times less. The
      car analogy has been used before, but not at this level of detail.


      huge numbers of computers. In some ways, the steady drop in efficiency with
      successive releases of the Windows operating system forced Intel to make faster
      and faster hardware, an unexpected bonanza for research computing.

      Acknowledgements
      I started the work cited by the Nobel Committee when I was 20 years old, having
      been put in the right place at the right time by John Kendrew. Ten years later the
      work was essentially done, but I have remained an active researcher and mentor
      who is proud to be a computer programmer [45]. I have also been blessed by a
      wonderful wife, Rina, who gave me three sons and kept home life steady during
      those very rocky early years. This makes me feel the need to try to influence the
      young by four simple pieces of advice (Fig. 21). Clearly advice is cheap, and I
      hope to help more by making sure that young scientists have the same remark-
      able opportunities afforded to me by my many mentors.
           One area of advice concerns the need to move out of your comfort zone and
      take risks (Fig. 22). I suppose I also need to mention that some things may be
      too risky (Fig. 23), but what does not kill you may make you stronger?




ok.indb 136                                                                                           11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems137




              Figure 21. ADVICE TO THE YOUNG. Adults tend give too much advice, so this is
              given in the expectation that it will be ignored. These four points are rather obvious
              but they certainly worked for me. Passion is needed for any endeavor. Being persistent
              means you believe in yourself and if you do not, why should anyone else? By being origi-
              nal, competition is less of a concern. By being kind and good, you make friend and not
              enemies.




              Figure 22. TAKE RISKS. It is difficult to predict the outcome of most actions. Taking
              some risks can lead you to wonderful places that would have been missed otherwise. This
              is true in science as it is in life. When a meeting I was attending in Sweden was held in
              Uppsala and not on the Stockholm archipelago, I decided to go it alone. Advised against
              hiking as the islands are small and flat, I rented a sea kayak online. As a complete novice,
              I found a short movie and set out myself on the weekend before midsummer day. I was
              completely alone on the water, but the sea was calm and the swans comforting until the
              wind hit (continued in Fig. 23).




ok.indb 137                                                                                                  11/4/14 2:27 PM


      138                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 23. BUT DO NOT BE TOO STUPID. The water was cold at 12°C so I stayed
      close to shore as I learned to balance. After a scary encounter with a Visby class mis-
      sile boat that passed as I was beached, I proceeded up the coast to Ornö Kyrka with the
      wind coming from behind. I headed back south to find a tiny island on the way where I
      camped for the night. I had a Swedish SIM card and felt comforted by email and internet.
      Still it was hard to sleep without a facemask, something essential with such short nights.
      Next morning I headed back and had a hard time crossing about 1 km of open water
      against a head wind. My island was paradise, but perhaps it was a bit too risky?


          As this unusual account comes to a close, I need to thank Shneior Lifson,
      my earliest mentor at the Weizmann Institute (Fig. 24A), and John Kendrew,
      Max Perutz, Francis Crick, Bob Diamond and Aaron Klug, my mentors in Cam-
      bridge (Fig. 24B). Sadly, only Diamond and Klug are here to read these words.
      As a group, these are my towering heroes of science [46].
          I also thank the 2013 Nobel Committee for Chemistry (Fig. 24C) for daring
      to recognize the role that computers have played in multiscale modeling of the
      complex chemical systems so important in biology. This work is intrinsically
      multi-disciplinary, extending from the math and physics of atomic interactions
      to chemical reactions in biology to biomedical therapeutics. As a result of this
      recognition, the entire field of computational biology has become bigger (Fig.
      25).
          Since moving to Stanford in 1987, I have been blessed by an exception group
      of PhD students and postdoctoral fellows (Fig. 26) and I thank them all pro-
      fusely for teaching me so much.




ok.indb 138                                                                                        11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems139




              (A)




              (B)




              (C)
              Figure 24. SPECIAL THANKS TO :(A) Shneior Lifson my mentor at the Weizmann
              Institute. (B) John Kendrew, Max Perutz, Bob Diamond, Francis Crick and Aaron Klug
              were my mentors in Cambridge. Bob Diamond was my actual PhD supervisor but inde-
              pendence was forced upon one: I never wrote a paper with Diamond but we did write
              related papers adjacent to one another in the same journal. (C) The 2013 Nobel Commit-
              tee in Chemistry. This may seem obvious as they awarded me a share of the Nobel Prize
              for 2013. No, I thank them for their courage to recognize the role that computers have
              played in taking chemistry of complex biological systems from the experimental lab into
              cyberspace. Given the incredible increase in computer power, there is no doubt that their
              recognition of a field that will have increasing importance in biomedical science will
              itself be recognized as formalizing the establishment of a new field.




ok.indb 139                                                                                               11/4/14 2:27 PM


      140                                                                 The Nobel Prizes




      Figure 25. OUR FIELD IS THE BIG WINNER. With this recognition, the field of com-
      putational structural biology and indeed the broader field of computational biology, all
      those who have worked away in the belief that computers and biology belong together
      are winners. This photo was taken on Stanford’s American football field during the game
      with UCLA on 19 October just 10 days after the Chemistry Prize announcement. Hear-
      ing 50,000 young people screaming “Nobel Prize, Nobel Prize” is an indelible, treasured
      memory.




      Figure 26. PAST & PRESENT GROUP. Since 1986, I have had the privilege to mentor
      14 PhD students and 29 postdoctoral fellows. They are all part of my family and a major-
      ity have followed my example and established independent academic careers. In my first
      20 years as an independent scientist, I worked with collaborators or alone, not trusting
      myself to direct others.




ok.indb 140                                                                                      11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems141


                  This work is supported by my NIH R01 award GM063817. I am the Robert
              W. and Vivian K. Cahill Professor of Cancer Research.



              References
               1. “Molecular Structure for Nucleic Acids.” J. D. Watson, F. H. C. Crick, Nature 1953,
                  171, 737–738.
               2. “Molecular Structure of Deoxypentose Nucleic Acids”: M. H. F. Wilkins, A. R.
                  Stokes, H. R. Wilson, Nature 1953, 171, 738–740
               3. “Structure of Myoglobin: A Three-Dimensional Fourier Synthesis at 2 Å. Resolu-
                  tion”: J. C. Kendrew, R. E. Dickerson, B. E. Strandberg, R. G. Hart, D. R. Davies, D.
                  C. Phillips, V. C. Shore, Nature 1960, 185, 422–427.
               4. “The Three-Dimensional Structure of a Protein Molecule”: J. C. Kendrew, Scientific
                  American 1961, 205 (6), 96–110.
               5. “The Structure of Haemoglobin. IV. Sign Determination by the Isomorphous Re-
                  placement Method”: D. W. Green, V. M. Ingram, M. F. Perutz, Proc. Roy. Soc. A
                  1954, 225, 287–307.
               6. “Structure of Haemoglobin: A Three-Dimensional Fourier synthesis at 5.5 Å Reso-
                  lution, Obtained by X-ray Analysis”: M. F. Perutz, M. G. Rossmann, A. F. Cullis, H.
                  Muirhead, G. Will, A. C. T. North, Nature 1960, 185, 3416–3422.
               7. “The Hen Egg-White Lysozyme Molecule”: D. C. Phillips, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
                  1967, 57, 483–495.
               8. “The Three-Dimensional Structure of an Enzyme Molecule”: D. C. Phillips, Scien-
                  tific American 1966, 205 (6), 96–110.
               9. “A Consistent Force Field for Calculation on Conformations, Vibrational Spectra
                  and Enthalpies of Cycloalkanes and n-Alkane Molecules”: S. Lifson, A. Warshel, J.
                  Phys. Chem. 1968, 49, 5116–5129.
              10. “A Quantum Mechanical Polarizable Force Field for Biomolecular Interactions”: A.
                  G. Donchev, V.D. Ozrin, M. V. Subbotin, O. V. Tarasov, V. I. Tarasov, Proc. Natl.
                  Acad. Sci. USA 2005, 102, 7829–7834.
              11. “Refinement of Protein Conformations Using a Macromolecular Energy Minimiza-
                  tion Procedure”: M. Levitt, S. Lifson, J. Mol. Biol. 1969, 46, 269–79.
              12. “Correlations in the Motion of Atoms in Liquid Argon”: A. Rahman, Physical Re-
                  view 1964, 136, A405–A411.
              13. “Molecular Dynamics Study of Liquid Water”: A. Rahman, F. H. Stillinger, J. Chemi-
                  cal Physics 1971, 55, 3336–3359.
              14. “Computer Simulation of Protein Folding”: M. Levitt, A. Warshel, Nature 1975, 253,
                  694–698.
              15. “A Simplified Representation of Protein Conformations for Rapid Simulation of
                  Protein Folding”: M. Levitt, J. Mol. Biol. 1976, 104, 59–107.
              16. “Minimization of Polypeptide Energy. I. Preliminary Structures of Bovine Pancre-
                  atic Ribonuclease S-peptide”: Gibson, K. D., H. A. Scheraga, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
                  USA 1967, 58, 420–427.
              17. “Conformation Analysis of Proteins”: M. Levitt, PhD Thesis, Cambridge University,




ok.indb 141                                                                                               11/4/14 2:27 PM


      142                                                                      The Nobel Prizes


              Cambridge, UK, 1971. http://csb.stanford.edu/levitt/Levitt_Thesis_1971/Levitt_
              Thesis_1971.html
      18.     “On the Nature of the Binding of Hexa-N-Acetyl Glucosamine Substrate to Lyso-
              zyme”: M. Levitt, In Peptides, Polypeptides and Proteins, Wiley, New York, 1974, pp.
              99–113.
      19.     “Theoretical Studies of Enzymic Reactions: Dielectric, Electrostatic and Steric Sta-
              bilization of the Carbonium Ion in the Reaction of Lysozyme”: A. Warshel, M. Lev-
              itt, J. Mol. Biol. 1976, 103, 227–249.
      20.     “Dynamics of Folded Proteins”: J. A. McCammon B. R. Gelin, M. Karplus, Nature
              1977, 267, 585–590.
      21.     “Accurate Simulation of Protein Dynamics in Solution”: M. Levitt, R. Sharon, Proc.
              Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1988, 85, 7557–7561.
      22.     “Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Helix Denaturation”: V. Daggett, M. Levitt, J.
              Mol. Biol. 1992, 223, 1121–1138.
      23.     “Atomistic Protein Folding Simulations on the Submillisecond Time Scale Using
              Worldwide Distributed Computing”: V. S. Pande, I., Baker, J. Chapman, S. P. Elmer,
              S. Khaliq, S. M. Larson, M. R. Shirts, C. D. Snow, E. J. Sorin, B. Zagrovic, Biopoly-
              mers 2003, 68, 91–109.
      24.     “Anton: A Special-Purpose Machine for Molecular Dynamics Simulation”: D. E.
              Shaw, M. M. Deneroff, R.O. Dror, J.S. Kuskin, R.H. Larson, J.K. Salmon, C. Young,
              B. Batson, K.J. Bowers, J.C. Chao, M.P. Eastwood, J. Gagliardo, J.P. Grossman, C.R.
              Ho, D.J. Ierardi, I. Kolossváry, J.L. Klepeis, T. Layman, C. McLeavey, M.A. Moraes,
              R. Mueller, E.C. Priest, Y. Shan, J. Spengler, M. Theobald, B. Towles, S.C. Wang,
              Proceedings of the 34rd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture
              (ISCA), San Diego, June 2007.
      25.     “Nobel Lecture: The Molecular Basis of Eukaryotic Transcription”: R. D. Kornberg,
              2006, http://www.nobelprize.orgnobel_prizes/ chemistry/laureates/2006/korn-
              berg_lecture.pdf
      26.     ”Automatic Discovery of Metastable States for the Construction of Markov Models
              Of Macromolecular Conformational Dynamics”: J. D. Chodera, N. Singhal, V. S.
              Pande, K. A. Dill, W. C. Swope, J. Chemical Physics 2007, 126, 155101–17.
      27.     “Can Morphing Methods Predict Intermediate Structures?”: D. Weiss, D. and M.
              Levitt, J. Mol. Biol. 2009, 385, 665–674.
      28.     “Millisecond Dynamics of RNA Polymerase II Translocation at Atomic Resolution”:
              D-A, Silva, D. Weiss, F. Pardo, L-T. Da1, M. Levitt., D. Wang., X. Huang, Proc. Natl.
              Acad. Sci. USA 2014, in press.
      29.     “Protein Normal-Mode Dynamics: Trypsin Inhibitor, Crambin, Ribonuclease and
              Lysozyme”: M. Levitt, C. Sander, P.S. Stern, J. Mol. Biol. 1985, 181, 423–447.
      30.     “Nobel Lecture: Unraveling the Structure of the Ribosome”: V. D. Ramakrishnan,
              2009, http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/ chemistry/laureates/2009/ramak-
              rishnan_lecture.pdf.
      31.     “Nobel Lecture: From the Structure and Function of the Ribosome to New Antibi-
              otics”: T. S. Steitz, 2009, http://www.nobelprize.org/ nobel_prizes/chemistry/laure-
              ates/2009/steitz_lecture.pdf.




ok.indb 142                                                                                           11/4/14 2:27 PM


              Birth and Future of Multiscale Modeling for Macromolecular Systems143


              32. “Nobel Lecture: Hibernating Bears, Antibiotics and the Evolving Ribosome”: A.
                  Yonath, 2009, http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/2009/
                  yonath_lecture.pdf
              33. ”Large Amplitude Elastic Motions in Proteins from a Single-Parameter, Atomic
                  Analysis”: M. Tirion, Physical Review Letters 1996, 77, 1905–1908.
              34. “Conformational Optimization with Natural Degrees of Freedom: A Novel Sto-
                  chastic Chain Closure Algorithm”: P. Minary, M. Levitt, J. Comp. Chem. 2010, 17,
                  993–1010.
              35. “Molecular Flexibility in ab initio Drug Docking to DNA: Binding-Site and Bind-
                  ing-Mode Transitions in All-Atom Monte Carlo Simulations”: R. Rohs, I. Bloch, H.
                  Sklenar, Z. Shakked, Nucleic Acids Research 2005, 33,7048–7057.
              36. “Modeling and Design by Hierarchical Natural Moves”: A. Y. L. Sim, M. Levitt, P.
                  Minary, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109: 2890–2895.
              37. “Training-free atomistic prediction of nucleosome occupancy”: P. Minary, M. Lev-
                  itt, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014, in press.
              38. “Subunit Order of Eukaryotic TRiC/CCT Chaperonin by Cross-linking, Mass Spec-
                  trometry and Combinatorial Homology Modeling”: N. Kalisman, C. M. Adams, M.
                  Levitt, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109, 2884–2889.
              39. “Architecture of an RNA polymerase II transcription pre-initiation complex”: K.
                  Murakami, H. Elmlund, N. Kalisman, D. A. Bushnell, C. M. Adams, M. Azubel, D.
                  Elmlund, Y. Levi-Kalisman, X. Liu, B. J. Gibbons, M. Levitt, R. D Kornberg, Science
                  2013, 342, 1238724.
              40. “Application of a polarizable force field to calculations of relative protein–ligand
                  binding affinities”: O. Khoruzhii, A. G. Donchev, G. Nikolay, A. Illarionov, M.
                  Olevanov, V. Ozrin, C. Queen, V. Tarasov, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008, 105,
                  10378–10383.
              41. “The Predicted Structure of Immunoglobulin D1.3 and its Comparison with the
                  Crystal Structure”: C. Chothia, A. M.Lesk, M. Levitt, A. G. Amit, R. A. Mariuzza, S.
                  E. V. Phillips, R. J. Poljak, Science 1986, 233: 755–758.
              42. “The Conformations of Immunoglobulin Hypervariable Regions”: C. Chothia, A.
                  M. Lesk, M. Levitt, A., Tramontano, S. J. Smith-Gill, G, Air, S. Sheriff, E. A. Padlan,
                  D. Davies, W. R. Tulip, P.M. Colman, Nature 1989, 342, 877–883.
              43. “A Humanized Antibody that Binds to the IL-2 Receptor”: C. Queen, W. P. Schnei-
                  der, H.E. Selick, P. W. Payne, N. F. Landolfi, J. F. Duncan, A. M. Avdalovic, M. Levitt,
                  R. P. Junghans, T. A. Waldmann, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1989, 86, 10029–10033.
              44. “Replacing the Complementarity-Determining Regions in a Human Antibody with
                  those from a Mouse”: Jones, P. T., Dear, P. H., Foote, J., Neuberger, M. S. & G. Win-
                  ter, Nature 1986, 321, 522–525.
              45. “Michael Levitt National Academy of Science USA Member Details,” http://nrc88.
                  nas.edu/pnas_search/memberDetails.aspx?ctID=3012570
              46. “Life-Long Influence of Max Perutz and the Laboratory of Molecular Biology”: M.
                  Levitt, in Memories and Consequences, edited by H. Huxley, 2013. http://www2.
                  mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/ebooks/Memories_and_consequences-Hugh_Huxley.epub

              Portrait photo of Michael Levitt by photographer Alexander Mahmoud.




ok.indb 143                                                                                                  11/4/14 2:27 PM
