                         W   ALTER   N . HA W O R T H


   The structure of carbohydrates and of vitamin C
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1937



              The structure of carbohydrates ad of vitamin C

Twenty years ago it could have been said that the wealth of natural products
which comprise the carbohydrate group was bewildering in its complexity.
Such materials as cellulose, glycogen, and starch seemed almost beyond the
range of structural investigation. It was recognized that these products were
built up somehow of simple sugars, particularly glucose. But our knowledge
of the mode of combination of two or more glucose molecules was doubtful
and insecure. This could scarcely have been otherwise inasmuch as it was
not until 1925 that a precise structural model of any sugar was clearly and
finally determined. The expressions used by Emil Fischer give us the stereo-
chemical relationship of the hexoses and pentoses which he represented as
open-chain aldehydes and ketones and these configurational conceptions will
always be regarded as classical. It must now be said, however, that sugars of
the hexose and pentose series, whether occurring as free isolated substances
or assembled as the constituent parts of complex carbohydrates, conform to
one of two simple structural models which are related either to pyran or to
furan.




   The model of glucose which I introduced in 1925 is represented in skele-
ton form as being built up of a ring of six atoms, five of these being carbon
and one oxygen, together with an additional side-chain carbon atom. This
I described as the pyranose form. When this model is clothed with its con-
stituent oxygen and hydrogen atoms it then appears as represented in the
second picture above where the model of bglucose is portrayed. If we
depart from this atomic representation and sketch a formula for        and


         STRUCTURE OF CARBOHYDRATES AND VITAMIN C                       415




glucose it will be best to have this model in mind and represent it by per-
spective formulae.




   Other normal hexoses have been shown to conform similarly to this same
structural plan. Thus the normal varieties of                         and
fructose are illustrated below, all of them being pyranose forms, i.e. forms
which are based upon the ring structure present in pyran. Similarly the
normal pentoses have been shown to be pyranose in structure and their
formulations are here given.


416                         1937 W.N.HAWORTH

   Much less stable forms of pentose and hexose are those which I have
described as the furanose forms. Only the derivatives of these have been
isolated as homogeneous crystalline substances, e.g. the ethyl- and methyl-
glucosides which are hydrolysed with something of the order of 100 times
the velocity of the normal methylglucosides. Yet it is in this form that cer-
tain sugars occur in a state of combination in Nature, particularly the pentose
arabinose and the hexose known as fructose or hevulose. When these sugars
are isolated they revert to the normal or pyranose forms which have six-
atom rings.




  It is clear that these simple sugars acquire wider significance when regarded
as the building stones in such complex natural products as cellulose, starch,
inulin, or the wood gum known as xylan. Much of my work has been
devoted to an inquiry into the manner in which two or more sugars unite
with one another or are found united in Nature in the disaccharides such as
sucrose, maltose, cellobiose, gentiobiose, melibiose and others. From the
picture of simple sugars which I have given it will be evident that there are
several ways in which two glucose units may unite, by loss of water, through
the intermediary of a common oxygen atom. Investigations conducted
during the past 15 years have enabled us to build upon the speculations of
Emil Fischer and to arrive at a precise picture for each of the disaccharides.
The expression


        STRUCTURE OF CARBOHYDRATES AND VITAMIN C                          417
merely indicates the union of two hexose residues with loss of water to give
a biose. Any of the five hydroxyl positions present in a hexose such as glucose
are available as a means of attachment to a similar glucose residue. Actually
those bioses found in Nature do not exhaust all the possibilities which are
available as a means of assembly of pairs of sugar units.
   If we utilize a method of numbering the carbon atoms of a pyranose,
beginning with the reducing group or potential aldehyde group in an aldose
as No. 1, this will facilitate our reference to the various structures which
apply to the known disaccharides. It must be remarked that the hydroxyl
group attached to No. 1 position is located below the plane of the ring in
the α-form and above the plane of the ring in the β-form and these two
formulae are illustrated above. When we come to consider the mode of
assembly of the pairs of glucose residues which occur in the representative
bioses such as maltose and cellobiose, it is found that a unit of
nose is linked with the hydroxyl at the 4th position of another glucose residue
to give maltose, but on the other hand cellobiose is found to be derived from
                   which is linked to a similar unit at the same 4th position.




This is illustrated in the formulae shown above. In the case of cellobiose it
is seen that the active group at No. 1 position of one glucose unit is above
the plane, and is united to a hydroxyl group below the plane of the ring in
the second residue at position 4. To bring the rings into alignment in the
final cellobiose formula shown on the right, one of these rings is now in-


418                          1937 W.N.HAWORTH

verted or turned through 180°. Although the units participating in the union
of maltose are structurally identical with those assembled in cellobiose yet
these products are widely different in kind.
   The difference lies entirely in the spatial arrangement of the left-hand
formula indicating the     or β-form of glucopyranose. This simple distinc-
tion furnishes the reason for the different entities of maltose and cellobiose.




This difference is fundamental and provides also a reason for the difference
in identity of starch and cellulose. It is found that starch is based entirely on
the maltose model inasmuch as maltose is obtained in high yield from starch.
On the other hand cellobiose is the representative disaccharide derived from
cellulose and it is the mode of linking obtaining in cellobiose which is re-
peated throughout the whole molecule of cellulose. These constitutional
forms are seen more clearly in the atom models which I represent as the
skeletons of maltose and cellobiose.
   Other disaccharides exist in which the linking is different. For example,
the mode of assembly of two glucose units combined through the hydroxyl
positions at 1 and 6 is found to occur in gentiobiose, which is the biose
present in the glucoside amygdalin. In the examples given we have seen that
the assembly of pairs of hexose units is effected by the linking of the hy-
droxyl at position 1 of one unit with the hydroxyl in another unit at either
position 4 or 6. Turning now to the important disaccharide, sucrose, we fmd
that here two different hexose units are involved, namely, glucose and fruc-
tose, which are assembled as a pair through the union of the hydroxyl at
position 1 in glucose with that at No. 2, which is the reducing position in
this case, in the fructose residue. Sucrose is unique in its constitution inas-
much as in this example of a biose we find a pyranose, or six-atom ring
form, linked with a furanose, or five-atom ring form, and as the reducing
positions in each are utilized in their combination to a biose, sucrose becomes
a non-reducing sugar. Probably for this reason it is more easily crystallized


         STRUCTURE OF CARBOHYDRATES AND VITAMIN C                           419




than the other bioses and we know it to be the most abundant, or the most
easily available, of all pure organic substances.
   From this rapid review of structural forms and of the modes of assembly
of pairs of sugar units in a biose, let us now turn to illustrate similar exper-
imental conclusions as to how more than two sugar molecules are assembled
in various forms of carbohydrates. These formulations are based on the same
 kind of chemical proof as I have applied to the disaccharides, but in a review
of this kind I propose to concern myself with results rather than with meth-
ods. Let us now take two pairs of maltose molecules and show how these
are assembled in starch and glycogen and similarly how two cellobiose units
are united as they appear in the cellulose chain. Thus we are able to approach
to the constitutional picture representing starch and cellulose. Or if we en-
visage the procedure of adding repeating units of maltose to an ever length-
ening chain we arrive at the model of starch and, by repeating a similar
procedure with cellobiose, we represent repeating units as they occur in a
 very extended chain molecule in cellulose. Remarkable as the statement may
 appear it is nevertheless the case that these two models are structurally iden-
tical. They owe their differences to the two stereochemical forms of the same


420                          1937 W.N.HAWORTH

glucopyranose unit; as already stated, these are found to be α-glucopyranose
in maltose and                     in cellobiose. The more symmetrical figure
is that provided by the repeating pattern of cellobiose units. Here the side
chain on each hexose appears alternately above and below in the picture, and
this contrasts with the model shown for starch inasmuch as the side chain or
6th carbon atom occurs entirely on one side, a representation less symmetri-
cal than that of cellulose. Moreover, the departure from the true linear ar-
rangement is greater in the case of starch than of cellulose. The reason for this
is apparent because in cellulose each alternate glucose unit is reversed and
therefore any departure from the true linear direction is corrected in this
model. We see therefore that in the structural representation for cellulose we
have a reason for the occurrence of cellulose as a fibre in that its molecule
approaches the rectilinear condition. Thus its conformation is more regular
and provides a pattern which characterizes the X-ray diagrams for this sub-
stance. The diagram for starch is much less regular and less easy to interpret.
Moreover there are other characteristic differences probably traceable to the
continuous pattern formed by the assembly of                 units in starch and
to this we shall return. The cellobiose picture as determined by the classical
methods of organic chemistry fits perfectly into the size of cell demanded
by the X-ray diagrams, which fulfil every dimension of the repeating pattern
of the cellobiose formula.
   A question of particular moment is concerned with the length of the chain
of repeating units in starch, cellulose, and glycogen. For it may now be said
that glycogen has the same internal constitution as starch. On the other hand
xylan or wood gum is constituted on a similar plan to cellulose except that
it is built up of xylose units, largely, in place of glucose. Wisdom dictates


          STRUCTURE OF CARBOHYDRATES AND VITAMIN C                        421

 that in a problem of this complexity all the available polysaccharides should
 be studied together as a group. Information which may not be readily avail-
 able from the study of one polysaccharide may be revealed by the study of
 another, and it is probable that a conclusion will be reached which is com-
 mon to all of them. It is a reasonable supposition that Nature in building
 up polysaccharides follows a common plan. For this reason I have developed
 what is now known as the end-group assay of methylated polysaccharides
 as a preliminary to the study of the chain length. Unless these chains are
 constituted as continuous loops then there must be a terminal group which
 carries one more non-reducing hydroxyl than any of the intermediate units
 in the chain, or than the remaining end group which will terminate with a
 reducing unit. Our study of xylan has been important from this point of
 view. In xylan some 17 or 18                    units are assembled in a chain
which is terminated by one unit of arabofuranose. This latter can be easily
removed by hydrolysis and there remains only a chain of xylose residues.
 In 1934 I pointed out that this picture of xylan was probably typical of other
polysaccharides in that these chains of limited length aggregated to form a
larger entity and the nature of the bonds effecting the union of adjacent
chains was discussed. It was suggested that these might be either united by
principal valency links or by some other type of bond such as that which is
responsible for coordination. Whatever this kind of agency or link may be,
 I prefer to describe it as the polymeric bond and as such it may differ from
 ordinary valency bonds and may find currency in the whole field of poly-
meric substances.
    In starch, for example, the individual chains terminate after 26 or 30
glucopyranose units and the chains are assembled by the same aggregative
force as that just mentioned. It has been found possible to effect the reverse
change of disaggregation in the case of starch. This was effected by mild acid
 treatment of the starch grains followed by acetylation and methylation. Very
recently this observation has been confirmed by my former colleague E.
L. Hirst who has isolated the methylated form of a single chain of 26
glucopyranose units. In the case of glycogen the chains differ from starch
in being shorter in length and we have examined specimens of glycogen
which contain continuous chains of both 12 and 18 a-glucose units. These
chains again are interlinked by the polymeric bond to form a very large
molecular complex showing a molecular weight of 1,000,000 or more.
    The same experimental methods have been applied in order to gain an
insight into the molecular size of cellulose. Here the complexity of the prob-


422                         1937 W.N.HAWORTH

lem is very great. In 1932 I showed that, taking every precaution to avoid
breakdown of cellulose, cotton linters could be acetylated under mild condi-
tions and then methylated, by two treatments only with the reagents, to
attain an almost completely substituted methylated specimen. This, by the
method of end-group assay, contained one end group recognized as crys-
talline tetramethyl glucose for every 190 units of trimethyl glucose. The
observation was made that the value of 100 to 200                        units
probably constituted the minimum length of chain in cellulose but that na-
tive cellulose untreated by chemical reagents would probably be found to
possess still greater complexity. In this connection I suggested in 1935 that
the molecular aggregate of cellulose may comprise an aggregation which
not only increases the length of the chain, but also the width, by the lateral
combination of adjacent chains. I pointed out that these factors must be rec-
ognized in any comparison of the molecular weight of cellulose determined
by physical and chemical methods. All recent experiments in my laboratory
have fully confirmed these conclusions. There can be no doubt that those
forces which I describe as polymeric bonds are active in linking together
adjacent chains of cellulose as in the case of xylan, glycogen, and starch. I
do not share the view recently expressed that cellulose is constituted on the
plan of a continuous loop of glucose units, this single loop being of a size
to correspond with the high molecular weight found for cellulose by phys-
ical methods, although in my book on the constitution of sugars published
in 1929 I suggested that this conception must be fully explored.
   Time does not permit me to outline the range of facts which have been
accumulated from our study of other polysaccharides such as inulin, man-
nan, and certain of the vegetable gums such as gum arabic, or gum acacia.
But these experiments have thrown further light on the general problem of
the molecular structure of complex carbohydrates.
   Now, if I may, I should like to turn to another aspect of the subject of
carbohydrates which brings us to the study of the constitution and synthesis
of vitamin C.



                 The constitution and synthesis of vitamin C

 It will be recalled that in the course of his researches in 1928 Szent-Györgyi
 isolated from the adrenal cortex and also from orange juice and cabbage
juice, a highly reducing substance which has many of the properties of a


          STRUCTURE OF CARBOHYDRATES AND VITAMIN C                           423
carbohydrate. This substance had been named hexuronic acid in virtue of
its acidity and strong resemblance to highly reactive sugar acids. It was crys-
talline, having melting point 192° and            + 23° in water; it was easily
affected by oxidizing agents, and was capable of undergoing reversible oxi-
dation by iodine or phenol indophenol. The molecular formula was estab-
lished as C6H 8O 6, and before any question of its relationship to a vitamin
arose, Professor Szent-Györgyi paid me a visit in the University of Birming-
ham and invited me to investigate the constitution of this highly interesting
substance.
    Soon its possible connection with vitamin C appeared probable from the
experiments of Szent-Györgyi and Svirbely and of Tillmans and also of
Waugh and King. At this stage larger quantities of the material were pre-
pared by Szent-Györgyi, first of all from adrenal cortex and later from
Hungarian paprika, a richer and much more convenient source. On the sug-
gestion of Professor Szent-Györgyi and myself, the name of the substance
was changed from that of hexuronic acid, which was not distinctive, to that
 of ascorbic acid. It had been shown by Szent-Györgyi that the antiscorbutic
 activity was due to the substance itself and not to a contamination of the
 material with some more potent substance. Moreover, we prepared the pri-
 mary oxidation product of ascorbic acid and this was found by Hirst and
 Zilva to be as active physiologically as the original ascorbic acid; and further,
 it was shown that the acid regenerated by the reduction of the oxidized
 material was still fully active. These observations showed that Tillmans’ hy-
 pothesis concerning the reversible oxidation of vitamin C was indeed correct
 and they served also to explain the earlier observations of Zilva on the so-
 called "reducing factor". Further evidence that ascorbic acid was identical
 with vitamin C came from investigation of the potency of samples prepared
 from different sources; and the observation that synthetic ascorbic acid pre-
 pared from completely inactive materials had the same degree of physio-
 logical activity as the natural substance, furnished final and incontrovertible
 proof.

Constitution of ascorbic acid. Ascorbic acid is a monobasic acid, giving well-
defined salts of the type C6H7O6M. It is a powerful reducing agent and its
oxidation can be effected in stages, the first of which requires the equivalent
of one atomic proportion of oxygen for each molecule of ascorbic acid.
When oxidation is arrested at this stage the product can be reduced quanti-
tatively to ascorbic acid by reducing agents such as hydriodic acid or hydro-


424                           1937 W.N.HAWORTH

gen sulphide. Ascorbic acid is specially sensitive to oxidation by gaseous oxy-
gen in the presence of minute traces of copper as catalyst, but in these cir-
cumstances the reaction proceeds beyond the reversible stage and involves
destruction of the molecule. Ascorbic acid reacts readily with phenylhydra-
zine giving a product having the composition of an osazone. The presence
of at least one keto group capable of undergoing enolization is thus con-
firmed and the character of the ultraviolet absorption spectrum (intense band
at 245       in acid solution) is in full agreement with this. Furthermore,
the intensity of the absorption suggests that conjugated double bonds are
present in the molecule. The above mentioned properties pointed to the pres-
ence in ascorbic acid of the group (I) and an exact analogy is provided by
dihydroxymaleic acid (II) which displays absorption similar to that of
ascorbic acid and undergoes reversible oxidation by iodine in acid solution.




   Another property of ascorbic acid which was known at an early stage in
the investigation and played an important part in the elucidation of the molec-
ular structure was the unusual flatness of the molecule revealed by crystallo-
graphic and X-ray examination carried out in my laboratory by Dr. Cox.
By attention to this criterion a choice could be made between alternative
structural formulae which, at the commencement of the investigation, ap-
peared to satisfy the requirements of the known chemical transformations.
   Our observation that ascorbic acid could be transformed almost quantita-
tively into furfural provided strong evidence that the molecule contained
a straight chain and not a branched chain of carbon atoms. Further evidence
of this, and insight into the stereochemical relationships of ascorbic acid were
obtained from a study of the oxidation, by sodium hypoiodite, of the pri-
mary (reversible) oxidation product. Two substances were obtained in al-


          STRUCTURE OF CARBOHYDRATES AND VITAMIN C                                425
most quantitative yield, namely oxalic acid and l-threonic acid (IV), the
identity of the latter being established by its transformation into trimethyl
l-threonamide (V) and into d-tartaric acid (VI). These facts establish the
conclusions that in alkaline solution the primary oxidation product of ascor-
bic acid reacts as a salt of the acid (I I I) and that ascorbic acid is related stereo-
chemically to l-gulose.




   An important observation was that, when newly formed, the primary re-
versible oxidation product from ascorbic acid does not possess acidic prop-
erties but behaves in all respects as a lactone, which develops acidity when
kept in aqueous solution. It followed that the acidic character of ascorbic
acid is due to an enolic hydroxyl group and not to a free carboxyl group
and, in order to determine the structure of ascorbic acid, it remained only
to discover the nature of the lactone ring in the primary oxidation product.
The main features of the constitution of ascorbic acid were now established
and its formulation as a lactone of 2-keto-l-gulonic acid, capable of reacting
in various tautomeric modifications, was first announced from the Univer-
sity of Birmingham, early in 1933.
   The elucidation of the nature of the lactone ring followed from a study
of the oxidation product obtained when tetramethylascorbic acid reacts with
ozone. It had been shown by Micheel that the dimethyl derivative of ascorb-
ic acid, obtained by Karrer by the action of diazomethane, gives a di-p-
nitrobenzoyl derivative and that the latter reacts with ozone giving a neutral
ester containing the same number of carbon atoms as the unoxidized mate-
rial. It followed that a ring system must be present in ascorbic acid, but the
products obtained on hydrolysis of the neutral ester (oxalic acid and l-
threonic acid) did not permit of deductions being made concerning the na-


426                         1937 W.N.HAWORTH

ture of the ring, and the interpretation at that time advocated by Micheel
was invalid in that it involved the presence of a free carboxyl group in as-
corbic acid. By reference to the accompanying formulae it will be seen that
by application of a similar method of oxidation to fully methylated ascorbic
acid the nature of the ring system can be determined with certainty. It was
found that dimethylascorbic acid (VIII) was readily converted into the
corresponding tetramethyl derivative (IX) by the action of silver oxide and
methyl iodide, and that this on treatment with ozone gave rise to a neutral
ester (X) which reacted with ammonia giving oxamide and the amide of
3:4-dimethyl-l-threonic acid (XI). The presence of a hydroxyl group in the
            in the latter substance was proved by the observation that the
amide gave a strong positive Weerman reaction (formation of sodium cya-
nate by the action of sodium hypochlorite on the amide). It follows im-
mediately that in ascorbic acid, in dimethylascorbic acid, and in tetramethyl
ascorbic acid, the lactone ring is of the γ-type and engages the hydroxyl
group attached to the fourth carbon atom of the chain. Ascorbic acid is
therefore to be represented by (VII). If, on the other hand, ascorbic acid
had contained a             ring the products, obtained by the action of am-
monia on the neutral ester formed by ozonization, would have been oxamide
and 2:4-dimethyl-l-threonamide and the latter amide would not have under-


         STRUCTURE OF CARBOHYDRATES AND VITAMIN                      C      427
gone the Weerman reaction. The structure (VII) (enolic form of 2-keto-l-
gulonolactone) is in full agreement with all the chemical properties of as-
corbic acid and, when an atomic model of this constitution is built up, it is
seen that the structure is almost flat and its dimensions account satisfactorily
for the crystallographic and X-ray observations.

The synthesis of ascorbic acid. The two principal methods which are now
available for the synthesis of ascorbic acid and its analogues are: (a) addition
of hydrogen cyanide to an osone followed by acid hydrolysis of the addition
compound, and (b) the re-arrangement of 2-keto-3:4-dihydroxy-acids or
their esters. Method (a) suffers fromthe disadvantage that it requires osones
as starting materials, and when these are available it is a powerful and certain
method which has been utilized for the preparation of many analogues
of ascorbic acid. Moreover, it was the method employed simultaneously
by Reichstein and by Hirst and myself, in the first synthesis of the d- and
l-isomerides of ascorbic acid. The mechanism of the reaction has been the
subject of detailed investigation and it will be illustrated by reference to the
synthesis of d-gluco-ascorbic acid. The first stage of the synthesis from gluco-
sone (XII) results in the formation of C7H11O6N, a crystalline addition pro-
duct which displays a strong absorption band at 275               The properties
of this substance show that it is not the open-chain cyanohydrin (XIII)
but the cyclic imino-compound (XIV) which exists in aqueous solution as a
neutral internal salt, evidence on this point being obtained from studies of
the optical rotatory dispersion of the substance in neutral and in acid solution
(when the ionisation is suppressed). Similar cyclic bodies have been obtained
in the course of synthesis of other analogues of ascorbic acid and the reaction
appears to be a general one. The intermediate cyclic-imino body (XIV) pos-
sesses many of the characteristic properties of ascorbic acid (e.g. intense




              I

                                    --


428                          1937 W.N.HAWORTH

absorption band, oxidation by iodine in acid solution) and on hydrolysis
by aqueous acid the imino group is removed and gluco-ascorbic acid (XV)
is produced. The latter substance possesses the characteristic ring system of
ascorbic acid, and displays chemical properties (and an absorption spectrum)
closely similar to those of natural ascorbic acid. The synthesis of natural l-
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) proceeds in a similar way from l-xylosone (XVI)
which is obtainable from d-galactose as the outcome of the following series
of transformations : d-galactose     d-galactose--1:2,3:4-diacetone     d-galac-
turonic acid-1:2,3:4-diacetone        d-galacturonic acid      l-galactonic acid
    l-galactonamide l-lyxose        l-xylosazone l-xylosone.




   Several analogues of l-ascorbic acid have also been synthesized by the
above-mentioned method. It may be observed that the nomenclature ad-
opted for convenience of reference derives the name of the substance from
that of the osone used in the synthesis.
   In the preparation of l-ascorbic acid it is advantageous to avoid the use of
l-xylosone which is not easily accessible. By application of the second mode
of synthesis notable advances have been made in the ease of preparation of
synthetic vitamin C. This method was first applied by H. Ohle in the prepa-
ration of d-arabo-ascorbic acid (XVIII) from 2-keto-d-gluconic acid. The
acid, and more particularly the methyl ester (XVI I), undergoes ring closure
and isomerization under a variety of conditions, amongst which the action
of sodium methoxide may be referred to as of special importance, and the
resulting substance possesses the ring system of ascorbic acid. In the case of
natural ascorbic acid the necessary keto-acid is 2-keto-l-gulonic acid (XXII)
which can be readily obtained, as shown by Reichstein, from l-sorbose (XX)
by oxidation of sorbose diacetone (XXI) and subsequent removal of the
acetone residues. l-Sorbose in turn is now available in quantity by the bacte-
rial oxidation of d-sorbitol (XIX).


         STRUCTURE OF CARBOHYDRATES AND VITAMIN C                         429




   A still simpler method for the synthesis of l-ascorbic acid consists, as I
have shown by my experiments, in the direct oxidation of l-sorbose which
like d -fructose, is specially sensitive to oxidation at the primary alcoholic
group at C1. When oxidized under carefully controlled conditions by nitric
acid l-sorbose (XX) is transformed directly into (XXII), and the methyl
ester of (XXII) gives the sodium salt of l-ascorbic acid when treated with
sodium methoxide. In a similar way d -fructose gives rise to 2-keto-d-glu-


430                         1937 W.N.HAWORTH

conic acid, the methyl ester of which yields the sodium salt of d-arabo-as-
corbic acid (XVI II) on treatment with sodium methoxide.
   That the distinguishing feature of ascorbic acid and its analogues, in so
far as absorption spectra and chemical properties are concerned, lies in the
enolic double bond, may be illustrated by reference to the work of H. von
Euler and C. Martius on reductone (hydroxymethylglyoxal, CHO.C(OH)
                      h
= C H O H ) which resembles     ascorbic acid chemically and in its absorption
of light, and is strongly acidic without possessing a carboxyl group (Norrish
and Griffiths).
