                                O . HA S S E L


               Structural aspects of interatomic
                   charge-transfer bonding
                         Nobel Lecture, June 9, 1970


In the nineteenth century convincing experimental proof was collected of
interactions in liquid systems between molecular species generally regarded as
chemically "saturated", leading to more or less stable complexes. In several
cases stoichiometric solid compounds could even be isolated from such mix-
tures. The number of intermolecular complexes more or less extensively
studied during the last two decades mainly employing spectrophotometric
methods is considerable, and it has become possible not only to classify the
different types of complexes, but also to predict and subsequently to prepare
and study new complexes. The understanding of the processes leading to the
formation of intermolecular complexes remained rather incomplete, how-
ever, and about the atomic arrangements in the complexes almost nothing
was known until direct interferometric experiments were carried out.
   The two types of reversibly functioning intermolecular interactions for
which a more precise structural picture was available already before the
second world war were apparently only those leading to the formation of
hydrogen bonding and to "dative covalent bonds" like those formed in the
interaction between amine nitrogen atoms and boron atoms belonging to
boron trihalide molecules. For both reaction categories it was suggested that
an electron transfer from a "donor" to an "acceptor" atom takes place. Quan-
titative experimental work carried out by spectroscopists during the last two
decades has substantiated the belief that the formation of molecular complexes
may generally be attributed to a transfer of negative electrical charge from a
donor molecule (Lewis or Bronsted base) to an acceptor molecule (the Lewis
acid) and it had become natural to classify the process involved as a "charge-
transfer" interaction.
   Among the molecules acting as electron donors those which owe their
donor properties to the presence of atoms possessing one or more "lone pairs"
of electrons - the "n donors" - are of particular significance. Other types of
donor molecules are also known, like unsaturated hydrocarbons, in particular
aromatic hydrocarbons and some of their derivatives, molecules deriving


          INTERATOMIC         CHARGE-TRANSFER          BONDING            315
their donor properties from the presence of comparatively loosely bound
electrons. Molecules exhibiting electron-accepting properties may be of
widely differing nature ranging from aromatic molecules with strongly
electronegative substituents to molecular species containing an atom which
should normally act as an "n donor" but has, in the molecule in question,
acquired a certain positive surplus charge.
   During the later part of the 1940’s the interest in complexes formed by
donor and acceptor molecules was stimulated by quantitative spectroscopic
work dealing first with solutions of iodine in benzene, later with a consider-
able number of liquid systems containing different combinations of donor and
acceptor molecules dissolved in solvents regarded as "inert" with respect to
the interacting species. From the spectroscopic data equilibrium constants and
thermodynamic values associated with the formation of 1:1 complexes were
evaluated. A quantum mechanical theory of the "complex resonance" was
worked out by Mulliken which is of a very general nature and explains spec-
troscopical observations, but has not yet made possible reliable predictions
regarding the atomic arrangements within the complexes.
   Direct interferometric structure determinations in the vapour phase are
regarded virtually impossible in most cases because of the extremely low con-
centration of the complex which may be expected to be present. X-Ray crys-
tallographic structure determinations have made it possible, however, to draw
conclusions regarding atomic arrangements not only in solids, but even in
isolated I : I complexes, conclusions which should be of value for theoretical
workers trying to establish a more elaborate theory of charge-transfer inter-
action.
   Particular importance may be attributed to complexes in which direct
bonding exists between one atom belonging to the donor molecule and an-
other atom belonging to the acceptor molecule. Complexes of this kind are
above all those formed by donor molecules containing atoms possessing "lone
pair electrons" and halogen or halide molecules. A presentation and discussion
of the general results obtained by X-ray analysis of solid adducts exhibiting
charge-transfer bonding between such atoms might therefore be of some
interest.
   First, some of the conclusions drawn before direct structure determinations
had been carried out, deserve to be recalled.

The considerations were based on the assumption that halogen atoms are
directly linked to donor atoms with a bond direction roughly coinciding with


316                           1969 O.HASSEL

the axes of the orbitals of the lone pairs in the non-complexed donor mole-
cule. The oxygen atom of an ether or ketone molecule was supposed to form
bonds with both halogen atoms in an isolated 1 : 1 complex, which would
require the halogen molecule axis to run orthogonal to the COC plane in an
ether complex, and to be situated in the




plane in a ketone complex. In both cases three-membered rings would then
result, containing one oxygen and two halogen atoms. Even in an isolated 1 : 1
complex formed by pyridine both halogen atoms were supposed to be at-
tached to the donor atom, although in different ways: one of them was
expected to be situated in the plane of the pyridine molecule on the axis of the
nitrogen lone pair orbital, the second (supposed to carry a certain negative
surplus charge) outside this plane, under attraction of the (positively charged)
nitrogen atom.
   Early in the 1950’s X-ray crystallographic investigations ofhalogen adducts
were started in Oslo, beginning with the solid 1 : 1 1,4-dioxan-bromine com-
pound. The most striking feature of the resulting crystal structure1, the endless
chains of alternating dioxan and bromine molecules depending on linear
O-Br-Br-O arrangements running in a direction roughly equal to the
"equatorial" direction in cyclohexane (Fig. 1) was rather unexpected. It
proved that both atoms belonging to a particular halogen molecule may
simultaneously be bonded to oxygen atoms, although probably not to the
same oxygen atom The existence of halogen molecule bridging between
donor atoms contradicts previous assumptions according to which a charge-
transfer bond formed by one of the atoms belonging to a particular halogen
molecule creates a marked negative charge on the partner atom.




The oxygen-bromine distance in the dioxan-bromine adduct is 2.7 Å and
thus considerably larger than the sum of the covalent radii of oxygen and
bromine, but at the same time definitively shorter than the sum of the corre-
sponding van der Waals radii. The type of "polymerisation" of simple com-


          INTERATOMIC CHARGE-TRANSFER BONDING                               317
plexes into endless chains observed in the crystalline dioxan-bromine com-
pound has also been observed in the crystalline 1:1 adducts of dioxan and
chlorine, resp. iodine. A comparison between the oxygen-halogen separations
and of the interhalogen bond lengths in the three 1,4- dioxan adducts leads to
the conclusion that the former increases rather slowly from chlorine to iodine,
indicating a certain degree of compensation of the effect of larger halogen
radius by the increase in charge-transfer bond strength. On the other hand,
the halogen-halogen bond length increases, although slowly, from chlorine
to iodine compared with that observed in "free" halogen molecules, an
observation which must also find its explanation in the stronger charge-
transfer interaction between oxygen and halogen.
   In the solid 1:2 iodomonochloride 1,4-dioxan adduct, isolated complexes
are observed in which iodine is bonded to oxygen in a linear oxygen-iod-
ine-chlorine arrangement, again approximately pointing in the direction of
an equatorial bond in cyclohexane. Similar results have been obtained for
halogen complexes formed by 1,4-dithiane and 1,4-diselenane, with the
exception that in diselenane an (axial, bond direction appears to be more
favourable than an equatorial. The increased strength of the charge-transfer
bonding is indicated by a more pronounced lengthening of the halogen-
halogen bond. The fact that no example of halogen molecule "bridging"
between donor atoms has, so far, been observed in dithiane or diselenane
compounds also points to a relatively strong donor-acceptor interaction.
   From the structures of the crystalline adducts of 1,4-dioxan it became clear
that both atoms of a particular halogen molecule are able to form bonds to
donor atoms, although apparently not to the same donor atom. The question
then arose whether or not a particular donor atom may be involved in more
than one bond to halogen. This would appear possible for n donor atoms like
oxygen possessing two lone electron pairs. In the crystal structure of the 1 : 1
acetone-bromine adduct it was actually found that each keto oxygen atom is
linked in a symmetrical way to two neighbouring bromine atoms, thus serving
as a starting point for two bromine molecule bridges, both with a linear
O-Br-Br-O arrangement and with an angle between the two bond direc-
tions of 110º.
   In the case of amine adducts it would not be expected that a nitrogen atom
might be capable of forming more than one single bond to halogen. The cor-
rectness of this anticipation has been borne out by the results of a considerable
number of crystal structure determinations of addition compounds, usually
choosing iodine or an iodine monohalide as the acceptor partner. Here again,


318                            1969 O. HASSEL

 the bond direction corresponds to that expected from simple considerations
 regarding the orbital of the lone electron pair on the amine nitrogen atom in
 the donor molecule. The nitrogen-halogen-halogen arrangement has always
 been found to be nearly linear, the bonds between the nitrogen atom and the
 carbon, resp. the iodine atom are tetrahedrally arranged in the case of aliphatic
 amines, essentially co-planar if the donor molecule is a heteroaromatic amine.
 The strength of the charge-transfer bond may be inferred from the short
 nitrogen-halogen bond distance which is only 2.3 Å in all complexes formed
 by tertiary amines and iodine or iodine monohalides, a value only about
 0.25 Å larger than the sum of the covalent radii of nitrogen and iodine. A
 lengthening of the interhalogen bond by approximately 0.2 Å observed in
 these complexes is therefore not surprising. The fact that halogen molecule
 bridges have never been observed between amino nitrogen atoms also indi-
cates that the nitrogen-halogen bond is rather strong. This does not imply,
however, that such bridges can not be stable between other kinds of nitrogen
atoms. Thus, in the isolated complex containing two molecules of aceto-
nitrile and one bromine molecule such bridges are present, which appears very
natural because nitriles are known from spectroscopical measurements to be
weaker donors than are the amines.
   The only crystal structure of an amine adduct so far investigated in which
a cyanogen halide acts as the acceptor molecule is that formed by pyridine and
cyanogen iodide2. The complex contains a linear arrangement N-I-C=N
which is symmetrically situated in the pyridine plane along the line drawn
between the pyridine nitrogen and the γ -carbon atoms. The N-I bond
distance is larger than 2.3 Å by about one quarter of an Å unit, in agreement
with the spectroscopical finding that cyanogen iodide is a relatively weak
acceptor.
   Only one single addition compound containing alcohol and halogen mole-
cules has been investigated crystallographically, the 2 : 1 methanol-bromine
adducts. Its structure may be, and probably is, characteristic of the type of
structure to be generally expected for alcohol-halogen adducts in that oxygen
atoms are linked together partly by hydrogen bonds, partly by linear O-Br-
Br-O arrangements. Each oxygen atom is actually tetrahedrally surrounded
by a methyl group, two hydrogen bonds and one bromine molecule bridge.
This structure provides us in any case with a striking example of analogy be-
tween intermolecular charge-transfer and hydrogen bonding. Further ex-
amples will be presented below.
   It would appear natural to search for a closer interdependence between in-


           INTERATOMIC         CHARGE-TRANSFER           BONDING             319

teratomic distances (between donor and acceptor atoms and between the two
halogen atoms) and the strength of the charge-transfer bond in crystalline
adducts exhibiting the types of linear arrangements of donor and halogen
atoms described above. This has, however, not turned out to be an easy task.
It is, however, possible to evaluate, withconsiderably success, overall distances
along the linear chains of donor and halogen atoms, either between the donor
atom and the second halogen atom or, in the case of halogen molecule bridges,
the distance between the two donor atoms. This is done by simple summation
of the radii of individual atoms along the chain. Accepted covalent radii of
the donor atoms are used, and for halogen atoms radii related to such atoms
involved in charge-transfer bonds. For the latter the mean values of the
covalent and the Van der Waals radius are chosen. The overall distances thus
computed are generally in acceptable agreement with observed distances
(Table I). Such predictions of overall distances may no doubt be useful when
working out new crystal structures, but considerations which may be expect-
ed to yield informations about the strength of the bond between a halogen
and a donor atom must evidently involve the shortening of this bond and the


 320                                 1969 O.HASSEL

 transfer process. For this reason evaluation of "effective" radii R1 and R2 of the
 centre halogen atom in the two opposite directions, towards the donor and
 towards the second halogen atom, were carried out simply by subtracting the
 covalent radii of the donor atom, resp. the second halogen atom from the
observed distances. In Fig. 2 de values R1 and R 2 are plotted against each
 other for a number of adducts in which iodine is the centre atoma. Points
 representing the individual adducts show a marked tendency to concentrate
 near a straight line descending from the left to the right according to the
 equation:



 Besides the points representing n donor-IX adducts the figure also contains
 points giving cceffectiveu radii of iodine in solids in which trihalide ions are
 present with iodine as the centre atom and linked to two halogen atoms of the
 same kind. Such IX2 ions may be either symmetricator non-symmetrical, in
 the latter the halogen atom closest to the centre atom is believed to carry a
 smaller negative charge than the more distant halogen atom. We assume that
 in the weakest IX complexes like those with oxygen as the donor atom, this
 atom corresponds to the halogen atom carrying the larger negative charge in




       Fig. 2. Plot of "effective" radii R 1 and R2 of iodine in adducts and in trihalide ions.


           INTERATOMIC        CHARGE-TRANSFER            BONDING            321
non-symmetrical trihalide ions. Further, that the nitrogen atom in the strong
IX adducts of tertiary amines takes the place of the other halogen atoms in
trihalide ions which has a smaller negative charge and comes closer to the
centre atom. The points in Fig. 2 representing the weakest complexes are
situated in the upper left part of the diagram, those representing the strongest
complexes bottom right. It appears significant that the point corresponding to
the relatively weak pyridine-cyanogen iodine complex (R1 = 1.42, R2 = 1.88)
is found in the upper middle of the diagram. Theoretically, it is difficult to
assess if the relation between R 1 and R 2 should be expected to be strictly
linear. It might perhaps be more adequately expressed by another curve, e.g. a
hyperbola with an angle almost equal to 180º between its asymptotes, than
by a straight line.
   Turning now to complexes in which halide molecules act as electron ac-
ceptors it should be mentioned that the concept of a halogen atom linked to a
non-halogen atom but still acting as an electron acceptor emerged at a rather
recent date. The conclusion that halides may serve as acceptors in the forma-
tion of addition compounds formed with n donor molecules might have been
drawn decades ago, but the idea was apparently not put forward until 1959 5.
It had in fact been known for some time that 1:3 adducts of iodoform and of
antimony triiodide may exhibit a remarkable (macroscopic) crystallographic
similarity and this was now so interpreted that the bonding between the two
molecular species present in such adducts depended on bonds linking iodine
atoms to n donor atoms. Crystal structure determinations carried out in the
following years fully confirmed this suggestion and showed that the atomic
arrangement within the complexes is such that the arrangement carbon
(antimony)-iodine-n donor atom is linear or at least very nearly so. The
crystal structure of a considerable number of other adducts formed by halo-
genated hydrocarbons and n donor molecules have now been determined with
the result that one may be rather confident about the general principles
governing the atomic arrangements in such adducts. In particular, a nearly
linear arrangement carbon-halogen-donor atom has always been observed.
   In most adducts so far investigated both participants contain more than one
atom capable of taking part in charge-transfer bonds. When each oxygen,
sulphur or selenium atom is linked to only one iodine atom in 1:1 addition
compounds of iodoform with 1,4-dioxan or its analogues, structures ex-
hibiting endless chains of alternating donor and acceptor molecules would be
anticipated. Such chains are actually present in these adducts, chains analogous
to those found in the sulphuric acid-dioxan compound. Figs. 3a and b il-


322                             1969 O. HASSEL




      Fig. 3a . Chains of sulphuric acid and dioxan molecule in the 1:1 adduct.

lustrate the shape of the chains observed in the sulphuric acid-dioxan, resp.
the iodoform-dithiane compound. The similarity between these chains again
affords an example of analogy between hydrogen and charge-transfer bond-
ing.
   The possibility that an oxygen, sulphur or selenium atom may be involved
in two charge-transfer bonds with halogen atoms should always be kept in
mind, however, particularly when the acceptor molecule contains a large
number of halogen atoms. Thus, in the 1:1 diselenane-etraiodoethylene
adduct6 every selenium atom is bonded to two iodine atoms, the bond direc-
tions being roughly equatorial resp.axial and the selenium-iodine bond
lengths almost identical. A "cross-linking" of the chains results, all iodine
atoms are linked to selenium and each selenium atom to two iodine atoms.
   In view of the moderate energies apparently involved in bonding between
halide halogen atoms and n donor atoms it would appear natural to suggest
that the Van der Waals interaction energy between acceptor molecules con-
taining a sufficiently large number of the heaviest halogen species may contrib-
ute substantially to the lattice energy of a solid addition compound. Crystal


           INTERATOMIC         CHARGE-TRANSFER              BONDING            323




       Fig. 3b. Chains of iodoform and dithiane molecules in the 1:1 adduct.

structure determinations of tetrabromo - and tetraiodoethylene and of their
1:1 pyrazine adducts actually give some support to this suggestion. The
mutual arrangement of the halide molecules is virtually identical in the tetra-
halogenoethylene crystals and in the corresponding crystalline addition com-
pounds. The four crystals all belong to the space group          and their unit
cells all contain four molecules which are in the tetrahalogenoethylene crystals
practically identical in shape, but not crystallographically equivalent. The
structures of the 1:1 adduct crystals may formally be derived from those of
the tetrahalide crystal by removing one set of equivalent molecules and re-
placing them by pyrazine molecules. For both adducts this results in the for-
mation of endless chains of alternating donor and acceptor molecules in which
each nitrogen atom is bonded to a halogen atom situated near the plane of the
pyrazine ring with a nearly linear nitrogen-halogen-carbon arrangement and


324                           1969 O.HASSEL

a nitrogen-halogen bond about 3 Å long. In the tetrabromoethylene adduct
these chains are all parallel, in the tetraiodoethylene adduct, however, the
chains are running along two different crystallographic directions7.
   A phenomenon which has not yet apparently been met with great interest,
but should perhaps deserve more attention, is the formation of solid solutions
between donor and acceptor molecules. Until recently, the experimental
facts favouring the suggestion of mixed crystal formation were somewhat
meagre, however, and no attempt of a crystallographic investigation had
apparently been made before an X-ray crystallographic investigation of the
system hexamethylenetetraminine-carbon tetrabromide was carried out8.
These two substances actually form mixed crystals, containing from zero to
about sixty mole per cent of the acceptor partner, which could be examined
in the form of single crystals. The crystals are cubic with an over-structure
depending on the composition, but with a subcell that corresponds to the true
unit cell of the donor component, only slightly decreasing in dimension as the
acceptor concentration increases. The experimental findings seem to prove
that the tendency towards the formation of solid solutions actually depends on
the faculty of the two partners to form nitrogen-bromine charge-transfer
bonds. Accurate thermodynamic measurements of this and of certain related
binary systems would appear to be of considerable interest.
   Solutions containing hexamethylenetetramine and iodoform or bromo-
form do not show any tendency to deposit mixed crystals when the solvent is
evaporated. This may be due to the attraction of the "active" hydrogen atom
towards amino nitrogen. A solid 1:1 hexamethylenetetramine-iodoform ad-
duct has been prepared and its crystal structure determineda. In this crystal
(Fig.4) every acceptor molecule is tetrahedrally linked to four neigh-
bouring donor nitrogen atoms by three I-N bonds (2.94 Å long) and to a
fourth nitrogen atom via the CH hydrogen atom. The C(H)-N distance is
only 3.21 A and the bond appears therefore to be energetically of some
importance. It appears very probable that a 1:1 bromoform adduct of hexa-
methylenetetramine, isostructural with the iodoform adduct, may exist. In
this adduct, the halogen-nitrogen bonds would be expected to be somewhat
weaker, the C-H-N bonds, however, somewhat stronger than in the iodo-
form adduct.
   Crystals having the 1:1 composition have so far not been isolated in the
hexamethylenetetramine-bromoform system, but another compound, a
solid 1 :2 compound has been obtained in the form of crystals suitable for
X-ray examination. It is obvious that in a solid of this composition all CH


           INTERATOMIC         CHARGE-TRANSFER             BONDING             325




Fig. 4. Tetrahedral arrangement of hexamethylenetetramine molecules around an iodo-
                           form molecule in the 1:1 adduct.

groups and all bromine atoms cannot form bonds with nitrogen atoms. This
means that a competition between the two kinds of intermolecular bonds
may take place, the outcome of which may give indications regarding relative
strengths of the bond types. In the crystal structure derived10 from the X-ray
data of the adduct containing hexamethylenetetramine and bromoform mol-
ecules in the proportion 1:2 it is obvious that two of the bromine atoms
belonging to half the number of acceptor molecules form charge-transfer
bonds to nitrogen atoms in neighbouring donor molecules, the other half
none. Each donor molecule is tetrahedrally linked to two bromine atoms and
to two CH-groups all belonging to neighbouring bromoform molecules.
Fig. 5 visualizes the arrangement of bromoform molecules surrounding each
hexamethylenetetramine molecule. These results seem to indicate that the
CH···N bonds are stronger than are the Br··· N bonds between hexamethy-
lenetetramine and bromoform molecules.
   The relative stability of C-H···N bonding indicated by the results of X-ray
investigations of adducts of hexametbyleneretramine and trihalogenometh-
anes make it appear possible to carry out chemical separations via addition
compounds held together by such bonds. It may be suggested for example
that the separation into optically active components of racemic haloform -
HCFClBr - can be achieved via adduct formation with a properly chosen
optically active amine.


326                           1969 O. HASSEL




Fig. 5. Bromoform molecules surrounding each hexamethylenetetramine molecule in
                                 the 2 :1 adduct.

Even in crystals containing only one molecular species intermolecular
bonds between n donors and halogen atoms should be expected in particular
cases. They were searched for in the crystals of carboxylic acid halides where
such bonds between halogen and carbonyl oxygen atoms appeared to be
possible since an earlier investigation had proved that oxgen-halogen bond-
ing actually exists in 1:1 adducts formed by oxalyl chloride, resp. oxalyl
bromide, and 1,4-dioxan. X-Ray investigations of oxalyl chloride and
oxalyl bromide proved that this kind of bonding determines the crystal
structure of the bromine compound but are absent in the chlorine compound.


           INTERATOMIC CHARGE-TRANSFER BONDING                                 327
In the former each oxalyl bromide molecule is linked to its four nearest
neighbours by O··· Br bonds. That the two compounds have quite different
crystal structures is not so surprising as the oxygen-chlorine interaction is
expected to be considerably weaker than that between oxygen and bromine.

                                           I




        Fig. 6. Planar sheets of cyanuric chloride molecules in the crystal.

A particularly interesting example of charge-transfer interaction between
nitrogen and halogen atoms is provided by the structure of solid cyanuric
chloride - the trimeric form of cyanogen chloride. According to available X-
ray data11 the crystals are built up of planar layers of the type shown in Fig. 6,
held together by Van der Waals forces. Within the layers each molecule is
linked to six neighbour molecules by nitrogen-chlorine bonds and the C-
Cl-N arrangement is probably strictly linear. At the time of publication of
this paper no experimental facts about similar charge-transfer bonding were
available, and it is not surprising that the authors failed to interpret their
results by suggesting bonds between nitrogen and chlorine atoms to be pres-
ent.


328                            1969 O. HASSEL

   When n donor atoms like oxygen or nitrogen are involved in hydrogen
bonds the resulting atomic arrangements are usually similar to those observed
in charge-transfer complexes in which the same donor atom is linked to a
halogen atom. It is therefore not surprising that a replacement of chlorine
in cyanuric chloride by hydroxy groups (cyanuric acid) or amino groups
(melamine) leads to crystal structures very similar to that of cyanuric chloride,
the aromatic nitrogen atoms being linked to hydroxy resp. amino groups in
neighbour molecules by hydrogen bonds.
   Complex formation due to charge-transfer interaction between n donor
atoms and halogen atoms belonging to halide molecules does not always result
in bond distances significantly shorter than those expected for Van der Waals
contacts between the two atoms. This may partly be due to the somewhat
"diffuse" character of Van der Waals radii, partly also be explained if the
bond, in the case of very weak charge-transfer interactions, has an inter-
mediate character. The presence of charge-transfer interaction is indicated by
the angle between the halogen-donor atom bond direction and the bond
between the halogen atom and the atom in the acceptor molecule which is
directly linked to it. This angle tends to be about 180º. It is readily recognized
that the charge-transfer contribution to the bond is substantially increased
when a lighter halogen atom is replaced by a heavier one. Thus, the nitrogen-
halogen distance is actually a little shorter in the 1:1 adduct pyrazine-tetra-
iodoethylene than in the corresponding tetrabromoethylene adduct.
   Even in complexes where "active" hydrogen atoms are linked to nitrogen
or oxygen atoms bond distances are difficult to predict accurately, and ob-
served values are often insignificantly shorter than those calculated under the
assumption of a Van der Waals interaction. In such cases arguments in favour
of a weak "hydrogen bond" between donor and acceptor molecule must to
some extent be based on the actual geometry of the complex.

X-Ray investigations of solid adducts in which molecules containing oxygen,
nitrogen, etc. act as donors, molecules containing halogen atoms or "active"
hydrogen atoms as acceptors, have contributed substantially to our present
knowledge about atomic arrangements in certain donor-acceptor complexes.
Previous suggestions based on spectroscopic observations have in some cases
been found incorrect. Simple rules for the arrangements of the bonds (to some
extent even bond lengths) have been formulated. Perhaps most striking, and
certainly not expected, is the farreaching analogy between atomic arrange-
ments in complexes formed by the same category of donors with the two so


           INTERATOMIC          CHARGE-TRANSFER              BONDING    329
different types of acceptors. It may perhaps be suggested that the results
obtained from direct X-ray structure analysis may contribute to the the-
oretical understanding of both categories of donor-acceptor interaction.




 1. O. Hassel and J. Hvoslef, Acta Chem. Scand., 8 (1954) 873.
 2. T. Dahl, O. Hassel and K. Sky, Acta Chem. Scand, 21 (1967) 592
 3. P. Grothand O. Hassel, Acta Chem. Scand., 18 (1964) 402.
 4. O. Hassel and Cbr. Römming, Acta Chem. Scand., 21 (1967) 2659.
 5. O. Hassel, Chem. Soc. (London), Centenary Lecture, May 9th, 1957.
 6. T. Dahl and O. Hassel, Acta Chem. Scand., 19 (1965) 2000.
 7. T. Dahl and O. Hassel, Acta Chem. Scand., 22 (1968) 2851.
 8. T. Dahl and O. Hassel, Acta Chem. Scand., 22 (1965) 372.
 9. T. Dahl and O. Hassel, Acta Chem. Scand., 24 (1970) 377.
10. T. Dahl and O. Hassel, Acta Chem. Scand., 25 (1971) 2168.
11. W. Hoppe, H. U. Lenni and G. Morando, Z. Krist., 108 (1957) 321.
