DISCOVERY OF GREEN FLUORESCENT PROTEIN,
GFP

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2008
by
Osamu Shimomura
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA.




PROLOGUE
I discovered the green fluorescent protein GFP from the jellyfish Aequorea
aequorea in 1961 as a byproduct of the Ca-sensitive photoprotein aequorin
(Shimomura et al., 1962; Johnson et al., 1962), and identified its chro-
mophore in 1979 (Shimomura, 1979). GFP was a beautiful protein but it
remained useless for the next 30 years after the discovery.
   My story begins in 1945, the year the city of Nagasaki was destroyed by
an atomic bomb and World War II ended. At that time I was a 16-year old
high school student, and I was working at a factory about 15 km northeast of
Nagasaki. I watched the B-29 that carried the atomic bomb heading toward
Nagasaki, then soon I was exposed to a blinding bright flash and a strong
pressure wave that were caused by a gigantic explosion. I was lucky to sur-
vive the war. In the mess after the war, however, I could not find any school
to attend. I idled for 2 years, and then I learned that the pharmacy school
of Nagasaki Medical College, which had been completely destroyed by the
atomic bomb, was going to open a temporary campus near my home. I ap-
plied to the pharmacy school and was accepted. Although I didn’t have any
interest in pharmacy, it was the only way that I could have some education.
   After graduating from the pharmacy school, I worked as a teaching assistant
at the same school, which was reorganized as a part of Nagasaki University.
My boss Professor Shungo Yasunaga was a gentle and very kind person. In
1955, when I had worked for four years on the job, he arranged for me a paid
leave of absence for one year, and he sent me to Nagoya University, to study
at the laboratory of Professor Yoshimasa Hirata.


CYPRIDINA LUCIFERIN
The research subject that Professor Hirata gave me was the bioluminescence
of the crustacean ostracod Cypridina hilgendorfii. Cypridina emits blue light
when its luciferin is oxidized in the presence of an enzyme luciferase and
molecular oxygen (Fig. 1). The luciferin had been studied for many years


                                                                          117


at Newton Harvey’s laboratory at Princeton University (Harvey, 1952), but
it had never been completely purified, due to its extreme instability. Prof.
Hirata wanted to determine the structure of the luciferin of Cypridina, and
he asked me to purify the luciferin and to crystallize it, because crystallization
was the only way to confirm the purity of substances at the time.




Figure 1. The ostracod Cypridina hilgendorfii freshly caught, and placed on a dark surface.


Using 500 g of dried Cypridina (about 2.5 kg before drying), I began the
extraction and purification of luciferin in an atmosphere of purified hydro-
gen using a large specially made Soxhlet apparatus (Fig. 2). After 5 days of
day-and-night work, 500 g of dried Cypridina yielded about 2 mg of luciferin
after purification. I tried to crystallize the purified luciferin, but all my efforts
ended up with amorphous precipitates, and any leftover luciferin became
useless by oxidation by the next morning. So I had to repeat the extraction
and purification again and again. I worked very hard, and tried every method
of crystallization that I could think of, without success. Ten months later,
however, I finally found that the luciferin could be crystallized in a highly
unusual solvent (Shimomura et al., 1957). The solvent I found was a high
concentration of hydrochloric acid. Using the crystallized luciferin, we were
able to determine the chemical structures of the luciferin and its oxidation
products (Kishi et al., 1966; Fig. 3). Those data became essential later in the
study of aequorin.




118


Figure 2. The apparatus used for extracting Cypridina luciferin.


In 1959, Professor Frank Johnson invited me to work at his Princeton labo-
ratory owing to my success in Cypridina work. In September 1960, shortly
after my arrival at Princeton, Dr. Johnson asked me if I would be interested
in studying the bioluminescence of the jellyfish Aequorea. I was strongly im-
pressed by his description of the brilliant luminescence and the abundance
of the jellyfish at Friday Harbor in the state of Washington. I agreed to study
the jellyfish.




Figure 3. Crystals of Cypridina luciferin (left), and the chemical structures of Cypridina luci-
ferin and its luminescence reaction product, oxyluciferin (right).


                                                                                           119


THE JELLYFISH AEQUOREA AND THE PHOTOPROTEIN AEQUORIN
Early in the summer of 1961, we traveled from Princeton, NJ, to Friday
Harbor, WA, driving 5,000 kilometers. Friday Harbor was a quiet, peaceful
small village at the time (Fig. 4). The jellyfish were abundant in the water
(Fig. 5). At the University of Washington laboratory there, we carefully
scooped up the jellyfish one by one using a shallow dip net. The light organs
of Aequorea aequorea (Fig. 6) are located along the edge of the umbrella,
which we called a ring. The ring could be cut off with a pair of scissors, elimi-
nating most of the unnecessary body part.




Figure 4. Friday Harbor, 1961. The University of Washington Laboratory is located on the
opposite shore of the bay, at left center in the picture. By 1980, about one third of the bay
in the foreground had been turned into a marina.


At the time, it was a common belief that the light of all bioluminescent or-
ganisms was produced by the reaction of luciferin and luciferase. Therefore,
we tried to extract luciferin and luciferase from the rings of the jellyfish. We
tried every method we could think of, but all our efforts failed. After only a
few days of work, we ran out of ideas.




120


Figure 5. The jellyfish Aequorea aequorea in nature.


I was convinced that the cause of our failure was the luciferin-luciferase hy-
pothesis that dominated our mind. I suggested to Dr. Johnson that we forget
the idea of extracting luciferin and luciferase and, instead, try to extract a
luminescent substance whatever it might be. However, I was unable to con-
vince him. Because of the disagreement on experimental method, I started
to work alone at one side of a table, while, on the other side, Dr. Johnson and
his assistant continued their efforts to extract a luciferin. It was an awkward,
uncomfortable situation.




Figure 6. Top view of a specimen of Aequorea aequorea in daylight at sea (left), and when
stimulated in a darkroom (right).


                                                                                    121


Since the emission of light means the consumption (loss) of active biolumi-
nescent substance, the extraction of bioluminescent substances from light
organs must be performed under a condition that reversibly inhibits the
luminescence reaction. Therefore, I tried to reversibly inhibit luminescence
with various kinds of inhibitors of enzymes and proteins. I tried very hard,
but nothing worked. I spent the next several days soul-searching, trying to
find out something missing in my experiments and in my thought. I thought
day and night. I often took a rowboat out to the middle of the bay to avoid
interference by people. One afternoon, an idea suddenly struck me on the
boat. It was a very simple idea: “Luminescence reaction probably involves a
protein. If so, luminescence might be reversibly inhibited at a certain pH.”
   I immediately went back to the lab and tested the luminescence of light
organs at various pHs. I clearly saw luminescence at pH 7, 6 and 5, but not
at pH 4. I ground the light organs in a pH 4 buffer, and then filtered the
mixture. The cell-free filtrate was nearly dark. But it regained luminescence
when it was neutralized with sodium bicarbonate. The experiment showed
that I could extract the luminescence substance, at least in principle (Fig.
7).




Figure 7. The process that revealed Ca2+ to be the activator of luminescence reaction.


But a big surprise came the next moment. When I threw the extract into a
sink, the inside of the sink lit up with a bright blue flash. The overflow of
an aquarium was flowing into the sink, so I figured out that seawater had
caused the luminescence. Because the composition of seawater is known, I
easily found out that Ca2+ activated the luminescence. The discovery of Ca2+
as the activator suggested that the luminescence material could be extracted
utilizing the Ca-chelator EDTA, and we devised an extraction method of the
luminescent substance (Fig. 8).




122


Figure 8. Procedure for extraction of aequorin and GFP.


During the rest of the summer of 1961, we extracted the luminescent sub-
stance from about 10,000 jellyfish. After returning to Princeton, we purified
the luminescent substance and obtained a few milligrams of purified pro-
tein. The protein emitted blue light in the presence of a trace of Ca2+. We
named the protein aequorin (Shimomura et al., 1962). Aequorin was the first
example of photoproteins discovered (Shimomura, 1985). During the puri-
fication of aequorin, we found another protein that exhibited a bright green
fluorescence. It was only in a trace amount, but we purified this protein too,
and called it “green protein.” The protein was renamed “green fluorescent
protein” by Morin and Hastings (1971).
   We wanted to understand the mechanism of the aequorin bioluminescence
reaction; because it became clear in 1967 that aequorin was highly useful and
important as a calcium probe in biological studies (Ridgway and Ashley,
1967). First, we tried to isolate the light-emitting chromophore of aequorin.
However, there was no way to extract the native chromophore (Shimomura
and Johnson, 1969; Shimomura et al., 1974), because any attempt to extract
the chromophore always resulted in an intramolecular reaction of aequorin
that triggered the emission of light, destroying the original chromophore.
Indeed, the secret of light emission of Aequorea was well protected.
   We nevertheless found that a fluorescent compound was formed when
aequorin was denatured with urea in the presence of 2-mercaptoethanol
(Shimomura and Johnson, 1969). We named this fluorescent compound AF-
350, based on its absorption maximum at 350 nm. We decided to determine
the structure of AF-350. However, to obtain the 1 mg of AF-350 needed for a
single experiment toward the structural study of this compound, about 150 mg
of purified aequorin was needed, and that meant we had to collect and extract
at least 50,000 jellyfish. Considering that we probably would need several mil-
ligrams of AF-350, the structure determination was a huge undertaking for us.

                                                                           123


Figure 9. The jellyfish ring cutting machine constructed by Frank H. Johnson in 1969. A
specimen is placed on the black Plexiglas platform and rotated to spread the edge of the
umbrella. While rotating, the specimen is pushed toward the rotating blade (10-inch meat
cutting blade) to cut off a 2–3 mm wide strip containing the light organs. The strip drops
into a container below.


In processing a large number of jellyfish to obtain a sufficient amount of AF-
350, we found that cutting rings with a pair of scissors was too slow. To speed
up the process, Dr. Johnson constructed a jellyfish cutting machine (Fig. 9),
which enabled one person to cut more than 600 rings per hour, or 10 times
more than by hand.




Figure 10. Left: Jellyfish collectors of the summer of 1974. From left, my wife Akemi, Dr.
Chang, myself, Mrs. Chang, Mrs. Johnson, Dr. Johnson, Debby (a helper). At lower right
are my children, Tsutomu and Sachi. We collected 30–40 bucketfuls of jellyfish each day.
Right: My family collecting jellyfish.

124


We started to collect jellyfish at 6 AM, and a part of our group began to cut
off the rings at 8 AM. We spent all afternoon extracting aequorin from the
rings. Then, we collected more jellyfish in the evening, 7 PM to 9 PM, for the
next day (Figs. 10). Our laboratory looked like a jellyfish factory (Fig. 11),
and was filled with the jellyfish smell.




Figure 11. Scenes of jellyfish cutting by two assistants (left), and the extraction of aequorin
(right).


After five years of hard work, we determined the chemical structure of AF-
350 in 1972 (Shimomura and Johnson, 1972). The result was surprising. The
structure of AF-350 contained the skeleton of a 2-aminopyrazine (Fig. 12)
that was previously found in the oxidation products of Cypridina luciferin,
although the side chains are different. This finding suggested a close re-
lationship between the luminescence systems of Aequorea and Cypridina.
Based on that information, we were able to determine the structure of the
chromophore of aequorin to be coelenterazine (Fig. 12). Eventually we elu-
cidated that the luminescence reaction of aequorin takes place as shown in
Fig. 13.




                                                                                          125


Figure 12. The chemical structures of AF-350 (coelenteramine), coelenteramide (a prod-
uct of luminescence reaction of aequorin) and coelenterazine, compared with those of
Cypridina oxyluciferin and luciferin.




Figure 13. The luminescence and regeneration of aequorin. The photoprotein aequorin
binds with two Ca2+ ions (Shimomura, 1995; Shimomura and Inouye, 1996), and decom-
poses into coelenteramide, CO2 and apoaequorin accompanied by the emission of light
(emission maximum at 465 nm). Apoaequorin can be regenerated into the original aequo-
rin by incubation with coelenterazine in the presence of oxygen.




126


GREEN FLUORESCENT PROTEIN
In a live specimen of Aequorea, the light organs contain GFP in addition to ae-
quorin, and the energy of the blue light produced by the aequorin molecule
is transferred to the GFP molecule, and GFP emits green light (Morise et al.,
1974).




Figure 14. Crystals of GFP (left; photo by Dr. Shinya Inoué), and the process of isolating the
chromophore of GFP (right).


Although GFP is highly visible and easily crystallizable (Fig. 14, left), the
yield of GFP from the jellyfish was extremely low, much lower than that of
aequorin. Therefore, to study GFP, we had to accumulate GFP little by little
for many years while we studied the chemistry of aequorin luminescence.
The amount of GFP we accumulated reached a sufficient amount to study
this protein in 1979. Thus, we tried to find out the nature of the GFP chro-
mophore by a series of experiments, using 100 mg of the protein in one
experiment (Fig. 14, right).
   We first cut the molecule of GFP into small pieces of peptide by enzy-
mic digestion. We isolated and purified the peptide that contained the
chromophore, and then analyzed the structure of the chromophore. I was
surprised when I measured the absorption spectrum of the peptide. The
spectrum was nearly identical to that of a compound that I had synthesized in
my study of Cypridina luciferin 20 years earlier. Based on the spectral resem-
blance and some other properties, I could quickly identify the chromophore
structure of GFP (Shimomura, 1979).
   What I found is illustrated in Fig. 15. Fluorescent proteins are usually
a complex of a protein and a fluorescent compound (as shown at upper
left). However, GFP was a very special fluorescent protein that contained a
fluorescent chromophore within the protein molecule (as shown at upper
right). The lower part of the figure shows further details of GFP. GFP is a
single chain of peptide containing more than 200 amino acid residues. The
chromophore was formed from 3 amino acid residues in the peptide chain,
by dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions. This finding was extremely

                                                                                         127


important because it showed that the chromophore is a part of the peptide
chain, and thus it opened the possibility of cloning GFP. The chromophore
structure was later confirmed by Cody et al. (1993).




Figure 15. The structure of the chromophore in the molecules of GFP.


When I found the chromophore of GFP in 1979, I thought I had done all I
could do with GFP, and decided to terminate my work on GFP in order to
concentrate my efforts in the study of bioluminescence, my lifework. Then a
mysterious thing happened. The population of Aequorea in the Friday Harbor
area drastically decreased after 1990, thus making it practically impossible to
prepare any new samples of natural aequorin or GFP. Fortunately, however,
aequorin had been cloned by Inouye et al. (1985; 1986) and Prasher et al.
(1985), and GFP was cloned by Prasher et al. (1992), thus making the natural
proteins unessential. In 1994, GFP was successfully expressed in living organ-
isms by Chalfie et al., and it was further developed into its present prosperous
state by Roger Tsien.
   Now GFP and its homologues are indispensable in biomedical research,
due to the fact that these proteins self-contain a fluorescent chromophore in
their peptide chains and they can be expressed in living bodies. The identifi-
cation of the fluorescent chromophore, however, depended on the GFP that
had been accumulated for many years in our study of aequorin. Without the
study of aequorin, the chromophore of GFP would have remained unknown
and the flourishing of fluorescent proteins would not have occurred.




128


REFERENCES
Chalfie, M., Tu, Y., Euskirchen, G., Ward, W. W., and Prasher, D. C. (1994), “Green fluores-
      cent protein as a marker for gene expression,” Science 263: 802–805.
Cody, C. W., Prasher, D. C., Westler, W. M., Prendergast, F. G., and Ward, W. W. (1993),
      “Chemical structure of the hexapeptide chromophore of the Aequorea green-fluores-
      cent protein,” Biochemistry 32: 1212–1218.
Harvey, E. N., (1952). Bioluminescene, Academic Press, New York.
Inouye, S., Noguchi, M., Sakaki, Y., Takagi, Y., Miyata, T., Iwanaga, S., Miyata, T., and Tsuji,
      F. I. (1985), “Cloning and sequence analysis of cDNA for the luminescent protein ae-
      quorin,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82: 3154–3158.
Inouye, S., Sakaki, Y., Goto, T., and Tsuji, F. I. (1986), “Expression of apoaequorin comple-
      mentary DNA in Escherichia coli,” Biochemistry 25: 8425–8429.
Kishi, Y., Goto, T., Hirata, Y., Shimomura, O., and Johnson, F. H. (1966), “Cypridina biolumi-
      nescence I: structure of Cypridina luciferin,” Tetrahedron Lett., 3427–3436.
Morin, J. G., and Hastings, J. W. (1971), “Energy transfer in a bioluminescent system,” J. Cell.
      Physiol., 77: 313–318.
Morise, H., Shimomura, O., Johnson, F. H., and Winant, J. (1974), “Intermolecular energy
      transfer in the bioluminescent system of Aequorea,” Biochemistry 13: 2656–2662.
Prasher, D., McCann, R. O., and Cormier, M. J. (1985), “Cloning and expression of the cDNA
      coding for aequorin, a bioluminescent calcium-binding protein,” Biochem. Biophys. Res.
      Commun. 126: 1259–1268.
Prasher, D. C., Eckenrode, V. K., Ward, W. W., Prendergast, F. G., and Cormier, M. J. (1992),
      “Primary structure of the Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein,” Gene 111: 229–
      233.
Ridgway, E. B., and Ashley, C. C. (1967), “Calcium transients in single muscle fibers,” Biochem.
      Biophys. Res. Commun. 29: 229–234.
Shimomura, O. (1979), “Structure of the chromophore of Aequorea green fluorescent pro-
      tein,” FEBS Lett. 104, 220–222.
Shimomura, O. (1985), “Bioluminescence in the sea: photoprotein systems,” Symp. Soc. Exp.
      Biol. 39: 351–372.
Shimomura, O. (1995), “Luminescence of aequorin is triggered by the binding of two cal-
      cium ions,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 211: 359–363.
Shimomura, O., and Eguchi, S. (1960), “Studies on 5-imidazolone. I–II.,” Nippon Kagaku
      Zasshi 81: 1434–1439.
Shimomura, O., and Inouye, S. (1996), “Titration of recombinant aequorin with calcium
      chloride,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 221: 77–81.
Shimomura, O., and Johnson, F. H. (1969), “Properties of the bioluminescent protein ae-
      quorin,” Biochemistry 8: 3991–3997.
Shimomura, O., and Johnson, F. H. (1972), “Structure of the light-emitting moiety of ae-
      quorin,” Biochemistry 11: 1602–1608.
Shimomura, O., and Johnson, F. H. (1978), “Peroxidized coelenterazine, the active group in
      the photoprotein aequorin,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75: 2611–2615.
Shimomura, O., Goto, T., and Hirata, Y. (1957), “Crystalline Cypridina luciferin,” Bull. Chem.
      Soc. Japan 30: 929–933.
Shimomura, O., Johnson, F. H., and Saiga, Y. (1962), “Extraction, purification and properties
      of aequorin, a bioluminescent protein from the luminous hydromedusan, Aequorea,” J.
      Cell. Comp. Physiol. 59: 223–239.
Shimomura, O., Johnson, F. H., and Morise, H. (1974), “Mechanism of the luminescent
      intramolecular reaction of aequorin,” Biochemistry 13: 3278–3286.
Portrait photo of Osamu Shimomura by photographer Ulla Montan.




                                                                                           129
