                            O T T O WA L L A C H

                        Alicyclic compounds
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1910



The extraordinary honour of being allowed to address this illustrious as-
sembly and to express my thanks for the superb recognition bestowed on
my modest work by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, gives me a
feeling of happy pride at having been found worthy of distinction by such a
 distinguished body of men. But I am also deeply moved by another emo-
tion. This place, where Jacob Berzelius once worked is, from the scientific
point of view, a holy land for chemists, where, on entering, one still seems
to sense the presence of this reverence-inspiring immortal genius. Berzelius
sowed the seed, the fruit of which we are reaping now. It is no mere acci-
 dent, but a logical historical evolution that Friedrich Wöhler concluded his
studies here in Stockholm, which enabled him to carry out his pioneering
work on the essential oil of bitter almonds in Göttingen, and that today
Wöhler’s pupil and successor to the professorial chair in Göttingen has been
invited to report on the progress achieved during the recent decades in the
field of "cyclic compounds", among which many components of essential
oils must be counted.
   The chapter of organic chemistry which I shall discuss first, really belongs
to that field which Berzelius had included under the heading of "vegetable
chemistry".
   From a very early age onwards people’s attention had been attracted to
the volatile substances, characterized by strong smells or flavours, which are
among the large variety of substances which form within plants; these were
used partly for therapeutic purposes, but in particular for increasing pleas-
urable sensations by nerve stimulation. Food was flavoured with fragrant
herbs; eminent persons whom one wanted to honour, were anointed with
exquisite oils; the air in places where acts of worship were performed, was
saturated with incense, gum benzoin and myrrh and other scented narcotic
drugs; and even the dead were enveloped in fragrant substances before
burial.
   In consequence of their wide application, spices and seasonings became
important trading articles early in history. Trading caravans and later on the


                          ALICYCLIC COMPOUNDS                               179
proud ships of the maritime nations dominating the seas, brought even in
earliest times to the West and to the northern countries less favoured by Na-
ture, where cinnamon, vanilla, cloves, cardamon and camphor cannot thrive,
these precious aromata, from the blessed fields of the Orient, where even
today there is a strong predilection for high-flavoured spices and heavily
scented substances.
   Initially only the drugs themselves were used, but later people learnt to
extract from the fragrant plants their essential components, the essences, just
as they learnt how to produce spirit of wine from the fruit of the vine, and,
so to speak, present them in a more concentrated form. This is the start of the
history of essential oils.
   This is not the place to discuss the methods by which the volatile vegetable
substances were obtained, whether by simple heating (so-called dry distilla-
tion) or by distillation with steam, or by extraction; neither is it possible to
discuss how each of these methods was gradually improved until the present
degree of perfection was reached, above all by fractionation of the substances
in a vacuum or under reduced air pressure instead of under normal atmos-
pheric pressure; these methods made distillation easier and prevented the
formation of undesirable decomposition products during the process.
   With time the number of known volatile vegetable substances has in-
creased considerably. It has been possible to trace historically back to a very
early age the taxes which were imposed on medicines, spices and similar
substances in German towns. Thus, for instance, one finds that in the year
1500 thirteen, in 1540 thirty-eight and in 1708 already one hundred and
twenty vegetable oils are mentioned. Nowadays their number is many times
larger.
   In vast modern factories engaged in extracting essential oils, of which the
firm Schimmel & Co. in Miltitz near Leipzig is one of the most important,
any kind of plant containing these oils is systematically processed, if ob-
tainable in large enough quantities, and the oils are extracted for a detailed
investigation of their components.
   The scientific study of the components of the vegetable oils, however, has
only been undertaken in modern times. Initially, nobody knew what to do
with them from a chemical point of view. The investigation of the essential
oil of bitter almonds, undertaken jointly, as already mentioned, by Wöhler
and Liebig in 1832 was of epoch-making importance. These famous chemists
proved that bitter almonds contain, besides liquid and non-volatile fatty oil,
an inodorous solid substance, namely amygdalin, which, under the influence


180                             1910 O.WALLACH

of acids or ferments absorbs water and splits into glucose, prussic acid and the
volatile, strong smelling bitter almond oil. From the series of ferments or
enzymes, as called nowadays, which initiate the splitting, one is contained in
the almond itself, namely the emulsin. The smell of bitter almonds becomes
noticeable as the emulsin causes this splitting reaction. Such substances
causing chemical reactions by their mere presence are called catalysts, follow-
ing Berzelius’ proposal. The process itself is called catalysis. In recent times
the catalytic phenomena have again been in the foreground of theoretical
and practical chemical interests. In this connection it is therefore important
to mention briefly the observations made on amygdalin by Wöhler and
Liebig, because these illustrate by which processes volatile, odorous substan-
ces can form from non-volatile, odourless matter in plants. Substances which
have the ability of splitting into more simple volatile ones etc. in the presence
of vegetable ferments, are those with a more complex composition. We
shall refer to this again later on.
   In the first instance we are interested in bitter almond oil itself, this
fragrant main component of an important essential oil.
   The investigation of this substance by Wöhler and Liebig is regarded as
one of the most classic and memorable in chemical science. It showed for the
first time that in organic as well as in inorganic compounds, certain com-
pound radicals could play the part of simple substances. This was, in Berze-
lius’ formulation, the sign of a new dawn breaking with regard to organic
chemistry. And yet, almost another generation had to go by before the dawn
gave way to the full light and the structure of "benxoyl", the chemical radical
contained in bitter almond oil, became quite clear. Only in 1865 did the
ingenious conception of Kekulé find the solution to the up till then mysteri-
ous nature of the "aromatic substances", to which bitter almond oil belongs.
In bitter almond oil, like in a great number of other substances that previ-
ously had been counted among the "aromatic compounds" on behalf of their
strong smell, a derivative of benzene is present. The special properties of
benzene and its derivatives are caused by the typical arrangement of their
carbon atoms. Kekulé demonstrated that the arrangement of the atoms in
the normal organic compounds is chain-like, whereas in benzene and its
derivatives it is in the form of rings. It is precisely the substances appertaining
to the latter group which are distinguished by characteristic smells, particu-
larly those belonging to the aldehydic type of compounds. Bitter almond oil
proved to be nothing other than the simplest aldehyde of the benzene series,
namely benzaldehyde.


                          ALICYCLIC COMPOUNDS                                  181
   Following this, it was not difficult to determine that substances, the struc-
ture of which is quite analogous, can cause the strong odour of vegetable
matter; thus, e.g. cinnamic aldehyde causes the smell of cinnamon oil and
cassia oil. Anisic aldehyde, vanillin, heliotropin are also aldehydes derived
from benzene and occur in the well-known plants to which their names re-
fer. Mention can also be made of substances appertaining to other types of
compounds in the benzene series, which are vital components of strong-
smelling plants. Among these are e.g. coumarin in Asperula odorata (wood-
ruff), some of the phenols, such as thymol from the oil of thyme and in par-
ticular a large number of esters. For instance, it has been known for a long
time that oil of winter green consists mainly of salicylic acid methyl ester.
More recent research has shown that the ester of anthranilic acid, an acid
containing nitrogen (o -aminobenzoic acid, C6H 4(NH 2)C0 2H), plays a role
in some strong-smelling oils.
   But, however important the benzene compounds may have proved to be
for the aromatic nature of many oils, it became apparent that such benzene
derivatives could not be regarded as vital components of numerous other
essential oils. In this connection mention must be made of the turpentine oils
proper, the various oils extracted from the needles of Coniferae, orange-
peel oil, caraway oil (carvone), peppermint oil, eucalyptus oil, fennel oil,
thuja oil, camphor oil, and many others. Initially there was no explanation
available on the nature of the substance occurring in this group of oils.
   It was impossible to define these substances chemically, and the compo-
nents which had been observed were at first divided into two groups accord-
ing to their physical properties.
   Compounds which are liquid like turpentine oil and remain in a liquid
state even at low temperatures, were called "terpenes", and those that were
solid, like camphor were called "camphors" Berzelius had already objected
to the usage of designating all components of essential oils that precipitated
in solid form as camphors, and proposed calling the liquid substances elaeop-
tenes, and the solid ones stearoptenes. In spite of the justified objections raised
 by Berzelius, who considered that the old designations were misleading, as
 many solid precipitations from oils have no connection whatsoever to
camphor, this old distinction between terpenes and camphors has not dis-
 appeared. However, the latter designation was later only retained for oxy-
 genous compounds with identical or similar composition as the ordinary
 camphor; the liquid compounds of such structure were also called camphors.
   Various difficulties were encountered when a start was made on identifying


182                             1910 O.WALLACH

the chemical composition of the oils in question analytically, because in most
cases one was dealing with mixtures of substances, difficult to separate from
each other. However, very soon a characteristic fact became evident, namely
that all important bodies appertaining to this group have 10 carbon atoms.
   In organic chemistry we have learnt to derive from compounds containing
only carbon and hydrogen, i.e. from the hydrocarbons, all other types of
combinations, such as alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, acids, etc. Systematic
scientific research therefore had to start with the terpene hydrocarbons.
These, the terpenes proper, have 16 hydrogen atoms linked with 10 carbon
atoms, therefore the chemical formula is C10H 16.
   Round about the middle of last century eminent French chemists (e.g.
Berthelot and Riban), in particular, had already investigated these hydrocar-
bons. Of great importance in these investigations was the fact discovered by
Biot round about 1816 that turpentine oil, camphor and related compounds
could deflect a polarized beam of light. The direction and intensity of the
deflection appeared to be characteristic properties of optically active bodies.
 Since active terpenes which showed larger or smaller divergences in their
 optical behaviour were found in a great variety of plants, these substances
 of different origins were regarded as being different from each other. Ac-
 cordingly, they were given names derived from the starting material, such
 as terebenthene, camphene, citrene, carvene, cynene, cajeputene, eucalyptene,
 hesperidene and so on. Gradually in this way, a great number of terpene
 hydrocarbons were listed in the literature, and the matter became more and
 more confused and obscure.
    It was improbable from the start that there should be so many different
 hydrocarbons C10H 16 occurring naturally, as had been assumed and it was
 obvious that in many cases the divergences observed in the properties had
 been caused by the presence of impurities. But there were no means avail-
 able for ascertaining this, because not enough chemical characteristics were
 known about either the terpenes or their derivatives.
    It is true that as early as 1803 Kindt has produced a characteristic solid
 compound containing chlorine (the present pinene hydrochloride C10H17Cl)
 when he treated turpentine oil with hydrochloric acid; this compound, on
 account of its smell and the already discussed usage of designating solid pre-
 cipitates from such oils, was simply called "synthetic camphor". A little later
 Thenard produced in the same manner another solid compound (the present
 dipentene dihydrochloride C10H 18C l2) and very much later (1877) Dr. Al-
 bert Atterberg in Uppsala made the important discovery that another, easily


                             ALICYCLIC COMPOUNDS                               183
 crystallizing compound (sylvestrene dihydrochloride) could be obtained
 from certain Swedish oils, and at about the same time Tilden discovered that
 some terpenes combine with nitrosyl chloride to form substances which are
 difficultly soluble. But all knowledge gained by the middle of the 1880’s was
 not adequate to clear up these matters, all the more as the investigations were
 up against another difficulty: namely the fact that the terpenes are extra-
 ordinarily unstable substances. They resinify not only easily by absorbing
 oxygen when exposed to air, but to a certain extent also when stored for
 some time without air. This is manifested by the change in physical proper-
 ties, boiling point, density, and optical behaviour. In particular, these sub-
 stances suffer displacements in the structure of the molecule under the in-
 fluence of chemical reagents without, however, changing their composition;
 isomerizations, as they are called in accordance with Berzelius’ proposal, take
 place and this phenomenon is more pronounced in the terpenes than in any
other previously known substances.
    The premise for any successful investigation therefore was the task of de-
 termining definite and reliable distinguishing characteristics for those ter-
penes which really differ from each other.
    Several useful new observations, among others those on crystallized brom-
ination products of the hydrocarbons, have enabled me, by taking into ac-
 count and further developing the reactions already known, to achieve this
 aim to such a degree that it is now possible to name sufficient distinguishing
characteristics for the various substances within this group. It now became
evident that the number of the known terpene hydrocarbons that differ
from each other from a chemical point of view, is in fact quite small; at the
same time it was possible to separate, facilitated by previous investigations, the
existing modification into clearly defined main groups, according to density,
boiling point and refractive power. After the accurate diagnosis on the pres-
ence of certain compounds had been ensured-even if they only appeared
as a part constituent as in essential oils-it was possible to tackle the next task,
namely the determination of the mutual chemical relations of the oxygenous
and oxygen-free constituents of essential oils.
   By suitably converting hydrocarbons into oxygenous compounds and,
reciprocally, oxygenated substances into hydrocarbons, and by effectuating
the transitions, it was practicable to find the connection between a very large
number of substances occurring in essential oils and appertaining to the
terpene group and to trace the genetic relationship between the various
substances.


184                             1910 O. WALLACH

   It would be hopeless to try and attempt to discuss within the short time
available the long series of experiments that were successfully carried out
with this purpose in mind. I have given a short tabular survey of my experi-
ments on pages 38-51 of my book "Terpene und Campher" (Terpenes and
Camphors).
   Listing only a few examples here, I want to mention that I succeeded in
converting the main component of the ordinary turpentine oil, namely
pinene, C10H 16, into the odiferous constituent of caraway oil, namely car-
vone C10H 14O, and then reconverting this into the isomers of pinene, i.e.
limonene and terpinene. It was possible to convert this same pinene via the
lilac-scented alcohol terpineol to eucalyptole, C10H 18O, the main constit-
uent of worm-seed oil (chenopodium oil) and of the oil from Eucalyptus glo-
hulus, and to convert this in turn to l -limonene, and so on.
   As already mentioned, the main purpose of these investigations was the
attempt to find links between the various known compounds in order to
gain understanding of their mutual relationships; among other factors, re-
duction of an unsaturated compound to one with a higher degree of satura-
tion played an important part. For instance, the following series is known:
C 10H 14O, carvone; C10H 16O dihydrocarvone; C10H 18O tetrahydrocarvone.
It was a simple matter to convert the active carvone C10H14O into dihydro-
carvone by direct addition of hydrogen. The last step, however, to C 10H18O
could not be accomplished directly by the normal chemical reduction meth-
ods. Dihydrocarvone does not continue to absorb nascent hydrogen pro-
duced by a chemical process.
   This aim, therefore, could only be reached in a roundabout way. Dihydro-
carvone was rearranged into an isomeric compound, namely carvenone.
This then absorbed hydrogen and resulted in C10H18O. However, carvenone
is no longer optically active and therefore neither is its reduction product.
So, up to that time it had not been possible to obtain active tetrahydrocar-
vone directly from carvone. I am very happy, however, to be able to tell you
that within the last few weeks I was able to eliminate conclusively this diffi-
culty. I found, quite unexpectedly, that carvone can be reduced directly to
active tetrahydrocarvone by allowing free hydrogen to act on carvone at
normal temperatures and in the presence of colloidal palladium. This process
can also be excellently applied to other compounds of our series, which
otherwise would have been completely unaffected by direct reduction. It
has made Possible for certain cases the realization of transitions which had
previously seemed impossible and represents a definite step forward. It is


                           ALICYCLIC COMPOUNDS                             185
particularly remarkable to note how much more effectively the molecular
hydrogen reacts as compared with the nascent hydrogen, which so far has
been regarded as being of far superior efficacy.
   The investigations on the mutual relationships among the terpene com-
pounds have been profitable in other directions as well.
   As already mentioned, most of the terpenes are optically active substances.
We know that the hypothesis of Le Bel and Van ’t Hoff (1874) was the cor-
rect interpretation of the phenomenon of optical activity and that prior to
this Pasteur had found when mixing equal quantities of laevo-rotatory and
dextro-rotatory modifications of a substance in solution, a new substance
with quite different properties may result. A mixture of laevo-tartaric acid
and dextro-tartaric acid resulted in inactive meso-tartaric acid, the proper-
ties of which are entirely different from those of the active constituents. But
up to the year 1888 this was the only experimentally established example of
racemization , as this phenomenon was called (derived from the name acidum
racemicum for tartaric acid).
   With the discovery of the occurrence of laevo-limonene in the needles of
Pinus sylvestris, whereas so far only dextro-limonene had been known (as is
found e.g. in the orange-peel oil) and with methods of producing well-
crystallized derivatives of limonene at my disposal, I was now in a position
to obtain whole series of racemic compounds from their active constituents;
a secondary result was the discovery that the terpene hydrocarbon dipen-
tene, which so far, on account of the peculiarity of its derivatives had been
regarded as a special terpene, is nothing but inactive limonene.
   The experiences which were gathered in investigating the mutual rela-
tionships between the terpene compounds also assisted in preparing the final
solution of the question which is always the most important and most
interesting one for theoretical chemists, namely what the internal structure
of the molecule, or the constitution, as chemists call it, of this group of
compounds would be.
   All recent experiments had already confirmed the accuracy of an older
assumption, namely that the hydrocarbons C10H 16 occurring naturally, are
related to a benzene hydrocarbon C10H 14, the so-called cymol (isopropyl- p-
methylbenzene):


186                             1910 O.WALLACH




Pinene, camphor and other compounds can be converted by appropriate
chemical processes to cymol or cymol derivatives, e.g. carvacrol:




Kekulé, the brilliant originator of the benzene theory, had already ex-
pressed the opinion that terpenes were partially reduced cymol. He assumed
in the benzene compounds - as shown by our formula - a nucleus of six
carbon atoms, which carry, when cyclically linked, three so-called double
bonds between the carbon atoms. If one then imagines, for example, one of
these double bonds converted into a single bond by the addition of two hy-
drogen atoms, one arrives from C10H 14 at C10H 16, i.e. a substance with
terpene composition. When Kekulé advanced this opinion, the practica-
bility of dissolving bonds in benzene by absorption of hydrogen was only a
hypothesis. The credit for proving by experiments that such an additive
process is really feasible must essentially go to Ad. von Baeyer, who proved
that by doing so, substances could be obtained which have lost their charac-
teristics of benzene compounds, although they still have a ring-like or cyclic
(as it is now usually called) arrangement of atoms, and rather resemble in
their behaviour the ordinary or aliphatic combinations with chain-like pat-
tern of atoms. Later the designation alicyclic was introduced for such com-
pounds (also for other cyclic systems).
   In accordance with this concept therefore the terpenes would appear to be


                         ALICYCLIC COMPOUNDS                               187
a special case of alicyclic compounds, which form by accident - or for rea-
sons which we as yet do not understand-with particular ease in plants.
   In the main this concept has proved to be correct, even if not quite ade-
quate, as we shall now see. It explains, among other things, why terpene
compounds isomerize with such ease (i.e. displace the bonds contained in
them). Unsaturated substances (i.e. in our view those containing carbon
double bonds) can be added to and can absorb e.g. water, acids, etc. by dis-
solving existing bonds. The added components can then, in certain circum-
stances, be split off in directions different from those in which they had been
picked up. Thus we arrive at so-called bond displacements, i.e. isomeriza-
tions.
   The following structural formulae give an example which makes the rela-
tion of phellandrene and terpinenes to cymol clear and explains the isomeriza-
tions which may occur when water is added and split off, respectively.




However, Kekulé’s interpretation could not be used to explain the beha-
viour of some terpenes, in particular that of the most widely used one, which
has been known longest, i. e. pinene, the main constituent of the French,


I88                            1910 O. WALLACH

American and Swedish turpentine oil. The same applies to camphor, which
Kekulé regarded as the ketone of dihydrogenated cymol, something like:




I must confine myself here to the brief statement that it has now been ac-
cepted with certainty that the substances mentioned, and also analogous
ones, have their molecule constructed from two mutually interlaced carbon
rings, in such a way that when one ring dissolves, the double-ring system
again becomes a single one.
   The simplest case of this kind occurs with the so-called diagonal bond in
the molecule. Bredt proved by a series of excellent experimental investiga-
tions that camphor contains two intertwined five-ring compounds. In pinene
a four-membered ring is combined with a six-membered one; thujone com-
bines a three-membered ring with a five-membered one.
   The following formulae will illustrate the prevailing concept and will also
show how, e.g. the double-ring system of pinene can change into a single
ring system by water absorption (conversion of pinene to terpineol) :


                          ALICYCLIC COMPOUNDS                               189
   Credit is principally due to Semmler for having demonstrated that another
quite different group of substances contained in essential oils, and distin-
guished by particular smells, does not belong to the cyclic compounds at all,
but to the category of unsaturated aliphatic compounds. These, however,
have a strong tendency towards ring formation, and therefore towards
conversion to cyclic compounds. One of these substances for instance is
citral, which imparts to the oil of lemons its lemon odour, and geraniol,
which smells of roses.

As soon as chemists have a definite conception of the internal structure of
the molecule of an organic compound, they are able to tackle the task of
producing these substances by artificial methods, i.e. by synthesis, as we call
it. As far as the terpene compounds occurring naturally were concerned,
peculiar difficulties in connection with the synthesis had to be overcome
even after their structure was known; these were mainly connected with the
sensitivity of these substances to chemical reagents. However, even in this
field synthetic preparation had made great progress in recent years. Numer-
ous methods have been made known, first of all for producing alicyclic
compounds of terpene-like character; here the chemist differentiates between
lower or higher homologous terpene compounds, according to whether the
carbon content is smaller or greater than in the natural representatives, which
contain IO carbon atoms. However, also true terpene compounds such as
limonene, lately also sylvestrene, terpineol, menthol, camphor and others,
have been synthesized from their elements. Among the chemists, to whom
great credit is due in this connection, W. H. Perkin Jr. deserves special men-
tion. In any case, one may well say today: there are no more insurmountable
difficulties in this field. Even if many of the problems have not been solved
as yet: the veil has been removed from the mysterious picture of the ter-
penes and camphors and there is now nothing which impedes further rapid
progress!

Distinguished Audience! It is by no means easy to treat simply and briefly
the special subject that I have to discuss, even when addressing specialists, on
account of the difficult material. It is even more arduous to make these mat-
ters clear in the difficult language of organic chemistry to an audience, which,
although so broadly educated, is none the less not expert. I must therefore
beg your great indulgence for the topics I have just been expounding to you
in terms as general as possible. The majority of the distinguished audience


190                            1910 O.WALLACH

will probably find the following easier to understand; I shall now discuss the
 reaction which this progress in our field has had on the development of the
industry, which is engaged in the preparation and practical utilization of the
essential oils and their components.
   Until about 25 years ago, the manufacture of essential oils was purely a
matter of trial and error. The plants which contained odiferous constituents
were simply distilled and the distillate was put on the market. In view of the
lack of knowledge regarding their chemical nature, these products were not
always handled in the right way, and above all, the door was wide open for
adulteration. There was no remedy for this, even if it was carried out with
only moderate skill. A strongly scented oil, like for instance the precious rose
absolute, could easily be greatly diluted by worthless additives and the con-
sumer had no reliable means of checking at his disposal. Now all this has been
changed greatly. Thanks to the clear characterization of the individual com-
ponents of essential oils, we now have available adequate analytical methods,
by which adulterations can be proved and protection given against it. Apart
from the purely chemical methods, investigations relating to the physical
properties of the substances, like boiling point, density, refractive index, ro-
tatory power are of great importance in these tests; all these properties were
determined with the greatest care in the course of the work on the terpene
compounds.
   A further progress is denoted by the fact that the importance of the indivi-
dual components of the essential oils can be correctly assessed on the basis of
the knowledge gained. Previously it was thought that the hydrocarbons
were of special importance for the scent properties of an essential oil. Now
the contrary is known, they are often regarded as useless ballast, which the
plant produces together with the really valuable substances, and a start has
been made on the production of "terpene-free essential oils", which nat-
urally have a much higher commercial value and are more suitable for prac-
tical use.
   The endeavours to determine which constituents really impart the specific
and valuable properties to an essential oil have led to another result important
for the estimation of perfumes. Most of the oils which are valued as scents
are mixtures of substances; only the combined effect of these leads to the
known result. And in this connection the unexpected fact became apparent
that the especially pleasantly scented natural oils not seldom contained a very
small quantity of extremely malodorous substances, which nevertheless in-
fluence the effect of the scent. These are decomposition products of vege-


                            ALICYCLIC COMPOUNDS                               191
table proteins and are closely related to those which are formed by the de-
composition of animal proteins in the digestive process and which give such
a repugnant smell to faeces. One of these substances is indole. This, for exam-
ple, is a characteristic component ofjasmine oil, as was proved by Dr. Albert
Hesse in a brilliant investigation.
   This and similar experiences which could only be achieved by the pro-
gress in scientific investigations, have been in particular applied to good use
by that branch of industry which is engaged in the artificial composition of
scents. The preparation of such artificial mixtures is of quite old standing, the
best known example being Eau de Cologne, which was invented in 1725, and
is a combination of neroli oil and other substances.
   Nowadays, however, artificial flower oils - such as rose-blossom oil, jas-
mine-flower oil, orange-blossom oil - are produced in excellent qualities on a
scientific basis; these are not at all, or only slightly, inferior to the natural
oils, but are not so exorbitantly expensive; an idea of the price of the natural
oils may be given by the calculation that a single kilogramme of essential
violet-blossom oil would cost 80,000 Mark and would require 33,000 kilo-
grammes of blooms.
   The clever utilization for practical purposes of scientific results is the only
cause of a highly flourishing essential-oil industry in Germany, with the re-
sult that this northern country is now an important competitor in the pro-
duction of perfumery to the climatically much more favoured Romanic
countries (especially the South of France).
   The present output of the German essential-oil and artificial-scent industry
is estimated at 40-50 million Marks annually. According to their own infor-
mation, the firm of Schimmel in Miltitz alone have a stock of material of an
average value of 2 million Marks.
   How closely linked this flourishing industry is with the scientific develop-
ment is apparent from the fact that the total chemical industry in Germany,
which, as is well known, has been constantly increasing, has only doubled
its production value in the period from 1550-1895, whereas the essential-oil
industry has quadrupled its output during the same period.
   We may well expect a lot more practical successes in the utilization of the
synthetic methods developed during the last few years. For, as we have seen,
the natural terpene compounds are only a special case in the infinitely large
group of alicyclic compounds. We are now able to prepare substances which
are analogous to the ones that occur naturally and which are distinguished by
their smell, and these will therefore have similar properties, because similarly


192                             1910 O.WALLACH

 constructed molecules usually have a similar effect on our nervous system .
 We can now predict, with certain limitations, that synthetically producible
 compounds with a certain molecular structure will smell of peppermint, or
 camphor, or caraway seed or lilac, etc. As soon as we can wrest from Nature
 the secret of the internal structure of the compounds produced by her, chem-
 ical science can then even surpass Nature by producing compounds as
 variations of the natural ones, which the living cell is unable to construct. In
 such a manner the great progress was partly achieved by the dyestuff indus-
 try, who has now produced compounds of e.g. the indigo and alizarine
 groups, which cannot be found in Nature. In the same way the pharmaceu-
 tical industry is producing compounds which are related to atropine and co-
 caine, which possess the physiological effect of these remedies, but which
 have been usefully modified somewhat for certain purposes.
    Thus, in our field, too, chemical variation will lead to practical results.
    Complete success has already been achieved by the chemical synthesis
 with regard to the already mentioned artificial preparation of ordinary
 camphor; in the past we have had to rely almost entirely on the production
 of the island of Formosa and the goodwill of the Japanese. Even if for various
 reasons the artificial production of this important substance is not an econom-
ic proposition yet, the certainty of having developed methods for the pro-
 duction of synthetic camphor from turpentine oil will prevent the branches
 of industry which need camphor, like the celluloid industry, from having to
 face another emergency as was temporarily experienced during the Russo-
Japanese War.

As soon as science has solved one problem, new ones arise. This is the essence
of science and it applies, of course, also to the field of essential oils.
   In principle we now know what the substances are which are produced by
plants in the form of essential oils; we can also determine their presence by
reliable reactions; we have an idea of their molecular structure, and we
can even produce them artificially - an accomplishment which Berzelius still
thought impossible for all times.
   But behind all this there looms a vast new problem, in comparison to
which the one already solved seems quite small: the problem, what kind of
chemical processes in the plant organism cause the formation of essential
oils. How can we explain their infinite variety?
   One would think that plants belonging to the same genus would always
produce identical or at least similar oils. But this is by no means so.


                           ALICYCLIC COMPOUNDS                               I93
   As an example let us look at the family of the Eucalyptus species, to which
the "fever tree", Eucalyptus globulus, belongs which is planted so extensively
in Italy. This plant contains in its leaves, fruit and other parts eucalyptole or
cineole, which imparts the strong smell and which is an oxygenous com-
pound C10H18O. On the other hand, another species, Eucalyptus amygdalina
produces no eucalyptole, but the terpene C 10H16, i.e. phellandrene, which is
characterized particularly by its inconstancy. Yet another species, Eucalyptus
citriodora contains citronellal, which smells of lemons. Eucalyptus piperita, how-
ever, supplies a peppermint-scented substance.
   Thus, plants botanically closely related form quite different products, and
vice versa, some not related at all, produce sometimes identical substances.
For instance, eucalyptole is produced just as abundantly from a composita,
namely Artemisia cinsae, as from Ecalyptus globulus. Where is the connec-
tion? This can only be found out by a detailed investigation on the manner
in which the essential oils in plants are produced and stored. We already
know that many plants deposit these substances in special oil cells. This ap-
plies, e.g. to the oil in orange peel and orange blossoms. Therefore, these
substances can easily be extracted from the plant parts by distillation with
vapour. But this by no means applies to all cases. The fresh blooms of jasmine
and tuberoses contain only very little oil, and distillation with vapour sup-
plies only very small quantities of unpleasantly smelling substances. Odiferous
 substances, however, continue to develop in these plants, when the blooms
 have been cut and the plant begins to die.
    Therefore, in these cases the valuable aromata are obtained by a quite
 different process as used for the preparation of, say, the orange peel or orange
 blossom oil, namely by the process of the so-called enfleurage. The cut plants
 are enclosed in a so-called "chassis", i.e. cases equipped with sheets of glass
 which have been covered with grease. The volatile substances which continue
 to form during that time are absorbed by the grease and can then be ex-
 tracted from these fragrant pomades.
    The processes which take place during this slow formation of odiferous
substances in plants such as tuberoses, which can be closely watched, remind
 us of the facts which we learnt about the formation of the bitter-almond oil
 from the non-odorous amygdalin. Under the influence of fermentation,
 complex compounds are gradually split by delivering up the volatile constit-
 uents. But to find out what these complex molecules are and under what
 conditions they are formed must be the subject of further investigations.
    We know that the production of essential oil in the plant is connected on


I94                             1910 O. WALLACH

the one hand with its vegetative state, and with the cultivation conditions
and other factors on the other hand. In recent times the French research
scientist Charabot, in particular, has set himself the task of investigating this
subject and these studies will bring us nearer to the solution of the question
which substances should really be regarded as the parent substances for the
production of the terpenes and camphors in plants.

Distinguished Audience! Theoretically and practically we have made great
strides forward within the last quarter of a century in the field of which I
have had the honour of giving you a short survey. But we still see in front of
us a large fertile field which is waiting to be cultivated. The magnanimous
Founder, whose memory we are honouring these days, in accordance with
his high-minded intentions to foster science, wished to give recognition to
scientific work that had been accomplished, but at the same time he wanted
to inspire us to undertake new work. May the work for the further develop-
ment of chemical science, which has its strongest roots in this beautiful,
strong and hard-working country of Sweden, continue to flourish in the
future, for the promotion of culture and the benefit of mankind.
