                               O T T O HAHN


  From the natural transmutations of uranium to its
                   artificial fission
                      Nobel Lecture, December 13, 1946


The year 1946 marked a jubilee in the history of the chemical element, ura-
nium. Fifty years earlier, in the spring of 1896, Henri Becquerel had discov-
ered the remarkable radiation phenomena of this element, which were at
that time grouped together under the name of radioactivity.
   For more than 100 years, uranium, discovered by W. H. Klaproth in 1789,
had had a quiet existence as a somewhat rare but not particularly interesting
element. After its inclusion in the Periodic System by D. Mendeleev and
Lothar Meyer, it was distinguished from all the other elements in one partic-
ular respect: it occupied the highest place in the table of the elements. As
yet, however, that did not have any particular significance.
   We know today that it is just this position of uranium at the highest place
of the then known chemical elements which gives it the important properties
by which it is distinguished from all other elements.
   The echo of Becquerel’s fundamental observations on the radioactivity of
uranium in scientific circles was at first fairly weak. Two years later, how-
ever, they acquired an exceptional importance when the Curies succeeded in
separating from uranium minerals two active substances, polonium and ra-
dium, of which the latter appeared to be several million times stronger than
the same weight of uranium.
   It was only a few years before the first surprising property of this "ra-
diating" substance was explained. The radioactive elements decompose ac-
cording to definite rules into other active elements with different chemical
 and physical properties, simultaneously emitting corpuscular particles, the
    and          The         were characterized by Rutherford as positively
 charged helium nuclei, after it had been shown earlier that the        consist-
 ed of negative elementary particles, the so-called electrons.
    With the hypothesis, suggested by Rutherford and Soddy in 1902, of the
 disintegration of the atoms, the postulate of the indivisibility of chemical
 elements had to be abandoned.
    Parallel with the investigation of the radioactive disintegration processes


52                                1944 O.HAHN

 of uranium, which produce radium, radium emanation, the so-called active
 deposits, and polonium, research was carried out on thorium, at that time
 the second highest element of the Periodic Table. From thorium were ob-
 tained, in an exactly similar manner, strongly active disintegration products:
 radiothorium, mesothorium, thorium X, etc. There was also a third series of
 disintegration products, the actinium series, which however also started from
 uranium.
    By the systematic study of the penetration of α-particles through thin
 layers of material, Rutherford in 1911 was able to propose his model of the
 nuclei of chemical atoms. According to this view, the atoms of the elements
 consist of the positively charged nucleus, representing practically the whole
 mass of the atom, around which move, at a relatively great distance, electrons
 which neutralize the nuclear charge. The charge of the nucleus undoubtedly
 represents the position of the element in the Periodic System.
   The radioactive disintegration reactions are thus nuclear changes which
 are not affected by the usual processes of physics or chemistry.
   We are so certain of the unchangeability of these natural laws of radio-
active breakdown, that from the speed of the changes we can construct a
sort of "geological clock". Actually the final substance which is produced
from uranium by way of these many active intermediate products is stable
lead; from the quantity of the latter formed in the originally pure uranium
mineral, it is possible to calculate the age of the mineral and therefore also of
the geological deposit in which it has crystallized out. The same holds for
thorium, which also produces as final product a kind of lead, although dif-
ferent from the "uranium lead".
   Investigation proceeded further. Again the α-particles of radioactive sub-
stances formed the means for the solution of problems of nuclear physics.
Following Rutherford’s nuclear model, these particles were recognized as
free helium nuclei. With their relatively large mass of 4 (compared with the
small electron mass of about 1/1800) and their initial velocity of up to
15,000 km/set, they formed the bullets with which it might be possible to
blast a way to the nuclei of the atoms, inaccessible to other means. And again
it was the genius Rutherford who made the next discovery, which was to
have extremely important results. In 1919 he was able to show that by
bombardment of nitrogen with the energetic α-particles of radium C, an
α−particle, that is a helium nucleus, was captured by the nitrogen nucleus,
and a hydrogen nucleus - a proton - left the newly formed nucleus.
   The process is represented by the equation:


    TRANSMUTATIONS OF URANIUM TO ARTIFICIAL FISSION                         53



In this equation the lower indices represent the nuclear charges, the upper
ones the nuclear masses (atomic weights). The remaining energy is given up
in the form of kinetic energy to the released proton, which shows that the
latter is derived from the nucleus.
   Here for the first time was an artificial transmutation of atoms, actually a
building-up off atoms, since an oxygen of mass 17 was produced from a
nitrogen of mass 14.
   In the following years a large number of reactions following the same
pattern were discovered. On account of the positive charge of the α-particle
this type of reaction did not succeed in bringing about nuclear transmutations
of the heavy elements, since their high nuclear charge of positive sign repelled
the α-particle sufficiently to prevent its penetration into the nucleus.
   The year 1932 brought further important discoveries: the positron, heavy
hydrogen, and - last but not least - the neutron. The discovery of the neutron
was the result of detective work carried out in three countries. The initial
impulse was given by Bothe and Becker in Germany, who were able to
detect an exceptionally penetrating radiation, believed by them to consist of
γ -rays, on exposing beryllium to α-particles. Then the Joliot-Curies in
France proved that the "γ -rays" which appeared in the experiments of Bothe
and Becker set free hydrogen nuclei (protons) with great energy from hy-
drogen-containing compounds, which is impossible for γ -rays. Finally Chad-
wick in England gave the final explanation of these results: in addition to
γ -rays there occurred uncharged neutral atomic nuclei with a mass of 1,
which he called neutrons. The course of the reaction is:



On the discovery of neutrons, the phenomenon of isotopy, known for a
number of years, could readily be explained. The chemical elements are
composed of protons and neutrons. The number of charged protons deter-
mines the chemical nature of the element: the sum of protons and neutrons
determines the atomic weight. Thus a larger or smaller number of neutrons
does not affect the chemical nature of the element, but merely produces iso-
topic kinds of atoms such as had been known for a long time in the different
isotopes of lead, many mercury isotopes, two of chlorine, etc. Heavy hy-
drogen, discovered in 1932, is similarly an isotope of ordinary hydrogen. It
has in its nucleus both a proton and a neutron, and thus has a mass of 2


54                               1944 O.HAHN

instead of 1. The highest chemical element known at that time, uranium, is
also not a simple element, but contains isotopes of which 238U is the parent
of the radium series and 235U that of the protactinium and actinium series.
   Soon was it seen that neutrons would form projectiles specially suited for
the transmutation of atoms: they have no charge and are thus not repelled
by the positive nuclei of the elements. While however the (α, p) decomposi-
tions of Rutherford - (α, p) is the abbreviated formula for a reaction in which
an α-particle is taken up and a proton split off - nearly always produce stable
kinds of atoms which occur naturally, in the (α, n) changes - the taking up
of an α-particle and emission of a neutron - the Joliot-Curies had observed
an entirely new phenomenon. In 1934 they found that, on irradiation of
certain elements with α-particles, not only neutrons but also positrons, that is
positive electrons, appeared, even after the irradiation with α-particles had
ceased. The emission of positrons fell off in the same way as had already been
observed in the decay of natural radioactive elements. Artificial active el-
ements had been produced. The first elements with which this "artificial"
 activity on irradiation had been observed were boron and aluminium.
   From boron was produced an active nitrogen; from aluminium an active
phosphorus; and in their turn these were transformed into carbon and silicon
 respectively, with emission of positrons, according to the reactions




                        (*indicates a radioactive isotope)

A new and large field for further investigation was hereby opened. At the
same time the experimental possibilities for carrying out nuclear physical
investigations were fundamentally expanded.
   While so far the particles from natural radioactive elements had been the
sole means of producing artificial nuclear reactions, high-voltage installations
- van de Graaff generators and the cyclotron - could now be used in addition.
More and more intensive irradiations could be carried out, and more and
more new reactions could be realized.
   For the time being, however, radium-beryllium mixtures continued to be
used, since they were very convenient, though perhaps not very intensive,
sources of neutrons for further investigations, especially of the newly discov-
ered artificial radioactivity. Such sources of neutrons were prepared by thor-


   TRANSMUTATIONS OF URANIUM TO ARTIFICIAL FISSION                                55

ough mixing of a well-dried, finely-powdered radium salt with the finest
possible beryllium powder, and sealing the mixture into airtight glass or
metal tubes. Uranium itself was only of importance because radium was
obtained from it.
  It was especially the Italian scientist Fermi who first realized the great
importance of neutrons for the production of nuclear reactions: Fermi and
his co-workers irradiated practically all of the elements of the Periodic Sys-
tem with neutrons, and made numerous artificial radioactive elements.
  Generally, the course of the reaction was such that, especially when work-
ing with slow neutrons*, the neutrons were captured by the nucleus. There-
by in many cases an unstable isotope of the irradiated element was produced,
passing into the next higher element with emission of β-rays. This latter was
generally a stable atom occurring among the usual chemical elements, e.g.




Fermi and his co-workers continued their tests through the whole of the Peri-
odic System up to uranium. Here also they discovered many transmutations
produced by neutrons, including some very rapid ones. They proceeded from
the obvious assumption that initially there are produced artificial, active,
short-living uranium isotopes; as these emit β-rays Fermi inferred the produc-
tion of so-called "transuraniums", representatives of the element 93 which
is not known naturally, and possibly even of the still higher element 94.
   Fermi’s proofs were not accepted everywhere. It was pointed out that for
example in the case of the so-called 13-minute element - that detected with
the greatest certainty - the possibility of its being an isotope of element 91,
i.e. protactinium, could not be ruled out**.
   At this point Lise Meitner and I decided to repeat Fermi’s experiments in
order to decide whether the 13-minute element was a protactinium isotope
or not. This decision was taken the more readily since, by the discovery of
protactinium (1917), we were familiar with its chemical properties. More-
* As Fermi first showed, such slow neutrons, of low energy, can be obtained from the
primary high-energy neutrons by passing them through substances with a high content
of hydrogen. The kinetic energy of the neutrons is then transferred to the hydrogen
nuclei in elastic collisions.
* * From another direction (Ida Noddack) the objection was raised that all the elements
of the Periodic System must first be excluded before it was possible to draw the
conclusion that an element 93 had been obtained. This objection was not taken seriously
as it appeared to be in opposition to all physical views of nuclear physics.


56                            1944 O.HAHN

over, a β-radiating isotope of element 91 was well known to us in the form
of uranium Z, discovered by myself, which had the favourable half-life of
6.7 hours, and was available from uranium salts.
   With the help of the "indicator method" we were able to prove without
doubt that the 13-minute element of Fermi was neither a protactinium iso-
tope, nor a uranium, actinium, or thorium. In accordance with the position
of science at the time, Fermi’s assertion should be correct, and the 13-minute
element a representative of the element 93, that is a "transuranium".
   We should point out here that other possibilities did not occur to anyone
at that time. Since the discovery of the neutron and the application of artifi-
cial sources of radiation, a large number of most unusual nuclear reactions
had been discovered; the products were always either isotopes of the irra-
diated substances, or their next, or at most next-but-one, neighbours in the
Periodic System; the possibility of a breakdown of heavy atomic nuclei into
various light ones was considered as completely excluded.
   With the tests on Fermi’s 13-minute element and the checking of other,
rather less certain, results of Fermi, we found (later in co-operation with F.
Strassmann) that the phenomena associated with the irradiation of the
highest element of the Periodic System were much more complicated than
had originally been supposed. Fermi and his co-workers had already, in their
first communication, described two short-life β-radiating kinds of atoms
(half-life 10 sec and 40 sec), which they naturally considered to be artificial
isotopes of uranium produced from the original uranium by the capture of
neutrons. Lise Meitner and I found, in addition, a substance with a half-life
of 23 minutes, which we conclusively identified as an artificial radioactive
uranium isotope. With Fermi’s substances of short life, the isotopy with ura-
nium can only be assumed, but not proved. The 23-minute element occurred
without any other radiation conditions in a so-called "resonance process".
   As the result of many years of work, we (Hahn, Meitner, and Strassmann)
had finally obtained a great number of artificial active kinds of atoms, which
all appeared to be formed directly or indirectly by β-radiation from the
supposed short-living uranium isotopes, and which therefore must all rep-
resent so-called transuraniums - elements higher than uranium.
   According to their chemical behaviour, these could be classified into va-
rious groups, and, since in many cases the gradual production from
 diating parent substances could be directly observed, decay schemes were
drawn up extending to elements 95 and 96. In so far as the work was repeated
by others, the results were always confirmed.


    TRANSMUTATIONS OF URANIUM TO ARTIFICIAL FISSION                           57

   Independently of the transuranium investigations of Hahn, Meitner, and
Strassmann just mentioned, Curie and Savitch described in 1937 and 1938 a
so-called 3.5-hour substance which they had obtained by irradiation of ura-
nium with neutrons, and of which the chemical properties could not readily
be determined. According to Curie and Savitch, the substance appeared to
be a rare earth, but was not actinium; it had more resemblance to lanthanum,
and could only be separated from the latter by "fractional crystallization".
With some hesitation Curie and Savitch decided to include the substance in
the transuranium series, but the possibilities put forward by them appeared
difficult to understand and unsatisfactory.
   As this 3.5-hour element had been included with the transuraniums, I,
together with Strassmann, tried to obtain it. After careful experiments we
arrived at remarkable results, which may be formulated approximately as
follows: "In addition to the transuraniums described by Hahn, Meitner, and
Strassmann, there are produced by two successive                  three artificial,
           radium isotopes with different half-life times, which in their turn
change into artificial β-active actinium isotopes". The conclusion that radium
isotopes had been produced was the only one possible since, according to the
chemical properties, only barium and radium could be considered. Barium
was, according to the physical viewpoint of the time, impossible, and thus
only radium was left.
    The separation of this active group was performed by means of a barium
precipitate; not however in the form of barium sulphate, which with its
large surface strongly adsorbs other elements, but, on the suggestion of
 Strassmann, as barium chloride, which crystallizes very well from concen-
trated hydrochloric acid and which precipitates uncontaminated by other
substances.
    At the same time the production of radium under these conditions of
radiation was very remarkable: α-decompositions had never been observed
with neutrons low in energy, and yet here, as with the transuraniums, a num-
 ber of isotopes appeared simultaneously.
    The experiments were continued in various directions. The preparations
 were, however, always very weak and the α-rays of the most stable of the
new isotopes were so strongly absorbed that thicker layers could only be
 investigated with poor yields of radiation. An attempt was therefore made
 to separate the artificial "radium" as far as possible from the barium added
 as carrier, in order to obtain coatings permitting easier measurement. This
 was done by fractional crystallization using the method of Madame Curie,


58                               1944 O. HAHN

a method with which we had been thoroughly familiar over a number of
years. About 30 years previously I, together with Lise Meitner, had separated
the radium isotope mesothorium from barium by fractional crystallization.
More recently, with the assistance of a number of co-workers, the laws gov-
erning the formation of mixed crystals between radium and barium salts had
been systematically investigated.
    The attempts to separate our artificial "radium isotopes" from barium in
this way were unsuccessful; no enrichment of the "radium" was obtained. It
was natural to ascribe this lack of success to the exceptionally low intensity
of our preparations. It was always a question of merely a few thousands of
atoms, which could only be detected as individual particles by the Geiger-
Müller counter. Such a small number of atoms could be carried away by the
 great excess of inactive barium without any increase or decrease being per-
 ceptible, even if the barium was precipitated in the form of barium chloride,
which precipitates in a very pure form.
    In order to check this, we repeated the same tests with a weak intensity of
 the natural radium isotopes mesothorium and thorium X. These substances
 were freed from every trace of their parent substance and decay products with
 the greatest care and, by systematic dilution, preparations were made which
 were only just detectable with the Geiger-Müller counter. Crystallizations
 were carried out with the chlorides, bromides and chromates, always with
 the corresponding barium salt as carrier.
    The result was, as was to be expected for radium, that mesothorium and
 thorium X were concentrated in the first fractions of the salts named, and in
 fact in quantities such as we should expect from our previous experience.
 This proved that the few atoms of natural radium isotopes also behaved in
 exactly the same manner as strong preparations.
    Finally we proceeded to direct "indicator tests". We mixed the pure nat-
 ural radium isotopes with our artificial "radium" isotopes, also previously
 freed from their decay products, and fractionated the mixture in the same
  way as before. The result was that the natural radium isotopes could be
  separated from barium, but the artificial ones could not.
     We checked the results in still another way. If the artificial alkaline earth
  isotopes were radium, then the decay products produced directly through
  β-emission should consist of actinium: from the element 88 should be pro-
  duced the element 89. If on the other hand it was barium, then lanthanum
  should be formed: from element 56 the next higher element 57. With the
  aid of the pure actinium isotope mesothorium-2 we carried out an "indicator


  TRANSMUTATIONS OF URANIUM TO ARTIFICIAL FISSION                          59

test" by mixing mesothorium-2 with one of the known primary decay prod-
ucts of artificial radium isotopes, and then carrying out the chemical separa-
tion of actinium and lanthanum by the method of Madame Curie. During
the fractionation of lanthanum oxalate with actinium, the latter accumulates
in the final fractions. This actually occurred with the actinium isotope meso-
thorium-2. The decay product of our so-called "radium isotope" however
remained with the lanthanum. The artificial rare earth, which had been con-
sidered to be actinium, was really lanthanum. Thus it was established that the
alkaline earth isotope, which we had believed to be radium, was in fact an
artificial active barium; the lanthanum could have been produced only from
barium and not from radium.
    In order to make quite certain, we carried out a so-called "cycle" with
 barium. The most stable of the active isotopes, now identified as barium, was
 freed from active decay products and other impurities by recrystallization
with inactive barium; one quarter of the total quantity was kept for com-
parison, and three quarters were subjected to the following cycle of barium
 precipitations: Ba-chloride → Ba-succinate → Ba-nitrate → Ba-carbonate →
 Ba-ferrimannite → Ba-chloride. After passing through this series of com-
 pounds, many of which crystallized beautifully, the resulting barium chloride
 and the recrystallized comparison preparation were measured alternately
 using the same counter, with equal weights and equal thicknesses of layers.
 The initial activity and the increase as the result of further formation of the
 active lanthanum were the same for both preparations, within the limits of
 error: the crystallization of so many and such different salts had produced no
 separation of the active barium from the carrier. It could only be concluded
 that the active product and the carrier were chemically identical, that is,
 barium.
    In the first communication on these tests, which "were in opposition to all
 the phenomena observed up to the present in nuclear physics" (January 6th,
  1939), the indicator tests mentioned had not been entirely completed, and
 we had therefore expressed ourselves cautiously. As a second partner in the
 new process we assumed an element with an atomic weight of about 100, as
 in that case the combined atomic weights would be that of uranium, "for
 example 138 + 101 (e.g. element 43) gives 239!"
     After the completion of the measurements in hand, and of the "cycle", the
  possibility of error was still further excluded.
     This completion of the tests and the above-mentioned "cycle" appeared
  in a second communication (February 10th, 1939). This also described the


60                                  1944 O. HAHN

splitting of the element thorium and its confirmation with the aid of indica-
tor tests analogous to those described above. Here also reference was made
to the detection of an inert gas and an alkali metal derived from it; the na-
ture of the gas was recognized, and its separation from uranium accomplished
by means of a current of air passed over the uranium during the irradiation.
An active strontium and an active yttrium were identified in the uranium
itself.
   Immediately after the first publication on the production of barium from
uranium, there appeared as a first communication an article by Lise Meitner
and O. R. Frisch in which the possibility of a breakdown of heavy atomic
nuclei into two lighter ones, with total charges equal to that of the original
nucleus, was explained with the aid of Bohr’s model of the original nucleus.
Meimer and Frisch also estimated the exceptionally high energy output to
be expected from this reaction, from the curve of the mass deficiencies of
the elements in the Periodic Table. The great repulsive energy of the frag-
ments produced by the splitting was first demonstrated experimentally by
Frisch and shortly afterwards by F. Joliot. Meitner and Frisch soon proved
that the active breakdown products, previously considered to be transura-
niums, were in fact not transuraniums but fragments produced by splitting.
They were able to accumulate these by "repulsion" outside the radiated
uranium.
  In quick succession there appeared a whole series of publications from
European and American nuclear physics institutes, confirming and expanding
the tests described.
  Thus the process proceeds in such a way that the nucleus of the uranium
with a charge of 92 is split into two nuclei of moderate size*. If one of these is
barium, which has a nuclear charge of 56, there must be produced at the
same time a krypton with a nuclear charge of 36. Together these nuclei add
up to 92. Both have however, as may easily be seen from the masses of ura-
nium and of the stable isotopes of barium and krypton which occur naturally,
too great a mass, and thus an excess of neutrons. They should therefore pass
over into stable elements with higher nuclear charges, with emission of
rays; and in fact, as our later experiments showed, sometimes achieve stability
by way of a great number of unstable intermediate decay products.
  The highest stable krypton isotope has a mass of 86. In uranium fission
there is produced, among other atoms, an unstable krypton with mass 88.
* The expression "nuclear fission" (Kernspaltung; fission nucléaire) is due to Meitner
and Frisch.


    TRANSMUTATIONS OF URANIUM TO ARTIFICIAL FISSION                             61

Uranium 235 is responsible for the fission induced by thermal neutrons, as
Bohr was the first to see; this fission forms by far the larger part. If there are
no side reactions then the mass of the other fission product belonging to the
krypton 88, that is of the barium, should be 236 - 88 = 148. As the highest
stable barium isotope has a massof 138, the first-mentioned product is not
less than 10 units heavier. Strassmann and myself had already noted, in our
second communication, the possibility that neutrons were set free in the
fission process. That this was in fact the case was first established experimen-
tally by F. Joliot.
   The investigations continued at a rapid pace, both from the physical and
the chemical side. Only a year after the first communication on the produc-
tion of barium from uranium, there appeared in the Reviews of Modern Phys-
ics (U.S.A.) a bibliography on the splitting of heavy nuclei (Nuclear Fission,
by L. A. Turner) in which nearly one hundred publications in this sphere
were mentioned.
   During the Second world War, the very confusing fission reactions were
systematically investigated in the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry
with a view to their chemical disentanglement, and numerous new reactions
 were discovered. Japanese investigators found that, when fast neutrons were
 used, the fission of uranium proceeded more symmetrically than with slow




Table I. Atomic weights of some natural isotopes, and of artificial isotopes produced
             by nuclear fission, if the excess of neutrons is not released.


62                               1944 O.HAHN

ones. At the beginning of 1945 we were able to make a table (Table 3) in
which were collected, as direct or indirect products of uranium fission, 25
different elements, ranging from 35 (bromine) to 59 (praseodymium), in
the form of about 100 active kinds of atoms. The active atoms, believed by
us up to 1939 to be transuraniums, were all fission products and their active
successors, and not elements with atomic number higher than uranium!




        Table 2. Fission products of uranium between elements 35 and 42.

   From the nature of the problem, the physical work proceeded in a dif-
ferent direction. Especially important in this connection was the above-
mentioned investigation of Joliot in which he proved experimentally, in the
spring of 1939, that in the fission process, neutrons appeared in addition to
the (always two) new elements.
   Since by the action of neutrons on uranium, fresh neutrons are liberated,
the latter, if they meet uranium atoms, produce further fissions, in their turn.


   TRANSMUTATIONS OF URANIUM TO ARTIFICIAL FISSION                         63




Table 3. Summary of the fission products of uranium known at the Kaiser Wilhelm
                      Institute for Chemistry by early 1945.
           (s = seconds; m = minutes; h = hours; d = days; a = years)


64                             1944 O. HAHN

If more than one fresh neutron is produced, and the process is so arranged
that all the fresh neutrons strike uranium atoms, then we have a chain of
continuously renewing fission reactions which, like an avalanche started by
a snowball, can attain enormous dimensions. Thereby the practical applica-
tion of atomic energy first came into the range of possibility. S. Flügge, then
attached to the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry, was the first to refer
to this.
   About 10 years ago, Joliot concluded his Nobel Lecture with the following
words : "If, turning to the past, we cast a glance at the progress achieved by
Science at an ever-increasing pace, we are entitled to think that scientists,
building up or shattering elements at will, will be able to bring about trans-
mutations of an explosive type, true chemical chain reactions. If such trans-
mutations do succeed in spreading in matter, the enormous liberation of
usable energy can be imagined. But, unfortunately, if the contagion spreads
to all the elements of our planet, the consequences of unloosing such a cat-
aclysm can only be viewed with apprehension. Astronomers sometimes ob-
serve that a star of medium magnitude increases suddenly in size; a star
invisible to the naked eye may become very brilliant and visible without any
 telescope - the appearance of a Nova. This sudden flaring up of the star is
 perhaps due to transmutations of an explosive character like those which our
 wandering imagination is perceiving now - a process that the investigators
 will no doubt attempt to realize while taking, we hope, the necessary pre-
 cautions!"
    What was ten years ago only a figment of our "wandering imagination",
 has already become to some extent a threatening reality. The energy of
 nuclear physical reactions has been given into men’s hands. Shall it be used
 for the assistance of free scientific thought, for social improvement and the
 betterment of the living conditions of mankind? Or will it be misused to
 destroy what mankind has built up in thousands of years? The answer must
 be given without hesitation, and undoubtedly the scientists of the world will
 strive towards the first alternative.



                                   Postscript

In the preceding paragraphs we have given a general outline of how the
investigation of the natural radioactivity of uranium led to the artificial
splitting of that element. But this does not exhaust the possibilities of ura-


    TRANSMUTATIONS OF URANIUM TO ARTIFICIAL FISSION                      65

nium. Uranium consists mainly of two isotopes with atomic weights 235
and 238. The first is present in the mixture only to the extent of       part;
nevertheless the fission process described above, which is caused with special
violence by "slow" neutrons, is to be ascribed chiefly to its rare isotope. It
has already been mentioned above that Lise Meitner and the present writer
were able to identify, after the irradiation of uranium with neutrons, a sub-
stance having a half-life of 23 minutes as undoubtedly a uranium isotope.
(The short-lived isotopes, thought first by Fermi and later by ourselves to be
artificial uranium isotopes, were actually fission products.) The 23-minute
uranium was produced in a so-called resonance process by neutrons of a
certain velocity. Since this substance emits β-rays, a representative of el-
ement 93, that is an actual transuranium, must be produced. Although we
sought for it, we were unable to detect it in the very weak preparations
which we had at the time. Later it was identified in the United States as a
β-emitter with a half-life of 2.3 days. Thus it has an atomic weight of 239.
Since this true transuranium 93 emits β-rays in turn, it must be concluded
that an element 94, a further transuranium, is formed. This is a relatively
long-living α-emitting substance (half-life 24,000 years). The American sci-
entist Seaborg gave it the name plutonium, calling element 93 neptunium.
A second isotope of element 93 also occurs, it is produced in another way
from uranium 238, namely by a so-called (n, 2n) process with the aid of
neutrons of great energy: one neutron, so to speak, in passing through the
 uranium nucleus knocks out another one. The result is a β-emitting uranium




                        Table 4. Uranium transmutations.


66                               1944 O.HAHN

isotope of mass 237, which thus transforms into a second neptunium isotope
of which the half-life is some millions of years.
     Thus the behaviour of uranium on irradiation with neutrons of different
velocities, both fast and slow, is very complicated (see Table 4). In addition
to the natural splitting process, which continues during the irradiation at a
speed independent of all the other reactions, the following occur:
( 1) Nuclear fission with formation of numerous artificial atoms of all el-
ements between 30 and 64.
(2) Emission of surplus neutrons during this fission process, making a chain
reaction possible.
 (3) The resonance capture of a neutron with a definite energy by uranium
238, with formation of uranium 239, which in its turn is transformed into the
 elements neptunium and plutonium.
 (4) The giving up of a surplus neutron by the 238 U with formation of a
237
    U, which also forms a neptunium isotope.
     As, in process (1), slow (thermal) neutrons mainly attack the rare isotope
235
    U; process (3) is a kind of competitor of process ( 1), since in the resonance
process (3) the neutrons are captured before they have reached thermal veloc-
 ities. It is a matter of experimental technique to prevent this capture as much
 as possible, in order to facilitate the chain reaction. On the other hand, the
 extra neutrons produced in the fission of process (2) give rise to the resonance
 process, and thereby to the formation of plutonium. If this latter element is
 obtained in sufficient quantity by means of a slow controlled chain reaction
 carried out on a large scale (in a so-called "pile"), and is separated from ura-
 nium, then it can also act as carrier of a chain reaction. The same holds for
 pure 235U after it has been separated from the isotope 238, since with 235U the
 resonance process, which interrupts the chain reaction, does not occur.
     Both uranium 235 and plutonium are made in the United States. The
 result was the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
