                                O   TTO   D   IELS



  Description and importance of the aromatic basic
               skeleton of the steroids
                                 Nobel Lecture*


Cholesterol was discovered as long ago as 1789I. Since it was found to be
widely distributed in both the plant and the animal organism, and since it
plays an important part in the latter (being present in blood, brain, liver,
egg yolk, gall-stones, etc.), it is understandable that many chemists and
physiologists should have directed their efforts, especially during the second
half of the 19th century, towards deter mining the composition and structure
of this remarkable and important substance.
   Until the beginning of the 20th century, however, the results of these
researches were but modest, and the hope of discovering the nature of
cholesterol and of its chemical structure had not been realized.
   All that had been established was its composition, C27H46O, and the fact
that the cholesterol molecule contained one double bond and one alcoholic
OH group.
   This was certainly not very much! Nevertheless, on the basis of these
results it had been established that cholesterol was a complex hydroaromatic
system composed of four rings. Until 1900, however, all efforts to explain
this system, e.g. by oxidative modification and by determination of the
character of the cleavage products, had failed.
  Two years later I myself succeeded in making two important observations
on cholesterol. Firstly that with NaOBr it could be transformed fairly
easily into a dicarboxylic acid with very good crystallizing properties and
with the same number of carbon atoms as cholesterol:




From this it was quite clear that this dicarboxylic acid was produced as a
result of the splitting of one of the four rings of the cholesterol.

* Professor Diels intended to deliver his Nobel Lecture during a visit to Stockholm
in May, 1951. He had completed the manuscript of this article but was prevented by
illness from coming to Sweden and delivering the lecture.


260                            1950 O.DIELS

   Secondly, since the dicarboxylic acid no longer contained the OH group
of the cholesterol, it was evident that its formation from cholesterol must
involve the following process:




There followed from this the further important fact that the OH group was
not in a side chain in the cholesterol but was linked to a ring system.
   At about the same time I proved that this OH group was a secondary
alcohol group, for I succeeded - which had until then been attempted in vain
- in converting cholesterol by a very simple method, namely by catalytic
dehydration, into the corresponding ketone: cholestenone:



After these successes I withdrew for the time being from cholesterol research
because, owing to the ever-increasing number of collaborators, I had to
familiarize myself with many other fields of organic chemistry.
   During the next two decades it was primarily Windaus and Wieland who
devoted themselves - and with great success - to research on cholesterol. It
was a satisfaction to me that the two compounds which I had discovered -
the dicarboxylic acid C27H 44O 4 and the cholestenone C27H 44O - played an
important part in these investigations and advanced the research in a not
inconsiderable degree.
   Thus, elucidation of the complex cholesterol molecule proceeded step by
step, until already by 1919, Windaus2 was able to suggest a tentative cho-
lesterol formula (I):




  A few years later, however, Wieland, Schlichting, and Jacobi suggested,
on the basis of the results of their research, a different structural formula:


              AROMATIC BASIC SKELETON OF STEROIDS                           261




which differs from that of Windaus by its two five-membered rings, as well
as in other important respects.
   It will be seen, then, that ideas on the true structure of cholesterol, and
therefore on its formula, were very vague at that time.
   This uncertainty prompted me, remembering my former successes in this
field, to try to "get through" to the aromatic basic skeleton and determine
its character by dehydration of cholesterol.
   I was fully aware, of course, that many unsuccessful attempts to do this
had been made with a great variety of dehydrating agents. The problem,
therefore, was to discover new dehydrating methods with a specific action.
   First, I tried with palladinized charcoal in boiling cholesterol, i.e. at ap-
proximately 400ºC. I had some success here in so far as I actually obtained
an abundant yield of an aromatic hydrocarbon, which could be characterized
satisfactorily as the familiar chrysene:




   However, for the structural formula - and this was the problem - it was
scarcely possible to draw any useful conclusion from this observation, since
at the high dehydration temperature rearrangements to the chrysene, which
is exceptionally stable, are quite possible. Later, however, I was able to prove
that chrysene is directly related to the true basic skeleton of cholesterol.
   In other fields of organic chemistry sulphur had proved to be a very useful
dehydrating agent, but with cholesterol it had been a failure because its
action was too vigorous, and because it entered the molecule by substitu-
tion. Thus, all in all, dehydration of cholesterol with sulphur resulted in an
amorphous mixture of semi-viscous substances which could not be sepa-
rated from one another.


262                              1950 O.DIELS

   Then, fortunately, I hit upon the happy idea of replacing sulphur by sele-
nium, because the action of this element is much more gentle than that of
sulphur, and because it does not have the tendency to enter organic mol-
ecules.
   This new dehydrating agent was an unexpected success.
   By heating melted cholesteryl chloride or cholesterol with selenium pow-
der until evolution of hydrogen selenide had ceased, and by fractionating
the reaction product I obtained, as main product, a large yield of a beauti-
fully crystallized aromatic hydrocarbon with the composition C18H 16 and
melting point 124-125ºC. This hydrocarbon has loomed very large in the
literature on organic chemistry during the past two or three decades.
   Since this wholly unexpected result, obtained by a method - "selenium
dehydration" - which I had recently discovered, aroused much interest
everywhere, it was only natural that, like a great many chemists throughout
the world, I should have attempted to explain the structure of this hydro-
carbon C 18 H 16 , which was obviously the aromatic basic skeleton of cho-
lesterol. Strangely enough, however, the task was by no means easy, despite
the fact that this was an aromatic system.
   And so it was that just before my own investigation had been brought to
a successful and decisive conclusion, Harper, Kon, and Ruzicka3 forestalled
me by establishing the identity of the
which they had produced by synthesis, with the hydrocarbon C 18H16 which
I had obtained by dehydrating cholesterol with selenium.
   Shortly after this I myself again proved the identity of the two products
by converting them into the same tribromide4.
   Subsequently the composition and correctness of the formulation of the
important hydrocarbon C18H 16 was checked and confirmed in many dif-
ferent quarters, and consequently the following structure has been definitely
assigned to it:




The first tangible result of this discovery was the certainty that a structural
formula agreeing with all experimental observations could now be drawn
up for cholesterol:


              AROMATIC BASIC SKELETON OF STEROIDS                          263




   Much more important for science, however, was the fact, which was
gradually emerging, that an intimate connection exists between cholesterol
and a large number of substances of very great importance in the medical,
physiological, and biological fields. Of these we will mention in particular
ergosterol and the other steroids, bile acids, sex hormones, the "heart genins"
(digitoxigenin, gitoxigenin, strophantidin, peristogenin, uzarigenin, etc.) and
the neutral sapogenins.
   The hormones corticosterone and desoxy-corticosterone:




which have very recently been isolated from suprarenal cortex by Kendall
and Reichstein likewise contain the characteristic ring skeleton of
cyclopentenophenanthrene, as well as all the other above-mentioned natural
substances in hydrated form.
   All these compounds and many others can be transformed into the hydro-
carbon C18H 16 with its reliably determined structure of
tenophenanthrene by the method which I discovered for dehydrating cho-
lesterol and which I introduced into science as "selenium dehydration".
   Even the remarkable observation which I described a little earlier on,
namely the formation of chrysene during severe dehydration of cholesterol
with palladinized charcoal, is now explainable, for it is understandable that
                                       (I), which is probably the first sub-
stance to be produced by dehydration:


264                                 1950 O.DIELS




should be transformed into chrysene (II) - which is extremely stable - under
the much more vigorous conditions of dehydration with palladinized char-
coal at raised temperature, and that the process should be accompanied by
ring extension and splitting-off of hydrogen.
   It will rightly be asked: What is the synthetic principle on which this
obviously highly important product of
is built up in nature, and why is it that this particular type which, as founda-
tion of many substances indispensable to life and of extreme physiological
and biological importance, plays such a vital role in the vegetable and animal
kingdoms? However, the time has not yet come when we can give an
answer to questions so fundamental and so important to an understanding
of the workings of Nature. But I am firmly convinced that this problem -
like all others - will eventually be solved.




1. Chevreul, Ann. Chim., 1 (1789) 95.
2. A. Windaus, Nachr. Kgl. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen, (1919) 237; Chem. Ber., 52 (1919) 162.
3. S. H. Harper, G. A. R. Kon, and F. C. J. Ruzicka, J. Chem. Soc, (1934) 124.
4. O. Diels and F. Rickert, Chem. Ber., 68 (1935) 267.
