MY LIFE WITH O3, NOx AND OTHER YZOXs

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1995

by
PAUL CRUTZEN

Max-Planck-Institute for Chemistry, Department of Atmospheric Chemistry,
Mainz, Germany.

             To the generation of Jamie Paul and our future grandchildren, who will
             know so much more and who will celebrate the disappearance of the
             ozone hole. I hope you will not be disappointed with us.



 I was born in Amsterdam on December, 3, 1933, the son of Anna Gurk and
Jozef Crutzen. I have one sister who still lives in Amsterdam with her family.
 My mother’s parents moved to the industrial Ruhr region in Germany from
 East Prussia towards the end of the last century. They were of mixed German
 and Polish origin. In 1929 at the age of 17, my mother moved to Amsterdam
 to work as a housekeeper. There she met my father. He came from Vaals, a
 little town in the southeastern corner of the Netherlands, bordering
 Belgium and Germany and very close to the historical German city of
 Aachen. He died in 1977. He had relatives in the Netherlands, Germany and
 Belgium. Thus, from both parents I inherited a cosmopolitan view of the
 world. My mother, now 84 years old, still lives in Amsterdam, mentally very
 alert, but since a few months ago, wheelchair-bound. Despite having worked
 in several countries outside The Netherlands since 1958, I have remained a
 Dutch citizen.
    In May, 1940, The Netherlands were overrun by the German army. In
 September of the same year I entered elementary school, “de grote school”
 (the big school), as it was popularly called. My six years of elementary school
 largely overlapped with the 2nd World War. Our school class had to move
  between different premises in Amsterdam after the German army had con-
 fiscated our original school building. The last months of the war, between
 the fall of 1944 and Liberation Day on May, 5, 1945, were particularly horri-
 ble. During the cold “hongerwinter” (winter of famine) of 1944-1945, there
 was a severe lack of food and heating fuels. Also water for drinking, cooking
 and washing was available only in limited quantities for a few hours per day,
 causing poor hygienic conditions. Many died of hunger and disease, in-
 cluding several of my schoolmates. Some relief came at the beginning of
 1945 when the Swedish Red Cross dropped food supplies on parachutes
 from airplanes. To welcome them we waved our red, white and blue Dutch
 flags in the streets. I had of course not the slightest idea how important
 Sweden would become later in my life. We only had a few hours of school


190                                Chemistry 1995


 each week, but because of special help from one of the teachers, I was al-
 lowed together with two other schoolmates to continue to the next and final
 class of elementary school; unfortunately, all the others lost a year. More or
 less normal school education only became possible again with the start of the
 new school year in the fall of 1945.
    In 1946, after a successful entrance exam, I entered the “Hogere
 Burgerschool” (HBS), “Higher Citizen School”, a 5 year long middle
 school, which prepared for University entrance. I finished this school in
June, 1951, with natural sciences as my focal subjects. However, we all also
 had to become proficient in 3 foreign languages: French, English and
 German. I got considerable help in learning languages from my parents:
 German from my mother, French from my father. During those years, che-
mistry definitely was not one of my favourite subjects. They were mathema-
 tics and physics, but I also did very well in the three foreign languages.
 During my school years I spent considerable time with a variety of sports:
football, bicycling, and my greatest passion, long distance skating on the
 Dutch canals and lakes. I also played chess, which in the Netherlands is ran-
ked as a “denksport” (thought sport). I read widely about travels in distant
lands, about astronomy, as well as about bridges and tunnels. Unfortunately,
because of a heavy fever, my grades in the final exam of the HBS were not
good enough to qualify for a university study stipend, which was very hard to
 obtain at that time, only 6 years after the end of the 2nd world war and a few
years after the end of colonial war in Indonesia, which had been a large drain
on Dutch resources. As I did not want to be a further financial burden on my
parents for another 4 years or more (my father, a waiter, was often unem-
ployed; my mother worked in the kitchen of a hospital), I chose to attend the
Middelbare Technische School (MTS), middle technical school, now called
 the higher technical school (HTS), to train as a civil engineer. Although the
MTS took 3 years, the second year was a practical year during which I earned
a modest salary, enough to live on for about 2 years. From the summer of
 1954 until February, 1958, with a 21-month interruption for compulsory
military service in The Netherlands, I worked at the Bridge Construction
Bureau of the City of Amsterdam. In the meanwhile, on a vacation trip in
Switzerland, I met a sweet girl, Terttu Soininen, a student of Finnish history
and literature at the University of Helsinki. A few years later I was able to enti-
ce her to marry me. What a great choice I made! She has been the center of
a happy family; without her support, I would never have been able to devote
so much of my time to studies and science. After our marriage in February,
 1958, we settled in Gävle, a little town about 200 km north of Stockholm,
where I had found a job in a building construction bureau. In December of
that same year our daughter Ilona was born. In March, 1964, she got a little
sister, Sylvia. Ilona is a registered nurse, now living in Boulder, Colorado. Her
son Jamie Paul is 12 years old. Sylvia is a ‘marketing assistant in München,
Germany. All were present in Stockholm, Upsala and Gävle during the Nobel
week. We had a happy and unforgettable time.


                                  Paul Crutzen                             191

   All this time I had longed for an academic career. One day, at the begin-
ning of 1958, I saw an advertisement in a Swedish newspaper from the
Department of Meteorology of Stockholm Högskola (from 1961, Stockholm
University) announcing an opening for a computer programmer. Although
I had not the slightest experience in this subject, I applied for the job and
had the great luck to be chosen from among many candidates. On July 1,
1959, we moved to Stockholm and I started with my second profession. At
that time the Meteorology Institute of Stockholm University (MISU) and the
associated International Meteorological Institute (IMI) were at the forefront
of meteorological research and many top researchers worked in Stockholm
for extended periods. Only about a year earlier the founder of the institutes,
Prof. Gustav Rossby, one of the greatest meteorologists ever, had died sud-
denly and was succeeded by Dr. Bert Bolin, another famous meteorologist,
now “retired” as director of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC). At that time Stockholm University housed the fastest com-
puters in the world (BESK and its successor FACIT).
   With the exception of participation in a field campaign in northern
Sweden, led by Dr. Georg Witt to measure the properties of noctilucent
clouds, which appear during summer at about 85 km altitude in the coldest
parts of atmosphere, and some programming work related to this, I was until
about 1966 mainly involved in various meteorological projects, especially help
ing to build and run some of the first numerical (barotropic) weather pre-
diction models. I also programmed a model of a tropical cyclone for a good
friend, Hilding Sundquist, now a professor at MISU. At that time program-
ming was a special art. Advanced general computer languages, such as Algol
or Fortran, had not been developed, so that all programmes had to be writ-
ten in specific machine code. One also had to make sure that all operations
yielded numbers in the range -1 x 1, which meant that one had to scale
all equations to stay within these limits; otherwise the computations would
yield wrong results.
   The great advantage of being at a university department was that I got the
opportunity to follow some of the lecture courses that were offered at the
university. By 1963 I could thus fulfill the requirement for the filosofie kan-
didat (corresponding to a Master of Science) degree, combining the subjects
mathematics, mathematical statistics, and meteorology. Unfortunately; I
could include neither physics nor chemistry in my formal education, becau-
se this would have required my participation in time consuming laboratory
exercises. In this way I became a pure theoretician. I have, however, always
felt close to experimental work, which I have strongly supported during my
later years as director of research at the National Center of Atmospheric
Research (NCAR) in Boulder, Colorado (1977-1980) and at the Max-Planck-
Institute for Chemistry in Mainz, Germany (since 1980).
    Being employed at the meteorological research institute, it was quite natu-
ral to take a meteorological topic for my filosofie licentiat thesis (compara-
ble to a Ph.D. thesis). Building on my earlier experience further develop-


192                              Chemistry 1995


ment of a numerical model of a tropical cyclone had been proposed to me.
However, around 1965 I was given the task of helping a scientist from the
U.S. to develop a numerical model of the oxygen allotrope distribution in
the stratosphere, mesosphere and lower thermosphere. This project got me
highly interested in the photochemistry of atmospheric ozone and I started
an intensive study of the scientific literature. This gave me an understanding
of the status of scientific knowledge about stratospheric chemistry by the lat-
ter half of the 1960’s, thus setting the “initial conditions” for my scientific
career. Instead of the initially proposed research project, I preferred re-
search on stratospheric chemistry, which was generously accepted. At that time
the main topics of research at the Meteorological Institute at the University
of Stockholm were dynamics, cloud physics, the carbon cycle, studies of the
chemical composition of rainwater, and especially the “acid rain” problem
which was largely “discovered” at MISU through the work of Svante Oden
and Erik Eriksson. Several researchers at MISU, among them Prof. Bolin and
my good friend and fellow student Henning Rodhe, now Professor in
Chemical Meteorology at MISU, got heavily involved in the issue which drew
considerable political interest at the first United Nation Conference on the
Environment in Stockholm in 1972 (1). However, I wanted to do pure science
related to natural processes and therefore I picked stratospheric ozone as my
subject, without the slightest anticipation of what lay ahead. In this choice of
research topic I was left totally free. I can not overstate how I value the gene-
rosity and confidence which were conveyed to me by my supervisors Prof.
Georg Witt, an expert on the aeronomy of the upper atmosphere, and the
head of MISU Prof. Bert Bolin. They were always extremely helpful and
showed great interest in the progress of my research.




STRATOSPHERIC OZONE CHEMISTRY

As early as 1930 the famous British scientist Sydney Chapman [2] had pro-
posed that the formation of “odd oxygen”, O X = O + O3, is due to photoly-
sis of 02 by solar radiation at wavelengths shorter than 240 nm

R 1 : O2 +                       2 O
Rapid reactions, R2 and R3, next lead to the establishment of a steady state
relationship between the concentrations of O and O 3




without affecting the concentration of odd oxygen. Destruction of odd oxy-
gen, counteracting its production by reaction R1, occurs via the reaction


                                               Paul Crutzen                                             193


Until about the middle of the 1960’s it was generally believed that reactions
R1-R4 sufficed to explain the ozone concentration distribution in the stra-
tosphere. However, by the mid 1960’s, especially following a study by Benson
and Axworthy (3), it became clear that reaction R4 is much too slow to balan-
ce the production of “odd oxygen” by reaction R1 (see Figure 1). In 1950
David Bates and Marcel Nicolet (4), together with Sydney Chapman the
great pioneers of upper atmospheric photochemistry research, proposed




Figure 1: Ozone production and destruction rates, including absolute and relative contributions by the
Chapman reaction R4 (DO), NOx catalysis R11 + R12 (D N ), NO X catalysis R5 + R6 (D H ) and ClO X catalysis
R21 t R22 (D Cl ) x . (120). The calculations neglect the heterogeneous halogen activation which become very
important below 25 km under cold conditions.


194                             Chemistry 1995


that catalytic reactions involving OH and HO2 radicals could counterbal-
ance the production of odd oxygen in the mesosphere and thermosphere.
Building on their work and on laboratory studies conducted by one of the
1967 Nobel Prize Laureates in Chemistry, Prof. R. Norrish of Cambridge
University and his coworkers (5, 6), the ozone destruction reaction pair (R5,
R6) involving OH and HO2 radicals as catalysts were postulated by Hampson
(7) and incorporated in an atmospheric chemical model by Hunt (8):




The proposed primary source for the OH radicals was photolysis of O3 by
solar ultraviolet radiation of wavelengths shorter than about 320 nm, leading
to electronically excited O(1D) atoms,




a small fraction of which reacts with water vapour




Most O( 1D) reacts with O2 and N 2 to rapidly reproduce O 3 , leading to a
null cycle with no effect on ozone or odd oxygen




In the absence of laboratory measurements for the rate constants of reac-
tions R5 and R6, and in order for these reactions to counterbalance the pro-
duction of odd oxygen by reaction R1, Hunt adopted the rate constants




In my filosofie licentiat thesis of 1968 I analyzed the proposal by Hampson
and Hunt and concluded that the rate constants for reactions R5 and R6
which they had chosen could not explain the vertical distribution of ozone
in the photochemically dominated stratosphere above 25 km. Furthermore,
I pointed out (9) that the above choice of rate constants would also lead to
unrealistically rapid loss of ozone (on a timescale of only a few days) in the
troposphere. Anticipating a possible role of OH in tropospheric chemistry,
in the same study I also briefly mentioned the potential importance of a reac-
tion between OH with CH4. We now know that reactions R5 and R6 proceed
about 25 and 10 times slower, respectively, than postulated by Hunt and


                                   Paul Crutzen                              195


Hampson and that the CH4 oxidation cycle plays a very large role in tropo-
spheric chemistry, a topic to which we will return.
    Regarding stratospheric ozone chemistry, I discarded the theory of
Hampson and Hunt and concluded: “... at least part of the solution of the
problem of the ozone distribution might be the introduction of photoche-
 mical processes other than those treated here. The influence of nitrogen
 compounds on the photochemistry of the ozone layer should be investigated “.
    Unfortunately no measurements of stratospheric NO x (NO and NO2)
were available to confirm my thoughts about their potential role in stratos-
 pheric chemistry. By the summer of 1969 I had joined the Department of
Atmospheric Physics at the Clarendon Laboratory of Oxford University as a
 postdoctoral fellow of the European Space Research Organization and stayed
 there for a two year period. The head of the research group, Dr. (now Sir)
John Houghton, hearing of my idea on the potential role of NO x , handed
 me a solar spectrum, taken on board a balloon by Dr. David Murcray and
 coworkers of the University of Denver, and indicated to me that it might reve-
 al the presence of HNO3 (10). After some analysis I could derive the approx-
 imate amounts of stratospheric HNO3, including a rough idea of its vertical
 distributions. I did not get the opportunity to write up the result, because at
 about the same time, Rhine et al (11) published a paper, showing a vertical
 H N O3 column density of 2.8 x 10 -4 a t m . c m    7.6 x 1015 molecules cm -2 )
 above 18.8 km. With this information I knew that NOx should also be pre-
 sent in the stratosphere as a result of the reactions,




This gave me enough confidence to submit my paper (12) on catalytic ozone
destruction by NO and NO2, based on the simple catalytic set of reactions:




The net result of reactions R11 and R12 is equivalent to the direct reaction
R4. However, the rate of the net reaction can be greatly enhanced by relati-
vely small quantities of NO x on the order of a few nanomole/mole (or
ppbv). I also included a calculation of the vertical distribution of strato-
spheric HNO3. As the source of stratospheric NOx, I initially accepted the pro-
posal by Bates and Hays (13) that about 20% of the photolysis of N2O would
yield N and NO. Subsequent work showed that this reaction does not take
place. However, it was soon shown that NO could also be formed to a lesser
extent, but still in significant quantities, via the oxidation of nitrous oxide
(N2O )


196                              Chemistry 1995




(14-16). It was further shown by Davis et al. (17) that reaction R12 proceeds
about 3.5 times faster than I had originally assumed based on earlier labora-
tory work. Later it was also shown that earlier estimates of O3 production by
reactions R1 and R2 had been too large due to overestimations of both the
absorption cross sections of molecular oxygen (18) and solar intensities in
the ozone producing 200-240 nm wavelength region (19, 20). As a result of
these developments it became clear that enough NO is produced via reaction
R13 to make reactions R11 and R12 the most important ozone loss reactions
in the stratosphere in the altitude region between about 25 and 45 km.
    N 2O is a natural product of microbiological processes in soils and waters.
A number of anthropogenic activities, such as the application of nitrogen fer-
tilizers in agriculture, also lead to significant N 2O emissions. The rate of
increase in atmospheric N 2O concentrations for the past decades has been
about 0.3% per year (21). That, however, was not known in 1971. The disco-
very of the indirect role of a primarily biospheric product on the chemistry
of the ozone layer has greatly stimulated interest in bringing biologists and
atmospheric scientists together. Other examples of such biosphere-strato-
sphere interactions are CH 4 and OCS.


MAN’S IMPACT ON STRATOSPHERIC OZONE

In the fall of 1970, still in Oxford, I obtained a preprint of a MIT sponsored
Study on Critical Environmental Problems (SCEP) which was held in July of
that year (22). This report also considered the potential impact of the intro-
duction of large stratospheric fleets of supersonic aircraft (U.S.: Boeing;
Britain/France: Concorde; Soviet Union: Tupolev) and gave me the first
quantitative information on the stratospheric inputs of NO x which would
result from these operations. By comparing these with the production of
NOx by reaction R13, I realized immediately that we could be faced with a
severe global environmental problem. Although the paper in which I pro-
posed the important catalytic role of NOx on ozone destruction had already
been published in April, 1970, clearly the participants in the study confe-
rence had not taken any note of it, since they concluded “The direct role of
CO, CO 2, NO, NO2, SO2, and hydrocarbons in altering the heat budget is
small. It is also unlikely that their involvement in ozone photochemistry is as
significant as water vapour”. I was quite upset by that statement. Somewhere
in the margin of this text I wrote “Idiots”.
   After it became quite clear to me that I had stumbled on a hot topic, I
decided to extend my 1970 study by treating in much more detail the che-
mistry of the oxides of nitrogen (NO, NO 2, NO 3, N2O 4, N2O 5), hydrogen
(OH, HO 2), and HNO3, partially building on a literature review by Nicolet
(23). I soon got into big difficulties. In the first place, adopting Nicolet’s
reaction scheme I calculated high concentrations of N2O 4, a problem which


                                    Paul Crutzen                               197


I could soon resolve when I realized that this compound is thermally un-
stable, a fact which was not considered by Nicolet. A greater headache was
caused by the supposedly gas phase reactions




and




for which the only laboratory studies available at that time had yielded rat-
her high rate coefficients: k14 = 1.7 x                                and k 1 5 =
= 1.7 -17 x                        at room temperatures. A combination of reactions
R14 and R15 with these rate constants would provide a very large source of
OH radicals, about a thousand times larger than supplied by reaction R8, lea-
ding to prohibitively rapid catalytic ozone loss. This was a terribly nervous
period for me. At that time no critical reviews and recommendations of rate
coefficients were available. With no formal background in chemistry, I basi-
cally had to compile and comprehend much of the needed chemistry by
myself from the available publications, although I profited greatly from dis-
cussions with colleagues at the University of Oxford, especially Dr. Richard
Wayne of the Physical Chemistry Laboratory, a former student of Prof. R.
Norrish in Cambridge. I discussed all these difficulties and produced exten-
sive model calculations on the vertical distributions of trace gases in the
                              system in a paper which was submitted by the end of
1970 to the Journal of Geophysical Research (received January 13, 1971) and
which, after revision, was finally published in the October 20 issue of 1971
(15). The publication of this paper was much delayed because of an exten-
ded mail strike in Britain. Because of the major problems I had encountered,
I did not make any calculations of ozone depletions, but instead drew atten-
tion to the potential seriousness of the problem by stating “An artificial
increase of the mixing ratio of the oxides of nitrogen in the stratosphere by
about 1 x 10-8 may lead to observable changes in the atmospheric ozone
level” and further in the text “It is estimated that global nitrogen oxide mix-
ing ratios may increase by almost 10-8 from a fleet of 500 SSTs in the strato-
sphere. Larger increases, up to 7 x 10-8, are possible in regions of high traffic
densities . . . . Clearly, serious decreases in the total atmospheric ozone level
and changes in the vertical distributions of ozone, at least in certain regions,
can result from such an activity...”


THE SUPERSONIC TRANSPORT CONTROVERSY IN THE U.S.

Unknown to me, a debate on the potential environmental impact of super-
sonic stratospheric transport (SST) had erupted in the U.S. Initially the con-
cern was mainly enhanced catalytic ozone destruction by OH and HO2 radi-


198                              Chemistry 1995


 cals resulting from the release of H2O in the engine exhausts (24). By mid-
 March, 1971, a workshop was organized in Boulder, Colorado, by an Advisory
 Board of the Department of Commerce, to which Prof. Harold Johnston of
 the University of California, Berkeley, was invited. As an expert in laboratory
 kinetics and reaction mechanisms of NO x compounds (e.g. 25-27), he
 immediately realized that the role of NO x in reducing stratospheric ozone
 had been grossly underestimated. Very quickly (submission 14 April, revision
 14 June) on August 6, 1971, his paper appeared in Science (27) with the title
 “Reduction of Stratosperic Ozone by Nitrogen Oxide Catalysts from
 Supersonic Transport Exhaust”. In the abstract of this paper Johnston stated
  "... oxides of nitrogen from SST exhaust pose a much greater threat to the
 ozone layer than does the increase in water. The projected increase in stra-
 tospheric oxides of nitrogen could reduce the ozone shield by about a factor
 of 2, thus permitting the harsh radiation below 300 nanometers to permea-
 te the lower atmosphere”. During the summer of 1971, I received a preprint
 of Johnston’s study via a representative of British Aerospace, one of the
 Concorde manufacturers. This was the first time I had heard of Harold
Johnston, for whom I quickly developed a great respect both as a scientist
 and a human being. Although I had expressed myself rather modestly about
 the potential impact of stratospheric NOx emissions from SST’s, for the rea-
 sons given above, I fully agreed with Prof. Johnston on the potential severe
 consequences for stratospheric ozone and I was really happy to have support
 for my own ideas from such an eminent scientist. For a thorough resume of
 the controversies between scientists and industry, and between meteorolo-
 gists and chemists, recurring themes also in later years, I refer to Johnston’s
 article “Atmospheric Ozone” (28). It should also be mentioned here that
 Prof. Johnston’s publications in the early 1970’s removed several of the
 major reaction kinetic problems which I had encountered in my 1971 study
 (15). It was shown, for instance, that neither reaction R14 nor R15 occur to
 a significant degree in the gas phase, and that the earlier laboratory studies
 had been strongly influenced by reactions on the walls of the reaction vessels
 (29), an advice which was earlier also given to me in a private communica-
 tion by Prof. Sydney Benson of the University of Southern California.
     In July, 1971, I returned to the University of Stockholm and devoted myself
 mainly to studies concerning the impact of NOx releases from SST’s on stra-
 tospheric ozone. In May, 1973, I submitted my inaugural dissertation “On
 the Photochemistry of Ozone in the Stratosphere and Troposphere and
 Pollution of the Stratosphere by High-Flying Aircraft” to the Faculty of
 Natural Sciences and was awarded the degree of Doctor of Philosophy with
 the highest possible distinction, the third time this had ever happened
 during the history of Stockholm University (and earlier Stockholm
 “Högskola”). This was one of the last occasions in which the classical and rat-
 her solemn “Filosofie Doktor”, similar to the Habilitation in Germany and
 France, was awarded. I had to dress up just like during the Nobel
 Ceremonies. First and second “opponents” were Dr. John Houghton and Dr.


                                             Paul Crutzen                                            199


Richard Wayne of the University of Oxford, who wore their college gowns for
the occasion. Dr. Wayne also served as a most capable, not obligatory, third
opponent, whose task it was to make a fool of the candidate. Unfortunately,
the classical doctoral degree has been abolished (I was one of the last ones
to go through the procedure). The modern Swedish Filosofie Doktor degree
corresponds more closely to the former Filosofie Licential degree.
   In large part as a result of the proposal by Johnston (27) that NOx emis-
sions from SST’s could severely harm the ozone layer, major research pro-
grams were started, the Climate Impact Assessment Program (CLAP), orga-
nized by the U.S. Department of Transportation (30), and the
COVOS/COMESA (31, 32) program, jointly sponsored by France and Great
Britain (the producers of the Concorde Aircraft). The aim of these programs
was to study the chemical and meteorological processes that determine the
abundance and distribution of ozone in the stratosphere, about which so litt-
le was known that the stratosphere was sometimes dubbed the “ignorosphe-
re”. The outcome of the CIAP study was summarized in a publication by the
U.S. National Academy of Sciences in 1975 (33). “We recommend that natio-
nal and international regulatory authorities be alerted to the existence of
potentially serious problems arising from growth of future fleets of strato-
spheric airlines, both subsonic and supersonic. The most clearly established
problem is a potential reduction of ozone in the stratosphere, leading to an
increase in biologically harmful ultraviolet light at ground level”.
   The proposed large fleets of SST’s never materialized, largely for econo-
mic reasons; only a few Concordes are currently in operation. The CLAP and
COVOS/COMESA research program, however, greatly enhanced knowledge
about stratospheric chemistry. They confirmed the catalytic role of NOx in
stratospheric ozone chemistry. A convincing example of this was provided by
a major solar proton event which occurred in August, 1972 and during
which, within a few hours, large quantities of NO, comparable to the normal
NO x content, were produced at high geomagnetic latitudes (>               as
shown in Figure 2. With such a large input of NO, a clear depletion of stra-
tospheric ozone was expected (34), a hypothesis which was confirmed by




Figure 2: Production of NO at high geomagnetic latitudes during the solar proton event of 1972 for two
assumptions about the electronic states of the N atoms formed (P N = 0, or 1). Also shown are the average
NO x concentrations for these locations.


200                                         Chemistry 1995


analysis of satellite observations (35). Figure 3 shows results of the calculated
and observed ozone depletions, the former obtained with a model which
also considered chlorine chemistry (36).
      Although I had started my scientific career with the ambition to do basic
research related to natural processes, the experiences of the early 1970’s had
made it utterly clear to me that human activities had grown so much that
they could compete and interfere with natural processes. Since then this has
been an important factor in my research efforts. Already by the end of 1971
I wrote in an article published in the “The Future of Science Year Book” of
the USSR in 1972:
“. . . the upper atmosphere is an important part of our environment. Let us
finish by expressing a sincere hope that in the future environmental dangers
                                                                       I        I




Figure 3: Observed and calculated percentage ozone depletions resulting from the 1972 solar proton event.
The various calculated curves correspond to assumed values of parameters that were not well known.


                                     Paul Crutzen                               201


of new technological development will be recognizable at an early stage. The
proposed supersonic air transport is an example of a potential threat to the
environment by future human activities. Other serious problems will cer-
tainly arise in the increasingly complicated world of tomorrow”.


Tropospheric Ozone

 My first thoughts on tropospheric ozone photochemistry go back to 1968, as
 discussed briefly above (9). However, in the following 3 years, my research
was largely devoted to stratospheric ozone chemistry. Then in 1971 a very
 important paper with the title “Normal Atmosphere: Large Radical and
 Formaldehyde Concentrations Predicted” was published by Hiram Levy III,
 then of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge,
 Massachusetts (37). Levy proposed that OH radicals could also be produced
 in the troposphere by the action of solar ultraviolet radiation on ozone
 (Reaction R8), and that they are responsible for the oxidation of CH 4 a n d
 CO, an idea which was also quickly adopted by Jack McConnell, Michael
 McElroy and Steve Wofsy (38) of Harvard University. The recognition of the
 important role of OH was a major step forward in our understanding of
 atmospheric chemistry. Despite very low atmospheric concentrations, cur-
 rently estimated at 10 6 m o l e c u l e s / c m 3, corresponding to a mean tropos-
 pheric volume mixing ratio of 4 x 10 -14 (39), it is this ultraminor constitu-
ent - and not the 1 0 13 times
                         .      more abundant O2 - which is responsible for the
 oxidation of almost all compounds that are emitted into the atmosphere by
 natural processes and anthropogenic activities. The lifetimes of most atmo-
 spheric gases are, therefore, largely determined by the concentrations of OH
 and the corresponding reaction coefficients (40) (see Table 1). Those gases

Table 1: Schematic representation of importance of OH radicals in atmo-
spheric chemistry.


202                             Chemistry 1995


that do not react with OH have very long atmospheric residence times and
are largely destroyed in the stratosphere. Examples of the latter class of
compounds are N 2O, and several fully halogenated, industrial organic
compounds, such as CFCl 3, CF2C l2, and CCl4. These play a major role in
stratospheric ozone chemistry, an issue to which we will return.
   Following Levy’s paper my attention returned strongly to tropospheric
chemistry. Starting with a presentation at the 1972 International Ozone
Symposium in Davos, Switzerland, I proposed that in situ chemical processes
could produce or destroy ozone in quantities larger than the estimated
downward flux of ozone from the stratosphere to the troposphere (41, 42).
Destruction of ozone occurs via reactions R7 + R8 and R5 + R6. Ozone pro-
duction takes place in environments containing sufficient NOx, via




The catalytic role of NO in atmospheric chemistry is, therefore, twofold. At
altitudes above about 25 km, where O atom concentrations are high, ozone
destruction by reactions R11 + R12 dominates over ozone production
by reactions R16 + R17 + R2. The latter chain of reactions is at the base
of all photochemical ozone formation in the troposphere, including that
taking place during photochemical smog episodes, originally discovered
in southern California, as discussed by Johnston (28). Such reactions can,
however, also take place in background air with ubiquitous CO and CH 4
serving as fuels: in the case of CO oxidation




This reaction chain requires the presence of sufficient concentrations of NO.
At low NO volume mixing ratios, below about 10 pmole/mole (p = pico = 10 -12),
oxidation of CO may lead to ozone destruction since the HO2 radical then
reacts mostly with O3:


                                   Paul Crutzen                               203


In a similar way, the oxidation of CH4 in the presence of sufficient NOx will
lead to tropospheric ozone production.




My talk at the International Ozone Symposium was not well received by some
members of the scientific establishment of that time. However, in the follow-
ing years, the idea gradually received increased support. In particular, Bill
Chameides and Jim Walker (43), then of Yale University, took it up and went
as far as proposing that even the diurnal variation of lower tropospheric
ozone could be explained largely by in situ photochemical processes.
Although I did not agree with their hypothesis (CH4 and CO oxidation rates
are just not rapid enough), it was good to note that my idea was being taken
seriously. (I should immediately add that especially Bill Chameides in subse-
quent years added much to our knowledge of tropospheric ozone). A couple
of years later, together with two of my finest students, Jack Fishman and
Susan Solomon, we presented observational evidence for a strong in situ tro-
pospheric ozone chemistry (44, 45). Laboratory measurements by Howard
and Evenson (46) next showed that reaction R16 proceeded about 40 times
faster than determined earlier, strongly promoting ozone production and
increased OH concentrations with major consequences for tropospheric and
stratospheric chemistry (47). A consequence of faster rate of this reaction is
a reduction in the estimated ozone depletions by stratospheric aircraft as the
ozone production reactions R16 + R17 + R2 are favoured over the destruc-
tion reaction R6. Furthermore, a faster reaction R16 leeds to enhanced OH
concentrations and thus a faster conversion of reactive NOx to far less reac-
tive HNO 3. Table 2 summarizes a recent ozone budget calculated with a

Table 2: Tropospheric ozone budgets, globally and for the northern (NH)
and southern (SH) hemisphere in 10 13 m o l e / y e a r . O n l y C H 4 a n d C O
oxidation cycles were considered. Calculations were made with the latest
version of the global, three-dimensional MOGUNTIA model (48).


204                                           Chemistry 1995


three-dimensional chemistry transport model of the troposphere. The
results clearly show the dominance of in situ tropospheric ozone production
and destruction. With the same model, estimates were also made of the pre-
sent and pre-industrial ozone concentration distributions. The calculations,
shown in Figures 4 and 5, indicate a clear increase in tropospheric ozone




Figure 4: Calculated zonal average ozone volume mixing ratios in units of nanomole/mole (or ppbv) for the
pre-industrial era (nano = 10 ) for different months.
                              -9




Figure 5: Same as figure 4, but for mid-1980’s.



concentrations over the past centuries (48). In Figure 6 we also show the
meridional cross sections of zonal average ozone, as compiled by Jack
Fishman (unpublished data).
   With the same model we have also calculated the OH concentration dis-
tributions for pre-industrial and present conditions. Since pre-industrial
times, CH4 volume mixing ratios in the atmosphere has increased (49) from


                                                Paul Crutzen                                        205




                                                                                              100




Figure 7: Calculated zonal and 24-hour average OH concentrations in units of 10 5 molecules/cm3 for the
pre-industrial period for January, April, July and October.


206                              Chemistry 1995




centrations, both for the pre-industrial and industrial periods. They indicate:
a) strong maxima of OH concentrations in the tropics, largely due to high
   intensities of ultraviolet radiation as a consequence of a minimum vertical
   ozone column. Consequently the atmospheric oxidation efficiency is
   strongly determined by tropical processes. For instance, most CH4 a n d
   CO is removed from the atmosphere by reaction with OH in the tropics.
b) the possibility of a significant decline in OH concentrations from pre-
   industrial to industrial conditions.
   The results presented in Figure 8 are of great importance, as they allow
   estimations of the sink of atmospheric CH4 by reaction with OH. Prior to
   the discovery of the fundamental role of the OH radical (37), estimates of
   the sources and sinks of trace gases were largely based on guess work with-
   out a sound scientific basis. As shown in Table 3, this recognition has led
   to very large changes in the budget estimates of CH 4 a n d C O .
   “Authoritative” estimates of the CH 4 budget of 1968 (no reference will
   be given) gave much higher values for CH 4 releases from natural wet-
   lands. With such a dominance of natural sources, it would have been
   impossible to explain the annual increase in atmospheric CH 4 concen-
   trations by almost 1% per year. Early estimates of CO sources, on the
   other hand, were much too low.

The dominance of OH concentrations and the high biological productivity
in the tropics clearly points at the great importance of the tropics and sub-
tropics in atmospheric chemistry. Despite this fact, research on low latitude
chemistry is much neglected, such that we do not even have satisfactory sta-
tistics on the ozone distribution in this part of the world. Tropical chemistry
is a topic which has played and will continue to play a large role in my re-
search. Contrary to what was commonly believed prior to the early 1980’s, the
chemical composition of the tropical and subtropical atmosphere is substan-


                                                Paul Crutzen                                              207


Table 3: Estimated budgets of important atmospheric trace gases made in
1968 and at present.
DMS denotes dimethylsulfide




tially affected by human activities, in particular biomass burning which takes
place during the dry season. The high temporal and spatial variability of
ozone in the tropics is shown in figure 9. Highest ozone concentrations are

                                                                                      200




                                                                                      800
                                                                                      900
                                                                                      000


Figure 9: Variability of ozone profiles in the tropics, including contrast between dry and wet season, and con-
tinents versus marine soundings.


208                               Chemistry 1995


observed over the polluted regions of the continents during the dry season,
lowest values in the clean air over the Pacific. I will return to the topic of tro-
pical tropospheric ozone, but will first review the stormy developments in
stratospheric ozone depletion by halogen compounds that started in 1974.


POLLUTION OF THE STRATOSPHERE BY ClO x




This reaction sequence is very similar to the catalytic NOx cycle R11 + R12
introduced before. The study by Stolarski and Cicerone, first presented at a
conference in Kyoto, Japan, in the fall of 1973, mainly considered volcanic
injections as a potential source of ClX (their initial interest in chlorine
chemistry was, however, concerned with the impact of the exhaust of solid
rocket fuels of the space shuttle). Two other conference papers (51, 52),
also dealt with ClOx chemistry. All three papers struggled, however, with the
problem of a missing chlorine source in the stratosphere (research over the
past 20 years has shown that the volcanic source is rather insignificant).
   In the fall of 1973 and early 1974 I spent some time looking for potential
anthropogenic sources of chlorine in the stratosphere. Initially my main
interest was with DDT and other pesticides. Then by the beginning of 1974
I read a paper by James Lovelock and coworkers (53) who reported atmo-
spheric measurements of CFCl3 (50 picomole/mole) and CC14 (71
pmole/mole) over the Atlantic. (Such measurements had been made pos-
sible by Lovelock’s invention of the electron capture detector for gas chroma-
tographic analysis, a major advance in the environmental sciences).
Lovelock’s paper gave me the first estimates of the industrial production
rates of CF2C l2 and CFCl 3. It also stated that these compounds “are unusu-
ally stable chemically and only slightly soluble in water and might therefore
persist and accumulate in the atmosphere ... The presence of these com-
pounds constitutes no conceivable hazard”. This statement had just aroused
my curiosity about the fate of these compounds in the atmosphere when a
preprint of a paper by M.J. Molina, and F.S. Rowland with the title
“Stratospheric Sink for Chlorofluoromethanes - Chlorine Atom Catalyzed
Destruction of Ozone” was sent to me by the authors. I knew immediately
that this was a very important paper and decided to mention it briefly during


                                  Paul Crutzen                              209


a presentation on stratospheric ozone to which I had been invited by the
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm. What I did not know was
that the press was likewise invited to the lecture. To my great surprise, within
a few days, an article appeared in the Swedish newspaper “Svenska
Dagbladet”. This article quickly attracted wide international attention and
soon I was visited by representatives of the German chemical company
Hoechst and also by Professor Rowland, who at that time was spending a sab-
batical year at the Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna. This was the first time I
had heard of Molina or Rowland, which is not surprising as they had not
been active in studies on the chemistry of the atmosphere. Needless to say, I
remained highly interested in the topic and by September, 1974, about 2
months after the publication of Molina’s and Rowland’s paper (54) I pre-
sented a model analysis of the potential ozone depletion resulting from con-
tinued use of the chlorofluorocarbons (CFC’s) (55) which indicated the pos-
sibility of up to about 40% ozone depletion near 40 km altitude as a result of
continued use of these compounds at 1974 rates. Almost simultaneously,
Cicerone et al. (56) published a paper in which they predicted that by
1985-1990, continued use of CFCs at early 1970’s levels could lead to ClOx
catalyzed ozone destruction of a similar magnitude as the natural sinks of
ozone. Following Molina’s and Rowland’s proposal, research on stratos-
pheric chemistry further intensified, now with the emphasis on chlorine
compounds.
   By the summer of 1974, together with my family, I moved to Boulder,
Colorado, where I assumed two halftime positions, one as a consultant at the
Aeronomy Laboratory of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), the other at the Upper Atmosphere Project of the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). The NOAA group,
which under the able direction of Dr. Eldon Ferguson had become the world
leading group in the area of laboratory studies of ion-molecule reactions,
had just decided to direct their considerable experimental skills to studies of
stratospheric chemistry. My task was to guide them in that direction. I still
feel proud to have been part of a most remarkable transformation. Together
with Eldon Ferguson, scientists like Dan Albritton, Art Schmeltekopf, Fred
Fehsenfeld, Paul Goldan, Carl Howard, George Reid, John Noxon, and
Dieter Kley rapidly made major contributions to stratospheric research,
including such activities as air sampling with balloon borne evacuated cans,
so-called “salad bowls” for later gas-chromatographic analysis, optical mea-
surements of the vertical abundances and distributions of NO 2 and NO 3
(later expanded by Susan Solomon to BrO and OClO), the design and ope-
ration of an instrument to measure extremely low water vapour mixing
ratios, and laboratory simulations of important, but previously poorly known
rate coefficients of important reactions. In later years the NOAA group also
devoted itself to studies of tropospheric chemistry, reaching a prominent
position in this research area as well. At NCAR the emphasis was more on
infrared spectrographic measurements by John Gille and Bill Mankin, work


210                                Chemistry 1995


which also developed into satellite-borne experiments. Another prominent
activity was the analysis of the vertical distributions of less reactive gases, such
a s C H4, H2O, N 2O , and the CFC’s, employing the cryogenic sampling tech-
nique which had been pioneered by Ed Martell and Dieter Ehhalt.
   In 1977, I took up the directorship of the Air Quality Division of NCAR,
my first partially administrative position. I continued, however, my scientific
work, something which many thought would be impossible. Fortunately, in
Nelder Medrud I had a highly competent administrative officer. In my posi-
tion as director I promoted work on both stratospheric and tropospheric
chemistry. My own research was mostly devoted to the development of pho-
tochemical models, conducted mostly with my students Jack Fishman, Susan
Solomon and Bob Chatfield. Together with Pat Zimmerman we started stu-
dies on atmosphere-biosphere interactions, especially the release of hydro-
carbons from vegetation and pollutant emissions due to biomass burning in
the tropics. I also tried to strengthen interactions between atmospheric che-
mists and meteorologists to improve the interpretation of the chemical mea-
surements obtained during various field campaigns. To get this interdiscipli-
nary research going was a challenge, particularly in those days.
   During this period, as part of various US and international activities, much
of my research remained centered on the issue of anthropogenic, chlorine-
catalyzed ozone destruction. However, because I am sure that this topic will
be covered extensively by my two fellow recipients of this year’s Nobel Prize,
I would like to make a jump to the year 1985, when Joe Farman and his col-
leagues (57) of the British Antarctic Survey published their remarkable set
of October total ozone column measurements from the Halley Bay station,
showing a rapid depletion on the average by more than 3% per year, starting
from the latter half of the 1970’s. Although their explanation (ClOx/ N Ox
interactions) was wrong, Farman et al. (57) correctly suspected a connection
with the continued increase in stratospheric chlorine (nowadays more than
5 times higher than natural levels). Their display of the downward trend of
ozone, matching the upward trend of the chlorfluorocarbons (with the
appropriate scaling) was indeed highly suggestive.
   The discovery of the ozone hole came during a period in which I was hea-
vily involved in various international studies on the potential environmental
impacts of a major nuclear war between the NATO and Warsaw Pact nations,
an issue to which I will briefly return in one of the following chapters.
Because so many researchers became quickly involved in the “ozone hole”
research, initially I stayed out of it. Then, in early 1986 I attended a scienti-
fic workshop in Boulder, Colorado, which brought me up-to-date with the
various theories which had been proposed to explain the ozone hole phe-
nomenon. Although it turned out that some of the hypotheses had elements
of the truth, in particular the idea put forward by Solomon et al. (58) of chlo-
rine activation on the surface of stratospheric ice particles, via the reaction,




212                              Chemistry 1995


NX and ClX families. (We should even have included BrX). Now, if the NX
compounds were removed from the gas phase, then reactions R25-R27
would not occur and most inorganic chlorine would be available in the acti-
vated, ozone destroying forms. A possible scenario would involve conversion
of NO x + HNO 3, via the nighttime reactions




As noted before, reaction R14 does not occur in the gas phase, but it readily
occurs on wetted particulate surfaces. These are always present in the lower
stratosphere in the form of sulfate particles, a fact which was first discovered
by Christian Junge, a pioneer in atmospheric chemistry and my predecessor
as director at the Max-Planck-Institute of Chemistry in Mainz (59). The sul-
fate particles are formed by nucleation of gas phase H 2SO 4 which is formed
from SO 2, following attack by OH (60, 61)




The sources of stratospheric SO 2 are either direct injections by volcanic
explosions (59) or oxidation of OCS, produced at the earth’s surface (62)
via




The possibility of HNO 3 formation via heterogeneous reactions on sulfate
particles was already considered in a 1975 paper which I co-authored with
Richard Cadle and Dieter Ehhalt (63). Based on laboratory experiments, this
reaction was, however, for a long while thought to be unimportant, until it
was discovered that the original laboratory measurements were grossly incor-
rect and that reaction R14 readily occurs on H 2O containing surfaces
(64-66). (Earlier tropospheric measurements had already indicated this
(67)). The introduction of reaction R14 leads to a significant conversion of
reactive NOx to much less reactive HNO3 thus diminishing the role of NO x
in ozone chemistry, especially in the lower stratosphere. By including reac-
tion R14, better agreement is obtained between theory and observations


                                  Paul Crutzen                              213


(68). The experience with reaction R14 and earlier discussed reactions R6,
R14 and R15, emphasizes the importance of high quality measurements.
   As soon as I had returned to Mainz, I contacted Dr. Frank Arnold of the
Max-Planck-Institute for Nuclear Physics in Heidelberg to explain to him my
idea about NO x removal from the gas phase. After about a week he had
shown that under stratospheric conditions, solid nitric acid trihydrate (NAT)
particles could be formed at temperatures below about 200K, that is a tem-
perature about 10 K higher than that needed for water ice particle forma-
tion. The paper about our findings was published in Nature at the end of
1986 (69). Independently, the idea had also been developed by Brian Toon,
Rich Turco and coworkers (70). Subsequent laboratory investigations, nota-
bly by David Hanson and Konrad Mauersberger (71) then of the University
of Minnesota, provided accurate information on the thermodynamic pro-
perties of NAT. It was next also shown that the NAT particles could provide
excellent surfaces to catalyze the production of ClOx by reactions R23 and
R24 (72, 73). Finally, Molina and Molina (74) proposed a powerful catalytic
reaction cycle, involving ClO-dimer formation,




completing the chain of events causing rapid ozone depletion under cold, sun-
lit stratospheric conditions. Note that reaction R37 implies an ozone depletion
response which is proportional to the square of the ClO concentrations.
Furthermore, as chlorine activation by reaction R23 is also non-linearly depen-
dent on the stratospheric chlorine content, a powerful non-linear, positive
feedback system is created, which is responsible for the accelerating loss of
ozone under “ozone hole” conditions. The “ozone hole” is a drastic example
of a man-made chemical instability, which developed at a location most re-
mote from the industrial releases of the chemicals responsible for the effect.
   The general validity of the chain of events leading to chlorine activation
has been confirmed by both ground based (75,76) and airborne in-situ (77)
radical observations. Especially the latter, performed by James Anderson and
his students of Harvard University, have been very illuminating, showing
large enhancements in ClO concentrations in the cold, polar region of the
lower stratosphere, coincident with a rapid decline in ozone concentrations.
Together with other observations this confirms the correctnesss of the ozone
depletion theory as outlined above. In the meanwhile the seriousness of this
global problem has been recognized by all nations of the world and interna-
tional agreements have been signed to halt the production of CFC’s and
halons from this year on. Although the cause-effect relationship is very clear,
for the layperson as well, it is depressing to see that it is, nevertheless, not
accepted by a small group of very vocal critics without any record of achieve-


214                             Chemistry 1995


ments in this area of research. Some of these have recently even succeeded
in becoming members of the U.S. Congress.


AND THINGS COULD HAVE BEEN MUCH WORSE

Gradually, over a period of a century or so, stratospheric ozone should reco-
ver. However, it was a close call. Had Joe Farman and his colleagues from the
British Antarctic Survey not persevered in making their measurements in the
harsh Antarctic environment for all those years since the International
Geophysical Year 1958/1959, the discovery of the ozone hole may have been
substantially delayed and there may have been far less urgency to reach inter-
national agreement on the phasing out of CFC production. There might
thus have been a substantial risk that an ozone hole could also have devel-
oped in the higher latitudes of the northern hemisphere.
   Furthermore, while the establishment of an instability in the Ox-ClO x sys-
tem requires chlorine activation by heterogeneous reactions on solid or
supercooled liquid particles, this is not required for inorganic bromine,
which is normally largely present in its activated forms due to gas phase pho-
tochemical reactions. This makes bromine on an atom to atom basis almost
a hundred times more dangerous for ozone than chlorine (78, 52). This
brings up the nightmarish thought that if the chemical industry had develo-
ped organobromine compounds instead of the CFCs - or alternatively, if chlo-
rine chemistry would have run more like that of bromine - then without any
preparedness, we would have been faced with a catastrophic ozone hole
everywhere and at all seasons during the 1970s, probably before the atmosphe-
ric chemists had developed the necessary knowledge to identify the problem
and the appropriate techniques for the necessary critical measurements.
Noting that nobody had given any thought to the atmospheric consequences
of the release of Cl or Br before 1974, I can only conclude that mankind has
been extremely lucky, that Cl activation can only occur under very spe-
cial circumstances. This shows that we should always be on our guard for the
potential consequences of the release of new products into the environment.
Continued surveillance of the composition of the stratosphere, therefore,
remains a matter of high priority for many years ahead.
   In the meanwhile, we know that freezing of H 2S O4- H N O3- H2O mixtu-
res to give NAT particle formation does not always occur and that super-
cooled liquid droplets can exist in the stratosphere substantially below NAT
nucleation temperatures, down to the ice freezing temperatures (79). This
can have great significance for chlorine activation (80, 81). This issue, and
its implications for heterogeneous processes, have been under intensive inve-
stigation at a number of laboratories, especially in the U.S., notably by the
groups headed by A.R. Ravishankara at the Aeronomy Laboratory of NOAA,
Margaret Tolbert at the University of Colorado, Mario Molina at MIT, Doug
Worsnop and Chuck Kolb at Aerodyne, Boston, and Dave Golden at Stanford
Research Institute in Palo Alto. I am very happy that a team of young collea-


                                  Paul Crutzen                              215


gues at the Max-Planck-Institute for Chemistry under the leadership of
Dr. Thomas Peter is likewise very successfully involved in experimental and
theoretical studies of the physical and chemical properties of stratospheric
particles at low temperatures. A highly exciting new finding from this work
was that freezing of supercooled ternary H 2S O4/ H N O3/ H2O mixtures
may actually start in the small aerosol size ranges when air parcels go through
orographically induced cooling events. Under these conditions the smaller
particles, originally mostly consisting of a mixture of H 2S O4/ H2O, will
most rapidly be diluted with HNO 3 and H 2O and attain a chemical compo-
sition resembling that of a NAT aerosol, which, according to laboratory
investigations, can readily freeze (82, 83).


TROPICAL BIOMASS BURNING

By the end of the 1970’s considerable attention was given to the possibility of
a large net source of atmospheric CO2 due to tropical deforestation (84).
Biomass burning is, however, not only a source of CO2, but also of a great
number of photochemically and radiatively active trace gases, such as NOx,
CO, CH 4, reactive hydrocarbons, H 2, N2O, OCS, CH3Cl, etc. Furthermore,
tropical biomass burning is not restricted to forest conversion, but is also a
common activity related to agriculture, involving the burning of savanna
grasses, wood and agricultural wastes. In the summer of 1978, on our way
back to Boulder from measurements of the emissions of OCS and N2O from
feedlots in Northeastern Colorado, we saw a big forest fire high up in the
Rocky Mountain National Forest, which provided us with the opportunity to
collect air samples from a major forest fire plume. After chemical analysis in
the NCAR Laboratories by Leroy Heidt, Walt Pollock and Rich Lueb the
emission ratios of the above gases relative to CO 2 could be established.
Multiplying these ratios with estimates of the global extent of CO2  22 pproduc-
tion by biomass burning, estimated to be of the order of 2-4 x 10           ,
(85), we next derived the first estimates of the global emissions of H2 , CH4,
CO, N2O, NOx, OCS and CH3Cl, and could show that the emissions of these
gases could constitute a significant fraction of their total global emissions.
These first measurements stimulated considerable international research
efforts. Except for N2O (for which our first measurements have since proved
incorrect) our original findings were largely confirmed, although large
uncertainties in the quantification of the various human activities contribu-
ting to biomass burning and individual trace gas releases remain (86).
Because biomass burning releases substantial quantities of reactive trace
gases, such as hydrocarbons, CO, and NOx, in photochemically very active
environments, large quantities of ozone were expected to be formed in the
tropics and subtropics during the dry season. Several measurement cam-
paigns in South America and Africa, starting in 1979 and 1980 with NCAR’s
Quemadas expedition in Brazil, have confirmed this expectation (87-92).
The effects of biomass burning are especially noticeable in the industrially


216                                             Chemistry 1995


lightly polluted southern hemisphere, as is clearly shown from satellite obser-
vations of the tropospheric column amounts of CO and O3 in figures 11 and
12 (93, 94).




Figure 11: Observed distributions of vertical column ozone in the troposphere for 4 periods from Fishman
et al. (91, 93). 1 Dobson unit represents a vertical column of 2.62 10 m o l e c u l e s c m .
                                                                           16               -2




“NUCLEAR WINTER”

My research interests both in the effects of NOx on stratospheric ozone and
in biomass burning explain my involvement in the “nuclear winter” studies.
When in 1981 I was asked by the editor of Ambio to contribute to a special
issue on the environmental consequences of a major nuclear war, an issue co-
edited by Dr. Joseph Rotblat, this year’s Nobel Peace Prize awardee, the ini-
tial thought was that I would make an update on predictions of the destruc-
tion of ozone by the NOx that would be produced and carried up by the fire-
balls into the stratosphere (95, 96). Prof. John Birks of the University of
Colorado, Boulder, one of the co-authors of the Johnston study on this topic
(96), who spent a sabbatical in my research division in Mainz, joined me in
this study. Although the ozone depletion effects were significant, it was also
clear to us that these effects could not compete with the direct impacts of the
nuclear explosions. However, we then came to think about the potential cli-
matic effects of the large amounts of sooty smoke from fires in the forests
and in urban and industrial centers and oil storage facilities, which would
reach the middle and higher troposphere. Our conclusion was that the


                                  Paul Crutzen                             217




                   120




absorption of sunlight by the black smoke could lead to darkness and strong
cooling at the earth’s surface, and a heating of the atmosphere at higher ele-
vations, thus creating atypical meteorological and climatic conditions which
would jeopardize agricultural production for a large part of the human
population (97). This idea was picked up by others, especially the so-called
TTAPS (Turco, Toon, Ackerman, Pollack, Sagan) group (98) who even pre-
dicted that subfreezing temperatures could be possible over much of the
earth. This was supported by detailed climate modeling (99). A major inter-
national study of the issue which was conducted by a group of scientists work-
ing under the auspices of SCOPE (Scientific Committee on Problems of the
Environment) of ICSU (International Council of Scientific Unions) also sup-
ported the initial hypothesis, concluding that far more people could die by
the climatic and environmental consequences of a nuclear war than directly
by the explosions (100, 101).


218                               Chemistry 1995


   Although I do not count the “nuclear winter” idea among my greatest
scientific achievements (in fact, the hypothesis can not be tested without
performing the “experiment”, which it wants to prevent), I am convinced
that, from a political point of view, it is by far the most important, because it
magnifies and highlights the dangers of a nuclear war and convinces me that
in the long run mankind can only escape such horrific consequences if
nuclear weapons are totally abolished by international agreement. I thus
wholeheartedly agree in this respect with Joseph Rotblat and the Pugwash
organization, this year’s recipients of the Nobel Prize for Peace.


CURRENT RESEARCH INTERESTS

Realizing the great importance of heterogeneous reactions in stratospheric
chemistry, together with my Dutch students Jos Lelieveld (now professor at
the University of Utrecht) and Frank Dentener, I have been involved in stu-
dies on the effects of reactions taking place in cloud droplets and tropo-
spheric aerosol particles. In general, such reactions result in removal of NOx
and lower concentrations of O3 and OH (102, 103). Furthermore, even at
high enough NO x concentrations to allow ozone formation by reactions
R16 + R17 + R2, such reactions would be much limited within clouds due to
the fact that the NOx molecules, which are only slightly water soluble, stay in
the gas phase, while the HO2 radicals readily dissolve in the cloud droplets,
where they can destroy ozone via the reactions,




The role of rapid transport of reactive compounds from the planetary boun-
dary layer into the upper troposphere is another topic with which I have
been involved with some of my students over the past decade. This may have
important effects on the chemistry of the upper troposphere (104, 105). My
great interest in the role of clouds in atmospheric chemistry has brought me
in close contact with a major research group at the University of California,
San Diego, headed by my good friend Prof. V. Ramanathan.
   A new project in which I am currently much interested is the possibility of
Cl and especially Br activation in the marine boundary layer. It is already
known that Br activation can explain the near-zero O3 concentrations which
are often found in the high latitude marine boundary layer during spring-
time (106). In our most recent papers we discuss the possibility that Br acti-
vation may also occur in other marine regions and seasons (107, 108).
   The ideas outlined above will be tested by field programs and, if confirm-
ed, introduced in advanced photochemical-transport models. The field
programs will be mostly carried out by members of my research division at
the Max-Planck-Institute for Chemistry, often in collaboration with other
experimental groups. The modeling work is conducted within a consortium


                                     Paul Crutzen                                  219


of researchers from Sweden, The Netherlands, France, Italy and Germany.
This effort is funded by the European Union and coordinated by Professors
Lennart Bengtsson, Hamburg, Henning Rodhe, Stockholm and Jos
Lelieveld, Utrecht.


A LOOK AHEAD

Despite the fundamental progress that has been made over the past decades,
much research will be needed to fill major gaps in our knowledge of atmo-
spheric chemistry. In closing I will try to indicate some of those research
areas which I consider to be of greatest interest (109).
    Tropospheric Ozone Observations: Despite the great importance of tropo-
spheric ozone in atmospheric chemistry, there are still major uncertainties
concerning its budget and global concentration distribution. Everywhere,
but especially in the tropics and the subtropics, there is a severe lack of data
on tropospheric ozone concentrations. Considering the enormous role of
tropical ozone in the oxidation efficiency of the atmosphere, the already
recognized large anthropogenic impact on ozone through biomass burning,
and the expected major agricultural and industrial expansion of human acti-
vities in this part of the world, this knowledge gap is very serious. At this stage
it is not possible to test photochemical transport models owing to severe scar-
city of ozone observations, especially in the tropics and subtropics. Of criti-
cal importance in the effort to obtain data from the tropics and subtropics
will be the training and long term active participation of scientists from the develop-
ing countries. Besides the ozone measurements at a number of stations and
during intensive measurement campaigns, it will be important to also obtain
data on reactive hydrocarbons, CO, NO x, NX and on chemical constituents
in precipitation. Unfortunately, it has been frustrating to note how little
response there has been from potential funding agencies to support efforts
in this direction.
   Long-term observations of atmospheric properties: Two major findings have
demonstrated the extreme value of long term observations of important
atmospheric chemical properties. One example was the discovery of the
rapid depletion of stratospheric ozone over Antarctica during the spring
months, as discussed before. Another is the recent, unexpected major, tem-
porary break in the trends of CH 4 and CO. Most surprising were the chan-
ges in CO, for which Khalil and Rasmussen (110) derived a downward trend
in surface concentrations by                  r in the northern hemisphere and
by as much as                 r in the southern hemisphere between 1987 and
1992. Even larger downward trends,                      in the northern hemisphere
and                 in the southern hemisphere, were reported for the period
between June, 1990 and June, 1993 by Novelli et al. (111). Although these
trends have again reversed (P. Novelli, private communication) into the pre-
vious upward trend of + 0.7% per year for CO and almost 1% per year for
C H4 (112, 113) the temporal break is remarkable. The reasons for this sur-


220                              Chemistry 1995


prising behaviour are not known. They may consist of a combination of: (i)
variable annual emissions from biomass burning, (ii) higher concentrations
of OH radicals, maybe due to loss of stratospheric ozone, triggered by an
increase in reactive aerosol surfaces in the stratosphere following the
Pinatubo volcanic eruption in June, 1991, (iii) a dynamically forced global
redistribution of CO, introducing a bias due to the location of the limited
number of measuring sites, (iv) reduced CO formation from the oxidation
of natural hydrocarbons emitted by tropical forests due to globally altered
precipitation and temperature patterns, or, most likely, a combination of
these plus other, yet unknown factors. At this stage we can only conclude that
the causes for the surprisingly rapid CO trend changes are not known, the
main reason being incomplete global coverage of the CO measurement net-
work. The same applies for CH4.
   Intensive measurement campaigns: Comprehensive field programmes that
have been conducted in the past with detailed observations of all factors that
influence the photochemistry of the troposphere will also be much needed
in the future, especially in various regions of the marine and continental tro-
pics and subtropics, in order to find out whether we understand the major
processes that determine the chemistry of ozone and related photochemi-
cally active compounds. Applications of comprehensive chemical-transport
models should be an important part of these activities. Topics in which
greatly improved knowledge is necessary, are especially: improved quanti-
fication of the stratospheric influx of ozone; distributions, sources and sinks
of CH4, reactive hydrocarbons, CO, NOx and NX; quantification of natural
NO emissions from lightning and soils.
   Cloud transport: The role of clouds as transporters of boundary layer che-
mical constituents, such as CO, NO x, reactive hydrocarbons and their oxi-
dation products to the middle and upper troposphere (and possibly into the
lower stratosphere) should be better understood and quantified, so that they
can be parameterized for inclusion in large scale photochemical models of
the atmosphere. Similarly the production of NO by lightning and its vertical
redistribution by convective storms should also be much better quantified,
both for marine and continental conditions. Current uncertainties of NO
production by lightning are at least a factor of four.
   Chemical interactions with hydrometeors: The interactions of chemical consti-
tuents emanating from the boundary layer with liquid and solid hydromete-
ors in the clouds will be of special importance. There is for instance the ques-
tion of why strong ozone formation has not been noticed around the most
convective regions in the continental tropics in which large amounts of
forest-derived reactive hydrocarbons, such as isoprene (C 5H 8), and their
oxidation products are rapidly lifted to the middle and upper troposphere
and mixed with lightning-produced NO to provide favourable conditions for
photochemical ozone formation. Could it be that the expected ozone for-
mation is prevented by chemical interactions of the hydrocarbon reaction
products and NO, with the hydrometeors? Could significant ozone destruc-


                                  Paul Crutzen                            221


tion take place in cloud water and/or on the surface of ice particles which
may be partially covered by water (114, 115)? Such questions regarding
potential loss of ozone by reactions with hydrometeors may be especially rele-
vant in connection with observations of record low O3 volume mixing ratios
often of less than 10 ppbv in the upper kilometers of the troposphere in
March 1993 in an extended, heavily convective region between Fiji and
Christmas Island over the Pacific Ocean (116). Although such low ozone
volume mixing ratios had been noted on several occasions in the tropical
marine boundary layer and can be explained by the ozone-destroying reac-
tions R6-R8 in the lower troposphere, it should be ascertained whether these
reactions alone suffice to explain the extremely low ozone concentrations in
such a large volume of air.
   Photolysis rates in cloudy atmosphere: Regarding the photochemistry taking
place in cloudy atmospheric conditions, recent observations of unexpected-
ly high absorption of solar radiation in cloudy atmospheres (117) point to
the possibility that multiple scattering in broken cloud systems may lead to
strongly enhanced photolysis rates and photochemical activity, leading e.g. to
much higher O3 destruction and OH production rates by reactions R7 and
R8, or ozone production by reactions R16 + R17 + R2, than thought so far.
The influence of clouds on the photochemically active UV radiation field is
a potentially very important research topic which should be pursued by mea-
surements and the development of appropriate radiative transfer models.
   Biogenic sources of hydrocarbons, CO and NO: The continental biosphere is a
large source of hydrocarbons. Quantification of these sources in terms of
geophysical (e.g. temperature, humidity, light levels) and biogeochemical
(soil physical and chemical properties, land use) parameters are urgently
needed for inclusion in atmospheric models. The hydrocarbon oxidation
mechanisms in the atmosphere should also be better understood, so that for-
mation of ozone, carbon monoxide, partially oxidized gaseous hydrocar-
bons, and organic aerosol can be better quantified. The formation of orga-
nic aerosol from hydrocarbon precursors and their capability to serve as
cloud condensation nuclei are related, potentially important, subjects which
have not been studied in any depth so far.


222                               Chemistry 1995


It should be explored whether halogen activation reactions may also occur
under different circumstances than indicated above (106-108).
   Heterogeneous reactions on aerosol particles The issue of interactions between
gases and atmospheric aerosol is largely unexplored and very little conside-
red in tropospheric chemistry models. Examples are interactions of dimethyl
sulfide-derived sulphur compounds with seasalt in the marine boundary
layer and reactions of             H S O NO x N 2O 5 a n d H N O3 on soil dust par-
ticles which remove these compounds from the gas phase. In the case of
industrial SO2, the neglect of such heterogeneous reactions may well have
led to overestimations of the climatic cooling effects of anthropogenic aero-
sol, as any incorporation of sulphur in soil dust or sea salt will prevent the
nucleation of new sunlight backscattering sulfate particles.
                           in the stratosphere: Ozone is a significant greenhouse
gas with an infrared absorption band in the atmospheric window region, cen-
tered at 9.6 lm. Although the tropospheric ozone amount is only about 10%
of that of the stratosphere, the effective longwave optical depth of tropos-
pheric ozone is larger. Of greatest importance would be any changes that
might take place in the ozone concentrations in the tropopause regions as a
result of human activities, such as H2O, NO, SO2 and particulate emissions
from expanding fleets of civil aircraft flying in the stratosphere and upper
troposphere. On the one hand this may lead to increasing temperatures in
the lower stratosphere. However, increased HNO 3 and H 2O concentrations
in the lower stratosphere may increase the likelihood of polar stratospheric
particle formation and ozone destruction. Such a course of events is also pro-
moted by cooling of the stratosphere by increasing concentrations of CO2.
(This cooling effect increases with height in the stratosphere and mesosphere.
The implications of this for the future dynamics of the stratosphere,
mesosphere and lower thermosphere is likewise a topic, deserving atten-
tion). Changes in chemical and radiative conditions in the lower stratosphere
may, therefore, create feedbacks which we need to understand well, inclu-
ding understanding their potential impact on tropopause heights and tem-
peratures, stratospheric water vapor, lower stratospheric cloud characteristics
and the tropospheric hydrological cycle. Recent observations of increasing
trends of water vapour concentrations in the lower stratosphere over
Boulder emphasize this point (119). All these factors should be taken into
account before decisions are taken on vast expansions of aircraft operations
in the stratosphere.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Firstly, I have to thank my parents, my wife and my family for their love and
support, and for creating the personal environment without which nothing
will go.
   I thank my secretaries Anja Wienhold and Bettina Krüger for their joyful
attitude and hard work in sometimes chaotic times, especially in connection


                                  Paul Crutzen                             223


with the “Nobelrummel”. Many thanks to Geoff Harris, Mark Lawrence and
Jens-Uwe            for a final reading of the manuscript.
    I thank my current and former students, post-docs and coworkers at the
 Max-Planck-Institute for Chemistry for their enthusiastic research efforts.
 Several of them are now professors at universities or directors of major
 research activities. With most of them I keep a close contact and we are
 friends for life.
    I also thank the Max-Planck-Society and the various organizations with
which I am or have been associated during my scientific career. All of them
 have been very important in trusting me with long-term funding and giving
 me excellent opportunities to do research without major interferences. I am
 particularly happy to be a member of the NSF Center on the role of Clouds
 in atmospheric Chemistry and Climate at Scripps Institution of
 Oceanography of the University of California, San Diego, I am learning a lot
 about clouds, one of the most important elements in the climate system. I
 thank my good friend, Prof. V. Ramanathan, and SIO for this great oppor-
 tunity to rejuvinate myself during a few months of the year.
    I thank my director colleagues and personnel of the Max-Planck-Institute
 for Chemistry, the University of Mainz, the City of Mainz, and the
 “Sonderforschungsbereich” for a wonderful welcome and party after my
 return to Mainz as a fresh Nobel Laureate following a brief vacation in Spain.
 I will also never forget my “homecoming” at MISU, Stockholm and the wel-
 come (with illegal fireworks) by my Dutch students and “grandstudents” in
 Wageningen, The Netherlands.
     Finally, I have to thank the many colleagues, all around the world, who
 have congratulated me on the Nobel Prize award. Many of them have them-
 selves contributed greatly to the remarkable progress in our research field
 over the past quarter of a century; only a few of these I could recognize in
 this Nobel Lecture. As most of them have written, this is an award to the
 entire atmospheric chemistry and environmental field. I totally agree and
 thank you all.
    And last, but not least, a great Thank You to the Nobel Committee of the
 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Your decision is an enormous boost for
 environmental research


224                                    Chemistry 1995


REFERENCES
 1.   Sweden’s Case Study for the United Nations Conference on the Human
      Environment 1972: Air Pollution Across National Boundaries. The Impart on the
      Environment of Sulfur in Air and Precipitation, Stockholm, 1972.
      Chapman, S., A theory of upper atmospheric ozone, Mem. Roy. Soc., 3, 103-125,
      1930.
      Benson, S.W. and A.E. Axworthy, Reconsiderations of the rate constants from the
      thermal decomposition of ozone, J. Chem. Phys., 42, 2614, 1965.
      Bates, D.R. and M. Nicolet, The photochemistry of atmospheric water vapour,
       J. Geophys. Res., 55, 301, 1950.
      McCrath, W.D. and R.G.W. Norrish, Studies of the reaction of excited oxygen atoms
      and molecules produced in the flash photolysis of ozone, Proc. Roy. Soc, A 2.54, 317,
      1960.
 6.   Norrish, R.G.W. and R.P. Wayne. The photolysis of ozone by ultraviolet radiation.
      "The photolysis of ozone mixed with certain hydrogen-containing substances. Proc.
      Roy. Soc. London, A 288, 361, 1965.
 7.   Hampson, J., Chemiluminescent emission observed in the stratosphere and mesos-
      phere, in “Les problèmes métérologiques de la stratosphère et de la mésosphère”,
      p. 393. Presses universitaires de France, Paris, 1965.
 8.   Hunt, B.G., Photochemistry of ozone in a moist atmosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 71,
       1385, 1966.
 9.   Crutzen, P.J., Determination of parameters appearing in the “dry” and “wet” pho-
      tochemical theories for ozone in the stratosphere, Tellus, 21, 368-388, 1969.
1O.   Murcray, D.G., T.G. Kyle, F.H. Murcray and W.J. Williams, Nitric acid and nitric oxide
      in the lower stratosphere, Nature, 218, 78, 1968.
11.   Rhine, P.E., L.D. Tubbs and D. Williams, Nitric acid vapor above 19 km in the Earth’s
      atmosphere, Appl. Optics, 8, 1.501, 1969.
12.   Crutzen, P.J., The influence of nitrogen oxides on the atmospheric ozone content,
      Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc., 96, 320-325, 1970.
13.   Bates, D.R. and P.R. Hays, Atmospheric nitrous oxide, Planet. Space Sci., 15, 189, 1967.
14.   Greenberg, R.I. and J. Heicklen. Reaction of O(1D) with N2O, Int. J. Chem. Kin., 2,
       185, 1970.
15.   Crutzen, P.J., Ozone production rates in an oxygen-hydrogen-nitrogrn oxide atmos-
      phere, J. Geophys. Res., 76, 7311, 1971.
16.   McElroy, M.B. and J.C. McConnell. Nitrous oxide. A natural source of stratospheric
      NO, J. Atmos. Sci., 28, 1085, 1971.
17.   Davis, D.D. et al., Recent kinetic measurements on the reactions of O(3p), H and
      HO 2, Second Conference on CIAP, p. 126, DOT-TSC-OST-73-4, 1973.
18.   Yoshino. K. et al., Improved absorption cross-sections of oxygen in the wavelength
      region 205-240 nm of the Herzberg Continuum, Planet. Space Sri., 36, 1469, 1988.
19.   Frederick, J.E. and J.E. Mentall, Solar irradiance in the stratosphere: Implications for
      the Herzberg Continuum Absorption of 02, Geophys. Res. Lett., 9, 461, 1982.
20.   Nicolet, M., The solar spectral irridiance and its action in the atmospheric photodis-
      sociation processes, Planet. Space Sci., 29, 951, 1981.
21.   Weiss, R.F., The temporal and spatial distribution of tropospheric nitrous oxide, J.
      Geophys. Res., 86, 7185, 1981.
22.   SCEP (Study on Critical Environmental Problems). Man’s Impact on the Global
      Environment. Assessment and Recommendations for Action, The MIT Press.
      Cambridge, MA and London, England, 1970.
23.   Nicolet, M., Nitrogen oxides in the chemosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 70, 679, 1965.
24.   Harrison, H.S., Stratospheric ozone with added water vapour: influence of high alti-
      tude aircraft, Science, 170, 734, 1970.
25.   Johnston, H.S. and H.J. Crosby. Kinetics of the fast gas phase reaction between ozone
      and nitric oxide, J. Chem. Phys., 22, 689, 19.54,
26.   Johnston, H.S. and D. Marvin, Working Papers for a Survey of Rate Data for Chemical
      Reactions in the Stratosphere, National Bureau of Standards, Report 10931, 1972.


                                         Paul Crutzen                                     225


27.   Johnston, H., Reduction of stratospheric ozone by nitrogen oxide catalysts from
       supersonic transport exhaust, J. Geophys. Res, 173, 517, 1971.
28.   Johnston, H.S., Atmospheric Ozone, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 43, 1, 1992.
29.   Johnston, H.S. and R.A. Graham, Photochemistry of NOx and HNOx compounds,
       Can. J. Chem., 52, 1415, 1974.
30.    CIAP (Climate Impact Assessment Program). Report of Findings: The Effects of
       Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft, DOT-TX-75-50, U.S. Department of
      Transportation, Washington, DC, 1974.
31.    COMESA. The Report of the (Committee on Meteorological Effects of Stratospheric
      Aircraft, U.K. Meteorological Office, Bracknell, England, 1975.
32.    COVOS, Comité d’Etudes sur les Consequences des Vols Stratosphériques, Société
       Métérologique de France, Boulogne, France, 1976.
33.    NAS (National Academy of Sciences). Environmental Impact of Stratospheric Flight,
       ISBN O-309-023467, Washington, DC, 1975.
34.    Crutzen, P.J., I.S.A. Isaksen and G.C. Reid, Solar proton events: Stratospheric sources
       of nitric oxide, Science, 189, 457, 1975.
35.    Heath, D.F., A.J. Krueger and P.J. Crutzen, Solar proton event: Influence on stratos-
       pheric ozone, Science, 197, 886, 1977.
36.    Solomon, S. and P:J. Crutzen, Analysis of the August 1972 solar proton event, inclu-
       ding chlorine chemistry, J. Geophys. Res., 86, 1140, 1981.
37.    Levy, H., 111, Normal atmosphere: Large radical and formaldehyde concentrations
       predicted, Science, 173, 141, 1971.
38.    McConnell, J.C., M.B. McElroy and S.C Wofsy, Natural sources of atmospheric CO,
       Nature, 233, 187, 1971.
39.    Prinn, R.G. et al., Atmospheric trends and lifetime of trichloroethane and global
       average hydroxyl radical concentrations based on 1978-1994 ALE/GAGE mea-
       surements, Science, 269, 187, 1995.
40.    Levy, H., III, Photochemistry of the lower troposphere, Planet. Space Sci., 20, 919,
       1972.
41.    Crutzen, P.J., A discussion of the chemistry of some minor constituents in the stra-
       tosphere and troposphere, Pure Appl. Geophys., 106-108, 1385, 1973.
42.    Crutzen, P.J., Photochemical reactions initiated by and influencing ozone in un-
       polluted tropospheric air, Tellus, 26, 47, 1974.
43.    Chameides, W.L. and J.C.G. Walker, A photochemical theory of tropospheric ozone,
      J. Geophys. Res., 78, 87.51, 1973.
44.    Fishman, J. and P.J. Crutzen, The origin of ozone in the troposphere, Nature, 274,
       855,1978.
45.    Fishman, J., S. Solomon and P.J. Crutzen, Observational and theoretical evidence in
       support of a significant in-situ photochemical source of tropospheric ozone, Tellus,
       31, 432, 1979.
46.    Howard, C.J. and K.M. Evenson, Kinetics of the reaction of HO2 radicals with NO,
       Geophys. Res. Lett., 4, 437, 1977.
47.    Crutzen, P.J. and C.J. Howard, The effect of the HO2 + NO reaction rate constant on
       one-dimensional model calculations of stratospheric ozone depletions, Pure and
      Appl. Geophys., 116, 497, 1978.
48.    Crutzen, P.J. and P.H. Zimmermann, The changing photochemistry of the tropos-
       phere, Tellus, 43 A/B, 136, 1991.
49.    Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific
      Assessment (J.T. Houghton et al., Eds.), Cambridge University Press, 365 pp, 1990.
50.    Stolarski, R.S. and R.J. Cicerone, Stratospheric chlorine: A possible sink for ozone,
       Can. J. Chem., 52, 1610, 1974.
51.   Wofsy, S.C. and M.B. McElroy, HOx, NOx and CIO       x: Their- role in atmospheric pho-

       tochemistry, Can. J. Chem., 52, 1582, 1974.
52.   Crutzen, P.J., A review of upper atmospheric photochemistry, Can. J. Chem., 52,
       1569,1974.
53.   Lovelock, J.E., R.J. Maggs and R.J. Wade, Halogenated hydrocarbons in and over the
      Atlantic, Nature, 241, 194, 1973.


226                                    Chemistry 1995

54.    Molina, M.J. and F.S. Rowland, Stratospheric sink of chlorofluoromethanes: Chlorine
       atom-catalized destruction of ozone, Nature, 249, 810, 1974.
55.    Crutzen, P:J., Estimates of possible future ozone reductions from continued use of
      fluoro-chloro-methanes (CF 2Cl 2, CFCl3), Geophys. Res. Lett., 1, 205, 1974.
56.   Cicerone, R.J., R.S. Stolarski and S. Walters, Stratospheric ozone destruction by man-
       made chlorofluoromethanes, Science, 185, 1165, 1974.
57.   Farman, J.C., B.C. Gardiner and J.D. Shanklin, Large losses of total ozone in Antarctica
       reveal seasonal ClOx/NO x interaction, Nature, 315, 201, 1985.
58.   Solomon, S., R.R. Garcia, F.S. Rowland, and D.J. Wuebbles, On the depletion of
      Antarctic ozone, Nature, 321, 755, 1986.
59.   Junge, C.E., C.W. Chagnon and J.E. Manson, Stratospheric aerosols, J. Meteorol., 18,
       81, 1961.
60.    Davis, D.D., A.R. Ravishankara and S. Fischer, SO2 oxidation via the hydroxyl radical:
       atmospheric fate of the HSOx radicals, Geophys. Res. Lett, 6, 113, 1979.
61.    Stockwell, W.R. and J.G. Calvert, The mechanism of the HO-SO2 reaction, Atmos.
       Environ., 17, 2231, 1983.
62.    Crutzen, P.J., The possible importance of CSO for the sulfate layer of the stratos-
       phere, Geophys. Res. Lett., 3, 73, 1976.
63.    Cadle, R.D., P.J. Crutzen and D.H. Ehhalt, Heterogeneous chemical reactions in the
       stratosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 80, 3381, 1975.
64.    Mozurkewich, M. and J.G. Calvert, Reaction probabilities of N 2O 5 on aqueous aero-
       sols, J. Geophys. Res., 93, 15889, 1988.
65.    Hanson, D.R. and A.R. Ravishankara, The reaction probabilities of ClONO2 and
       N 2O 5 on 40 to 75 percent sulfuric acid solutions, J. Geophys. Res., 96, 17307, 1991.
66.   Van Doren, J.M., L.R. Watson, P. Davidovits, D.R. Worsnop, M.S. Zahniser and C.E.
       Kolb, Temperature dependence of the uptake coefficients of HNO 3, HCl, and N2O 5
       by water droplets, J. Phys. Chem., 94, 3265, 1990.
67.    Platt, U., D. Perner, A.M. Winer, G.W. Harris and J.N. Pitts, Jr., Detection of NO3 in
       the polluted troposphere by differential optical absorption, Geophys. Res. Lett, 7, 89,
       1980.
68.    Pommereau, J.F. and F. Goutail, Stratospheric O3 and NO2 observations at the south-
       ern polar circle in summer and fall 1988, Geophys. Res. Lett., 15, 895, 1988.
69.    Crutzen, P.J. and F. Arnold. Nitric acid cloud formation in the cold Antarctic stra-
       tosphere: a major cause for the springtime “ozone hole”, Nature, 324, 651, 1986.
70.    Toon, O.B., P. Hamill, R.P. Turco and J. Pinto. Condensation of HNO 3 and HCl in
       the winter polar stratosphere, Geophys. Res. Lett., 13, 1284, 1986.
71.    Hanson, D.R. and K. Mauersberger. Vapor pressures of HNO3/H 2O solutions at low
       temperatures, J. Phys. Chem., 92, 6167, 1988.
72.    Molina, M.J., T.L. Tso, L.T. Molina and F.C.-Y Wang. Antarctic stratospheric chemis-
       try of chlorine nitrate, hydrogen chloride and ice, Science, 238, 1253, 1987.
73.   Tolbert, M.A., M.J. Rossi, R. Malhotra, and D.M. Golden. Reaction of chlorine nitra-
       te with hydrogen chloride and water at Antarctic stratospheric temperatures,
       Science, 238, 1258 1987.
74.    Molina, L.T. and M.J. Molina. Production of Cl202 from the self-reaction of the Cl0
       radical, J. Phys. Chem., 91, 433, 1987.
75.    de Zafra, R.L., M. Jaramillo, A. Parrish, P.M. Solomon, B. Connor, and J, Barrett,
       High concentration of chlorine monoxide at low altitudes in the Antarctic spring
       stratosphere, I. Diurnal variation, Nature, 328, 408, 1987.
76.    Solomon, S., G.H. Mount, R.W. Sanders, and A.L. Schmeltekopf, Visible spectrosco-
       py at McMurdo Station, Antarctica: Observations of OC1O, J. Geophys. Res., 92, 8329,
       1987.
77.   Anderson, J.G., W.H. Brune, and M.H. Proffitt, Ozone destruction by chlorine
       radicals within the Antarctic vortex: The spatial and temporal evolution of ClO-O 3
      anticorrelation based on in situ ER-2 data, J Geophys. Res., 94, 11465, 1989.
78.   Wofsy, S.C., M.B. McElroy and Y.L. Yung, The chemistry of atmospheric bromine,
       Geophys. Res. Lett., 2, 215, 1975.
79.    Dye, J.E., D. Baumgardner, B.W. Gandrud, S.R. Kawa, K.K. Kelly, M. Loewenstein,


                                           Paul Crutzen                                     227

       G.V. Ferry, K.R. Chan and B.L. Gary, Particle size distribution in Arctic polar stratos-
       pheric clouds, growth and freezing of sulfuric acid droplets, and implications for
       cloud formation, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 8015, 1992.
 80.   Cox, R.A., A.R. MacKenzie, R. Müller, Th. Peter and P.J. Crutzen, Activation of stra-
        tospheric chlorine by reactions in liquid sulphuric acid, Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 1439,
        1994.
 81.   Hanson, D.R., A.R. Ravishankara and S. Solomon, Heterogeneous reactions in sulfu-
       ric acid aerosol: A framework for model calculations, J. Geophys. Res., 99. 3615. 1994.
 82.   Meilinger, S.K.. T. Koop, B.P. Luo, T. Huthwelker, K.S. Carslaw, P.J. Crutzen and T.
       Peter, Size-dependent stratospheric droplet composition in lee wave temperature
       fluctuations and their potential role in PSC freezing, Geophys. Res. Lett, 22, 3031,
        1995.
 83.    Koop, T., B.P. Luo, U.M. Biermann, PJ. Crutzen and T. Peter, Freezing of
       HNO 3/H 2SO 4/H 2O solutions at stratospheric temperatures: Nucleation statistics
       and Experiments, J. Phys. Chem. (to be submitted).
 84.   Woodwell, G.M., R.H. Whittaker, W.A. Reiners, G.E. Likens, C.C. Delwiche and D.B.
       Botkin, The biota and the world carbon budget, Science, 199, 141, 1978.
 85.   Seiler, W. and P.J. Crutzen, Estimates of gross and net fluxes of carbon between the
       biosphere and the atmosphere from biomass burning, Climatic Change, 2, 207, 2980.
 86.   Crutzen, P.J. and M.O. Andreae, Biomass burning in the Tropics: Impact on atmos-
        pheric chemistry and biogeochemical cycles, Science, 250, 1669, 1990.
 87.   Crutzen, P.J., A.C. Delany, J. Greenberg, P. Haagenson, L. Heidt, R. Lueb, W. Pollock,
       W. Seiler, A. Warthurg and P. Zimmerman, Tropospheric chemical composition
       measurements in Brazil during the dry season, J. Atmos. Chem., 2, 233, 1985.
 88.   Amazon Boundary Layer Experiment (ABLE 2A): Dry season 1985, Collection of 24
        papers, J. Geophys. Res., 93 (D2), 1349-1624, 1988.
 89.   Andreae, M.O. et al., Biomass burning emissions and associated haze layers over
       Amazonia, J. Geophys. Res., 93, 1509, 1988.
 90.   Andreae, M.O. et al., Ozone and Aitken nuclei over equatorial Africa: Airborne
       observations during DECAFE 88, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 6137, 1992.
 91.   Fishman, J., K. Fakhruzzaman, B. Cros and D. Nyanga, Identification of widespread
       pollution in the southern hemisphere deduced from satellite analyses, Science, 252,
        1693, 1991.
 92.   FOS/DECAFE 91 Experiment, Collection of 13 papers in J. Atmos. Chem., 22, l-239,
        1995.
 93.   Fishman, J., Probing planetary pollution from space, Environ. Sci. Technol., 25, 612,
        1991.
 94.   Connors, V., M. Flood, T. Jones, B. Gormsen, S. Nolt and H. Reichle, Global distri-
       bution of biomass burning and carbon monoxide in the middle troposphere during
       early April and October 1994, in Biomass Burning and Global Change (J. Levine,
       Ed.), MIT Press, 1996 (in press).
 95.   Foley, H.M. and M.A. Ruderman, Stratospheric NO production from past nuclear
        explosions, J. Geophys. Res., 78, 4441, 1973.
 96.   Johnston, H.S., G. Whitten and J.W. Birks, Effects of nuclear explosions on stratos-
       pheric nitric oxide and ozone, J. Geophys. Res., 78, 6107, 1973.
 97.   Crutzen, P.J. and J. Birks, The atmosphere after a nuclear war: Twilight at noon,
       Ambio, 12, 114, 1982.
 98.   Turco, R.P., O.B. Toon, R.P. Ackerman, H.B. Pollack and C. Sagan, Nuclear winter:
       Global consequences of multiple nuclear explosion, Science, 222, 1283, 1983.
 99.   Thompson, S.L., V. Alexandrov, G.L. Stenchikov, S.H. Schneider, C. Covey and R.M.
       Chervin, Global climatic consequences of nuclear war: Simulations with three-
       dimensional models, Ambio, 13, 236, 1984.
100.   Pittock, A.B., T.P. Ackerman, P.J. Crutzen, M.C. MacCracken, C.S. Shapiro and R.P.
       Turco, Environmental Consequences of Nuclear War. Volume I: Physical and
       Atmospheric Effects, SCOPE 28, Wiley, 1986.
101.   Harwell, M.A. and T.C. Hutchinson. Environmental Consequences of Nuclear War.
       Volume II: Ecological and Agricultural Effects, SCOPE 28, Wiley, 1985.


228                                   Chemistry 1995


102. Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, Influences of cloud photochemical processes on
      tropospheric ozone, Nature, 343, 227, 1990.
103. Dentener, F:J. and P:J. Crutzen, Reaction of N2O 5 on tropospheric aerosols: Impact
     on the global disstrihutions of NOx, O3, and OH, J. Geophys. Res., 98 (D14), 7149,
      1993.
104. Chatfield, R. and P.J. Crutzen, Sulfur dioxide in remote oceanic air: Cloud transport
      of reactive precursors, J. Geophys. Res., 89 (D5), 711, 1984.
105. Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, Role of deep convection in the ozone budget of the
      troposphere, Science, 264, 1759, 1994.
106. Barrie, L.A., J.W. Bottenheim, R.C. Schnell, P.J. Crutzen and R.A. Rasmussen, Ozone
      destruction and photochemical reactions at polar sunrise in the lower Arctic atmos-
      phere, Nature, 334, 138, 1988.
107. Sander, R. and P.J. Crutzen, Model study indicating halogen activation and ozone
      destruction in polluted air masses transported to the sea, J. Geophys. Res. 101, 9121,
      1996.
108. Vogt, R., P.J. Crutzen and R. Sander, A new mechanism for bromine and chlorine
      release from sea salt aerosol in the unpolluted marine boundary layer, Nature (sub-
      mitted).
109. Crutzen, P.J., Overview of tropospheric chemistry: Developments during the past
      quarter century and a look ahead, Faraday Discuss. 100, 1, 1995.
110. Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, Global decrease of atmospheric carbon monox-
      ide, Nature, 370, 639, 1993.
111. Novelli, P.C., K.A. Masario, P.P. Tans and P.M. Lang, Recent changes in atmospheric
      carbon monoxide, Science, 263 1587, 1994.
112. Zander, R., Ph. Demoulin, D.H. Ehhalt, U. Schmidt and C.P. Rinsland, Secular in-
      creases in the total vertical abundances of carbon monoxide above central Europe
      since 1950, J. Geophys. Res., 94, 11021, 1989.
113. Zander, R., Ph. Demoulin, D.H. Ehhalt and U. Schmidt, Secular increases of the
     vertical abundance of methane derived from IR solar spectra recorded at the
     Jungfraujoch station, J. Geophys. Res., 94, 11029, 1989.
114. Crutzen, P.J., Global tropospheric chemistry, in Low-Temperature Chemistry of the
      Atmosphere (G.K. Moortgat et al., Eds), Springer, Berlin, pp 467-498, 1994.
115. Crutzen, P:J., Ozone in the Troposphere, in Composition, Chemistry and Climate of
      the Atmosphere (H.B. Singh, Ed.), Von Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 349-393,
      1995.
116. Kley, D., H.G.J. Smit, H. Vömel, S. Oltmans, H. Grassl, V. Ramanathan and PJ.
      Crutzen, Extremely low upper tropospheric ozone observations in the convective
      regions of the Pacific, Science (submitted).
117. Ramanathan, V., B. Subasilar, G.J. Zhang, W. Conant, R.D. Cess, J.T. Kiehl, H. Grassl
      and L. Shi, Warm pool heat budget and shortwave cloud forcing: a missing physics?
      Science, 267, 499, 1995.
118. Hausmann, M. and U. Platt, Spectroscopic measurement of bromine oxide and
      ozone in the high Arctic during Polar Sunrise Experiment 1992, J. Geophys. Res., 99,
      25399, 1994.
119. Oltmans, SJ. and D.J. Hofmann, Increase in lower-stratospheric water vapour at a
      mid-latitude northern hemisphere site from 1981 to 1994, Nature, 374, 146, 1995.
120. Crutzen, PJ., J.U.          C. Brühl, R. Müller and J.M. Russell III, A reevaluation of
      the ozone budget with HALOE UARS data: No evidence for the ozone deficit,
      Science, 268, 705, 1995.


                                         Paul Crutzen                                      229


PUBLICATIONS
Books

Crutzen, P.J and J. Hahn, 1985: Schwarzer Himmel. S. Fischer Verlag, 240 pp.
Pittock, A.B., T.P. Ackerman, P.J. Crutzen, M.C. MacCracken, C.S. Shapiro and R.P. Turco,
   1986: Environmental Consequences of Nuclear War, SCOPE 28, Volume I: Physical and
   Atmospheric Effects, Wiley, Chichester, 359 pp; 2nd edition 1989.
Crutzen P.J. and M. Müller, 1989: Das Ende des blauen Planeten? C.H. Beck Verlag, 271 pp.
Enquete Commission “Preventive Measures to Protect the Earth’s Atmosphere”, 1989:
   Interim Report: Protecting the Earth's atmosphere: an International Challenge. Ed. Deutscher
   Bundestag, Referat Öffentlichkeitsarbeit, Bonn, 592 pp.
Enquete Commission “Preventive Measures to Protect the Earth’s Atmosphere”, 1990:
   Protecting the Tropical Forests A High-Priority international Task. Ed. Deutscher Bundestag,
   Referat Öffentlichkeitsarbeit, Bonn, 968 pp.
Enquete Commission “Preventive Measures to Protect the Earth’s Atmosphere”, 1991:
   Protecting the Earth: A Status Report with Recommendations for a new Energy Policy. Ed.
   Deutscher Bundestag, Reterat Öffentlichkeitsarbeit, Bonn, 2 Volumes.
Crutzen, P.J., J.-C. Gerard and R. Zander (Eds.), 1989: Our Changing Atmosphere.
   Proceedings of the 28th Liege International Astrophysical Colloquium June 26-30,
   1989, Université de Liège, Cointe-Ougree, Belgium, 534 pp.
Graedel, T.E. and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: Atmospheric Change: An Earth System Perspective. W.H.
   Freeman, New York, 446 pp.
Crutzen, P.J. and J.G. Goldammer, 1993: Fire in the Environment: The Ecological, Atmospheric,
   and Climatic Importance of Vegetation Fires. Dahlem Konferenz (15-20 March 1992, Berlin),
   ES13, Wiley, Chichester, 400 pp.
Graedel, T.E. and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: Chemie der Atmosphäre. Bedeutung für Klima und Umwelt,
   Spektrum-Verlag, Heidelberg, 511 pp.
Graedel, T.E. and P.J. Crutzen, 1995: Atmosphere, Climate, and Change. W.H. Freeman, New
   York, 208 pp.

J OURNAL    A RTICLES    (REFEREED ) :

  1. Blankenship, J.R. and P.J. Crutzen, 1965: A photochemical model for the space-time
     variations of the oxygen allotropes in the 20 to 100 km layer. Tellus, 18, 160-175.
  2. Crutzen, P.J., 1969: Determination of parameters appearing in the “dry” and the
     “wet” photochemical theories for ozone in the stratosphere. Tellus, 21, 368-388.
  3. Crutzen, P.J., 1969: Determination of parameters appearing in the oxygen-hydrogen
     atmosphere. Ann. Geophys., 25, 275-279.
  4. Crutzen, P:J., 1970: The influence of nitrogen oxides on the atmospheric ozone con-
     tent. Quart. J Roy. Meteor Soc., 96, 320-325.
  5. Crutzen, P.J., 1970: Comments on “Absorption and emission by carbon dioxide in the
     mesosphere”. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor Soc, 96, 767-769.
  6. Crutzen, P.J., 1971: Energy conversions and mean vertical motions in the high latitu-
     de summer mesosphere and lower thermosphere. In Mesospheric Models and Related
     Experiments, G. Fiocco, (ed.), D. Reidel Publ. Co., Dordrecht, Holland, 78-88.
  7. Crutzen, P.J., 1971: Calculation of O2         in the atmosphere using new laboratory
     data. J. Geophys. Res., 76, 1490-1497.
  8. Crutzen, P.J., 1971: Ozone production rates in an oxygen-hydrogen-nitrogen oxide
     atmosphere. J. Geophys. Res., 76, 731 l-7327.
  9. Crutzen, P.J., 1972: SST’s-a threat to the earth’s ozone shield. Ambio, 1, 41-51.
 10. Crutzen, P.J., 1973: A discussion of the chemistry of some minor constituents in the
     stratosphere and troposphere. Pure App. Geophys., 106-108, 1385-1399.
 11. Crutzen, P:J., 1973: Gas-phase nitrogen and methane chemistry in the atmosphere. In
     Physics and Chemistry of Upper Atmospheres, B.M. McCormac (rd.), Reidel, Dordrecht,
     Holland, 110-124.
 12. Crutzen, PJ., 1974: A review of upper atmospheric photochemistry. Can. J. Chem., 52,
     1569-1581.


230                                    Chemistry 1995


13. Crutzen, P.J., 1974: Estimates of possible future oone reductions from continued use
    of fluorochloromethanes (CF 2Cl 2, CFCl3) Geophys. Res. Lett., 1, 205-208.
14. Crutzen, P.J., 1974: Estimates of possible variations in total ozone due to natural
    causes and human activities. Ambio, 3, 201-210.
15. Crutzen, P.J., 1974: Photochemical reactions initiated by and influencing ozone in
    unpolluted tropospheric air. Tellus, 26, 48-57.
16. Cadle, R.D., P.J. Crutzen and D.H. Ehhalt, 1975: Heterogeneous chemical reactions
    in the Stratosphere.J. Geophys. Res, 80, 3381-3385.
17. Crutzen, P.J., I.S.A. Isaksen and G.C. Reid, 1975: Solar proton events: stratospheric
    sources of nitric oxide. Science, 189, 457-459.
18. Johnston, H.S., D. Garvin, M.L. Corrin, P.J. Crutzen, R:J. Cvetanovic, D.D. Davis, E.S.
    Domalski, E.E. Ferguson, R.F. Hampson, R.D. Hudson, L.J. Kieffer, H.I. Schiff, R.L.
    Taylor, D.D. Wagman and R.T. Watson, 1975: Chemistry in the stratosphere, Chapter
    5, CIAP Monograph I. The Natural Stratosphere of 1974, DOT-TST-75-51, U.S.
    Department of Transportation, Climate Impact Assessment Program.
19. Schmeltekopf, A.L., P.D. Goldan, W.R. Henderson, W.J. Harrop, T.L. Thompson, F.C.
    Fehsenfeld, H.I. Schiff, P.J. Crutzen, I.S.A. Isaksen and E.E. Ferguson, 1975:
    Measurements of stratospheric CFCl 3 , CF2 C 12 , and N2 O. Geophys Res. Lett., 2,
    393-396.
20. Zerefos, C.S. and P.J. Crutzen, 1975: Stratospheric thickness variations over the northern
    hemisphere and their possible relation to solar activity J Geophys. Res., 80, 5041-5043.
21. Crutzen, P:J., 1976: Upper limits on atmospheric ozone reductions following increa-
    sed application of fixed nitrogen to the soil. Geophys. Res. Lett., 3. 169-172.
22. Crutzen, PJ., 1976: The possible importance of CSO for the sulfate layer of the stra-
    tosphere. Geophys. Res. Lett., 3, 73-76.
23. Crutzen, P.J. and D.H. Ehhalt, 1977: Effects of nitrogen fertilizers and combustion on
    the stratospheric ozone layer. Ambio, 6, l-3, 112-l 17.
24. Crutzen, P.J. and G.C. Reid, 1976: Comments on “Biotic extinctions by solar flares”.
    Nature, 263, 259.
25. Fehsenfeld, F.C., P.J. Crutzen, A.L. Schmeltekopf, C.J. Howard, D.L. Albritton, E.E.
    Ferguson, J.A. Davidson and H.I. Schiff, 1976: Ion chemistry of chlorine compounds
    in the troposphere and stratosphere.J. Geophys. Res., 81, 4454-4460.
26. Reid, G.C., I.S.A. Isdksen, T.E. Holzer and P.J. Crutzen, 1976: Influence of ancient
    solar proton events on the evolution of life. Nature, 259, 177-179.
27. Crutzen, P.J. and J. Fishman, 1977: Average concentrations of OH in the troposphe-
    re, and the budgets of CH4, CO, H2 and CH3CCl 3. Geophys. Res. Lett., 4, 321-324.
28. Fishman, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1977: A numerical study of tropospheric photochemis-
    try using a one-dimensional model. J. Geophys. Res., 82, 5897-5906.
29. Heath, D.F., A.J. Krueger and P.J. Crutzen, 1977: Solar proton event: influence on
    stratospheric ozone. Science, 197, 886-889.
30. Hidalgo, H. and P.J. Crutzen, 1977: The tropospheric and stratospheric composition
    perturbed by NO, emissions of high altitude aircraft.J. Geophys. Res., 82, 5833-5866.
31. Isaksen, I.S.A. and P.J. Crutzen, 1977: Uncertainties in calculated hydroxyl radical
    densities in the troposphere and stratosphere. Geophysics Norvegica, 31, 4, l-10.
32. Isaksen, I.S.A., K.H. Midtboe, J. Sunde and P.J. Crutzen, 1977: A simplified method to
    include molecular scattering and reflection in calculations of photon fluxes and
    photo-dissociation rates. Geophysica Norvegira, 31, 1 l-26.
33. Schmeltekopf, A.L., D.L. Albritton, P.J. Crutzen, D. Goldan, W.J. Harrop, W.R.
    Henderson, J.R. McAfee, M. McFarland, H.I. Schiff, T.L. Thompson, D.J. Hofmann
    and N.T. Kjome, 1977: Stratospheric nitrous oxide altitude profiles at various latitu-
    des. J. Atmos. Sci., 34, 729-736.
34. Crutzen, PJ. and C.J. Howard, 1978: The effect of the HO2 + NO reaction rate con-
    stant on one-dimensional model calculations of stratospheric ozone perturbations.
    Pure Appl. Geophys., 116, 487-510.
35. Crutzen, P.J., I.S.A. Isaksen and J.R. McAfee, 1978: The impact of the chlorocarbon
    industry on the ozone layer. J. Geophys. Res., 83, 345-363.


                                        Paul Crutzen                                     231

36. Fishman, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1978: The origin of ozone in the troposphere. Nature,
     274, 855-858.
37. Reid, G.C., J.R. McAfee and P.J. Crutzen, 1978: Effects of intense stratospheric
     ionization events. Nature, 257, 489-492.
38. Zimmerman, P.R., R.B. Chatfield, J. Fishman, P.J. Crutzen and P.L. Hanst, 1978:
     Estimates on the production of CO and H2 from the oxidation of hydrocarbon emis-
     sions from vegetation. Geophs. Res. Lett., 5, 679-682.
39. Crutzen, P.J,, 1979: The role of NO and NO2 in the chemistry of the troposphere and
     stratosphere. Ann. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 7, 443-472.
40. Crutzen, P:J,, 1979: Chlorofluoromethanes: threats to the ozone layer. Rev. Geophys.
     Space Phys., 17, 1824-1832.
41. Crutzen, P.J., L.E. Heidt, J.P. Krasnec, W.H. Pollock and W. Seiler, 1979: Biomass
     burning as a source of atmospheric gases CO, H 2 , N2 O, NO, CH 3 Cl and COS.
     Nature 282 253-256.
42. Dickerson, R.R., D.H. Stedman, W.L. Chameidcs, P.J. Crutzen and J. Fishman, 1979:
    Actinometric measurements and theoretical calculations of J(O3), the rate of photo-
     lysis of. ozone to O (1D) Geophys. Res. Lett., 6, 833-836.
43. Fishman, J., V. Ramanathan, P.J Crutzen and S.C. Liu, 1979: Tropospheric ozone and
     climate. Nature, 282, 81X-820.
44. Fishman. J., S. Solomon and P.J. Crutzen, 1979: Observational and theoretical
     evidence in support of a significant in situ photochemical source of tropospheric
     ozone. Tellus, 31, 432-446.
4.5. Berg, W.W., P.J. Crutzen, F.E. Grahek, S.N. Gitlin and W.A. Sedlacek, 1980: First mea-
     surements of total chlorine and bromine in the lower stratosphere. Trophy,. Res. Lett.,
     7, 937-940
46. Crutzen, P.J. and S. Solomon, 1980: Response of mesospheric ozone to particle
     precipitation. Planet. Space Sci., 28, 1147-l 153.
47. Heidt, L.E., J.P. Krasnec, R.A. Lueb, W.H. Pollock, B.E. Henry and P.J. Crutzen, 1980:
     Latitudinal distributions of CO and CH 4 over the Pacific. J Geophys. Res., 85,
     7329-7336.
48. Seiler, W. and P.J. Crutzen, 1980: Estimates of gross and net fluxes of carbon between
     the biosphere and the atmosphere from biomass burning. Climatic Change, 2, 207-247
49. Thomas, G.E., C.A. Barth, E.R. Hansen, C.W. Hord, G.M. Lawrence, G.H. Mount, G.J.
     Rottman, D.W. Rurch, A.I. Stewart, RJ. Thomas, J. London, P.L. Bailey, P:J. Crutzen,
     R.E. Dickinson, J.C. Gille, S.C. Liu, J.F. Noxon and C.B. Farmer, 1980: Scientific
     Objectives of the Solar- Mesosphere Explorer Mission. Pure Appl. Geophys., 118, 591-615.
50. Rodhe, H., P. Crutzen and A. Vanderpol, 1981: Formation of sulfuric acid in the
    atmosphere during long range transport. Tellus, 33, 132-141.
51. Rusch, D.W. J.(Z. Gérard, S. Solomon, P.J. Crutzen and G.C. Reis, 1981: The effects of
    particle precipitation events on the neutral and ion chemistry of the middle atmos-
    phere-1. Odd Nitrogen. Planet Space Sci., 29, 767-774.
52. Solomon, S. and P.J. Crutzen, 1981: Analysis of the August 1972 solar proton event
    including chlorine chemistry.,/. Geophys. Res., 86, 1140-l 146.
53. Solomon. S., D.W. Rusch, J.C. Gérard, G.C. Reid and P.J. Crutzen, 1981: The effect of
     particle precipitation events on the neutral and ion chemistry of the middle atmos-
    phere-11. Odd Hydrogen. Planet Space Sri., 29, 885-892.
54. Baulch, D.L., R.A. Cox, P.J. Crutzen, R.F. Hampson Jr., J.A. Kerr and J. Troe, 1982:
    Evaluated kinetic and photochemical data for atmospheric chemistry: Supplement 1.
    J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data. 11, 327-496.
55. Crutzen. P.J., 1982: The global distribution of hydroxyl. In: Atmospheric Chemistry, ed.
    E.D. Goldberg, pp. 313-328. Dahlem Konferenlen 1982. Berlin, Heidelberg, New
    York: Springer-Verlag.
56. Crutzcn, P.J. and J.W. Birks, 1982: The atmosphere after- a nuclear war: Twilight at
    Noon. A&o, 2&3, 114-125.
57. Hahn, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1982: The role of fixed nitrogen in atmospheric photo-
    chemistry. Phil. Trans. Ii. Soc. Lond., B 296, 521-541.


232                                    Chemistry 1995


58. Solomon, S., P.J. Crutzen and R.G. Roble, 1982: Photochemical coupling between the
    thermosphere and the lower atmosphere. 1. Odd nitrogen from 50-120 km.
    J. Geophys. Res., 87, 7206-7220.
59. Solomon, S., E.E. Ferguson, D.W. Fahey and P.J. Crutzen, 1982: On the chemistry of
    H 2 O, H2 and meteoritic ions in the meosphere and lower thermosphere. Planet.
    Space Sci., 30, 1117-l 126.
60. Solomon, S., G.C. Reid, R.G. Roble and P.C. Crutzen, 1982: Photochemical coupling
    between the thermosphere and the lower atmosphere. 2. D-region ion chemistry and
    the winter anomaly. J. Geophys. J. Res., 87, 7221-7227.
61. Zimmerman, P.R., J.P. Greenberg, S.O. Wandiga and P.J. Crutzen, 1982. Termites: A
    Potentially Large Source of Atmospheric Methane, Carbon Dioxide, and Molecular
    Hydrogen. Science, 218, 563-565.
62. Bolin, B., P.J. Crutzen, P.M. Vitousek, R.G. Woodmansce, E.D. Goldberg and R.B.
    Cook, 1983: Interactions of biochemical cycles, in: B. Bolin and R.B. Cook, Eds: The
     Major Biochemical Cycles and Their Interactions, SCOPE 21, pp. l-40, Wiley, Chichester.
63. Crutzen, P.J., 1983: Atmospheric interactions-homogeneous gas reactions of C, N,
    and S containing compounds, in: B. Bolin and R.B. Cook, Eds.: The Major Biochemical
     Cycles and Their Interactions, SCOPE 21, pp. 67-114, Wiley, Chichester.
64. Crutzen, P.J. and L.T. Gidel, 1983: A two-dimensional photochemical model of the
    atmosphere. 2. The tropospheric budgets of the anthropogenic chlorocarbons, CO,
    CH 4, CH3Cl and the effect of various NO, sources on tropospheric ozone. J. Geophys.
    Res., 88, 6641-6661.
65. Crutzen, P.J. and U. Schmailzl, 1983: Chemical budgets of the stratosphere. Planet.
     Space. Sci., 31, 1009-1032.
66. Frederick, J.E., R.B. Abrams and P.J. Crutzen, 1983: The Delta Band Dissociation of
    Nitric Oxide: A Potential Mechanism for Coupling Thermospheric Variations to the
     Mesosphere and Stratosphere. J. Geophys Res, 88, 3829-3925.
67. Gidel, L.T., P.J. Crutzen and J. Fishman, 1983: A two-dimensional photochemical
    model of the atmosphere. 1: Chlorocarbon emissions and their effect on stratosphe-
    ric ozone. J Geophys. Res., 88, 6622-6640.
68. Chatfield, R.B. and P.J. Crutzen, 1984: Sulfur Dioxide in Remote Oceanic Air-: Cloud
    Transport of Reactive Precursors. J. Geophys. Res., 89 (D5), 711 l-7132.
69. Crutzen, P.J., I.E. Galbally and C. Brühl, 1984: Atmospheric Effects from Postnuclear
     fires. Climatic Change, 6, 323-364.
70. Crutzen, P.J., M.T. Coffey, A.C. Delany J. Greenberg, P. Haagenson, L. Heidt, R.
     Heidt, L. Lueb, W.G. Mankin, W. Pollock, W. Seiler, A. Warthurg and P. Zimmerman,
     1985: Observations of air composition in Brazil between the equator and         during
     the dry season. Acta Amazonica, Manaus, 15(1-2): 77-l 19.
71. Crutzen, P.J., A.C. Delany, J. Greenberg, P. Haagenson, L. Heidt, R. Lueb, W. Pollock,
    W. Seiler, A. Warthurg and P. Zimmerman, 1985: Tropospheric Chemical Composition
     Measurements in Brazil During the Dry Season. J Atmos. Chem., 2, 233-256.
72. Crutzen, P.J., D.M. Whelpdale, D. Kley and L.A. Barrie, 1985: The cycling of sulfur
     and nitrogen in the remote atmosphere, in: The Biogeochemical Cycling of Sulfur and
     Nitrogen in the Remote Atmosphere (J.N. Galloway, R.J. Charlson, M.O. Andreae and H.
     Rodhe, Eds.), NATO ASI Series C 158, Reidel, Dordrecht, Holland, 203-212.
73. Delany, A.C., P. Haagenson, S. Walters, A.F. Warthurg and P.J. Crutzen, 1985:
     Photochemically produced ozone in the emission of large scale tropical vegetation
     fires. J. Geophys. A. Res., 90 (D1), 2425-2429.
74. Crutzen, P.J. and F. Arnold, 1986: nitric acid cloud formation in the cold Antarctic
     stratosphere: a major cause for the springtime “ozone hole”. Nature, 324, 651-655.
75. Crutzen, P.J., I. Aselmann and W. Seiler, 1986: Methane production by domestic ani-
     mals, wild ruminants, other herbivorous fauna, and humans. Tellus, 38B, 271-284.
76. Crutzen, P.J. and T.E. Graedel, 1986: The role of atmospheric chemistry in environ-
     ment-development interactions, in Sustainable Development of the Environment (W.C.
     Clark and R.E. Munn, Eds.), Cambridge University Press, 213-251.
77. Bingemer, H.G. and P.J. Crutzen, 1987: The production of methane from solid was-
     tes.,J. Geophys Res., 92 (D2), 2181-2187.


                                       Paul Crutzen                                     233

78. Crutzen, P.J., 1987: Role of the tropics in the atmospheric chemistry, in: R. Dickinson,
    Ed: Geophysiology of the Amazon, Wiley, Chichester-New York, 107-131,
79. Crutzen, P.J., 1987: Acid rain at the K/T boundary, Nature, 330, 108-109.
80. Barrie, L.A., J.W. Bottenheim, R.C. Schnell, PJ. Gutzen and R.A. Rasmussen, 1988:
    Ozone destruction and photochemical reactions at polar sunrise in the lower Arctic
    atmosphere. Nature, 334, 138-141.
81. Briihl, C. and P:J. Crutzen, 1988: Sccnar-ios of possible changes in atmospheric ten-
    peratures and o/one concentrations due to man’s activities as estimated with a one-
    dimensional coupled photochmical climate model. Climate Dynamics 2, 173-203.
82. Crutzen, P.J., 1988: Tropospheric ozone: an Overview pp. in: Tropospheric Ozone, I.S.A.
    Isdksen Ed., Reidel, Dordrecht, 3-32.
83. Crutzen, PJ., 1988: Variability in Atmospheric-Chemical Systems, in: Scales and Global
    Change, SCOPE 3.5, T. Rosswall R.G. Woodmansee and P.G. Risser, Eds., Wiley,
    Chichester, 81-108.
84. Crutzen, P.J., C. Briihl, U. Schmailzl and F. Arnold, 1988: Nitric acid haze formation
    in the lower stratosphere: a major contribution factor to the development of the
    Antarctic "ozone hole”, in Aerosols and Climate (M.P. McCormick and P.V. Hobbs,
    Editors), A. Deepak Publ., Hampton, Virginia, USA, pp. 287-304.
85. Hao, W.M., D. Scharffe, E. Sanhuela and P.J. Crutzen, 1988: Production of N 2O ,
    CH 4, and CO2 from Soils in the Tropical Savanna During the Dry Season. J. Atmos.
    Chem., 7, 93-105.
86. Horowitz, A., G. von Helden, W. Schneider, P.J. Crutzen and G.K. Moortgar, 1988:
    Ozone generation in the 214 nm photolysis of oxygen at 25°C. J. Phys. Chem., 92,
    4956-4960.
87. Liu, S.C., R.A. Cox, P.J. Crutzen, D.H. Ehhalt, R. Guicherit, A. Hofzumahaus, D. Kley,
    S.A. Penkett, L.F. Phillips, D. Poppr and ES. Rowland, 1988: Group Report: Oxidizing
    Capacity of the atmosphere, in: The Changing Atmosphere, F.S. Rowland and I.S.A.
    Isakuen, Eds., Wiley, Chichrstrr, p. 219-232.
88. Wilson, S.R., P.J. Crutzen, G. Schuster, D.W.T. Griffith and G. Helas, 1988: Phosgene
    measurements in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere. Nature, 334,
    6X9-691.
89. Aselmann, I. and P.J. Crutzen, 1989: Global distrihurion of natural freshwater
    wetlands and rice paddies, their net primary productivity, seasonality and possible
    methane emission. J. Atmos. Chem., 8, 307-358.
90. Briihl, C. and P.J. Crutzen, 1989: On the disporportionate role of tropospheric ozone
    as a filter against solar UV-B radiation. Geophys. Res. Lett., 16, 703-706.
91. Crutzen, P.J. and C. Brühl, 1989: The impact of observed changes in atmospheric
    composition on global atmospheric chemistry and climate, in: The Environmental
    Record in Glaciers and Ice Sheets, Dahlem Konferenzen 1988, H. Oeschger and C.C.
    Langway, Eds., Wiley, Chichester, pp. 249-266.
92. Pearman, G.I., R.J. Charlson, T. Class, H.B. Clausen, P.J, Crutzen, T. Hughes, D.A.
    Peel, K.A. Rahn, J. Rudolph, U. Siegenthalcr and D.S. Zardini, 1989: Group Report:
    M’hat Anthropogenic Impacts are recorded in Glaciers? In: Dahlem Workshop
    Reports: The Environmental Record in Glaciers and Ice Sheets, Dahlem Konferenzen, H.
    Oeschger and C.C. Langway, Eds., Wiley, Chichester, pp. 269-286.
93. Robertson, R.P., M.O. Andreae, H.G. Bingemer, P.J Crutzen, R.A. Delmas, J.H.
    Duizer, I. Fung, R.C. Harriss, M. Kanakidou, M. Keller, J.M. Melillo and G.A. Zavarzin,
    1989: Group Report: Trace gas exchange and the chemical and physical climate:
    Critical interactions, In: Dahlem Workshop Reports: Exchange of Trace Gases between
    Terrestrial Ecosystems and the Atmosphere, Eds. M.O. Andreae and D.S. Schimel, Life
    Sciences Research Report 47, Wiley, Chichester, pp. 303-320.
94. Simon, F.G., J.P. Burrows, W. Schneider, G.K. Moortgat and PJ. Crutzen, 1989: Stud?
    of the reaction ClO + CH3O 2       Products at 300 K. J Phys. Chem., 93, 7807-7813.
95. Zimmermann, P.H., H. Feichter, H.K. Rath, P.J: Crutzen and W. Weiss, 1989: A global
    three-dimensional source-receptor model investigating 85Kr. Atmos. Environ. 23,
    25-35.
96. Briihl, C. and P.J Crurzen, 1990: Ozone and climate changes in the light of the
    Montreal Protocol, a model study. Ambio, 19, 293-301.


234                                    Chemistry 1995


 97. Chatfield, R.B. and P.J. Crutzen, 1990: Are there interactions of iodine and sulfur spe-
     cies in marine air photochemistry? J. Geophys. Res., 95, 22319-22341.
 98. Crutzen, P.J. and M.O. Andreae, 1990: Biomass burning in the tropics: impact on
     atmospheric chemistry and biogeochemical cycles. Science, 250, 1669-1678.
 99. Feichter, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1990: Parameterization of vertical tracer transport due
     to deep cumulus convection in a global transport model and its evaluation with 222
     Radon measurements. Tellus 42B, 100-l 17.
100. Graedel, T.E. and PJ. Crutzen, 1990: Atmospheric trace constituents, in: The Earth as
     Transformed by Human Action, Eds. B.L. Turner II et al., Cambridge University Press,
     pp. 295-311:
101. Hao, W.M., M.H. Liu and PJ. Crutzen, 1990: Estimates of annual and regional relea-
     ses of CO2 and other trace gases to the atmosphere from fires in the tropics, based
     on the FAO statistics for the period 1975-1980, in: Fire in the Tropical Biota, Eco/ogical
     Studies, 84, J.G. Goldammer, Ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 440-462
102. Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1990: Influence of cloud and photochemical processes
     on tropospheric ozone. Nature, 343, 227-233.
103. Lobert, J.M., D.H. Scharffe, W.M. Hao and P.J. Crutzen, 1990: Importance of biomass
     burning in the atmospheric budgets of nitrogen-containing gases. Nature, 346,
     552-554.
104. Sanhueza, E. W.M. Hao, D. Scharffe, L. Donoso and P.J. Crutzen, 1990: N 2O and NO
     emissions from soils of the northern part of the Guayana Shield, Venezuela. J. Geophys.
     Res., 95 (D13) , 22481-22488.
105. Scharffe, D. W.M. Hao, L. Donoso, P.J. Crutzen and E. Sanhueza, 1990: Soil fluxes
     and atmospheric concentrations of CO and CH4 in the northern part of the Guayana
     Shield, Venezuela.,/. Geophys. Res., 95 (D13), 22475-22480.
106. Crutzen, P.J. and P.H. Zimmermann, 1991: The changing photochemistry of the tro-
     posphere. Tellus, 43 A/B, 136-151.
107. Hao, W.M., D. Scharffe, J.M. Lobert and P.J: Crutzen, 1991: Emissions of N 2O from
     the burning of biomass in an experimental system. Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 999-1002.
108. Kanakidou, M., H.B. Singh, K.M. Valentin and P:J, Crutzen, 1991: A 2-D study of etha-
     ne and propane oxidation in the troposphere.J. Geophys. Res, 96, 15395-15413.
109. Kuhlbusch, A.T., J.M. Lobert, P.J. Crutzen and P. Warneck, 1991: Molecular nitrogen
     emissions from denitrification during biomass burning. Nature, 351, 135-l 37.
110. Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1991: The role of clouds in tropospheric photochemis-
     try. J. Atmos. Chem., 12, 229-267.
111. Lobert,J.M., D.H. Scharffe, W.M. Hao, T.A. Kuhlbusch, R. Seuwen, P. Warneck and
     P.J. Crutzen, 1991: Experimental evaluation of biomass burning emissions: Nitrogen
     and carbon containing compounds, in: Global Biomass Burning: Atmospheric; Climatic
     and Biosphere Implications, Ed. J.S. Levine, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 122-125.
112. Peter, Th., C. Brühl and P.J. Crutzen, 1991: Increase in the PSC-formation probabili-
     ty caused by high-flying aircraft. Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 1465-1468.
113. Crutzen, P.J. and G.S. Golitsyn, 1992: Linkages between Global Warming, Ozone
     Depletion and Other Aspects of Global Environmental Change, in: Confronting
     Climatic Change, I.M. Mintzer, Ed., pp. 15-32, Cambridge University Press.
114. Crutzen, P.J., R. Müller, Ch. Brühl and Th. Peter, 1992: On the potential importance
     of the gas phase reaction CH3 O 2 + ClO                t         and the hererogenrous
     reaction         + HCI         + Cl2 in “ozone hole” chemistry. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19,
     1113-1116.
115. Kanakidou, M., PJ. Crutzen, P.H. Zimmermann and B. Bonsang, 1992: A 3-dimensio-
     nal global study of the photochemistry of ethane and propane in the troposphere:
     Production and transport of organic nitrogen compounds, in: Air Pollution Modeling
     and its implication IX, H. van Dop and G. Kallos (Eds.), Plenum Press, New York,
     41.5-426.
116. Langner, J., H. Rodhe, P.J. Crutzen and P. Zimmermann, 1992: Anthropogenic influ-
     ence on the distribution of tropospheric sulphate aerosol. Nature, 359, 712-715.
117. Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1992: Indirect chemical effects of methane on climate
     warming. Nature, 355, 339-342.


                                        Paul Crutzen                                      235

118. Luo, B.P., Th. Peter and P.J. Crutzen, 1992: Maximum supercooling of H 2SO 4 acid
      aerosol droplets. Ber Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 96, 334-338.
119. Singh, H.B. D. O’Hara, D. Herlth, J.D. Bradshaw, S.T. Sandholm, G.L. Gregory, G.W.
      Sachse, D.R. Blake, P.J. Crutzen and M. Kanakidou, 1992: Atmospheric measure-
      ments of PAN and other organic nitrates at high latitudes: possible sources and sinks.
     J. Geophys. Res., 97, 16511-16522.
120. Singh, H.B., D. Herlth, K. Zahnle, D. O’Hara, J. Bradshaw, S.T. Sandholm, R. Talbot,
      PJ. Crutzen and M. Kanakidou, 1992: Relationship of PAN to active and total odd
      nitrogen at northern high latitudes: possible influence of reservoir species on NO,
      and O3. J Geophys. Res., 97, 16523-16530.
121. Berges, M.G.M., R.M. Hofmann, D. Scharffe and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: Measurement of
      nitrous oxide emissions from motor vehicles in tunnels. J Geophys. Res., 98,
      18527-18531.
122. Crutzen, P.J. and C. Brühl, 1993: A model study of atmospheric temperatures and the
      concentrations of ozone, hydroxyl, and some other photochemically active gases
      during the glacial, the preindustrial holocene and the present. Geophys. Res. Lett. 20,
      1047-1050.
123. Crutzen, P.J. and G.R. Carmichael, 1993: Modeling the influence of fires on atmos-
      pheric chemistry, in: Fire in the Environment: The Ecological, Atmospheric, and Climatic
      Importance of VegetationFires, (PJ. Crutzen and J.G. Goldammer, Eds.), op. cit., 90-105.
124. Dentener, F. and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: Reaction of N 2 O 5 on tropospheric aerosols:
      Impact on the global distributions of NO,, 03 and OH. J.Geophys. Res., 98, 7149-
      7163.
125. Goldammer, J.G and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: Fire in the Environment: Scientific Rationale
      and Summary of Results of the Dahlem Workshop, in: Fire in the Environment: The
     Ecological, Atmospheric and Climatic Importance, (P.J. Crutzen and J.G. Goldammer,
      Eds.), op. cit., 1-14.
126. Kanakidou, M. and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: Scale problems in global tropospheric che-
      mistry modeling: Comparison of results obtained with a three-dimensional model,
      adopting longitudinally uniform and varying emissions of NO, and NMHC.
      Chemosphere, 26, 787-801.
127. Kanakidou, M., F.J. Dentener and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: A global three-dimensional
      study of the degradation of HCFC’s and HFC-134a in the troposphere. Proceedings
      of STEP-HALOCSIDE/AFEAS Workshop on Kinetics and Mechanisms for the Reactions of
      Halogenated Organic Compounds in the Troposphere, Dublin, Ireland, March 23-25, 1993,
      Campus Printing Unit, University College Dublin, 113-129.
128. Lelieveld, J., P.J. Crutzen and C. Brühl, 1993: Climate effects of atmospheric metha-
      ne, Chemosphere, 26, 739-768.
129. Müller, R. and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: A possible role of galactic cosmic rays in chlorine
      during polar night. J Geophys. Res., 98, 20483-20490.
130. Peter, Th. and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: The role of stratospheric cloud particles in Polar
      ozone depletion. An Overview.J. Aerosol Sci., 24, Suppl. 1, S119-S120.
131. Russell III, J.M., A.F. Tuck, L.L. Gordley, J.H. Park, S.R. Drayson, J.E. Harries, R.J.
      Cicerone and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: Haloe Antarctic observations in the spring of 1991,
      Geophys., Res. Lett., 20, 719-722.
132. Schupp, M., P. Bergamaschi, G.W. Harris and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: Development of a
      tunable diode laser absorption spectrometer for measurements of the 13C/ 12C ratio
     in methane. Chemosphere, 26, 13-22.
133. Carslaw, K.S., B.P. Luo, S.L. Clegg, Th. Peter, P. Brimblecombe and P.J. Crutzen, 1994:
      Stratopsheric aerosol growth and HNO3 gas phase depletion from coupled HNO3
      and water uptake by liquid particles. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 2479-2482.
134. Chen, J.-P. and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: Solute effects on the evaporation of ice particles,
     J. Geophys. Res., 99, 18847-18859.
135. Cox, R.A., A.R. MacKenzie, R. Müller, Th. Peter and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: Activation of
      stratospheric chlorine by reactions in liquid sulphuric acid, Geophys. Res. Lett., 21,
      1439-1442.


236                                     Chemistry 1995


136. Crowley, J.N., F. Helleis, R. Miiller, G.K. Moortgat and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: CH3OCl:
      UV/visible absorption cross sections, J values and atmospheric significance,
     J. Geophys. Rcs., 99, 20683-20688.
137. Crutzen, P.J., 1994: Global Tropospheric Chemistry, Proceedings of the NATO
     Advanced Study Institute on Low Temperature Chemistry of the Atmosphere, Maratea, Italy,
     August 29-September 11, 1993, NATO ASI Series I, 21 (Eds. G.K. Moortgat et al.),
      Springer, Heidelberg, 465-498
138. Crutzen, P.J., 1994: Global budgets for non-CO2 greenhouse gases, Environmental
      Monitoring and Assessment, 31, l-1 5.
139. Crutzen, P.J., J. Lelieveld and Ch. Brühl, 1994: Oxidation processes in the atmosphe-
      re and the role of human activities: Observations and model results, in: Environmental
      Oxidants, J.O. Nriagu and M.S. Simmons (Eds.), Vol. 28 in “Advances in
      Environmental Science and Technology”, Wiley, Chichester, 63-93.
140. Dentener, F.J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: A three dimensional model of the global ammo-
      nia cycle, J. Atmos. Chem. 19, 331-369.
141. Deshler, T., Th. Peter, R. Miiller and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: The lifetime of leewave-indu-
      ced ice particles in the Arctic stratosphere: I. Balloonborne observations. Geophys. Res.
      Lett., 21, 1327-1330.
142. Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: Emissionen klimawirksamer Spurengase durch
      die Nutzung von         und Erdgas. Energiwirtschaftliche Tagesfragen, 7, 435-440.
143. Lelieveld,,J. and P:J. Crutzen, 1994: Role of deep cloud convection in the ozone bud-
      get of the troposphere, Science, 264, 1759-l 761.
144. Luo, B.P., Th. Peter and P:J. Crutzen, 1994: Freezing of stratospheric aerosol droplets.
      Geophys. Res Lett., 21, 1447-1450.
145. Luo, B.P., S.L. Clegg, Th. Peter, R. Miiller and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: HCI solubility and
      liquid diffusion in aqueous sulfiric acid under strarosphetic conditions, Geophys. Res.
      Lett., 21, 49-52.
146. Miiller, R., Th. Peter, P.J. Crutzen, H. Oelhaf, G. Adrian, Th. v. Clarman, A. Wegner, I!.
      Schmidt and D. Lary, 1994: Chlorine chemistry and the potential for ozone depletion
      in the Arctic stratosphere in the winter of 1991/92. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 1427-1430.
147. Peter, Th. and P:J. Crutzen, 1994: Modelling the chemistry and micro-physics of the
      could stratosphere. Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study Institute on low
       Temperature Chemistry of the Atmosphere Maratea, Italy, August 29-September 1      1993,
      NATO          Series I, 21 (Eds. C.K. Moortgat et al.), Springer, Heidelberg,
148. Peter, Th.,                 R.        and T. Deshler, 1994:        lifetime
                     in the                     Il. Stabilization      to NAT-coating.
                 21, 1331-1334.
149.              E., L. Donoso, D.            and      Crutzen, 1994: Carbon monoxide flux-
      es from natural, managed, or cultivated                     grasslands,

150.          K., Th. Peter, B.P. Luo and          Crutzen, 1994: Volcanic Bishop’s ring:
     Evidence for a sulfuric acid tctrahydrate particle aerosole,
151.         H.B., D.             D. Herlth,       Sachse, D.R. Blake,                      M.
                 and                1994: Acetone in the atmosphere: Distribution, sources
     and sinks.                  99, 1805-I 819.
    Crutzen,       1995: On the role of       in Atmospheric chemistry: Sources, sinks and
     possible reductions in anthropogenic sources.             24, 52-55.
                   1995: Ozone in the troposphere, in:                              and
     of                 H.B. Sing (Ed.), Van Nostrand Reinhold             New York, 349-393.
                   1995: The role of methane in atmospheric chemistry and climate,
     Ruminant              Digestion,              Growth
     Eighth                             on Ruminant                  Eds.
                         G. Breves and D. Giesqcke, Ferdinand Enke Verlag, Stuttgart.
     291-315.
                  J.-U.         C.        R. Miiller, J.M. Russell III, 1995: A reevaluation of
     the        budget with HALOE             data: no evidence for the ozone
     268,


                                        Paul Crutzen                                     237

156. Finkbeiner, M., J.N. Crowley, 0. Horie, R. Müller, G.K. Moortgat and P.J. Crutzen,
     1995: Reaction between HO2 and ClO: Product formation between 210 and 300 K.J.
     Phys. Chem., 99, 1627416275.
157. Kanakidou, M., F.J. Dentener and P.J. Crutzen, 1995: A global three-dimensional
     study of the fate of HCFCs and HFC-134a in the troposphere. J. Geophys. Res., 100,
     18781-18801.
158. Koop, T., U.M. Biermann, W. Raber, B.P. Luo, P.J. Crutzen and Th. Peter, 1995:
     Do stratospheric aerosol droplets freeze above the ice frost point?. J. Geophys. Res.,
     22,917-920.
159. Kuhlbusch, T.A.J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1995: Toward a global estimate of black carbon in
     residues of vegetation fires representing a sink of atmospheric CO2 and a source of
     02. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 4, 491-501.
160. Meilinger, SK., T. Koop, B.P. Luo, T. Huthwelker, K.S. Carslaw, P.J. Crutzen and
     Th. Peter, 1995: Size-dependent stratospheric droplet composition in lee wave tem-
     perature fluctuations and their potential role in PSC freezing. Geophys. Res. Lett., 22,
     3031-3034.
161. Rodhe, H. and P.J. Crutzen, 1995: Climate and CCN, Nature, 375, 111.
162. Sander, R., J. Lelieveld and P.J. Crutzen, 1995: Modelling of the nighttime nitrogen
     and sulfur chemistry in size resolved droplets of an orographic cloud,,/. Atmos. Chem.,
     20, 89-l 16.
163. Schade, G.W. and P.J. Crutzen, 1995: Emission of aliphatic amines from animal
     husbandry and their reactions: Potential source of N 2O and HCN. J. Atmos. Chem.,
     22, 319-346.
164. Singh, H.B., M. Kanakidou, P.J. Crutzen and D.J. J acob, 1995: High concentrations
     and photochemical fate of oxygenated hydrocarbons in the global troposphere.
     Nature, 378, 50-54.
165. Vömel, H., S.J. Oltmans, D. Kley and P.J. Crutzen, 1995: New evidence for the
     stratospheric dehydration mechanism in the aquatorial Pacific. Geophys. Res Lett.,
     22,3235-3238.
166. Wang, C. and P.J. Crutzen, 1995: Impact of a simulated severe local storm on the
     redistribution of sulfur dioxide. J. Geophys. Res., 100, 11357-l 1367.
167. Wang, C., P.J. Crutzen, V. Ramanathan, S.F. Williams, 1995: The role of a deep
     convective storm over the tropical Pacific Ocean in the redistribution of atmospheric
     chemical species. J. Geophys. Res., 100, 11509-l 1516.
168. Wayne, R.P., P. Biggs, J.P. Burrows, R.A. Cox, PJ. Crutzen, G.D. Hayman, M.E. Jenkin,
     G. Le Bras, G.K. Moortgat, U. Platt, G. Poulet and R.N. Schindler, 1995: Halogen
     oxides: Radicals, sources and reservoirs in the laboratory and in the atmosphere.
     Atmos. Environ., 29, 2675-2884 (special issue).
169. Crutzen, P.J., 199.5: Introductory Lecture. Overview of tropospheric chemistry:
     Developments during the past quarter century and a look ahead. Faraday Discuss. 100,
     1-21.
170. Sander, R. and P.J. Crutzen, 1996: Model study indicating halogen activation and
     ozone destruction in polluted air masses transported to the sea. J. Geophys. Res. 101,
     9121, 1996




IN PRESS

SUBMITTED

171. Berges, M.G.M. and J. Crutzen, 1995 revised 1996: Estimates of global N20 emissions
     from cattle, pig and chicken manure, including a discussion of CH4 emissions. J
     Atmos. Chem.
172. Brühl, C., S.R. Drayson, J.M. Russell III, P.J. Crutzen, J.M. Mclnemey, P.N. Purcell, H.
     Claude, H. Gernandt, T.I. McGee, I.S. McDemid, M.R. Gunson, 1995: HALOE ozone
     channel validation. J. Geophys. Res..


238                                    Chemistry 1995


173. Kuhlbusch, T.A.J., M.O. Andreae, H. Cachier, J.G. Goldammer, J.-P. Lacaux, R. Shea
     and P.J. Crutzen, 1995: Black carbon formation by savanna fires: Measurements and
     implications for the global carbon cycle. J Geophys. Res.
174. Müller, R., P.J. Crutzen, J.U.            Ch. Brühl, J.M Russel and A.F. Tuck, 1994:
     Chlorine activation and ozone depletibn in the Artic vortex during the winters of
     1992 and 1993 observed by the halogen ocrulation experiment on the Upper
     Atmosphere Research Satellite. (to be submitted to J Geophys. Res.)
175. Bergamaschi, P., C. Brühl, C.A.M. Brenninkmeijer, G. Saueressig, J.N. Crowley, J.U.
             H. Fischer and P.J. Crutzen, 1996: Implications of the large carbon kinetic iso-
     tope effect in the reaction CH 4 + Cl for the C / C ratio of stratospheric CH 4 .
                                                      13   12



     Geophys. Res. Lett.
176. Kley, D., H.G.J. Smit, H. Vömel, S. Oltmans, H. Grassl V. Ramanathan and P.J.
     Crutzen, 1996: Extremely low upper tropospheric ozone observations in the convec-
     tive regions of the Pacific. Science.
177. Shorter, J.H., J.B. McManus, C.E. Kolb, E.J. Allwine, B.K. Lamb, B.W. Mosher, R.C.
     Harriss, U. Parchatka, H. Fischer, G.W. Harris and P.J. Crutzen, 1996. J Atmos. Chem.
178. Vogt, R. and P.J. Crutzen, 1996: A new mechanism for bromine and chlorine release
     from sea salt aerosol in the unpolluted boundary layer. Nature.

O T H E R P UBLICATIONS

 Al. Crutzen, P.J., 1969: Koldioxiden och klimatet (Carbon dioxide and climate),
     Forskning och Framsteg, 5, 7-9.
 A2. Crutzen, P.J., 1971: The photochemistry of the stratosphere with special attention
     given to the effects of NO, emitted by supersonic aircraft, First Conference on CIAP,
     United States Department of Transportation, 880-88.
 A3. Crutzen, P.J., 1971: On some photochemical and meteorological factors determining
     the distribution of ozone in the stratosphere: Effects on contamination by NO, emit-
     ted from aircraft, Technical Report UDC 551.510.4, Institute of Meteorology,
     University of Stockholm.
 A4. Crutzen, P.J., 1972: Liten risk för klimatindring (Small risk for climatic change; in
     Swedish). Forskning och Framsteg, 2, 27.
 A5. Crutzen, P.J., 1974: Artificial increases of the stratospheric nitrogen oxide content
     and possible consequences for the atmopsheric ozone, Technical Report UDC
     551.510.4:546.2, Institute of Meteorology, University of Stockholm.
 A6. Crutzen, P.J., 1974: Väderforskning med matematik (Weather research with mathe-
     matics; in Swedish). Forskning och Framsteg, 6, 22-23, 26.
 A7. Crutzen, P.J., 1975: Physical and chemical processes which control the production,
     destruction and distribution of ozone and some other chemically active minor con-
     stituents. GARP Publications Series 16, World Meterological Organization, Geneva,
     Switzerland.
 A8. Crutzen, P.J., 1975: A two-dimensional photochemical model of the atmosphere
     below 55 km. In: Estimates of natural and man-caused ozone perturbations due to NO,
     Proceedings of 4th CZAP Conference, US. Department of Transportation, Cambridge,
     DOT-TSC-OST-75-38, T.M. Hard and A.J. Brodrick (eds.), 264-279.
 A9. Crutzen, P.J., 1976: Ozonhöljet tunnas ut: Begrinsa spray-gaserna (The ozone shield
     is thinning: limit the use of aerosol propellants; in Swedish). Forskning och Framsteg, 5,
     29-35.
A10. Crutzen, P.J., 1977: The Stratosphere-Meosphere. Solar Output and Its Variations, O.R.
     White (ed.), Colorado Associated University Press, Boulder, Colorado, 13-16.
All. Crutzen, P.J., J. Fishman, L.T. Gidel and R.B. Chatfield, 1978: Numerical investiga-
     tions of the photochemical and transport processes which affect halocarbons and
     ozone in the atmosphere. Annual Summary of Research, Dept. of Atmospheric Science,
     Colorado State Univ., Fort Collins, CO.
A12. Fishman, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1978: The distribution of the hydroxyl radical in the tro-
     posphere. Atmos. Sci. Paper 284 (Dept. of Atmos. Sci., Colorado State University,
     Fort. Collins, CO).


                                                Paul Crutzen                                              239


A13. Crutzen, P.J. L.T. Gidel and J. Fishman, 1979: Numerical investigations of the photo-
     chemical and transport processes which affect ozone and other trace constituents in
     the atmosphere. Annual Summary of Research, Dept. of Atmospheric Science, Colorado
     State University, Fort Collins, CO.
A14. Crutzen, P.J., 1981: Atmospheric chemical processes of the oxides of nitrogen inclu-
     ding nitrous oxide. In: Denitrification, Nitrification and Atmospheric Nitrous Oxide. Ed.
     C.C. Delwiche, John Wiley and Sons, New York 1981, 17-44.
A15. Birks, J.W. and P.J. Crutzen, 1983: Atmospheric effects of a nuclear war, Chemistry in
     Britain, 19, 927-930.
A16. Galbally, I.E., P.J. Crutzen and H. Rodhe, 1983: Some changes in the Atmosphere
     over Australia that may occur due to a Nuclear War, pp. 161-185 in “Australia and
     Nuclear War”, (Ed. M.A. Denborough), Croom Helm Ltd., Canberrra, Australia, 270
      PP.
A17. Brühl, C. and P.J. Crutzen, 1984: A radiative vonvective model to study the sensitivity
      of climate and chemical composition to a variety of human activities, Proceedings of
      a working party meeting, Brussels, 18th May 1984, Ed. A. Ghazi, CEC, pp. 84-94.
A18. Crutzen, P.J. and M.O. Andreae, 1985: Atmospheric Chemistry, in T.F. Malone and
     J.G. Roederer, Eds., Global Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 75-l 13.
A19. Crutzen, P.J. and I.E. Galbally, 1985: Atmospheric conditions after a nuclear war. In:
      Chemical Events in the Atmosphere and Their Impact on the Environment. (G.B. Marini-
      Bettolo, Editor), Pontificiae Academiae Scientiarum Scripta Varia, Città del Vaticano,
      pp. 457-502.
A20. Crutzen, PJ. and J. Hahn, 1985: Atmospharische Auswirkungen eines Atomkrieges.
      Physik in unserer Zeit, 16, 4-15.
A21. Klose, W., H. Butin. P.J. Crutzen, F. Führ, H. Greim, W. Haber, K. Hahlbrock, A.
      Hüttermann. W. Klein, W. Klug, H.U. Moosmayer, W. Obländer, B. Prinz, K.E.
      Rehfuess      and       0.     Rentz,    1985:        Forschungsbeirat             Waldschäden/
      Luftverunreinigungen der Bundesregierung und der Lander, Zwischenbericht
      Dezember 1984, in Bericht über den Stand der Erkenntnisse zur Ursache
A22. Crutzen, P.J., 1986: Globale Aspekte der amtospharischen Chemie: Natürliche und
      anthropogene Einflüsse, Vorträge Rheinisch-Westfalische Akademie der
      Wissenschaften, S. 41-72, Westdeutscher Verlag GmbH, Opladen.
A23. Klose, W . , H . B u t i n a n d P . J . C r u t z e n , 1 9 8 6 : u . a . F o r s c h u n g s b e i r a t
      Waldschäden/Luftverunreinigungen der Bundesregierung und der Lander, 2.
      Bericht, 229 S.
A24. Crutzen, P.J., 1987: Recent depletions of ozone with emphasis on the polar “ozone
      hole”. Källa, 28, (Stockholm; in Swedish).
A25. Crutzen, P.J., 1987: Climatic Effects of Nuclear War, Annex 2 in Effects of Nuclear War
      on Health and Health Services, Report A40/11 of the World Health Organization to the
      40th World Health Assembly, 18 March 1987; WHO, Geneva.
A26. Crutzen, P.J., 1987: Ozonloch und Spurengase-Menschliche Einflüsse auf Klima und
      Chemie der Atmosphäre, Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Jahrbuch 1987, München, S.
      27-40.
A27. Darmstadter, J., L.W. Ayres, R.U. Ayres, W.C. Clark, R.P. Crosson, P.J. Crutzen, T.E.
      Graedel, R. McGill, J.F. Richards and J.A. Torr, 1987: Impacts of World Development
      on Selected Characteristics of the Atmopshere: An Integrative Approach, Oak Ridge
      National Laboratory, 2 Volumes, ORNL/Sub/8622033/1/V2, Oak Ridge, Tennessee
      37931, USA.
A28. Brühl, C. and P.J. Crutzen, 1989: The potential role of odd hydrogen in the ozone
      hole photochemistry, in Our Changing Atmosphere (P.J. Crutzen, J.-C. Gerard and R.
      Zander, Editors), Université de Liege, Institut d’Astrophysique, B-4200 Cointe-
      Ougree, Belgium, pp. 171-177.
A29. Crutzen, P.J., W.M. Hao, M.H. Liu, J.M. Lobert and D. Scharffe, 1989: Emissions of CO2
      and other trace gases to the atmosphere from fires in the tropics, in P.J. Crutzen, J.C.
      Gerard and R. Zander, Eds.: Our Changing Atmosphere, Proceedings of the 28th Liege
      International Astrophysical Colloqium, Université de Liege, Belgium, pp. 449-471.


240                                    Chemistry 1995


A30. Graedel, T.E. and P.J. Crutzen, 1989: The Changing Atmosphere. Scientific American,
     pp. 58-68 (in deutsch: Veranderungen der Atmosphäre. Spektrum der Wissenschaften,
     pp. 58-68.
A31. Lelieveld, J., P.J. Crutzen and H. Rodhe, 1989: Zonal average cloud characteristics for
     global atmospheric chemistry modelling. Report CM-76, UDC 551.510.4, Glomac
     89/l. International Meteorological Institute in Stockholm, University of Stockholm,
     54 pp.
A32. Crutzen, P.J., 1990: Auswirkungen menschlicher Aktivitäten auf die Erdatmosphäre:
     Was zu forschen, was zu tun? DLR-Nachtichten, Heft 59, S. 5-13.
A33. Crutzen, P.J., 1990: Comments on George Reid’s “Quo Vadimus” contribution
     “Climate”. In: Quo Vadimus. Geophysics for the next generation, Geophysical
     Monograph 60, IUGG Vol 10, Eds. G.D. Garland and John R. Apel, American
     Geophysical Union, Washington, USA, p. 47.
A34. Crutzen, P.J., 1990: Global changes in tropospheric chemistry, Proceedings of Summer
     School on Remote Sensing and the Earth’s Environment, Alpbach, Austria, 26 July-4 August
     1989, pp. 105-113.
A35. Crutzen, P.J., C. Briihl, 1990: The potential role of HO X and ClOX interactions in the
     ozone hole photochemistry, in Dynamics, Transport and Photochemistry in the Middle
     Atmosphere of the Southern Hemisphere, Ed. A. O’Neil, Kluwer, Dor-drecht, 203-212.
A36. Crutzen, P.J. and C. Briihl, 1990: The atmospheric chemical effects of aircraft opera-
     tions. In: Air Traffic and the Environment-Background, Tendencies and Potential Global
     Atmosphere Effects. Proceedings of a DLR International Colloqium Bonn, Germany, November
     15/16, 1990, Ed. Schumann, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg 1990, pp. 96-106.
A37. Horowitz, A., G. von Helden, W. Schneider, F.G. Simon, P.J. Crutzen and G.K.
     Moortgat, 1990: Oxygen photolysis at 214 nm and 25 “C, Proceedings of the Quadrennial
     Ozone Symposium, Göttingen 8-13 August 1988, Eds. R.D. Boikov and P. Fabian,
     Deepak Publ. Co., pp. 690-693.
A38. Briihl, Ch., P.J. Crutzen, E.F. Danielsen, H.         H.-D. Hollweg and D. Kley, 1991:
     Umweltvertriglichkeitsstudie für das Raumtransportsystem SÄNGER, Teil 1
     Unterstufe, Ed. Max-Planck-Institut für Meteorologie Hamburg, 142 pp.
A39. Crutzen, P.J., 1991: Methane’s sinks and sources. Nature, 350, pp. 380-382.
A40. Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1991: Climate discussion and fossil fuels. O i l
     Gas-European Magazine, 4, 11-15.
A41. Crutzen, P.J., 1992: Ozone depletion: Ultraviolet on the increase. Nature, 356,
     104-105.
A42. Crutzen, P.J., 1992: Menschliche Einflüsse auf das Klima und die Chemie der globa-
     len Atmosphäre, in: Stadtwerke der Zukunft-ASEW-Fachtagung Kassel, 1991, Ed.
     ASEW, Köln, Ponte Press, Bochum, 7-27.
A43. Graedel T.E. and P.J. Crutzen, 1992: Ensemble assessments of atmospheric emissions
     and impacts, in: Energy and the Environment in the 21 st Century, pp l-24, Energy
     Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge.
A44. Sander, R., J. Lelieveld and P.J. Crutzen, 1992: Model calculations of the nighttime
     aqueous phase oxidation of S(IV) in an orographic cloud. Proceedings of Joint
     CEC/EUROTRAC Workshop and LACTOZ-HALIPP Working Group on Chemical
     Mechanisms Describing Tropospheric Processes, Leuven, Belgium, September 23-25, 1992,
     Air Pollution Research Report 45, Ed. J. Peeters, E. Guyot SA, Brussels, 285-290.
A45. Briihl, Ch., P.J. Crutzen, H.        and D. Kley, 1993: The impact of the spacecraft sys-
     tem SÄnger on the composition of the middle atmosphere, in: AZAA Fourth
     International Aerospace Planes Conference, Orlando/Florida, l-4 December 1992,
     American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Washington DC, l-9.
A46. Crutzen, P.J., 1993: Die Beobachtung atmosphärisch-chemischer Verinderungen:
     Ursachen und Folgen für Umwelt und Klima. In: Klima: Vorträge im Wintersemester
      1992/93, Sammelband der Vorträge des Studium Generale der Ruprecht-Karls-
     Universität Heidelberg (Ed.), Heidelberger Verlagsanstalt, 31-48.


                                         Paul Crutzen                                      241


A47.           J.U., Th. Peter, C. Brühl and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: The influence of high flying
      aircraft on polar heterogeneous chemistry, Proceedings of an International Scientific
      Colloquium on Impart of Emissions from Aircraft and Spacecraft upon the Atmosphere, Köln,
      Germany, April 18-20, 1994, DLR-Mitteilung 9406, U. Schumann and D. Wurzel
      (Eds.), 229-234.
A48. Kanakidou, M., P.J. Crutzen and P.H. Zimmermann, 1994: Estimates of the changes
      in tropospheric chemistry which result from human activity and their dependence on
      NO, emissions and model resolution, Proceedings of the Quadrennial Ozone Symposium,
     June 413, 1992, Charlottsville, Virginia, U.S., NASA Conference Publication 3266,
      66-69
A49. Müller, R. and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: On the relevance of the methane oxidation cycle
      to “ozone hole chemistry”, Proceedings of the Quadrennial Ozone Symposium, June 4-13,
      1992, Charlottsville, Virginia, U.S., NASA Conference Publication 3266, 298-301.
A50. Peter, Th. and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: Das Ozonloch: Wie kam es dazu und was sollten wir
      daraus lernen? In: Der Mensch im Strahlungsfeld der Sonne. Konstnnz und Wandel in Natur
      und Gesellschaft. Ed. C. Fröhlich, FORUM DAVOS, Wissenschaftliches
      Studienzentrum, Davos, 31-44.
A51. Steil, B., C. Brühl, P.J. Crutzen, M. Dameris, M. Ponater, R. Sausen, E. Roeckner,
      U. Schlese and G.J. Roelofs, 1994: A chemistry model for use in comprehensive
      climate models, Proceedings of an International Scientific Colloquium on Impart of
      Emissions from Aircraft and Spacecraft upon the Atmosphere, Köln, Germany, April 18-20,
      1994, DLR-Mitteilung 9406, U. Schumann and D. Wurzel (Eds.), 235-240.
A52. Andreae, M.O., W.R. Cofer 111, P.J. Crutzen, P.V. Hobbs, J.M. Hollander,
      T. Kuhlbusch, R. Novakov, J.E. Penner, 1995: Climate impacts of carbonaceous and
      other non-sulfate aerosols: A proposed study. Lawrence Berkely Laboratory
      Document-PUB-54 11.
A53. Crutzen, P.J., 1995: On the role of ozone in atmospheric chemistry. In: “The
      Chemistry of the Atmosphere. Oxidants and Oxidation in the Earth’s Atmosphere”,
      Proceedings of the 7th BOC Priestley Conference, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, U.S.A.,
     June 25-27, 1994, Ed. A.R. Bandy, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,
      3-36.



A54. Lelieveld, J., PJ. Crutzen, D. Jacob and A. Thompson, 1995: modeling of biomass
     burning influences on tropospheric ozone, SAFARI BOOK
A55. Kanakidou, M., FJ. Dentener and P:J. Crutzen: Chlorodifluoromethane (HCFC-22)
     and its oxidation products in the troposhere. Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on
     Environmental Science and Technology, September 6-9, 1993, Lesvos, Greece.


242                       Chemistry 1995


Address:   Max-Planck-Institute for Chemistry
(office)   Department of Atmospheric Chemistry
           P.O. Box 3060
           D-55020 Mainz/GERMANY
           Telephone: +49-(O) 6131-305-458/9
           Telefax:    +49-(O) 6131-305-511 (or 436)
           E-mail: air@mpch-mainz.mpg.d400.de
(privat)   Am Fort Gonsenheim 36
           55122 Mainz
           Telephone: +49-(O) 6131-381094
