DISSECTIONS AND RECONSTRUCTIONS OF
GENES AND CHROMOSOMES
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1980

by
PAUL BERG
Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stan-
ford, California 94305



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The Nobel lecture affords a welcome opportunity to express my gratitude and
admiration to the numerous students and colleagues with whom I have worked
and shared, alternately, the elation and disappointment of venturing into the
unknown. Without their genius, perseverance and stimulation much of our
work would not have flourished. Those who have worked with students and
experienced the discomfort of their curiosity, the frustrations of their obstinacy
and the exhilaration of their growth know first hand the magnitude of their
contributions. Each in our common effort left a mark on the other and, I trust,
each richer from the experience. I have also been fortunate to have two devoted
research assistants, Ms. Marianne Dieckmann and June Hoshi, who have
labored diligently and effectively, always with understanding and sympathy for
my idiosyncracies.
   I have also been blessed with an amazing group of colleagues at Stanford
University who have created as stimulating and liberating an environment as
one could long for. Their many achievements have been inspirational and
without their help - intellectually and materially - my efforts would have been
severely handicapped. I am particularly grateful to Arthur Kornberg and
Charles Yanofsky, both longtime close personal friends, for their unstinting
interest, encouragement, support and criticism of my work, all of which en-
abled me to grow and thrive. And finally, there is my wife, Millie, without
whom the rare triumphs would have lost their lustre. Her strength, assent and
encouragement freed me to immerse myself in research.
   Certainly my work could not have taken place without the generous and
enlightened support of the U. S. National Institutes of Health, the National
Science Foundation, the American Cancer Society and numerous foundations
and individuals who invested their wealth in our research.


INTRODUCTION
   “Although we are sure not to know everything and rather
likely not to know very much, we can know anything that is
known to man, and may, with luck and sweat, even find out
some things that have not before been known to man.”
                                  J. Robert Oppenheimer


386                                Chemistry 1980


Although the concept that genes transmit and control hereditary characteris-
tics took hold early in this century, ignorance about the chemical nature of
genes forestalled most inquiries into how they function. All of this changed as a
result of several dramatic developments during the 1940’s to 1960’s. First,
Beadle and Tatum’s researches (1-3) lent strong support for earlier (4) and
widespread speculations that genes control the formation of proteins (en-
zymes); indeed, the dictum, “one gene - one protein”, intensified the search for
the chemical definition of a gene. The discovery by Avery and his colleagues (5)
and subsequently by Hershey and Chase (6) that genetic information is en-
coded in the chemical structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) provided the
first clue. Watson and Crick’s solution (7) of the molecular structure of DNA -
the three dimensional arrangement of the polymerized nucleotide subunits -
not only revealed the basic design of gene structure but also the outlines of how
genes are replicated and function. Suddenly, genes shed their purely conceptu-
al and statistical characterizations and acquired defined chemical identities.
Genetic chemistry, or molecular biology as it has frequently been called, was
born.
    Until a few years ago, much of what was known about the molecular details
of gene structure, organization and function had been learned in studies with
prokaryote microorganisms and the viruses that inhabit them, particularly, the
bacterium Escherichia coli and the T and lambdoid bacteriophages. These
organisms were the favorites of molecular biologists because they can be
propagated readily and rapidly under controllable laboratory conditions. More
significantly, utilizing several means of natural genetic exchanges characteristic
of these organisms and phages, the mapping and manipulation of their relative-
ly small genomes became routine. As a consequence, discrete DNA molecules,
containing one or a few genes, were isolated in sufficient quantity and purity to
permit extensive characterizations of their nucleotide sequences and chromo-
somal organisation. Moreover, such isolated genetic elements provided the
models, substrates and reagents needed to investigate a wide range of basic
questions: the chemical basis of the gentic code; mutagenesis; the mechanisms
of DNA and chromosome replication, repair and recombination; the details of
gene expression and regulation.
   The astounding successes in defining the genetic chemistry of prokaryotes
during the 1950’s and 60’s were both exhilarating and challenging. Not surpris-
ingly, I and others wondered whether the more complex genetic structures of
eukaryote organisms, particularly those of mammalian and human cells, were
organized and functioned in analogous ways. Specifically, did the requirements
of cellular differentiation and intercellular communication, distinctive charac-
teristics of multicellular organisms, require new modes of genome structure,
organisation, function and regulation? Were there just variations of the prokar-
yote theme or wholly new principles waiting to be discovered in explorations of
the genetic chemistry of higher organisms? It seemed important to try to find
out.


                                           P. Berg                                        387


SV4O’s Minichromosome
Sometime during 1965-66 I became acquainted with Renato Dulbecco’s work
on the then newly discovered polyoma virus. The growing sophistication of
animal cell culture methods had made it possible for Dulbecco’s laboratory to
monitor and quantify the virus’ growth cycle in vitro (8). Particularly significant
was the discovery that the entire virus genome resided in a single, relatively
small, circular DNA molecule, one that could accomodate about five to eight
genes (9). I was intrigued by the resemblance between polyoma’s life styles and
those of certain bacteriophages. On the one hand, polyoma resembled lytic
bacteriophages in that the virus could multiply vegetatively, kill its host and
produce large numbers of virus progeny (8). There was also a tantalizing
similarity to lysogenic bacteriophages, since some infections yielded tumori-
genie cells (10, 11). The acquisition of new morphologic and growth character-
istics, as well as certain virus specific properties, suggested that tumorigenesis
and cell transformation resulted from covalent integration of viral DNA into
the cell’s chromosomal DNA and the consequent perturbation of cell growth
control by the expression of virus genes (12, 13).




Fig. 1. Electron microgaphs of: SV 40 virions (u. 1.); SV40 DNA (u. r.); “condensed” SV40
minichromosomes (1.1.); “relaxed-beaded” SV40 minichromosome (1. r.). Photo by J. Griffith.


388                                 Chemistry 1980


   These discoveries and provocative speculations, together with an eagerness
to find an experimental model with which to study the mechanisms of mamma-
lian gene expression and regulation, prompted me to spend a year’s sabbatical
leave (1967-68) in Dulbecco’s laboratory at the Salk Institute. The work and
valuable discussions we carried on during that time (14) reinforced my convic-
tion that the tumor virus system would reveal interesting features about mam-
malian genetic chemistry.
    For somewhat technical reasons when I returned to Stanford, I adopted
SV40, a related virus, to begin our own research program. SV40 virions are
nearly spherical particles whose capsomers are organized in icosahedral sym-
metry (Fig. 1, upper left). The virions contain three viral coded polypeptides
and a single double-stranded circular DNA molecule (Fig. 1, upper right), that
is normally associated with four histones, H2a, H2b, H3 and H4 in the form of
condensed (Fig. 1, lower left) or beaded (Fig. 1, lower right) chromatin-like
structures. SV40 DNA contains 5243 nucleotide pairs (5.24 kbp), the entire
sequence of which is known from studies in S. M. Weissman’s (15) and W.
Fier’s (16) laboratories. Coding information for five (and possibly six) proteins
is contained in the DNA nucleotide sequence. Three of the proteins occur in
mature virions, possibly as structural components of the capsid shell, although
one might be associated with the DNA and have a regulatory function (17). Of
 the two non-virion proteins encoded in the DNA sequence, one is localized in
 the cell nucleus (large T antigen) and functions in Viral DNA replication and
cell transformation; the other, found in the cytoplasm (small t antigen), en-
hances the efficiency of cell transformation (18). Other proteins related in
structure to large T antigen have been speculated about, but their structures
and functions are unclear.
    Restriction endonucleases have played a crucial role in defining the physical
 and genetic organization of the SV40 genome (19, 20). The restriction or
 cleavage sites serve as coordinates for a physical map of the viral DNA; the
 availability of such map coordinates make it possible to locate, accurately,
 particular physical features and genetic loci. In this system of map coordinates
 the single EcoRI endonuclease cleavage site serves as the reference marker and
 is assigned map position            other positions in the DNA are assigned
 coordinates in DNA fractional length units measured clockwise from 0/l.0 (see
 Fig. 2). At the present time knowledge of the entire nucleotide sequence has
 made possible a more precise set of map coordinates: nucleotide pair number.
 Thus, nucleotide 0/5243 is placed within ori, the site where DNA replication is
 initiated, and the other nucleotide pairs are numbered consecutively in the
 clockwise direction (see Fig. 2).
    The SV40 minichromosome is expressed in a regulated temporal sequence
 after it reaches the nucleus of infected primate cells. Initially, transcription in
 the counter-clockwise direction of one strand (the E-strand) of about one half of
 the DNA (the early region) yields the early mRNAs (Fig. 2). These mRNAs,
 which encode the large T and small t antigen polypeptides (the stippled portion
 of the mRNAs indicate the protein coding regions), have 5’-ends originating
 from nucleotide sequences near the site marked ori and 3’-polyadenylated (poly


                                              P. Berg                                            389




Fig. 2. A physical and genetic map of SV40 DNA.
  The inner circle symbolizes the closed circular DNA molecule; indicated within the circle are the
nucleotide-pair map coordinates starting and ending at 0/5243. Al so shown by small arrows within
the circle are the sites at which five restriction endonucleases cleave SV40 DNA once. Arrayed
around the outside of the circle are the map coordinates, expressed in fractional lengths, beginning
at the reference point 0/1.0 (the EcoRI endonuclease cleavage site) and proceeding clockwise
around the circle. The coding regions for the early and late proteins are shown as stippled arrows
extending from the nucleotide pair of the first codon to the nucleotide pair that specifies termina-
tion of the protein coding sequence. Each of the coding regions is embedded in a mRNA, the span
of which is indicated by dotted or dashed 5'-ends and wavy poly A 3’-ends. The jagged or saw-
toothed portions of each mRNA indicate the portions of the transcript that are spliced in forming
the mature mRNAs.




A) ends from near map position 0.16. Synthesis of large T antigen triggers the
initiation of viral DNA replication at ori, a specific site in the DNA (Fig. 2
identifies ori at map position 0.67 or nucleotide position 0/5243); replication
then proceeds bi-directionally, terminating about 180° away near map position
0.17, yielding covalently closed circular progeny DNA. New viral mRNAs
appear in the polyribosomes concommitant with DNA replication; these are


390                                Chemistry 1980


synthesized in the clockwise direction from the L-strand of the other half of the
virus DNA (the late region) and are referred to as late mRNAs. Transcription
of the late mRNAs, which code for the virion proteins VPl, VP2, and VP3 (the
stippled regions designate the protein coding regions of these proteins), begins
from multiple positions between map positions 0.68-0.72 and terminates at
about map position 0.16. Finally, the accumulation of progeny DNA molecules
and virion proteins culminates in death of the cell and release of mature virion
particles.
   SV40 possesses an alternative life cycle when the virus infects rodent and
other non-primate cells. The same early events take place - the E-strand
mRNAs and large T and small t antigens are synthesized - but DNA replica-
tion does not occur and late strand mRNAs and virion proteins are not made.
Frequently, replication of cell DNA and mitosis are induced after infection, and
most infected cells survive with little evidence of prior infection. Generally, a
small proportion of the cells (less than 10%) acq uire the ability to multiply
under culture conditions that restrict the growth of normal cells; moreover,
these transformed cells can produce tumors after innoculation into appropriate
animals. Invariably, the transformed cells contain all or part of the viral DNA
covalently integrated into the cell’s chromosomal DNA and produce the
mRNAs and proteins coded by the early genes.
   During the 1970’s several different approaches, carried on in many laborato-
ries including my own, clarified the arrangement of SV40 genes on the DNA
and revealed how they function during the virus life cycle (21-23). Initially,
viral genes were mapped on the DNA relative to restriction sites by localizing
the regions from which early and late mRNAs were transcribed. Subsequently,
more precise mapping was achieved by correlating the positions of discrete
deletions and other alterations in the viral DNA with specific physiologic
defects. But with the nucleotide sequence map, the boundaries of each SV40
gene and the nucleotide segments coding for each polypeptide can be specified
with considerable precision (Figure 2). As expected, the availability of a precise
genetic and physical map of SV40’s minichromosome, has shifted the research
emphasis to explorations of the molecular mechanisms governing each gene’s
expression and function, the replication and maturation of the viral minichro-
mosome, recombination between the viral and host DNA, and how virus and
host gene products interact to cause transformation of normal into tumorigenic
cells. Excellent and more detailed summaries and analyses of the molecular
biology of SV40 and polyoma containing acknowledgements to the important
contributions made by many individuals can be found in several recent mono-
graphs (21-23).

SV40 as a Transducing Virus
The analysis of the organization, expression and regulation of bacterial gen-
omes was greatly aided by the use of bacteriophage-mediated transfer of genes
between cells. Indeed, specialized transducing phages of λ,            P22 and
others, permitted the cloning and amplification of specific segments of bacterial
DNA thereby, making it possible to construct cells with unusual and informa-


                                       P. Berg                                     391


tive genotypes and to obtain valuable substrates and probes for exploring
mechanisms of transcription, translation and regulation.
   This background led me to consider, soon after beginning work with the
tumor viruses, whether SV40 could be used to transduce new genes into
mammalian cells. Initially, I had serious reservations about the success of such
a venture because of the predictably low probability of generating specific
recombinants between virus and cell DNA and the limited capability for
selecting or screening animal cells that had acquired specific genetic properties.
But it seemed that one possible way out of this difficulty, at least one worth
trying, was to produce the desired SV40 transducing genomes synthetically.
Consequently, in about 1970, I began to plan the construction, in vitro, o f
recombinant DNA molecules with SV40 and selected non-viral DNA segments.
The goal was to propagate such recombinant genomes in suitable animal cells,
either as autonomously replicating or integrated DNA molecules. At the time
there were few if any animal genes available for recombination with SV40 DNA
but I anticipated that a variety of suitable genes would eventually be isolated.
Therefore, the first task was to devise a general way to join together, in vitro, a n y
two different DNA molecules.
   Hershey and his colleagues had already shown that λ-phage DNA could be
circularized or joined end to end in vitro (24). This occurred because λ p h a g e
DNA has cohesive ends, i.e., single-stranded, overlapping, complementary
DNA ends (25). So, it seemed that if cohesive ends could be synthesized onto
the ends of DNA molecules, they could be covalently joined in vitro with DNA
ligase.
    During 1971-72, using then available enzymes and relatively straight-
 forward enzymologic procedures, David A. Jackson, Robert H. Symons and I
 (26) and, independently and concurrently, Peter E. Lobban and A. D. Kaiser
 (27), devised a way to synthesize synthetic cohrsive termini on the ends of any
 DNA molecules, thereby paving the way for constructing recombinant DNAs i n
 vitro. Our procedure (Fig. 3) was developed using as the model “foreign” DNA
 a bacterial plasmid that contained some bacteriophage λ DNA and three E. coli
 genes that specify enzymes required for galactose utilization (28). Circular
 SV40 DNA (5.24 kbp) and λ dv gal plasmid DNA (about 10 kbp) were each
 cleaved with a specific endonuclease to convert them to linear molecules. Then,
 after a briefdigestion with λ -exonuclease to remove about fifty nucleotides from
 the 5’-termini, it was possible for deoxynucleotidyl terminal transferase to add
 short “tails” of either deoxyadenylate or deoxythymidylate residues to the 3’-
 termini. After mixing and annealing under appropriate conditions the two
 DNAs were joined and cyclized via their complementary “tails” (Fig. 3). The
 gaps that occur where the two DNA molecules are held together, were filled in
 with DNA polymerase I and deoxynucleoside triphosphate substrates and the
 resulting molecules were covalently sealed with DNA ligase; exonuclease III
 was present to permit repair of nicks or gaps created during the manipulations.
    The resulting hybrid DNA was approximately three times the size of SV40
 DNA and, therefore, could not be propagated as an encapsidated virus. But we
 intended to test whether the E. coli galactose genes would be expressed after


392                               Chemistry 1980


                     Construction Of Hybrid Genome




Fig. 3. The construction of    gaI recombinant DNA. See text for comment on individual
steps.


introduction into the chromosomes of cultured animal cells. Moreover, since
the λdvgal plasmid could replicate autonomously in E . coli ( 2 8 ) , w e a l s o
planned to determine if SV40 DNA would be propagated in E. coli cells and if
any SV40 genes would be expressed in the bacterial host. Although the SV40-
     gal recombinant DNA shown in Fig. 3 could not have replicated in E. coli -


                                      P. Berg                                  393


a gene needed for replication of the plasmid DNA in E. coli had been inactivat-
ed by the insertion of the SV40 DNA - a relatively simple modification of the
procedure - the use of hdv gal dimeric DNA as acceptor for the SV40 DNA
insert-could have circumvented this difficulty. Nevertheless, because many
colleagues expressed concern about the potential risks of disseminating E. coli
containing SW40 oncogenes, the experiments with this recombinant DNA were
discontinued.
   Since that time there has been an explosive growth in the application of
recombinant DNA methods for a number of novel purposes and challenging
problems. This impressive progress owes much of its impetus to the growing
sophistication about the properties and use of restriction endonucleases, the
development of easier ways of recombining different DNA molecules and, most
importantly, the availability of plasmids and phages that made it possible to
propagate and amplify recombinant DNAs in a variety of microbial hosts. (See
29, 30 for a collection of notable examples.)
    By 1975, extensive cloning experiments had produced elaborate libraries of
eukaryote DNA segments containing single genes or clusters of genes from
many species of organisms. As expected, studies of their molecular anatomy
and chromosomal arrangement have provided new insights about possible
mechanisms of gene regulation in normal and developmentally interesting
animal systems. But, it seemed likely from the beginning that ways would be
needed to assay isolated genes for their biological activity in vivo. Consequently,
I returned to the original goal of using SV40 to introduce cloned genes into
cultured mammalian cells. But this time we explored a somewhat different
approach.
    During 1972-74 Janet Mertz and I (31) learned how to propagate SV40
deletion mutants by complementation using appropriate SV40 temperature-
sensitive (ts) mutants as helpers. This advance made it feasible to consider
propagating genomes containing exogenous DNA in place of specific regions of
SV40 DNA. Accordingly, Stephen Goff and I devised a procedure to construct
such recombinants by removing defined segments of SV40 DNA with appropri-
ate restriction endonucleases and replacing them with “foreign” DNA seg-
ments using synthetic cohesive ends (32, 33) (Fig. 4). In this experimental
design the recombinant genomes must contain the origin of SV40 DNA replica-
tion (ori) so that they can be propagated; also they must be smaller than 5.3
kbp, that is, not more than one mature viral DNA length, to be incorporated
into virus particles. Furthermore, because the SV40 vector lacks genetic func-
tions coded by the excised DNA segment, the recombinant genomes are defec-
tive and must be propagated with a helper virus that can supply the missing
gene product or products. In our protocol the recombinant genome retains at
 least one functioning virus gene and, consequently, can complement a defective
 gene in the helper virus. For example, recombinants in which the inserted DNA
replaces all or part of SV40’s late region can be propagated with SV40 mutants
that have a defective early region (e. g. at high temperature with ts early
mutants); similarly, recombinants having exogenous DNA implants in place of


394                                      Chemistry 1980


DNA segments in the early region can be propagated with a helper genome
that is defective in its late region (in this instance, with ts late mutants).
   Our initial attempts (32, 33) to obtain expression of cloned DNA segments as
distinct mRNAs and proteins following introduction of the recombinant gen-
omes into cultured cells were negative. But as soon as we recognized that
expression of the new genetic information required that the transcript, originat-
ing from SV40 promoters and ending at SV40 specified poly A sites, be spliced,
our fortunes changed. The initial success in obtaining expression of added
genetic elements as mRNAs and proteins following transfection into cultured
monkey cells was achieved with a DNA segment coding for rabbit
(34). Soon afterward, a bacterial gene (Ecogpt) coding for xanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyl transferase (XGPRT) (35), a mouse DNA specifying dihydro-
folate reductase (DHFR) (36), and a bacterial gene (neo R ) for aminoglycoside
phosphotransferase (37) were successfully transduced into mammalian cells via
SV40 DNA based vectors. Generally, the transduced DNA segments are ex-
pressed at rates comparable to those of the SV40 genes they replace, but some
anomalies in the RNA processing have been observed.




Fig. 4. A scheme for construction of SV40 transducing genomes in vitro.
  Segments of the late (upward track) or early (downward track) regions of SW40 DNA (the
dashed circle on the left) are removed by sequential cleavages with restriction endonucleases.
Appropriate sized segments of any DNA, produced by restriction enzyme cleavages, enzymatic
copying of mRNA or chemical synthesis, can be inserted in place of the resected SV40 DNA
segment. Joining, via natural or synthetic cohesive ends (symbolized by the jagged lines), is
mediated by a DNA ligase. Ori indicates the position of the origin of SV40 DNA replication.


                                     P. Berg                                  395

   Hamer and Leder have also constructed and propagated recombinants of
SV40 DNA with cloned mouse genomic                 (38) or α-globin (39) genes.
In certain of their recombinants the transduced genes are expressed from SV40
late promoter signals, but other constructions reveal that transcription can be
initiated from the α-globin promoter as well (39). Their experiments also
demonstrate that proper splicing of the globin intervening sequences and
translation of the resulting mRNA’s can occur in a heterologous host.

New Transducing Vectors for Mammalian Cells
In the experiments referred to above, our principal aim had been to exploit the
ability of the recombinant genomes to replicate in the virus’ permissive host.
For example, following infection of monkey cells, the SV40 recombinant geno-
mes are amplified about 104 to 105-fold, thereby ensuring a high yield of the
products expressed from the transduced genes. This system has taught us a
great deal about the necessity and mechanistic subtleties of RNA splicing (40),
the rules governing expression of coding sequences inserted at different posi-
tions in SV40 DNA (41), and some novel features of SV40 gene expression itself
(42). But this experimental design has several distinct shortcomings. During
the course of the infection the cells are killed, precluding the opportunity to
monitor the transduced gene’s expression in continuously multiplying cell
populations. Moreover, only cells which can replicate SV40 DNA are able to
amplify the cotransduced genes. This constraint excludes many specialized and
differentiated animal cells as hosts for the transduced genes.
   To circumvent these disadvantages we have developed a new group of
transducing vectors that can be used to introduce and maintain new genetic
information in a variety of mammalian cells (Fig. 5). pSV2 (43), and its
derivatives pSV3 and pSV5 (35, 44) contain a DNA segment (shown as the
filled region in Fig. 5) from an E. coli plasmid (pBR322) that permits these
DNAs to propagate in E. coli cells, thereby greatly simplifying the genetic
manipulations involved in their use. Each of the vectors contains a marker gene
(shown in Fig. 5 as the hatched segment) flanked at the 5’-end with a DNA
segment containing the SV40 early promoter and origin of DNA replication
(ori); another SV40 DNA segment that ensures splicing and polyadenylation of
the transcript is located at the 3’-end of the marker segment (the SV40 derived
DNA segments are shown stippled in Fig. 5). Additional DNA segments can
also be inserted into the vector DNAs at any of several unique restriction sites;
consequently, a single DNA molecule can transduce several genes of interest
simultaneously.
    pSV2 can not replicate in mammalian cells because it and the cell lack the
means to initiate DNA replication at ori. This can be rectified by inserting, at
pSV2’s single BamHl cleavage site, DNA segments which contain either a
complete early region from SV40 DNA (pSV3), or polyoma’s early region
(pSV5) (Fig. 5). The viral early regions inserted into pSV3 and pSV5 vectors
code for proteins that promote DNA replications from their respective origins,
therefore, pSV3 DNA can replicate in monkey cells and pSV5 DNA replicates
in mouse cells (44).


396                                      Chemistry 1980




  The solid black segments in each diagram represent 2.3 kbp of pBR322 DNA sequence that
contains the origin of pBR322 DNA replication and the ampicillinase gene. The stippled regions
represent segments derived from SV40 DNA, the open region (in pSV5-gpt) is from polyoma DNA
and the hatched segment represents Ecogpt DNA containing the gene coding for E. coli XGPRT.




   To date three marker DNA segments have been used in conjunction with the
pSV2, 3 and 5 vector DNAs: Ecogpt, an E. coli gene that codes for the enzyme
XGPRT (35, 44); a mouse cDNA segment that specifies DHFR (36); neo R , a
bacterial plasmid gene specifying an aminoglycoside phosphotransferase that
inactivates the antibacterial action of neomycin-kanamycin derivatives (37).
Here, I shall only summarize several recent findings with Ecogpt as the marker
gene but, suffice it to say, transfection of a variety of cells with any of the vector-
dhfr or vector-neoR derivatives results in expression of the mouse DHFR, and
neo R phenotype, respectively.
   Richard Mulligan isolated the Ecogpt gene (35) to determine if it was useful
for the detection and selective growth of mammalian cells that acquired that
gene. The first priority was to establish that introduction of Ecogpt into
mammalian cells would promote the production of E. coli XGPRT. We found
that extracts from cultured monkey cells exposed to pSV2-gpt, pSV3-gpt and
pSV5-gpt DNAs did contain two GPRT enzyme activities (Fig. 6A); one
corresponds to the normal cellular enzyme, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphori-
bosyl transferase (HGPRT) by its electrophoretic behavior in a polyacrylamide
gel and the other has the same electrophoretic mobility as the E. coli XGPRT
activity. Other characterizations of XGPRT synthesized in monkey cells indi-
cate that it is indistinguishable by several criteria from the same enzyme made
in E. coli.


                                              P. Berg                                            397




              ORIGIN




Fig. 6. Detection of GPRT activity following electrophoresis of cell extracts in polyacrylamide gels.
   a) Extracts of about 5x10 CV1 cells harvested 3 days after transfection with 10 µg of pSV2-,
                             6


-3. or -5-gpt DNAs were electrophoresed in polyacrylamide gels and assayed for GPRT activity in
situ by incubation with ‘H-labeled guanine and detection of the labeled GMP product by fluoro-
graphic autoradiography (35). The black areas correspond to the location of guanine phos-
phoribosyl transferax activity on the gel and the arrows indicate the known positions of the
monkey and E. coli GPRT enzymes.



   E. coli XGPRT is analogous to the mammalian enzyme, HGPRT. Both use
guanine as a substrate for purine nucleotide synthesis. But E. coli XGPRT
differs from its mammalian counterpart in that it uses xanthine more efficiently
then hypoxanthine as a substrate (45); the mammalian enzyme can use hypo-
xanthine but not xanthine as a precursor for purine nucleotide formation (46).
   Since E. coli XGPRT is produced in monkey cells after introduction of the
Ecogpt gene, it was important to learn if the bacterial enzyme could replace the
cellular HGPRT function. This point could be tested with human Lesch-
Nyhan cells because they lack HGPRT and, as a consequence, can not grow in
a culture medium containing hypoxanthine, aminopterin and thymidine (HAT
medium) (47). It seemed likely that transfection of Lesch-Nyhan cells with
pSV-gpt DNAs would show whether the formation of E. coli XGPRT enabled
these mutant cells to survive in HAT medium.


398                          Chemistry 1980




  As expected, Lesch-Nyhan cells did not survive in HAT medium if they had not
received vector-gpt DNA. But when Lesch-Nyhan cell cultures received pSV2-gpt
or pSV3-gpt DNA, surviving colonies were recovered at a frequency of about 10-4
(35). Representatives of the surviving clones, subcultured in HAT medium for 40
generations, were found to contain E. coli XGPRT (Fig. 6B). Thus, the acquisition of
Ecogpt DNA and consequent expression of E. coli XGPRT rectified the defect
caused by the absence of the cellular HGPRT in these cells.
 The expression of Ecogpt provides a novel capability for mammalian cells;
normal mammalian cells do not utilize xanthine for purine nucleotide formation
but those that express Ecogpt and make E. coli XGPRT can do so. The acquisition
and expression for Ecogpt can, therefore, be made the basis for an effective
dominant selection for mammalian cells (48).
 Purine nucleotides are synthesized de novo or by salvage pathways (Fig. 7). In the
de novo pathway, inosinic acid (IMP), the first nucleotide intermediate, is converted
to adenylic acid (AMP) via adenylosuccinate and to guanylic acid (GMP) via
xanthylic acid (XMP). Salvage of free purines occurs by condensa-


                                            P. Berg                                          399

 tion with phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP): adenine phosphoribosyl
 transferase (APRT) accounts for the formation of AMP from adenine (A) and
 hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HGPRT) converts hypo-
 xanthine (Hx) and guanine (G) to IMP and GMP, respectively. No mamma-
lian enzyme comparable to the bacterial enzyme for converting xanthine (X) to
 XMP is known.
    Mycophenolic acid (MPA), an inhibitor of IMP dehydrogenase (49), pre-
 vents the formation of XMP and, therefore, of GMP. The inhibition of cell
 growth by mycophenolic acid can be reversed by the addition of guanine to the
 medium, because guanine can be converted to its mononucleotide by HGPRT.
 Since normal mammalian cells do not convert xanthine to XMP, they do not
 grow if the medium containing mycophenolic acid is supplemented with xan-
 thine. However, cells that contain E. coli XGPRT should grow under these
 conditions.
    Transfection of monkey or mouse cells with pSV2, 3 or 5-gpt DNA and
 subsequent transfer to a medium containing mycophenolic acid plus xanthine,
 yields surviving colonies with frequencies ranging from 10-4 to 10-5 (48).
 Omission of the DNAs, or transfection with pSV2, 3 and 5 DNA containing
 other marker segments (e.g.          or mouse DHFR DNA), or removal of the


                            PURINE NUCLEOTIDE SYNTHESIS




Fig. 7. Pathways of purine nucleotide synthesis.
   Methotrexate (MtxR) inhibits de novo synthesis of purines and mycophenolic acid (MPA)
specifically inhibits the conversion of IMP to XMP (49). The arrows between purine bases and
their respective mononucleotides indicate the reactions of the bases with PRPP catalyzed by purine
phosphoribosyl transferase. An arrow also indicates that AMP can be deaminated to IMP.


400                               Chemistry 1980

ori segment from pSV2-gpt DNA, results in fewer than 10-7 surviving colo-
nies. Ecogpt transformed clones contain cells that produce both the normal
HGPRT and the Ecogpt product, XGPRT. Analysis of the genetically trans-
formed cells’ DNA indicate that they have retained one to a few copies of the
pSV-gpt DNA, probably integrated into their chromosomal DNA. The struc-
ture, organization and expression of these integrated genes and the relation of
these parameters to their expression are presently being studied.
   Our present studies suggest that the requirements for obtaining expression of
prokaryote genes are not formidable. There is no reason to believe that the
bacterial genes, Ecogpt and neoR, are unique in their ability to be expressed in
mammalian cells. Consequently, I foresee that bacteria, their viruses and
simple eukaryotes will provide a rich source of genes for the modification of
mammalian cells.


PROSPECTS
The development and application of recombinant DNA techniques has opened
a new era of scientific discovery, one that promises to influence our future in
myriad ways. It has already had a dramatic and far reaching impact in the field
of genetics, indeed in all of molecular biology. Molecular cloning provides the
means to solve the organization and detailed molecular structure of extended
regions of chromosomes and eventually the entire genome of any organism
including man’s. Already, investigators have isolated a number of mammalian
and human genes, and in some instances determined their chromosomal ar-
rangement and even their detailed nucleotide sequence. Such detailed informa-
tion has profound implications for the future of medicine. Just as our present
knowledge and practice of medicine relies on a sophisticated knowledge of
human anatomy, physiology and biochemistry, so will dealing with disease in
the future demand a detailed understanding of the molecular anatomy, physiol-
ogy and biochemistry of the human genome. There is no doubt that the
development and application of recombinant DNA techniques has put us at the
threshold of new forms of medicine. There are many who contemplate the
treatment of crippling genetic diseases through replacement of defective genes
by normal counterparts obtained by molecular cloning. Scenarios about how
this could be done are rampant, only a few of which are plausible. Gene
replacement as a therapeutic approach has many pitfalls and unknowns,
amongst which are questions concerning the feasibility and desirability for any
particular genetic disease, to say nothing about the risks. It seems to me that if
we are ever to proceed along these lines we shall need a more detailed knowl-
edge of how human genes are organized and how they function and are
regulated. We shall also need physicians who are as conversant with the
molecular anatomy, physiology and biochemistry of chromosomes and genes as
the cardiac surgeon is with the structure and workings of the heart and
circulatory tree. Gene therapy will have to be evaluated in terms of alternative
and more conventional forms of treatment, just as is now done before undertak-
ing heart valve replacements and renal transplants. Moreover, the ethical


                                                 P. Berg                                     401

 questions that have been raised in some quarters about such strategies will
 surely confound the scientific and medical issues that confront us.
   The advent and widespread use of the recombinant DNA technology for
 basic and medical research and the implications for industrial and pharmaceu-
tical application has also revealed, or perhaps created, an underlying appre-
 hension, an apprehension about probing the nature of life itself, a questioning
 of whether certain inquiries at the edge of our knowledge and our ignorance
 should cease for fear of what we could discover or create. I prefer the more
 optimistic and uplifting view expressed by Sir Peter Medawar in his essay
 entitled “On The Effecting of All Things Possible” (“The Hope of Progress”,
 McThuen and Co. Ltd, London, 1972).

 “If we imagine the evolution of living organisms compressed
 into a year of cosmic time, then the evolution of man has
 occupied a day. Only during the past 10 to 15 minutes of the
 human day has our life been anything but precarious. We are
 still beginners and may hope to improve. To deride the hope
 of progress is the ultimate fatuity, the last word in the pover-
 ty of spirit and meanness of mind.”

    This passage speaks of the need to proceed. The recombinant DNA break-
 through has provided us with a new and powerful approach to the questions
 that have intrigued and plagued man for centuries. I, for one, would not shrink
 from that challenge.




 REFERENCES

. 1. Beadle, G. W. and Tatum, E. L., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 27: 499 (1941).
   2. Beadle, G. W., Chem. Revs. 37: 15 (1945).
   3. Beadle, G. W., The Harvey Lectures 40: 179 (1945).
   4. Garrod, A. E., Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Frowde, Hodder and Stoughton London (1941).
   5. Avery, O. T., MacLeod, C. M., McCarty, M., J. Exp. Med. 79: 137 (1944).
   6. Hershey, A. D. and Chase, M. J., Gen. Physiol. 36: 39 (1952).
   7. Watson, J. D. and Crick, F. H. C., Nature 171: 737, 964 (1953).
   8. Dulbecco, R. and Freeman, G., Virology 8: 396 (1959).
   9. Dulbecco, R. and Vogt, M., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 50: 236 (1963).
  10. Vogt, M. and Dulbecco, R., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 46: 365 (1960).
  11. Dulbecco, R. and Vogt, M., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 46: 1617 (1960).
  12. Sambrook, J. Westphal, H., Srinivasan, P. R., and Dulbecco, R., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA
      60: 1288 (1968).
  13. Oda, K. and Dulbecco, R., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 60: 525 (1968).
  14. Cuzin, F., Vogt, M., Dieckmann, M. and Berg, P., J. Mol. Biol. 47: 317 (1970).
  15. Reddy, V. B., Thimappaya, B., Dhar, R., Subramanian, K. M., Zain, B. S., Pan, J., Ghosh, P.
      K., Celma, M. L. and Weismann, S., M. Science 200: 494 (1978).
  16. Fiers, W., Contreras, R., Haegeman, G., Rogiers, R., Van der Voorde, A., Van Heuverswyn,
      H., Van Herrewaghe, J., Volckgart, G., and Ysebaert, M., Nature 273: 113 (1978).


402                                       Chemistry 1980

17. Llopis, R. and Stark, G. R. A., J. Virol. 1981, submitted.
18. Bouck, N., Beales, N., Shenk, T., Berg, P. and DiMayorca, G., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,
     75: 2473 (1973).
19. Nathans, D., The Harvey Lectures 70: 111 (1976).
20. Nathans, D., Le Prix Nobel -1978 p. 198, Almquist and Wiksell International, Stockholm,
     Sweden.
21. Kelly, T. J. Jr. and Nathans, D., Adv. Virus Res. 22: 85 (1977).
22. Fried, M. and Griffin, B. E., Adv. Can. Res. 24:67 (1977).
23. J. Tooze, ed., DNA Tumor Viruses (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Cold Spring Harbor, NY
     1980) chapters 2-5.
24. Hershey, A. D., Burgi, E. and Ingraham, L., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 49:748 (1963).
25. Wu, R. and Kaiser, A. D., J. Mol. Biol. 35: 523 (1968).
26. Jackson, D. A., Symons, R. H. and Berg, P., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 69: 2904 (1972).
27. Lobban, P. E. and Kaiser, A. D., J. Mol. Biol. 78:53 (1973).
28. Berg, D. E. Jackson, D. A. and Mertz, J. E., J. Viral. 14: 1063 (1974).
29. Science 196: No. 183 (1977).
30. Science 209: No. 4463 (1980).
31. Mertz, J. E. and Berg, P., Virology 62: 112 (1974).
32. Goff, S. P. and Berg, P., Cell. 9: 695 (1976).
33. Goff, S. P. and Berg, P., J. Mol. Biol. 133: 359 (1979).
34. Mulligan, R. C., Howard, B. H. and Berg, P., Nature (London) 277: 108 (1979).
35. Mulligan, R. C. and Berg, P., Science 209: 1422 (1980).
36. Subramini, S., Mulligan, R. C. and Berg, P., Mol. Cell. Biol. 9: 854-864 (1981).
37. Southern, P. J. and Berg, P., Mol. &Applied Gen. 1: 327-341 (1982).
38. Hamer, D. H. and Leder, P., Nature (London) 281: 35 (1979).
39. Hamer, D. H., Koehler, M. and Leder, P., Cell, 21: 697 (1980).
40. Buchman, A. and Berg, P., Mol. Cell. Biol. 8: 4395-4405 (1988).
41. Southern, P. J., Howard, B. H. and Berg, P., J. Mol. Appl. Gen. 1: 177-190 (1982).
42. White, R. T., Villarreal, L. P. and Berg, P., J. Virol. 42: 262-274 (1982).
43. Howard, B. H., Mulligan, R. C. and Berg, P., unpublished.
44. Mulligan, R. C., Howard, B. H., Southern, P. J. and Berg P., unpublished.
45. Miller, R. L., Ramsey, G. A., Krenitsky, T. A. and Elion, G. B., Biochemistry 1 I: 4723 (1979).
46. Krenitsky, T. A., Papaioannou, R., Elion, G. B., Biol. Chem. 244: 1263 (1969).
47. Szybalski, E. H. and Szybalski, W., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 48: 2026 (1962).
48. Mulligan, R. C. and Berg, P., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 78: 2072-2076 (1981).
49. Franklin, T. J. and Cook, J. M., Biochem. J. 113: 515 (1969).
