                               PAUL KARRER


       Carotenoids, flavins and vitamin A and B2
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1937



In the last few decades chemical research has been divided in the main into
two directions; one part aims at the investigation of the structure of the atom
in the widest sense, the other at the elucidation of the composition of the
living cell and its chemical reactions. The first direction has availed itself in
many ways of entirely new methods of investigation, which are essentially
of a physical nature. Biochemical research was able to base itself so far in
the main on the methods of classical chemistry, which certainly have been
improved and developed in an extraordinary manner.
   Progress in methods which modern biochemistry can no longer dream
of doing without, are the selective adsorption processes of Willstätter, sep-
aration by the ultracentrifuge of Svedberg, and chromatographic analysis
by Tsvett, by the use of which it is now possible to separate mixtures of
substances which were previously inextricable. Chromatographic analysis,
in particular, which is based upon filtration of the solution of the mixture
of substances through an adsorption column, in which the more easily ad-
sorbed substances are retained in the upper part of the tube, with the sub-
stances more difficult to adsorb being retained in the lower part, operates in
a similarly complete manner like a prism, which divides the white light into
the individual colours of the spectrum. Thanks to these efficient separation
processes our picture of the composition of plant and animal cells is today
essentially more complicated than it was a few years ago, and it cannot be
doubted that to later generations there will be revealed an even greater
diversity and non-uniformity of the living cell.
   The blue and red pigments of blossoms and berries, the anthocyanins,
which were formerly thought to be uniform and characteristic for the va-
rious plants concerned, have been shown by later investigations to be mix-
tures of many closely related substances. There is indeed not one flower, not
one berry, which owes its colouration to a single anthocyanin. Similar con-
ditions apply in another group of natural pigments, the carotenoids, about
which I have the honour to speak today. In the well-known book by L. S.
Palmer on carotenoids which was published in 1922, only six carotenoids are


434                            1937 P.KARRER

described which had been crystallized and analysed (carotene, lycopene, xan-
thophyll, lutein, fucoxanthin, and rhodoxanthin). Bixin was also known at
that time. Until four years ago the number of these naturally occurring
pigments had risen to 15 ; today we know already some 40 natural pigments
of this group, the isolation of which has only been made possible by the new
methods of separation.
   Attention has been paid to the carotenoids in more recent research, not
only because of their unique structure, but also because of their close relation
to the vitamins, as some carotenoids are provitamins of vitamin A and are
transformed into this vitamin in the animal organism. Investigation of the
structural constitution of the vitamins started from carotene; when it was
possible, in 1930, to establish the correct constitutional formula for b-caro-
tene, a structural formula for any other vitamin or provitamin was not yet
known. Shortly afterwards, in 1931, it became also possible to elucidate the
constitution of vitamin A itself, and thus to obtain the first insight into the
structure of a vitamin. We may perhaps remember that scarcely ten years
have elapsed since the time when many research scientists doubted the mate-
rial specificity of the vitamins, and were of the opinion that a special state
of matter, a special colloidal character, was the cause of the peculiar vitamin
effects which had been observed.
    Carotene and its relatives are polyenes; they contain numerous conjugated
double bonds in their molecules. We discovered this characteristic structural
principle for the first time when investigating the saffron pigment, crocetin.
As examples of the molecular structures of such polyenes I give here the
formulae of crocetin, bixin (norbixin), the tomato pigment lycopin and fi-
carotene (see opposite page).
   To the constitutionally clarified carotenoids there also belong α- and γ -
carotenes, the second yellow Pigment xanthophyll, whose wide distribution
in the animal kingdom has been demonstrated by Lönnberg in particular,
 and also zeaxanthin from maize and many other fruits, the pigment of lob-
 sters and many other crustacea, astacin, the paprika pigment capsanthin,
 cryptoxanthin, and many others.
    What is striking in the above structural formulae is not only the abundance
 of conjugated double bonds, unknown previously in any other natural sub-
 stances, but the fact that the carotenoid molecules are composed of isoprene
 residues. This applies for all carotenoids which are therefore to be recognized
 as relatives of the terpenes, camphor, and rubbers. Furthermore, the sym-
 metrical character of the above four formulae is striking; they are composed


            C A R O T E N O I D S , F L A V I N S , V I T A M I N S A A N D BZ   435




cule show the same structure. This structural principle, which we first rec-
ognized in the tomato pigment lycopin and then in carotene, later proved
to be realized in other branches of terpene chemistry and was applied by
various research workers with success in the derivation of structural formulae.
  The structural formulae of the above-mentioned four carotenoids have
been proved partly by decomposition reactions and partly by synthesis of
their perhydroderivatives.
  Two examples of this type are shown in the following structural formu-
lae, one showing constitutional determination by decomposition and the
other by synthesis.


436             1937 P.KARRER

      Oxidative decomposition of a-carotene




          Synthesis of perhydrocrocetin


            C A R O T E N O I D S , F L A V I N S , V I T A M I N S A A N D BZ   437




However, the theory now allows us to foresee furthermore for each in-
dividual carotenoid extraordinarily numerous stereoisomeric forms, since
at each individual double bond the substituents can be arranged either in
cis-position or trans-position, whereby even two modifications of the trans-
arrangement must be taken into consideration. Diagrammatically the three
extreme cases (continuous cis-form, continuous attenuated trans-form, and
continuous compressed trans-form) can be represented as follows:




   Theoretically a very large number of stereoisomers can be imagined by
combining cis- and trans-arrangements. As in many other cases, however,
Nature has made only slight use of these possibilities. Up to the present we
know only two carotenoid pigments in which this cis-trans-isomerism is
realized. These are bixin and crocetin, which occur in both forms as unstable
and stable isomers.
   Despite the wealth of possibilities of isomerism which are available here,
it can be established with great certainty, in the case of the unstable and
stable bixin, which double bond is responsible for the occurrence of the two
isomers. It is possible to decompose the polyenes by permanganate oxidation
in stages to aldehydes in the sense that one double bond after another is
oxidized. In this way the aldehydes I to III were obtained from unstable
bixin:


438                              1937 P.KARRER




In the same way decomposition of stable bixin yields aldehydes of structures
I to III. Whereas the compounds III are identical in both cases, the aldehydes
I and II obtained from unstable and stable bixin proved to be different; they
are cis-trans-isomers. From this it can be seen that the stereoisomerism of the
two natural bixins is very probably based on the different configuration of
the third double bond, counted from the free carboxyl.* If a trans-form is
assumed for the remaining double bonds (which for various reasons is not
improbable, though not proved), then the differences in structure of the two
isomeric bixins can be expressed by the following formulae:




* An objection to this conclusion could be brought forward, viz. that a labile apo-
3-norbixinal methyl ester (Formula III), in contrast to the labile apo-1-norbixinal
methyl ester and apo-2-norbixinal methyl ester (Formulae I and II), could rearrange
spontaneously to a stable form under the conditions of the oxidation.


             C A R O T E N O I D S , F L A V I N S , V I T A M I N S A A N D B2   439
  Even fine stereochemical details of such complex structural molecules are
thus experimentally accessible to test and clarification.
  Reference to the close relationship of β-carotene to vitamin A has already
been made. H. v. Euler recognized that carotene can replace vitamin A
in experiments on animals, and Th. Moore proved that in the animal or-
ganism it is transformed into vitamin A. These near relationships became
understandable when we succeeded in isolating and constitutionally eluci-
dating vitamin A. The structural formula, which is proved by a synthesis
of the perhydro-vitamin A, shows that the compound contains half of the
carbon skeleton of β-carotene and from this, by splitting at the central
double bond, the result must have been:




Recently this compound was given the name of axerophtol.
  It appeared now to be of interest to establish whether still further caro-
tenoids, besides β-carotene, could be decomposed through the animal or-
ganism, presumably through its liver tissue, to axerophtol. Investigation of
this problem, which was carried out together with H. v. Euler, led first
of all to the recognition that this does not hold true for most other natural
carotenoids. Substitution by OH or keto groups, splitting of the carbon ring
of β-carotene, etc., leads to a complete disappearance of the vitamin A effect.
Besides β-carotene, in whose molecule the unsubstituted carbon skeleton of
vitamin A occurs twice, those carotenoids proved still to be effective which
contain the carbon skeleton in the unsubstituted form at least once. Pigments
of this kind are α-carotene, γ -carotene*, cryptoxanthin*, echinenon**, a
β-carotene oxide, dihydro-β-carotene, dihydro-α-carotene, diiodo-β-caro-
tene, β-semicarotinone* and also β-apo-2-carotinal and β-apo-4-carotinal.
The structural formulae of some compounds of this provitamin group show
their close constitutional relationships to vitamin A:

  * R. Kuhn et al.
 ** E. Lederer


440                           1937 P. KARRER




       7.




----




The last three of these provitamins are synthetic products, which have
been formed by oxidative splitting at the first, second, or fourth double
bond of the carotene molecule.
  If a single double bond has changed its location in the carbon skeleton


            C A R O T E N O I D S , F L A V I N S , V I T A M I N S A A N D B2   441
characteristic for vitamin A, it is sufficient to neutralize its action as provi-
tamin A. In this way α-semicarotenone, which differs from effective
carotenone by displacement of the double bond in the carbon ring, proved
to be quite ineffective:




The action of vitamin A is consequently extraordinarily specific and
bound to a quite definite structure. Today it is possible to show the atom
arrangement in a polyene characteristic of vitamin A more reliably by exper-
iment on animals than by any chemical decomposition reaction or by spec-
trum analysis measurements. This high specificity is all the more surprising
if it is remembered that with regard to most hormones, e.g. the female
sexual hormones and the plant growth hormones, we can hardly speak of a
constitutional specificity. Not only do substances which are chemically
closely related produce there similar physiological results, but it can often
happen that compounds of entirely different constitutions show the same
effects as the. natural products.
   This strongly pronounced constitutional specificity of vitamin effects may
be connected with the results of the most recent investigations, which re-


442                            1937 P.KARRER

vealed that many vitamins are functional groups of enzymes, the highly
specific properties of which have long been known. These close relationships
between enzymes and vitamins were first shown in vitamin B2 or lacto-
flavin. According to the investigations of Warburg and Theorell the phos-
phoric acid ester of vitamin B2 is the functional group of the yellow oxida-
tion enzyme. Today lactoflavin and any other flavin can be obtained syn-
thetically, and hence we were able to investigate at this point to what extent
the vitamin effect is bound to a certain constitution.
   The process of such a flavin synthesis, one giving the best yields, may be
sketched very briefly. Aromatic primary amines are reductively condensed
with sugars. These result in compounds of type (a). They can then be
coupled with diazonium salts to azo-pigments (b). By reduction, diamino-
derivatives of formula (c) are obtained, which combine with alloxan to
form the flavin pigment.




By using this and similar methods more than 25 different flavins have
been obtained in our laboratory, which differ from one another by the na-
ture of the sugar residues or the substitution in the aromatic ring, amongst
them being lactoflavin itself. This experimental material formed the basis


            C A R O T E N O I D S , F L A V I N S , V I T A M I N S A A N D B2   443
for an assessment of the constitutional specificity of the action of vitamin B2.
As with vitamin A, with lactoflavin the amplitude of variation is extremely
narrow. A substitution of the d-ribose residue in the lactoflavin




by other sugars practically abolishes the action; only the arabinose com-
pounds still show a weak, stimulating effect. Just as much significance have
the two methyl groups in positions 6 and 7. One or the other can indeed
still be omitted or substituted by ethyl without the vitamin action being
substantially affected. On the other hand, the disappearance of both methyl
residues results in complete inactivity. Methyl groups in positions 5 or 8 are
unable to restore this again. The action of vitamin B 2 is therefore like that
of vitamin A, bound to an exactly circumscribed constitution and con-
figuration.
    This specificity makes itself felt not only against higher organisms but
also against bacteria. Elvehjem and my former collaborator Strong* were
recently able to show that of all the flavins tested, only lactoflavin, 6-methyl-
9-(1’,d-ribityl)- isoalloxazin,7-methyl-9-(I’,d-ribityl)-isoalloxazin, and 6-
methyl-7-ethyl-9-(I’,d-ribityl)-isoalloxazin can stimulate the growth of lac-
tic acid bacteria, i.e. the same flavins which are effective in experiments
 on rats. On the other hand, flavins with other sugar residues, and also the
 arabinose compounds, had no effect at all.
    Up to the present only one natural vitamin A has been found as a decom-
 position product of carotene - the axerophtol mentioned above. Never-
 theless, various observations (Heilbron, Morton et al.) suggest that in certain
 fish-liver oils, e.g. those of fresh-water fishes, perhaps still other substances
 occur with a vitamin A action, whose absorption spectra show longer waves
 than that of axerophtol. There is nothing surprising in this possibility, since
 we know that a vitamin A effect is peculiar to various synthetic decomposi-
 tion products of β-carotene with more than 20 C-atoms, such as the above-

* The curves on p. 444 were put at my disposal by Dr. Frank M. Strong.


444   1937 P.KARRER


            C A R O T E N O I D S , F L A V I N S , V I T A M I N S A A N D B2   445
mentioned apo-carotenals. The thought occurs that Nature too is treading
the path which we have been following in the laboratory of late, i.e. in
splitting up carotene not only at the central bonds but also at other double
bonds, whereby products must result with a longer chromophore system
with more double bonds than the ordinary vitamin A possesses. Such sub-
stances will be distinguished by absorption spectra of longer wavelengths.
Although vitamin A is one of those vitamins whose physiological effects
have long been known - Hopkins (1912), Stepp (1911-1912), McCollum,
Simmonds, Becker, and Shipley (1922) - even today we are still very much
in the dark with regard to the way it intervenes in the cell phenomenon
processes. In the cases of vitamin B2 (lactoflavin) and B1 (aneurin), research
during the last two years has been more successful in this connection, as the
parts played by the first in dehydration reactions and by the second in
natural carbohydrate decomposition have been clearly recognized. It is also
widely believed today that vitamin A participates in the case of oxidation
reduction reactions in the organism. How this intervention happens is, how-
ever, still not clearly known.
   Vitamin A exercises considerable influence on epithelial formation, and
many results of an A-avitaminosis are probably the results of the suspension
of the effect of the A-factor which promotes the formation of a healthy
epithelium. Thus, for instance, A-avitaminosis resulting from injury to the
epithelium is connected with lowered resistance to infections; furthermore,
in rats it leads to a chronic oestrus (colpokeratose), i.e. the outer layers of
the epithelia of the vagina become horny. Modern surgery is making in-
creasing use of the epithelium-promoting effect of vitamin A, by using cod-
liver oil preparations, rich in vitamin A, for helping the healing process in
wounds; carotene is believed to have a similar favourable effect.
   The action of the A-factor on the eyes is remarkably strong; a vitamin
deficiency leads to xerophthalmia, the cause of which is sclerotic change,
and to night blindness (hemeralopia), a disease which is often encountered,
even in these days, among primitive peoples whose nutrition is deficient.
It is most remarkable that the eye is one of the organs most rich in vitamins
which we know; not only lactoflavin and vitamin C (ascorbic acid), but
also vitamin B2, vitamin K, etc. are present in the eye in considerable
quantities. The same applies for the A-factors. Von Euler and Adler have
referred to the occurrence of carotenoids in the retina of the eyes of cattle
and fish, and G. Wald proved in our laboratory the presence of large
 quantities of vitamin A (axerophtol) in the retina. According to later in-


446                            1937 P.KARRER

vestigations by Wald, vitamin A appears to play an important part in the
act of seeing; in the process of exposure to light a pigment, "retinene", com-
bined with a protein and showing a colour reaction with antimony tri-
chloride, is formed from the visual purple. This colour reaction has its
absorption maximum at 662-666            From the retinene, vitamin A is formed
(absorption maximum of the antimony trichloride reaction 615                and
finally in the dark the vitamin A is transformed again into visual purple.
Eyes kept in the dark contain traces only of vitamin A.
    It would seem, therefore, that the chromophore system of the carotenoids
is also utilized in the act of seeing, and the animal organism makes varied use
of these plants pigments.
    Research into the problems connected with vitamin A took place in a
roundabout way; as I have explained before, it began with the chemical
treatment and elucidation of the composition of the carotenoids. At that
time no one imagined that those investigations would become the founda-
 tion for vitamin A research. The same circumstances have applied to various
 other vitamins. One of the most impressive examples, the last to become
known, is the story of nicotinic acid amide. This was recognized by War-
 burg as a constituent of a coenzyme, codehydrase II, and by von Euler as
 the building material of the cozymase (codehydrase I), in which it occurs
 together with adenine, pentose, and phosphoric acid:




Then, together with O. Warburg, we were jointly able to show that the
hydrogen-transferring role, i.e. the central significance, devolves precisely
upon this constituent of the two codehydrases in the oxidation-reduction
processes.
   A hydrogen transference was found to be possible only through such
nicotinic acid amide derivatives in which the pyridine nitrogen has a quar-
ternary character. Such compounds (Formula A) are transformed by assim-
ilating the hydrogen split from the substrate into ortho-dihydro derivatives
(Formula B), which then pass on the hydrogen to other compounds (S):


           C A R O T E N O I D S , F L A V I N S , V I T A M I N S A A N D Bz   447




In the two codehydrases it is the sugar residue, the pentose residue, which
stands in quatemary bond at the pyridine nitrogen of the nicotinic acidamide;
the dehydration of the resultant dihydronicotinic acid compound is effected
through the chromophore system of the yellow enzyme, i.e. through lacto-
flavin (vitamin B2). The entire dehydration process is represented by the
following structural formulae:




As a result of these investigations nicotinic acid amide suddenly became
of general interest. It was tried as a remedy in the most varied kinds of dis-
eases, and in doing this Elvehjem and his co-workers discovered that it is
the cure for the "black tongue" disease in dogs, on which experiments had
been carried out for decades. We are therefore dealing in this instance with
a newly discovered supplementary factor in nutrition, a new vitamin.
   It has often been said that it is only the first discovery which is difficult
and that the ensuing discoveries are usually only the continuations of the
first. Perhaps vitamins and carotenoids offer examples of this.
   In a lecture which I gave in 1932 I remarked: "The chemistry of the vi-
tamins has made great progress in the last few years; it has overtaken the


448                             1937 P.KARRER

chemistry of the hormones and left that of the enzymes far behind. Soon
we shall be so far advanced that all kinds of positive statements can be made
about the chemical nature of the different vitamins. Then the chemist will
be able to hand back the vitamin problem to the physiologist, so that the
latter may establish in what way these substances develop their effect in the
organism. Once physiology has solved this problem, it will have become
enriched by one of its greatest findings."
   This prophecy has been fulfilled to a large extent within the short space
of five years. The chemical side of the vitamin problem is solved in its
essential points; relationships to enzymes were found. It is the task of physiol-
ogy today to explain the intervention of these agents in the cell processes.
As this is, however, a matter of chemical processes, these will in the end
probably have to be elucidated by the chemist once again.
