DAVID KEILIN’S RESPIRATORY CHAIN
CONCEPT AND ITS CHEMIOSMOTIC
CONSEQUENCES
Nobel Lecture, 8 December, 1978
by
PETER MITCHELL
Glynn Research Institute, Bodmin, Cornwall, U. K.


0. INTRODUCTION

It was obviously my hope that the chemiosmotic rationale of vectorial
metabolism and biological energy transfer might one day come to be
generally accepted, and I have done my best to argue in favour of that
state of affairs for more than twenty years. But, it would have been much
too presumptuous to have expected it to happen. Of course, I might have
been wrong, and in any case, was it not the great Max Planck (1928, 1933)
who remarked that a new scientific idea does not triumph by convincing its
opponents, but rather because its opponents eventually die? The fact that
what began as the chemiosmotic hypothesis has now been acclaimed as the
chemiosmotic theory - at the physiological level, even if not at the bio-
chemical level - has therefore aroused in me emotions of astonishment and
delight in full and equal measure, which are all the more heartfelt because
those who were formerly my most capable opponents are still in the prime
of their scientific lives.
   I shall presently explain the difference between the physiological and
the biochemical levels at which the chemiosmotic theory has helped to
promote useful experimental research. But let me first say that my imme-
diate and deepest impulse is to celebrate the fruition of the creative work
and benevolent influence of the late David Keilin, one of the greatest of
biochemists and - to me, at least - the kindest of men, whose marvellously
simple studies of the cytochrome system, in animals, plants and microor-
ganisms (Keilin, 1925), led to the original fundamental idea of aerobic
energy metabolism: the concept of the respiratory chain (Keilin, 1929; and
see Nicholls, 1963; King, 1966). Perhaps the most fruitful (and surprising)
outcome of the development of the notion of chemiosmotic reactions is the
experimental stimulus and guidance it has provided in work designed to
answer the following three elementary questions about respiratory chain
systems and analogous photoredox chain systems: What is it? What does it
do? How does it do it? The genius of David Keilin led to the revelation of
the importance of these questions. In this lecture, I hope to show that, as a
result of the painstaking work of many biochemists, we can now answer the
first two in general principle, and that considerable progress is being made
in answering the third.
   Owing to the broad conceptual background, and the very wide range of
practical application of the chemiosmotic theory, I have had to be rather


296                              Chemistry 1978


selective in choosing aspects to review. I have chosen to consider the
evolution of the chemiosmotic theory from earlier fundamental biochemi-
cal and physicochemical concepts in three perspectives: 1, a middle-dis-
tance physiological-cum-biochemical perspective; 2, a longer physicochemi-
cal view; and 3, a biochemical close-up. These perspectives involve general
considerations of biochemical theory and knowledge, and scope is not
available to discuss experimental procedures on this occasion.


1.    PHYSIOLOGICAL-CUM-BIOCHEMICAL               PERSPECTIVE

A. Oxidative and Photosynthetic Phosphorylation
During the two decades between 1940 and 1960, the mechanism of oxida-
tive phosphorylation (by which some 95% of the energy of aerobic orga-
nisms is obtained), and the basically similar mechanism of photosynthetic
phosphorylation (by which much of the energy available from plant prod-
ucts is initially harvested from the sun) was recognised as one of the great
unsolved problems of biochemistry. At the beginning of this period, the
work of David Keilin (1925, 1929) on the cytochrome system, and work by
Warburg, Wieland and others on the respiratory hydrogen carriers, had
already led to the concept of the respiratory chain: a water-insoluble
complex of redox carriers, operating serially between the reducing sub-
strates or coenzymes and molecular oxygen (see Nicholls, 1963; King,
1966).
   As indicated in Fig. 1, according to Keilin’s chemically simple concept of


                                  P. Mitchell                            297


the respiratory chain, the respiratory-chain carriers (or their complexes of
molecular dimensions) were involved chemically only in redox reactions.
However, when, following the pioneer work of Kalckar (1937), Belitser &
Tsybakova (1939), Ochoa (1940), Lipmann (1941, 1946), Friedkin & Leh-
ninger (1948), and Arnon, Whatley & Allen (1954), attention was directed
to the mechanism by which the redox process was coupled to the phos-
phorylation of ADP in respiratory and photoredox metabolism, it was
natural for the metabolic enzymologists who were interested in this prob-
lem to use substrate-level phosphorylation as the biochemical model, and
to assume that the mechanism of coupling between oxidation and phos-
phorylation in respiratory and photoredox chains would likewise be ex-
plained in terms of the classically scalar idiom of metabolic enzymology
(see Slater, 1976).
   In 1953, the general chemical coupling hypothesis, summarised in Fig.
2, was given formal expression in a historically important paper by Slater,
which defined the reactions of the energy-rich intermediates at several
coupling sites along the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Accordingly,




many expert metabolic enzymologists made it their prime objective to
identify the energy-rich intermediates or other coupling factors supposed
to be responsible for coupling oxidoreduction to phosphorylation in redox
chain systems (Slater, 1953; Boyer et al., 1954; Chance & Williams, 1956;


298                              Chemistry 1978


Slater, 1958; Lehninger, 1959; Slater & Hulsmann, 1959; Chance, 1961;
Racker, 1961; Lehninger & Wadkins, 1962; Williams, 1962; Boyer, 1963;
Green et al., 1963; Hatefi, 1963; Ernster & Lee, 1964; Lardy et al., 1964;
Griffiths, 1965; Racker, 1965; Sanadi, 1965; Slater, 1966; Chance et al.,
1967). This development caused Keilin’s chemically-simple concept of the
respiratory chain to be almost universally rejected in favour of a chemically
duplex concept according to which respiratory chain components partici-
pated directly, not only in the known redox changes, but also in other
chemical changes involving the energy-rich intermediates - just as the
phosphorylating glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase is involved
in both oxidative and phosphorylative reactions.
   By the end of the two and a half decades between 1940 and 1965, the
field of oxidative phosphorylation was littered with the smouldering con-
ceptual remains of numerous exploded energy-rich chemical interme-
diates; the remarkable uncoupling action of 2,4-dinitrophenate and of
other chemically unrelated reagents, and of physical membrane-lytic treat-
ments, remained obscure; and the process of hypothesis-building, needed
to keep faith with the chemical-coupling notion, reached such fantastic
proportions as to be hardly intelligible to those outside the field (see
Mitchell, 1961 c, 1966, 1967 a). Nevertheless, the quest for the energy-rich
intermediates continued through the nineteensixties and persisted into the
nineteenseventies with only a minor broadening of the conception of the
type of coupling mechanism favoured by many of the metabolic enzymolo-
gists (Painter & Hunter, 1970; Storey, 1970, 1971; Slater, 1971, 1974,
 1975; Chance, 1972, 1974; Hatefi & Hanstein, 1972; Wang, 1972; Cross &
Boyer, 1973; Boyer et al., 1973, 1977; Ernster et al., 1973, 1974; Green,
 1974; Weiner & Lardy, 1974; Griffiths et al., 1977; Nordenbrand et al.,
 1977). This conceptual broadening, which began to occur during the early
nineteensixties, stemmed from ingenious suggestions by Boyer, Chance,
Ernster, Green, Slater, Williams and others (see Boyer, 1965; Slater, 1971,
 1974; Ernster et al., 1973). As indicated by Fig. 3, they assumed that
coupling may be achieved through a direct conformational or other non-
osmotic physical or chemical interaction - that might, for example, involve
protons as a localised anhydrous chemical intermediate (Williams, 1962,
 1970; and see Ernster, 1977 a; Mitchell, 1977 a), or might involve electrical
interaction (Green, 1974) - between the redox carrier proteins and certain
catalytic components associated with ATP synthesis in the supposedly
duplex respiratory chain system, often described as the “phosphorylating
respiratory chain”.
   Soon after 1950, it began to be recognised that the water-insoluble
property of preparations of respiratory chain and photoredox chain com-
plexes was related to the circumstance that, in their native state, these
complexes were part of the lipid membrane system of bacteria, mitochon-
dria and chloroplasts. But, such was the lack of liaison between the stu-
dents of transport and the students of metabolism, that the significance of
this fact for the field of oxidative and photosynthetic phosphorylation was


                                         P. Mitchell                                    299




Fig. 3. Phosphorylating respiratory chain: Local interaction coupling hypothesis. The symbol
~ represents a localised “high-energy” chemical intermediary or physical state.


not appreciated, despite suggestive clues provided, for example, by Lunde-
gardh (1945), Robertson & Wilkins (1948), Ussing (1949), Davies & Ogston
(1950), Conway (1951) and me (Mitchell, 1954). These clues suggested
that some osmotic type of protonic coupling mechanism might be feasible
(see Robertson, 1960, 1968; Lehninger, 1962). It was in this context that I
began to take an active outsider’s interest in this fundamental problem of
energy metabolism in the nineteenfifties (and occasionally talked to David
Keilin about it), while I was mainly engaged in trying to develop general
principles of coupling between metabolism and transport, by means of the
biochemical concepts of chemiosmotic group-translocation reactions and
vectorial metabolism (Mitchell, 1954, 1956, 1957, 1959, 1961a, b; Mitchell
& Moyle, 1956, 1958a, b). I shall define these concepts more fully later.
For the moment, suffice it to remark that it was these essentially biochemi-
cal concepts (Mitchell, 1961 a, b, 1962, 1963, 1967b, c, 1970a, b, 1972b,
1973 a, b, c, 1977c), and not my relatively subsidiary interest in energy
metabolism, that led me to formulate the coupling hypothesis, summarised
in Fig. 4, which came to be known as the chemiosmotic hypothesis. As it
happened, the main protonmotive ATPase principle of this hypothesis was
first outlined at an international meeting held in Stockholm in 1960
(Mitchell, 1961b). My motivation was simply a strategic conjectural one.
There was a chance worth exploring that the chemiosmotic rationale
might provide a generally acceptable conceptual framework in the field of
membrane bioenergetics and oxidative phosphorylation, and that, if so, it


300                               Chemistry 1978




Fig. 4. Chemiosmotic hypothesis: Physiological level.


might encourage more adventurous and successful interdisciplinary re-
search by improving communication and acting as a kind of navigational
aid (see Mitchell, 1961c, 1963, 1976a, 1977b).
   There are two conceptual levels at which the chemiosmotic rationale has
helped to promote useful experimental research.
   The level represented by Fig. 4 is essentially physiological. It aims to
answer the question: what does it do? At this conceptual level one makes
use of the general principle of coupling by proticity, the protonic analogue
of electricity. Separate protonmotive redox (or photoredox) and reversible
protonmotive ATPase complexes are conceived as being plugged through
a topologically closed insulating membrane between two proton-conduct-
ing aqueous media at different protonic potential. Thus, coupling may
occur, not by direct chemical or physical contact between the redox and
reversible ATPase systems, but by the flow of proticity around an aqueous
circuit connecting them. I use the word proticity for the force and flow of
the proton current by analogy with the word electricity, which describes
the force and flow of an electron current (Mitchell, 1972 a, 1976 a). Howev-
er, the total protonic potential difference      has both electric       and
chemical activity          components, according to the equation:


                                   P. Mitchell                             301

where Z is the conventional factor 2.303 RT/F, which is near 60 at
when the potentials are expressed in mV (Mitchell, 1961 c, 1966, 1968).
   To promote experimental research programmes designed to test, and if
possible to falsify, the physiological-level chemiosmotic coupling concept, it
was explicitly and unambiguously formulated (Mitchell, 1961 c, 1966) in
terms of the following four fundamental postulates, corresponding to the
four structural and functional systems represented in Fig. 4:
 1. The ATP synthase is a chemiosmotic membrane-located reversible
    ATPase, having characteristic            stoichiometry.
2. Respiratory and photoredox chains are chemiosmotic membrane-locat-
    ed systems, having characteristic              stoichiometry, and having
    the same polarity of proton translocation across the membrane for
    normal forward redox activity as the ATPase has for ATP hydrolysis.
3. There are proton-linked (or hydroxyl-ion-linked) solute porter systems
    for osmotic stabilisation and metabolite transport.
4. Systems 1 to 3 are plugged through a topologically closed insulating
    membrane, called the coupling membrane, that has a nonaqueous
    osmotic barrier phase of low permeability to solutes in general and to
    hydrogen ions and hydroxyl ions in particular. This is the cristae
    membrane of mitochondria, the thylakoid membrane of chloroplasts,
    and the plasma membrane of bacteria.
These postulates were almost entirely hypothetical and experimentally
unexplored when they were given as the basis of the chemiosmotic hypoth-
esis in 1961. My original guesses for the          and          stoichiome-
tries, and for the protonmotive polarity across the membrane (Mitchell,
1961c), required revision in the light of early experiments (Mitchell, 1963;
Mitchell & Moyle, 1965, 1967, 1968). Fig. 5 represents the correct polari-
ties, and what I think are probably the correct protonmotive stoichiome-
tries: A, for the mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation system (not
including the porters); and B, for the chloroplast non-cyclic photophos-
phorylation system. No change of fundamental principle was, however,
involved; and the postulates, represented by Figs. 4 and 5, have now
survived seventeen years of intensive scrutiny by many research workers,
using a great variety of experimental methods in many different research
laboratories, including my own (see: Racker, 1976; Papa, 1976; Boyer et
al., 1977; Ernster, 1977b; Bendall, 1977; Harold, 1977a; Jagendorf, 1977;
Kozlov & Skulachev, 1977; Skulachev, 1977; Witt, 1977; Dutton et al., eds,
1978; Hall et al., eds. 1978; Hinkle & McCarty, 1978; Junge et al., 1979a,b;
Mitchell, 1976a, 1977a, 1979). The progress of research on oxidative and
photosynthetic phosphorylation became much faster as soon as the molec-
ular complexes represented by each of the four postulates began to be
treated as biochemically separate systems (Fig. 4) that could best be studied
individually - as in the laboratories of Jagendorf (1967), Racker (1967),
Witt (1967), Chappell (1968) and Skulachev (1970) - instead of being
mixed up in the so-called “phosphorylating respiratory chain” or its photo-
synthetic analogue.


302                                  Chemistry 1978




Fig. 5. Oxidative phosphorylation (A); and Photosynthetic phosphorylation (B) coupled by
proticity (after Mitchell, 1967a).




  The physiological-level concept of chemiosmotic coupling includes, not
only the general principle of transformation of redox energy to phospho-
rylation energy, but also the principle of transmission of power from the
redox complexes plugged through the membrane at one point to the
reversible ATPase and other proticity-consuming complexes plugged
through the membrane anywhere else (Mitchell, 1976a, 1977c). This cir-
cumstance has helped to place the mechanism of oxidative and photosyn-
thetic phosphorylation in perspective in the broader field of membrane
bioenergetics and general physiology - with particularly striking results
for our understanding of microbial membrane transport and related pro-
cesses (see Hamilton & Haddock, eds, 1977; Harold, 1977a,b; Rosen &
Kashket, 1978).
  The four postulates, representing the four systems with characteristic
properties, are now widely regarded as experimentally established facts.
Thus, we appear to have answered the question: What does it do? The


                                 P. Mitchell                            303


plug-through respiratory chain and photoredox chain complexes generate
proticity across the coupling membrane, energising the aqueous conduc-
tors on either side, so that power can be drawn off by other plug-through
complexes, such as the reversible protonmotive ATPase. However, this
acceptance of the chemiosmotic coupling concept at the physiological level
is without prejudice to the possible biochemical mechanisms of the proton-
motive ATPase and redox complexes, and fixes their relative but not their
absolute protonmotive stoichiometries (Boyer et al., 1977; Ernster,
 1977b).
   The other conceptual level at which the chemiosmotic rationale has
helped to promote useful experimental research is essentially biochemical.
It concerns the functional stoichiometries, the molecular topologies and
the molecular mechanisms of the protonmotive ATPase, the redox (or
photoredox) complexes, and the porter complexes of postulates 1, 2, and
3.
    In my opinion, the biochemical content and value of the chemiosmotic
rationale depended from the outset on the feasibility of protonmotive
chemiosmotic reaction mechanisms of the direct group-translocation type,
exemplified by the redox loop and the hydrodehydration loop (Mitchell,
 1966, 1967a,b,c), which are relatively orthodox biochemically, and require
little more than the addition of a spatial dimension to Lipmann’s concept
of chemical group potential (Lipmann, 1941, 1946, 1960). Had this not
been so, I would not have thought it worth fostering the chemiosmotic
hypothesis, as I shall now proceed to explain.



B. The Coupling of Metabolism and Transport: Vectorial Metabolism
The photograph in Fig. 6 was taken in a tiny research room in the
basement of the Department of Biochemistry in Cambridge, England, in
 1942 or 1943, when I first began to do biophysical and biochemical
research. It shows Jim Danielli, Joan Keilin (David Keilin’s daughter), Mrs.
Danielli (who was acting as Jim Danielli’s technician) and me. Jim Danielli,
who is seen there operating a surface balance on a Langmuir trough, was
my research supervisor. He exposed me to the techniques and concepts of
the membranologists and students of transport, while the general outlook
of the Cambridge Biochemistry Department, in which we were working,
was that of classical homogeneous solution metabolic enzymology. Inter-
mediately was the position of David Keilin, at the Molteno Institute, with
his studies of the insoluble cytochrome system and associated components,
making up the respiratory chain.
   I could not but be impressed by the great divergence of outlook, and
even mutual antagonism, between the students of membranes and trans-
port on the one hand, and the students of metabolic enzymology on the
other hand - and I soon determined to try to understand both points of
view in the hope that they might be brought together.
   About seven years elapsed before I had accidentally become a microbi-


Fig. 6. Research at the bench in 1942 or 1943. Department of Biochemistry, Cambridge,
England. From left to right: Joan Keilin, Jim Danielli. Peter Mitchell, Mary Danielli.



ologist and was involved: first, in studies of a functional aspect of the
plasma membrane of bacteria, which I called the osmotic barrier (Mitchell,
 1949); and soon after, in studies of the specific uptake and exchange of
inorganic phosphate and arsenate through a catalytic system present in the
osmotic barrier of staphylococci (Mitchell, 1954; and see Mitchell & Moyle,
1956). This enabled me to give my full attention to the functional and


                                      P. Mitchell                                 305


conceptual relationships between chemical and osmotic reactions. The
remarkably high specificity of the phosphate translocation reaction in
staphylococci, its susceptibility to specific inhibitors including SH-reactors,
its high entropy of activation, which indicated a large conformational
change in the translocator system, and the tight coupling of phosphate
translocation against arsenate translocation that I observed - as in the
phenomenon of exchange-diffusion previously described by Using (1947)
 - indicated how closely osmotic translocation reactions could resemble (or
could be functionally related to) enzyme-catalysed group-transfer reactions
(Mitchell, 1956, 1957, 1959). Further, my observation with Jennifer Moyle,
that the plasma membrane material isolated from staphylococci contained
the cytochrome system and associated enzyme activities (Mitchell, 1956;




                                  O u t s i d e




                                   I n s i d e


                                  O u t s i d e




                                                    RX




Fig. 7. Hypothetical enzyme system for phosphoryl group translocation (from Mitchell,
1957).




Mitchell & Moyle, 1956), suggested that one should generalise Lunde-
gardh’s idea of vectorial electron translocation through the cytochrome
system (Lundegardh, 1945). Thus, from this work, and from related
observations and ideas, notably of Lipmann (1941), Robertson & Wilkins


306                              Chemistry 1978


(1948), Rosenberg (1948), Pauling (1950), Davies & Ogston (1950) and
Conway (1951), I surmised that certain of the group-transfer reactions,
catalysed by the enzyme and catalytic carrier systems in the bacterial
plasma membrane, might actually be vectorial group-translocation reac-
tions, because of the anisotropic topological arrangement and specific
conformational mobility of the catalytic systems. These, then were the
circumstances that led me to remark at a symposium in 1953: “. . in
complex biochemical systems, such as those carrying out oxidative phos-
phorylation (e.g. Slater & Cleland, 1953) the osmotic and enzymic specific-
ities appear to be equally important and may be practically synonymous”
(Mitchell, 1954).
   The general idea that I had in mind in the mid-nineteenfifties, illustrat-
ed by the hypothetical system for phosphoryl translocation reproduced in
Fig. 7, was that of substrate-specific conformationally mobile enzyme and
catalytic carrier systems catalysing the translocation, not only of solutes,
but also of chemical groups. Thus, by the spatial extension of the group-
potential concept of Lipmann (1941), transport could be conceived bio-
chemically as being directly driven by the real vectorial forces of metabolic
group-potential gradients. Hence the concepts of what I called chemiosmo-
tic reactions and vectorial metabolism - bringing together transport and
metabolism into one and the same chemiosmotic molecular-level biochemi-
cal process catalysed by group-conducting or conformationally mobile
group-translocating enzyme systems (Mitchell, 1957, 1959). This led direct-
ly to the explicit concept of energetic coupling through enzyme-catalysed
group translocation, as described in two papers by Jennifer Moyle and me
in 1958. Fig. 8, from this work, represents a hypothetical example in which
phosphoryl is conducted from ATP on the left to a substrate S on the right
(Mitchell & Moyle, 1958a,b).
   Mechanistically, the group translocation or conduction concept was a
development of the idea, put forward by Pauling in 1950, that enzymic
catalysis depends on tight binding of the transition-state complex rather
than of reactants and resultants. As we pointed out (Mitchell & Moyle,
 1958b), Pauling’s idea required only a small adjustment to adapt it to the
notion that the active centre regions of certain enzymes (and of certain
catalytic carriers, such as cytochromes) may be conceived, not simply as
specific group-binding centres, which would tend to lock in the transition
state, but rather as specific group-conducting devices that facilitate the
passage of chemical groups through a region of the catalytic complex
between separate domains that specifically interact with the group-donor
and group-acceptor species.
   It was, of course, realised that the chemicomotive effect of group trans-
location - or group conduction, as I now prefer to call it - would not be
manifested unless the enzyme or catalytic carrier molecules were inhomo-
geneously organised in space according to either of two main topological
principles. According to one topological principle, the organisation could
be at the macroscopic level in a membrane, thus giving rise to macroscopic


                                           P. Mitchell                                     307




             0 2




Fig. 8. Enzyme-catalysed group translocation illustrated by hypothetical phosphoryl transloca-
tion from ATP to a substrate S (from Mitchell & Moyle, 1958b).

chemiosmotic processes of which we gave some permutations and combi-
nations for a phosphokinase system by way of example, as shown in Table
1. The two aqueous phases are represented to right and left of the central
line denoting the membrane containing the anisotropic phosphokinase;
and, in each example, the chemical (group-transfer) reaction is represent-
ed as progressing downwards, while the osmotic (group-translocation)
reaction is represented as progressing through the phosphokinase in the
membrane. The table illustrates that the overall chemiosmotic process
would depend as much on the osmotic translocational (or conformational)
specificities as on the chemical specificities of the catalytic system. It is in
this respect that the vectorial chemiosmotic system differs fundamentally
from conventionally scalar chemical ones.
   The second case in Table 1 is shown in diagram A of Fig. 9. It represents
the macroscopic chemiosmotic group-conduction principle applied to the
phosphorylative translocation of the substrate GH, which could be a sugar,
as in the phosphoenol pyruvate phosphotransferase system discovered in
bacteria by Kundig, Ghosh & Roseman in 1964.
   Now, it was only a small, but nevertheless important, step from Table 1
to write heterolytic protonmotive ATPase reactions as shown in B and C of
Fig. 9. My original proposal (Mitchell, 1961b, c) for the protonmotive
ATPase, reproduced in Fig. 10, corresponds to the group-translocation
system of Fig. 9 B.
   According to the other topological principle for manifesting the chemi-
comotive effect of group translocation, we suggested that the organisation


308                                     Chemistry 1978




      EXAMPLE




         1




         2




         3




         4




         5




         6




         7




Table 1. Alternative translocation-specific chemiosmotic processes catalysed by a hypothetical
phosphokinase in a membrane (from Mitchell & Moyle, 1958b).




could be at the microscopic level, by pairing and enclosure of a ‘microscop-
ic internal phase’ between neighbouring catalytic units, thus giving rise to a
chemical coupling effect. As illustrated in Fig. 11 A, we cited as possible
examples the NADP-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase and the malic en-
zyme, which catalyse consecutive oxidation and decarboxylation reactions
(with oxalosuccinate and oxaloacetate respectively as intermediates
trapped in the microscopic internal phase). We pointed out that such
pairing of catalytic units could be developed in three dimensions for
branching or cycling reaction sequences in enzyme complexes (Mitchell &


                                         P. Mitchell                                   309




A




Fig. 9. Topologically macroscopic chemiosmotic group conduction: A, of group G, energised
by phosphate transfer; B and C, of OH - and O 2- respectively, energised by ATP hydrolysis.




Fig. 10. Protonmotive ATPase translocating OH - (from Mitchell, 1961c).


Moyle, 1958a, b). Diagrams B and C in Fig. 11 represent relevant hypo-
thetical examples of the application of this microscopic coupling principle
to redox (o/r) and hydrodehydration (h/d) complexes respectively. B re-
presents consecutive hydrogen and electron transfer, via a flavoprotein
(Fp) or ubiquinone (Q) and an ironsulphur protein (FeS) complex, as,
perhaps, in NADH dehydrogenase; and C shows consecutive H 2O and O2 -


    310                                  Chemistry 1978




A




B




C




                                                -
    transfer, the latter v i a ( A D P O - + P O ) / A D P O P antiport i n a n A T P a s e
    complex.
       The microscopic pairing and the macroscopic chemiosmotic principles
    of topological organisation have been developed together in chemiosmotic
    reaction systems. This is illustrated by Fig. 12, in which examples B and C
    of Fig. 11 have been plugged through a membrane to give a protonmotive
    redox loop complex and a protonmotive ATPase (hydrodehydration loop)
    complex respectively. Fig. 13 A and B represent the protonmotive redox
    loop in a more conventional nomenclature where X and Y are hydrogen
    and electron carrier respectively. It is, perhaps, more obvious from this
    cycling carrier style of representation that, in direct chemiosmotic mecha-
    nisms, the conformational movements or conduction processes of translo-
    cation overlap (in space-time) with the chemical processes of group trans-
    fer; and the chemicomotive stoichiometry depends on the chemical prop-
    erties, conformational articulations and/or conductive properties of the
    catalytic carriers, according to relatively conventional biochemical princi-
    ples.


                                           P. Mitchell                                    311




Fig. 12. Macroscopic and microscopic topological principles developed together in: A, proton-
motive redox loop; B, protonmotive ATPase (hydrodehydration loop).


               A                                         B




Fig. 13. Direct redox loop mechanism in cycling carrier idiom: A, plugged through the
membrane; B, connected through a proton-conducting component (following Mitchell, 1966
and 1968).




C. The Protonmotive Respiratory Chain and Photoredox Chain: What is it? How
does it do it?
Let us return to the theme of David Keilin’s respiratory chain in the light
of the essentially biochemical concept of direct group-translocating or
group-conducting chemiosmotic mechanisms.


312                                    Chemistry 1978




Fig. 14. Suggested alternation of H and e- conductors in respiratory chain systems: A, for
FAD-linked oxidations; B, for NAD-linked oxidations (after Mitchell, 1966).




   As indicated in Fig. 14, the chemiosmotic hypothesis, at the biochemical
level, permitted a return to David Keilin’s notion of a chemically simple
respiratory chain; but the protonmotive property would have to depend
on a topological complexity in place of the chemical complexity favoured
by the proponents of the chemical coupling type of hypothesis. This
seemed to me to be an attractive notion because it was in accord with the
evidence of the need for a special topological organisation of the compo-
nents of the respiratory chain, as shown by David Keilin’s early work on
the reversible dissociability of cytochrome c, and by the important pioneer-
ing work of Keilin & King (see King, 1966) on the reversible dissociation of
succinate dehydrogenase from the succinate oxidase complex of mito-
chondria - which, as we now know, set the scene for later topological
resolution and reconstitution studies.
   Fig. 15 shows how the alternation of hydrogen and electron carriers
down the chain might translocate protons across the membrane, the chain
being effectively looped across the osmotic barrier, forming three proton-
motive redox loops that I called Loops 1, 2 and 3, corresponding to the
three energy-transducing regions of the classical respiratory chain between
NADH and oxygen (Mitchell, 1966). In this way, each loop would translo-
cate two protons per bivalent reducing equivalent passing along - giving 6
in all for NADH oxidation, as observed experimentally (see: Mitchell,
1972a, 1976a, 1977b, 1979; Moyle & Mitchell, 1977, 1978a, b).
   At equilibrium, the total protonmotive potential across the membrane
would be equal to the total redox potential across each loop - that is,
around 250 mV (Mitchell, 1966). Thus, we can relate quantitatively the


                                      P. Mitchell                                 313




Fig. 15. Suggested looped configuration of respiratory chain systems (after Mitchell, 1966).

scalar group-potential differences of chemical reactions (i.e. of hydrogen
and electron transfer reactions) to the real vectorial forces of transport (i.e.
of oppositely directed H and e- transport, adding up to net H + transloca-
tion).
   Fig. 16 illustrates my original guesses, (A) for the non-cyclic photoredox
chain of chloroplasts, and (B) for the cyclic photoredox chain of certain
photosynthetic bacteria, which employ the same direct group-conducting
redox-loop principle as that applied to the respiratory chain (Mitchell,
1966). But a subtle difference of behaviour was expected because the
orientation of the photosynthetic pigment systems, as represented in these
diagrams, should cause a non-thermodynamic photoelectric effect across
the membrane with a very short rise-time - as shown by Witt (1967) in
elegant experiments on chloroplast thylakoids, and confirmed by Crofts
and others in both chloroplasts and photosynthetic bacteria (see Junge,
1977; Witt, 1977; Hall et al., eds, 1978).
   A great deal of ingenious experimental work in many laboratories over
the last decade has shown that these schemes require some modification of
detail, but their direct group-conducting redox-loop principle has been
amply confirmed, as indicated in the diagrams of Fig. 17, which, as I shall


 314                                     Chemistry 1978


            Outer phase
                WATER




Fig. 16. Suggested protonmotive photoredox chain systems: A, for chloroplast non-cyclic
photoredox activity; B, for bacterial cyclic photoredox activity. System I, System II and PPS
stand for photosynthetic pigment systems (after Mitchell, 1966, 1967a).


discuss in a little more detail later, summarise recent knowledge about the
mitochondrial respiratory chain (A), the chloroplast non-cyclic photoredox
chain (B), and the reversible ATPases (F 0F 1 and CF 0C F1), driven by these
systems. It is noteworthy that these schemes show remarkable similarities.


                                          P. Mitchell                                    315




Fig. 17. Direct chemiosmotic mechanisms for: A, mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation;
B, chloroplast non-cyclic photosynthetic phosphorylation: Biochemical level chemiosmotic
concept. Research information from many sources (see Dutton et al., eds., 1978; Hall et al.,
eds., 1978; Mitchell, 1977a, 1979; Trumpower, 1979). Symbols as conventionally used in
references cited: and see text.


The photoredox chain system, shown in Fig. 17 B and Fig. 5 B, obviously
has a real Z configuration that corresponds to the abstract Z scheme
introduced by Hill & Bendall in 1960.
   It may well be remarked that the protonmotive stoichiometries of these
schemes, which correspond to one proton per univalent reducing equiv-
alent traversing each effective redox loop, represent a crucial datum. In
my laboratory, and in most other laboratories where such stoichiometric
measurements have been made (see Mitchell, 1979), the                ratio has
been found to be near unity per effective redox loop. For reasons dis-
cussed elsewhere (Mitchell, 1972a, 1976a, 1977b, 1979; Moyle & Mitchell,
 1977, 1978a, b; Jones et al., 1978), I do not think that recent dissent from
the laboratories of Azzone (Azzone et al., 1977), Lehninger (Reynafarje &
Lehninger, 1978) and Wikström (Wikström & Krab, 1978) constitutes a
serious threat to this relatively hard experimental datum.
   We seem, therefore, to have a partial answer to the questions: What is it;
how does it do it? It is a system of specific hydrogen and electron conduc-
tors, which generates proticity by virtue of the fact that it is effectively
looped across the coupling membrane, and catalyses the spontaneous


316                               Chemistry 1978


diffusion of hydrogen atoms and electrons in opposite directions, adding
up to net proton translocation across the coupling membrane.


2. A LONG PHYSICOCHEMICAL VIEW OF CHEMICOMOTIVE
SYSTEMS

The first protonmotive device conceived by man was the electromotive
hydrogen-burning fuel cell, invented by the remarkable William Grove in
 1839. It is, perhaps, not self evident that such a fuel cell for generating
electricity is also, potentially, a generator of proticity. This is illustrated by
the diagrams of the hydrogen-burning fuel cell shown in Fig. 18. It simply
depends where one opens the circuit to conduct away the power for
external use. In A, the circuit is opened in the electron conductor to give
electricity. In B, the circuit is opened in the proton conductor to give
proticity (Mitchell, 1967a).
   The fuel cell is a beautiful example of the truth of the principle, enunci-
ated by Pierre Curie at the end of the last century (Curie, 1894), that
effects cannot be less symmetric than their causes. The phenomena of
transport in the fuel cell arise from the intrinsically vectorial disposition of
the chemical reactions at the anisotropic metal/aqueous catalytic electrode
interfaces (Liebhafsky & Cairns, 1968). Thus, the scalar group-potential
differences of the chemical reactions are projected in space as vectorial
chemical fields of force corresponding to the chemical group-potential
gradients directed across the electrode interfaces. These simple consider-
ations illustrate nicely the nonsensical character of the question asked by
certain theoreticians in the context of the coupling between transport and
metabolism around 1960, and still persisting in some circles: how can
scalar chemical reactions drive vectorial transport processes? The answer is
plainly: they can’t (Mitchell, 1962, 1967b).
   The idea of electrochemical cells and circuits was generalised by Gug-
genheim in 1933 to include the chemically motivated transport of any two
species of chemical particle around a suitably conducting circuit. Guggen-
heim’s rather abstract thermodynamic treatment effectively showed that
chemical transport can be coupled reversibly to chemical transformation
by splitting the chemical reaction spatially into two half reactions, connect-
ed internally by a specific conductor of one chemical species, and connect-
ed externally by a specific conductor of another chemical species needed to
complete the overall reaction (see Mitchell, 1968). When we include the
leading in and out of the reactants and resultants, as in the fuel cell of Fig.
 18, we see that there have to be two internal specific ligand conductors
arranged in a looped configuration between the interfaces where the
chemical half reactions occur (Mitchell, 1967a). Obviously, the external
specific ligand conduction process - for example, the flow of protons in
Fig. 18 B - must be the sum of the internal specific ligand conduction
processes - for example the flow of hydrogen atoms one way and of
electrons the opposite way in Fig. 18 B.


                                             P. Mitchell




            A




     PROTON     CONDUCTOR                    SOURCE OF




           B




        ELECTRON      CONDUCTOR



Fig. 18. Hydrogen-burning fuel cell: A, generating electricity; B, generating proticity (after
Mitchell, 1967a).




   The specification of chemical group conduction in an enzyme or catalyt-
ic carrier complex may usefully be considered to correspond to the specifi-
cation of an internal ligand conduction reaction of a chemicomotive cell,
the other internal and external circuit components of which may be deter-
mined by the topological arrangement of the specific group-conducting
complex, relative to other osmotic or diffusion-regulating systems. Thus,
as the name chemiosmotic implies, the intrinsic osmotic property of a


318                                       Chemistry 1978


chemical group-translocation or group-conduction reaction in biology re-
presents its chemicomotive potentiality, which may be exploited (through
natural selection) by appropriate topological organisation.
  For example, the notion of the protonmotive redox loop is based on this
type of development of the specific ligand-conducting group-translocation
concept




                                                                                            (2)




As indicated in equation (2), the internal (trans osmotic barrier) ligand
conductors in the redox-loop complex are conceived as being specific for
hydrogen atoms that diffuse down their potential gradient one way, and
for electrons that diffuse down their (electrochemical) potential gradient
the opposite way - exactly as in the fuel cell of Fig. 18 B, and as illustrated
further in Fig. 19. The outer circuit consists of the aqueous proton conduc-
tors on either side of the insulating lipid membrane (Mitchell, 1966).




Fig. 19. Fuel cell-like terminal redox loop of respiratory chain (after Mitchell, 1967a).


                                   P. Mitchell                              319


  The notion of the protonmotive hydrodehydration loop for reversible
ATP hydrolysis depends on a similar principle (Mitchell, 1966).




As illustrated formally in equation (3), protonmotive ATP hydrolysis may
be conceived as the specific conduction of ATP (written ADPOP) and H 2O
one way, and of ADPO - + PO- the opposite way, giving, by difference, the
net translocation of 2H + . In equation (3) the H2O is bracketed to denote
that there need be no specific H 2O conduction pathway, because lipid
membranes generally have a high conductance to water (see Mitchell,
 1977a).
   The considerations of this section of my lecture look two ways. They
show that the chemiosmotic rationale has its roots in physical and chemical
theory going back more than a century. They also suggest that the general
concept of specific vectorial ligand conduction has very powerful applica-
tions in physics, chemistry and biology, which are, as yet, by no means fully
appreciated (Mitchell, 1977c).
   The protonmotive redox loop and hydrodehydration loop, and other
possible chemicomotive loops, as generally defined here, depend on a very
simple specific ligand-conduction mechanism. I have called it the direct
chemiosmotic mechanism in the biological systems, where it represents a
spatial extension of the conventional biochemical concept of group trans-
fer, but it is identical in general principle to the mechanism of man-made
fuel cells. I find it remarkably paradoxical, therefore, that many physiolo-
gists and biochemists have tended to reject, or have found it difficult to
accept intuitively, the feasibility of this direct and most biochemically
conventional type of chemiosmotic mechanism (see Boyer, 1974; Skula-
chev, 1974; Boyer et al., 1977; DePierre & Ernster, 1977; Ernster, 1977a;
Papa et al., 1978). Instead, as illustrated in Fig. 20, they have been inclined
to adopt exclusively conformationally coupled mechanisms, in which the
chemical and osmotic reaction centres are conceived as being separate in
space-time, and interact exclusively via the conformational movements of
an intervening polypeptide system, indicated by the squiggly line. Such
essentially black-box mechanisms involving hypothetical translocators (T),
unlike their direct counterparts, can be adjusted to have any stoichio-
metry (n) to suit the experiments of the day, and they are of such low
information-content biochemically as to be very difficult to disprove ex-
perimentally. By providing a blanket explanation, but without currently
testable detail, it seems to me that the concept of exclusively conforma-
tional coupling in chemiosmotic reactions, which can be partly attributed
to a spillover from studies of the Na + / K+ -motive and Ca 2+ -motive ATPases,


320                                     Chemistry 1978



                                                         B




Fig. 20. Completely indirect or exclusively conformational type of chemiosmotic coupling
concept: A. for redox proton pump; B, for ATPase proton pump (following Bayer, Chance,
Ernster, Skulachev and others. See Mitchell, 1977a).



may actually inhibit productive research by acting as a palliative (see
Mitchell, 1977a,c, l979). Conjectures about direct biochemically explicit
chemiosmotic mechanisms, on the other hand, even if wrong, promote
experimental activity and enthusiasm by suggesting crucial experiments
for testing them. This, I think, has been an important strategic function of
the biochemical conceptual aspect of the chemiosmotic theory in the recent
past, and I would like to persuade more of my colleagues to make use of
that function in the future - even, perhaps, in the field of the Na + /K+ -
motive and Ca 2 + -motive ATPases (Mitchell, 1973c, 1979) where progress
in understanding the general chemiosmotic principle of the mechanisms
has so far been rather slow. The fact that the metal ions are not involved
directly in stable covalent compounds does not militate against them being
involved in stable electrostatic complexes with anionic phosphate groups
that move along specific pathways down their group-potential gradients
during ATP hydrolysis in the relatively non-aqueous environment of the
enzyme active site domain.
   Let me interject here that the protonic chemiosmotic theory has a much
broader range of applicability than is encompassed by the central field of
energy transduction in the classical oxidative and photosynthetic phos-
phorylation systems, treated in this lecture (see Mitchell, 1976a). For
example: there is the protonmotive bacteriorhodopsin system of Halobac-
terium halobium (Stoeckenius, 1977; Schreckenbach & Oesterhelt, 1978;


                                    P. Mitchell                             321


Drachev et al., 1978; Schulten & Tavan, 1978); the protonmotive pyro-
phosphatase of photosynthetic bacteria (Moyle et al., 1972); protic heating
in fat cell mitochondria of hibernating animals (Heaton et al., 1978); the
remarkable rotatory flagellar motor of bacteria, which is driven by proti-
city (see Manson et al., 1977; Matsuura et al., 1977; Glagolev & Skulachev,
1978); the protonmotive ATPase and proton-coupled porter systems in
chloroplast envelope membranes (Heldt, 1976; Edwards & Huber, 1978),
in the plasma membranes of moulds, yeasts and higher plants (see Mitch-
ell, 1970b, 1976a; Seaston et al., 1976; Bowman et al., 1978; Delhez et al.,
1978), and also in the membranes of chromaffin granules (Njus & Radda,
1978) and synaptosomes (Toll & Howard, 1978); interesting and unusual
redox chain systems, such as that of the acidophile Thiobacillus ferro-oxidans
(Ingledew et al., 1977), which has incidentally helped to rule out the
localised protonic anhydride coupling hypothesis; and probably other
proticity producing and consuming systems yet to be discovered. More-
over, it was never my wish or intention that the concepts of specific ligand
conduction and chemial group translocation (Mitchell, 1956, 1957, 1961a,
1962, 1963), on which the chemiosmotic theory is based, should be con-
fined to systems coupled by proticity. It is only the unique versatility of the
uses of proticity (Mitchell, 1976a), and its importance for power transmis-
sion in the main pathways of energy metabolism, that has accidentally
tended to associate the use of the chemiosmotic theory with protonmotive
and protonmotivated systems, rather than with other chemicomotive and
chemicomotivated systems. In recent reviews (Mitchell, 1977c, 1979), I
have endeavoured to encourage the wider use of chemiosmotic theory,
and the powerful biochemical concept of specific ligand conduction, in
terms of the general idea of chemicalicity - an explicit extension of Lip-
mann’s marvellously precocious idea of metabolic process patterns (Lip-
mann, 1946).


3. SOME QUESTIONS OF BIOCHEMICAL DETAIL IN THE PRO-
TONMOTIVE RESPIRATORY CHAIN AND PHOTOREDOX CHAIN

The respiratory chain system summarised in Fig. 17A differs from my
earlier suggestion of three linearly arranged redox loops (Figs. 14 and 15)
in that loops 2 and 3 are coalesced into a cyclic Loop 2 + 3 configuration,
described as the Q cycle, catalysed by the cytochrome b-c1 complex. In this
way, many of the otherwise anomalous thermodynamic poising and kinetic
characteristics of cytochromes b 566 and b 562 (represented by bb in the dia-
gram) may be explained; and the presence of ubiquinone (Q) as the only
hydrogen carrier in this redox region, and the site of action of the inhibi-
tor antimycin, may also be rationalised (Mitchell, 1975, 1976b; Rich &
Moore, 1976; Rieske, 1976; Trumpower, 1976, 1979; Konstantinov &
Ruuge, 1977; King, 1978; Moore, 1978; Rich & Bonner, 1978; Yu et al.,
1978; Ragan & Heron, 1978; Heron et al., 1978). As indicated by the
broken symbols of Fig. 17B, it is not yet certain whether a similar plasto-


322                              Chemistry 1978


quinone (PQ) cycle may operate in chloroplasts (see Bendall, 1977). An-
other significant feature of the diagrams of Fig. 17 is the inclusion of
ironsulphur centres (FeS), which, following the beautiful pioneer work of
Helmut Beinert, are now thought to have as important a role in electron
transport as the haem nuclei of cytochromes (Sands & Beinert, 1960;
Beinert, 1977).
   The representation of the respiratory and photoredox chains as a set of
physically compact complexes (that may be partially resolved and reconsti-
tuted) stems from work by Keilin & King (1958), by Takemori & King
 (1962), by the Madison group, led by Green and Hatefi (see Hatefi, 1966),
and by Efraim Racker’s group (see Racker, 1976). They originally defined
four complexes: NADH-Q reductase, succinate-Q reductase, QH 2 -cytoch-
rome c reductase (the cytochrome b-c, complex) and cytochrome oxi-
dase - functionally linked by ubiquinone and cytochrome c. Racker’s group
added the F o F 1 and CF 0C F1 complexes, which are physically and chemical-
             0




ly separate from the redox complexes (Racker, 1976, 1977; Jagendorf,
 1977; Kozlov & Skulachev, 1977; Kagawa, 1978; Senior, 1979).
   The lipid coupling membrane through which the redox and ATPase
complexes are plugged is now considered to be very mobile laterally (see
Hackenbrock & Höchli, 1977; King, 1978; Heron et al., 1978), in accor-
dance with the fluid membrane concept of Singe & Nicholson (1971).
   There are about equal numbers of cytochrome b-c 1 a n d c y t o c h r o m e
oxidase complexes in mitochondrial respiratory chains. Counting all the
different Q-linked dehydrogenases (NADH dehydrogenase, succinate de-
hydrogenase, electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase, choline dehy-
drogenase, glycerol-l-phosphate dehydrogenase, etc.), there are about as
many dehydrogenase complexes as there are cytochrome b-c 1 complexes.
Thus, there is no special significance of the number four in the redox
complexes of Green’s group. There is, however, a special significance of
two complexes: the cytochrome b-c 1 complex and the cytochrome oxidase
complex, which are functionally linked by cytochrome c, and make up the
protonmotive cytochrome system. This remarkably compact system serves
all the Q-linked dehydrogenases, only one of which, the NADH dehydro-
genase, is, so far, known to be protonmotive itself (Ragan, 1976).
   There are generally at least ten Q molecules per cytochrome b - c 1
complex, so providing for the redox pool function of Q, identified by
Kröger & Klingenberg (1973). However, recent work by Ragan and col-
leagues (Ragan & Heron, 1978; Heron et al., 1978) on functional interac-
tion between NADH-Q reductase and cytochrome b-c 1 complexes in lipo-
somal membranes confirms the thesis of King (1966, 1978) that the most
active redox-functional units are binary dehydrogenase-cytochrome b - c1
complexes containing bound Q. Thus, it may be that the Q pool function
arises more from rapid lateral lipid mobility, giving rise to a dynamic
association-dissociation equilibrium of binary dehydrogenase-cytochrome
b-c1 complexes with associated Q, than to the lateral diffusion of free Q
molecules between dehydrogenase and cytochrome b-c, complexes.


                                           P. Mitchell                                323


   Hauska (1977a,b) and Lenaz et al. (1977) have argued that Q and PQ are
sufficiently mobile across the lipid phase of liposomes to account for the
observed rates of condution of H atoms across mitochondrial and chloro-
plast coupling membranes by the Q and PQ pools. It seems likely, howev-
er, that, in accordance with the ideas of King, and with the concept of the
Q cycle (see Mitchell, 1975), the conduction of H atoms across the osmotic
barrier may occur preferentially via specific ligand-conducting Q and PQ
domains associated with Q-binding or PQ-binding proteins in the cytoch-
rome b-c1 (or b-f?) complexes, and in the neighbouring dehydrogenase
(or PSII?) complexes (Trumpower, 1976, 1978, 1979; Gutman, 1977; Yu et
al., 1977a,b, 1978; King, 1978; Ragan & Heron, 1978; Heron et al., 1978;
Hauska, 1977b).
   The possible conduction of H atoms by flavin mononucleotide (FMN) in
NADH dehydrogenase is based only on the known H-binding property of
the flavin group (Mitchell, 1972a; Garland et al., 1972; Gutman et al.,
 1975). The very wide gap between the redox midpoint potentials of FeS1
and FeS2, and the effects of       in poising these centres, are difficult to
reconcile with the arrangement shown in Fig. 17A (Ohnishi, 1979). As
indicated in Fig. 21, I suggest rather speculatively that a protein-bound




Fig. 2 1. Speculative suggestion for involvement of the   H/Q couple in NADH-Q reductase,
and connection to cytochrome system.




         couple, acting between FeS1 and FeS2, might possibly account
better for the general behaviour of the protonmotive NADH dehydrogen-
ase, and for its requirement (Lenaz et al., 1975) for a specific homologue
of Q.


324                                          Chemistry 1978


    The notion of the net conduction of O 2- groups by (ADP - + P -) / A T P
antiport in F 1 and CF 1 (Mitchell, 1972b, 1977a) is based on the precedent
of the mitochondrial ADP/ATP antiporter, which is known to conduct
 ADP and ATP only in specific protonation states (Klingenberg, 1977). The
 protonmotive NAD(P) transhydrogenase, not shown in Fig. 17, may like-
wise translocate protons by the effective antiport of the phosphate groups
of NAD and NADP, in different protonation states determined by the
redox states of the nicotinamide groups (Mitchell, 1972b).
    In summary, the bioenergetically efficient mechanisms, represented in
outline by Fig. 17, depend on two main principles: 1, the semi-fluid
bimolecular lipid membrane and the plug-through complexes form a
condensed, continuous non-aqueous (protonically insulating) sheet that
acts as the osmotic barrier and separates the aqueous proton conductors
on either side; 2, components of the complexes plugged through the
membrane catalyse the highly specific vectorially organised conduction of
e l e c t r o n s , H a t o m s , H + i o n s a n d O2- g r o u p s . A s e x a m p l e s o f s p e c i f i c
ligand binding, we have the electron-accepting action of cytochromes or
ironsulphur centres, the hydrogen-accepting action of flavoproteins or Q-
 proteins, and the O 2 - - accepting action of the ATP/(ADP - + P -) couple.
But the action of specific ligand conduction in the plug-through chemiosmo-
tic complexes requires additional dynamic topological, physical and chemi-
cal specifications that facilitate the diffusion of the ligands along uniquely
articulated pathways down through-space or through-bond fields of force.
    There is still much to be understood about the biochemical details of the
specific ligand-conduction processes, even for electron conduction (King,
 1978; Dockter et al., 1978). But, I think it is fair to say that the protonmo-
tive property of the mitochondrial cytochrome system and the photosys-
tems of chloroplasts can probably be correctly explained, in general princi-
ple, by the direct ligand-conduction type of chemiosmotic mechanism. The
same may be said of the protonmotive property of the photosystems of
bacterial chromatophores (Crofts & Bowyer, 1978; Dutton et al., 1978),
and of certain bacterial redox chains (see Hamilton & Haddock, eds, 1977;
Jones et al., 1978). The mechanism of the protonmotive ATPase is more
controversial; but, at all events, mechanistic conjectures of the direct che-
miosmotic type seem to me to be strategically valuable because they stimu-
late rational experimental research and thereby add to our biochemical
knowledge, even if they ultimately turn out to be wrong.


4. CONCLUSION AND PROSPECT

The students of membrane biochemistry and bioenergetics have endured
a long period of uncertainty and conceptual upheaval during the last thirty
years - a time of great personal, as well as scientific, trauma for many of
us.
  The present position, in which, with comparatively few dissenters, we
have successfully reached a consensus in favour of the chemiosmotic


                                   P. Mitchell                             325


theory, augurs well for the future congeniality and effectiveness of experi-
mental research in the field of membrane biochemistry and bioenergetics.
At the time of the most intensive testing of the chemiosmotic hypothesis, in
the nineteensixties and early nineteenseventies, it was not in the power of
any of us to predict the outcome. The aspect of the present position of
consensus that I find most remarkable and admirable, is the altruism and
generosity with which former opponents of the chemiosmotic hypothesis
have not only come to accept it, but have actively promoted it to the status
of a theory. According to their classically Popperian view (see Mitchell,
1977b), the chemiosmotic theory is worth accepting, for the time being, as
the best conceptual framework available (Slater, 1977). Thus to have
falsified the pessimistic dictum of the great Max Planck is, I think, a
singularly happy achievement.
   Returning, finally, to the theme of the respiratory chain, it is especially
noteworthy that David Keilin’s chemically simple view of the respiratory
chain appears now to have been right all along - and he deserves great
credit for having been so reluctant to become involved when the energy-
rich chemical intermediates began to be so fashionable. This reminds me
of the aphorism: “The obscure we see eventually, the completely apparent
takes longer”.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am especially indebted to my research associate, Jennifer Moyle, for
constant discussion, criticism and help. Many colleagues have contributed
to the evolution of ideas and knowledge traced in this lecture. In particu-
lar, I would like to mention the influence of Tsoo King, after the premaa-
ture death of David Keilin in 1963. I would also like to acknowledge that it
was Bill Slater who persuaded me to become more deeply involved in
practical research on oxidative phosphorylation in 1965, when Jennifer
Moyle and I first commenced work at the Glynn Research Laboratories. I
thank Jim Danielli for the photograph shown in Fig. 6; I thank Jack Dunitz
and Ulrich Müller-Herold for help in researching the dictum of Max
Planck (1928, 1933); and I thank Bernie Trumpower and Carol Edwards
for informing me, prior to publication of their work, that factor OxF is
probably a reconstitutively active form of the Rieske ironsulphur protein,
thus influencing the representation of the Q cycle in Fig. 17A. I am
grateful to Robert Harper and Stephanie Key for help in preparing the
manuscript, and to Glynn Research Ltd for general financial support.


326                                       Chemistry 1978


REFERENCES

Arnon, D. I., Whatley, F. R. and Allen, M. B. (1954) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 76, 6324-6328.
Azzone, G. F., Pozzan, T. and Bragadin, M. (1977) BBA Library 14, 107- 116.
Beinert, H. (1977) BBA Library 14, 11-21.
Belitser, V. A. and Tsybakova, E. T. (1939) Biokhimia 4, 516-535.
Bendall, D. S. (1977) in Internat. Rev. of Biochem. Plant Biochem. II (Northcote, D. H., ed.) vol.
   13, pp. 41-78, University Park Press, Baltimore.
Bowman, B. J., Mainzer, S. E., Allen, K. E., and Slayman, C. W. (1978) Biochim. Biophys.
  Acta 512, 13-28.
Bayer, P. D., Falcone, A. B. and Harrison, W. H. (1954) Nature 174, 401-404.
Boyer, P. D. (1963) Science 141, 1147-1153.
Bayer, P. D. (1965) in Oxidases and Related Redox Systems (King, T. E. et al., eds) vol. 2, pp. 994-
   1008, John Wiley, New York.
Boyer, P. D., Cross, R. L. and Momsen, W. (1973) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 70, 2837-
  2839.
Boyer, P. D. (1974) BBA Library 13, 289-301.
Boyer, P. D., Chance, B., Ernster, L., Mitchell, P., Racker, E. and Slater, E. C. (1977) Ann.
  Rev. Biochem. 46, 955-1026.
Chance, B. and Williams, G. R. (1956) Adv. Enzymol. 27, 65-134.
Chance, B. (1961) J. Biol. Chem. 236, 1569-1576.
Chance, B., Lee, C. P. and Mela, L. (1967) Fed. Proc. 26, 1341-1354.
Chance, B. (1972) FEBS Lett. 23, 3-20.
Chance, B. (1974) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 227, 613-626.
Chappell, J. B. (1968) Brit. Med. Bull. 24, 150-157.
Conway, E. J. (1951) Science 113, 270-273.
Crofts, A. R. and Bowyer, J. (1978) in The Proton and Calcium Pumps (Azzone, G. F. et al., eds)
  pp. 55-64, Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Cross, R. L. and Boyer, P. D. (1973) in Mechanisms in Bioenergetics (Azzone, G. F. et al., eds) pp.
  149- 155, Academic Press, New York.
Curie, P. (1894) J. Phys., 3ème Ser. 393-415.
Davies, R. E. and Ogston, A. G. (1950) Biochem. J. 46, 324-333.
Delhez, J., Dufour, J.-P., Thines, D. and Goffeau, A. (1977) Eur. J. Biochem. 79, 319-328.
DePierre, J. W. and Ernster, L. (1977) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 46, 201-262.
Dockter, M. E., Steinmann, A. and Schatz, G. (1978) J. Biol. Chem. 253, 31l-317.
Drachev, L. A., Kaulen, A. D. and Skulachev, V. P. (1978) FEBS Lett. 87, 161-167.
Dutton, P. L., Bashford, C. L., van den Bergh, W. H., Banner, H. S., Chance, B., Jackson, J.
  B., Petty, K. M., Prince, R. C., Sorge, J. R. and Takamiya, K. (1978) in Photosynthesis 77,
  Proc. Fourth Internat. Congr. Photosynth. (Hall, D. O. et al., eds) pp. 159- 171, Biochem. Soc.,
  London.
Dutton, L., Leigh, J. and Scarpa, A., eds (1978) Frontiers of Biological Energetics, Academic
  Press, New York.
Ewards, G. E. and Huber, S. C. (1978) in Photosynthesis 77, Proc. Fourth Internat. Congr.
  Photosynth. (Hall, D. O. et al., eds) pp. 95- 106, Biochem. Soc., London.
Ernster, L. and Lee, C. P. (1964) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 33, 729-788.
Emster, L., Juntti, K. and Asami, K. (1973) J. Bioenerg. 4, 149-159.
Ernster, L., Nordenbrand, K., Chude, O. and Juntti, K. (1974) in Membrane Proteins in
  Transport and Phosphorylation (Azzone, G. F. et al., eds) pp. 29-41, North-Holland, Amster-
  dam.
Ernster, L. (1977a) in Living Systems as Energy Converters (Buvet, R. et al., eds) pp. 115-118,
  North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Emster, L. (1977b) in Bioenergetics of Membranes (Packer, L. et al., eds) pp. 373-376, Elsevier/
  North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Friedkin, M. and Lehninger, A. L. (1948) J. Biol. Chem. 174, 757-758.


                                            P. Mitchell                                      327

Garland, P. B., Clegg, R. A., Downie, J. A., Gray, T. A., Lawford, H. G. and Skyrme, J. (1972)
   FEBS Symp. 28, 105-117.
 Glagolev, A. N. and Skulachev, V. P. (1978) Nature 272, 280-282.
 Green, D. E., Beyer, R. E., Hansen, M., Smith, A. L. and Webster, G. (1963) Fed. Proc. 22,
   1460- 1468.
Green, D. E. (1974) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 346, 27-78.
Griffiths, D. E. (1965) in Essays in Biochemistry (Campbell, P. N. and Greville, G. D., eds) vol. 1,
   pp. 91- 120, Academic Press, London.
 Griffiths, D. E., Hyams, R. L. and Bertoli, E. (1977) FEBS Lett. 74, 38-42.
 Grove, W. R. (1839) Phil. Mag., Ser. 3, 14, 127-130.
 Guggenheim, E. A. (1933) Modern Thermodynamics by the Methods of Willard Gibbs, Methuen,
   London.
 Gutman, M., Beinert, H. and Singer, T. P. (1975) in Electron Transfer Chains and Oxidutive
   Phosphorylation (Quagliariello, E. et al., eds) pp. 55-62, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
 Gutman, M. (1977) in Bioenergetics of Membranes (Packer, L. et al., eds) pp. 165-175, Elsevier/
   North-Holland, Amsterdam.
 Hackenbrock, C. R. and Höchli, M. (1977) FEBS Symp. 42, 10-36.
 Hall, D. O., Coombs, J. and Goodwin, T. W., eds (1978) Photosynthesis 77, Proc. Fourth Internat.
   Congr. Photosynth., Biochem. Soc., London.
 Hamilton, W. A. and Haddock, B. A., eds (1977) Symp. Soc. Gen. Microbial. 27.
 Harold, F. M. (1977a) Curr. Top. Bioenerg. 6, 83-149.
 Harold, F. M. (1977b) Ann. Rev. Microbial. 31, 181-203.
 Hatefi, Y. (1963) Adv. Enzymol. 25, 275-328.
 Hatefi. (1966) Compr. Biochem. 14, 199-231.
 Hatefi, Y. and Hanstein, W. G. (1972) J. Bioenerg. 3, 129-136.
 Hauska, G. (1977a) in Bioenergetics of Membranes (Packer, L. et al., eds) pp. 177- 186, Elsevier/
   North-Holland, Amsterdam.
 Hauska, G. (1977b) in Photosynthesis 77, Proc. Fourth Internat. Congr. Photosynth. (Hall. D. O. et
   al., eds) pp. 185-196, Biochem. Soc., London.
Heaton, G. M., Wagenvoord, R. J., Kemp, A. and Nicholls, D. G. (1978) Eur. J. Biochem. 82,
   515-521.
 Heldt, H. W. (1976) in The Intact Chloroplast (Barber, J., ed) pp. 215-234, Elsevier, Amster-
   dam.
 Heron, C., Ragan, C. I. and Trumpower. B. L. (1978) Biochem. J. 174, 791-800.
 Hill. R. and Bendall, F. (1960) Nature 186, 136-137.
 Hinkle, P. C. and McCarty, R. E. (1978) Scientific American 238, 104-123.
 lngledew, W. J., Cox, J. C. and Halling, P. J. (1977) FEBS Microbiology Letters 2, 193-197.
Jagendorf, A. T. (1967) Fed. Proc. 26, 1361-1369.
Jagendorf, A. T. (1977) in Encyclopedia of Plant Physiol. New Series (Trebst, A. and Avron, M.,
   eds) vol. 5, pp. 307-377, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Jones, C. W., Brice, J. M. and Edwards, C. (1978) FEBS Symp. 49, 89-97.
Junge, W. (1977) Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. 28, 503-536.
Junge, W., Auslinder, W., McGeer, A. and Runge, T. (1979a) Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 546,
   121-141.
Junge, W., McGeer, A. J., AuslBnder, W. and Kolla, J. (1979b) in 29th Mosbach Colloq.
   (Schäfer, G. and Klingenberg, M., eds) in press, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
 Kagawa, Y. (1978) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 505, 45-93.
 Kalckar, H. (1937) Enzymologia 2, 47-52.
 Keilin, D. (1925) Proc. Roy. Soc. B 98, 312-339.
Keilin, D. (1929) Proc. Roy. Soc. B 104, 206-252.
 Keilin, D. and King, T. E. (1958) Nature 181, 1520- 1522.
 King, T. E. (1966) Adv. Enzymol. 28, 155-236.
 King, T. E. (1978) FEBS Symp. 45, 17-31.
 Klingenberg, M. (1977) BBA Library 14, 275-282.
 Konstantinov. A. A. and Ruuge, E. K. (1977) FEBS Lett. 81, 137-141.


328


Kozlov, I. A. and Skulachev, V. P. (1977) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 463, 29-89.
Kröger, A. and Klingenberg, M. (1973) Eur. J. Biochem. 34, 358-368, and 39, 313-323.
Kundig, W., Ghosh, S., and Roseman, F. D. (1964) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 52, 1067-
  1074.
Lardy, H. A., Connelly, J. L. and Johnson, D. (1964) Biochemistry 3, 1961- 1968.
Lehninger, A. L. (1959) Rev. Modern Physics 31, 136-146.
Lehninger, A. L. (1962) Physiol. Rev. 42, 467-517.
Lehninger, A. L. and Wadkins, C. L. (1962) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 31, 47-78.
Lenaz, G., Pasquali, P., Bertoli, E., Parenti-Castelli, G. and Folkers, K. (1975) Archs.
  Biochem. Biophys. 169, 2 17-226.
Lenaz, G., Mascarello, S., Laudi, L., Cabrini, L., Pasquali, P., Parenti-Castelli, G., Sechi, A. M.
  and Bertoli, E. (1977) in Bioenergetics of Membranes (Packer, L. et al., eds) pp. 189-198,
  Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Liebhafsky, H. A. and Cairns, E. J. (1968) Fuel Cells and Fuel Batteries, John Wiley, New York.
Lipmann, F. (1941) Adv. Enzymol. I, 99-162.
Lipmann, F. (1946) in Currents in Biochemical Research (Green, D. E., ed.) pp. 137-148,
  Interscience, New York.
Lipmann, F. (1960) in Molecular Biology (Nachmansohn, D., ed.) pp. 37-47, Academic Press,
  New York.
Lundegardh, H. (1945) Arkiv. Bot. 32 A 12, 1-139.
Manson, M. D., Tedesco, P., Berg, H. C., Harold, F. M. and Van der Drift, C. (1977) Proc.
  Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 74, 3060-3064.
Matsuura, S., Shioi, J. -i. and Imae, Y. (1977) FEBS Lett. 82, 187-190.
Mitchell, P. (1949) in The Nature of the Bacterial Surface (Miles, A. A. and Pirie, N. W., eds) pp.
  55-75, Blackwell, Oxford.
Mitchell, P. (1954) Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. 8, 254-261.
Mitchell, P. (1956) Discuss. Farad. Soc. 21, 278-279 and 282-283.
Mitchell, P. and Moyle, J. (1956) Discuss. Farad. Soc. 21, 258-265.
Mitchell, P. (1957) Nature 180, 134- 136.
Mitchell, P. and Moyle, J. (1958a) Nature 182, 372-373.
Mitchell, P. and Moyle, J. (1958b) Proc. Roy. Phys. Soc., Edinburgh 27, 61-72.
Mitchell, P. (1959) Biochem. Soc. Symp. 16, 73-93.
Mitchell, P. (196 la) in Membrane Transport and Metabolism (Kleinzeller, A. and Kotyk, A., eds)
  pp. 22-34, Academic Press, New York.
Mitchell, P. (196 1 b) in Biological Structure and Function, Proc. First IUB/IUBS Internat. Symp,,
  Stockholm, 1960 (Goodwin, T. W. and Lindberg, O., eds) vol. 2, pp. 581-599, Academic
  Press, London.
Mitchell, P. (1961c) Nature 191, 144-148.
Mitchell, P. (1962) J. Gen. Microbial. 29, 25-37.
Mitchell, P. (1963) Biochem. Soc. Symp. 22, 142-168.
Mitchell, P. and Moyle, J. (1965) Nature 208, 147-151.
Mitchell, P. (1966) Chaiosmotic Coupling in Oxidative and Photosynthetic Phosphorylation, Glynn
  Research, Bodmin, Cornwall, England.
Mitchell, P. (1967a) Fed. Proc. 26, 1335-1340.
Mitchell, P. (1967b) Compr. Biochem. 22, 167-197.
Mitchell, P. (1967c) Adv. Enzymol. 29, 33-85.
Mitchell, P. and Moyle, J. (1967) Biochem. J. 105, 1147-1162.
Mitchell, P. (1968) Chaiosmotic Coupling and Energy Transduction, Glynn Research, Bodmin,
  Cornwall, England.
Mitchell, P. and Moyle, J. (1968) Eur. J. Biochem. 4, 530-539.
Mitchell, P. (1970a) Membr. Ion Transp. I, 192-256.
Mitchell, P. (1970b) Symp. Sot. Gen. Microbial. 20, 121-166.
Mitchell, P. (1972a) FEBS Symp. 28, 353-370.
Mitchell, P. (1972b) J. Bioenerg. 3, 5-24.
Mitchell, P. (1973a) J. Bioenerg. 4, 63-91.


                                            P. Mitchell                                        329


Mitchell, P. (1973b) in Mechanisms in Bioenergetics (Azzone, G. F. et al., eds) pp. 177-201,
  Academic Press, New York.
Mitchell, P. (1973c) FEBS Lett. 33, 267-274.
Mitchell, P. (1975) in Electron Transfer Chains and Oxidative Phosphorylation (Quagliariello, E. et
  al., eds) pp. 305-316, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Mitchell, P. (1976a) Biochem. Soc. Trans. 4, 399-430.
Mitchell, P. (1976b) J. Theoret. Biol. 62, 327-367.
Mitchell, P. (1977a) FEBS Lett. 78, l-20.
Mitchell, P. (1977b) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 46, 996-1005.
Mitchell, P. (1977c) Symp. Soc. Microbial. 27, 383-423.
Mitchell, P. (1979) Eur. J. Biochem. 95, l-20.
Moore, A. L. (1978) FEBS Symp. 49, 141-147.
Moyle, J., Mitchell, R. and Mitchell, P. (1972) FEBS Lett. 23, 233-236.
Moyle, J, and Mitchell, P. (1977) FEBS Lett. 84, 135-140.
Moyle, J. and Mitchell, P. (1978a) FEBS Lett. 88, 268-272.
Moyle, J. and Mitchell, P. (I978b) FEBS Lett. 90, 361-365.
Nicholls, P. (1963) in The Enzymes (Boyer, P. D. et al., eds) vol. 8, part B, pp. 3-40, Academic
  Press, New York.
Njus, D. and Radda, G. K. (1978) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 463, 219-244.
Nordenbrand, K., Hundal, T., Carlsson, C., Sandri, G. and Ernster, L. (1977) in Bioenergetics
  of Membranes (Packer, L. et al., eds) pp 435-446, Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Ochoa, S. (1940) Nature 146, 267.
Ohnishi, T. (1979) in Membrane Proteins in Energy Transduction (Capaldi, R. A., ed.), l-87,
  Marcel Dekker, New York.
Painter, A. A. and Hunter, F. E. (1970) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 40, 360-395.
Papa, S. (1976) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 456, 39-84.
Papa, S., Guerrieri, F., Lorusso, M., Izzo, G., Boffoli, D. and Stefanelli, R. (1978) FEBS Symp.
  45, 37-48.
Pauling, L. (1950) Ann. Rep. Smithsonian Inst. 225-241.
Planck, M. (1928) Wissenschaftliche Autobiographic , Leipzig. Planck’s remark, as presented in
  my paper, is a paraphrase of the following passage on p. 22: “Eine neue wissenschaftliche
  Wahrheit pflegt sich nicht in der Weise durchzusetzen, dass ihre Gegner iiberzeugt werden
  und sich als belehrt erkllren, sondern vielmehr dadurch, dass die Gegner allmihlich
  aussterben und dass die heranwachsende Generation von vornherein mit der Wahrheit
  vertraut gemacht ist.” But I have partly followed a later variant of this passage, given in
  Planck (1933). where he substituted the word Idee for Wahrheit.
Planck, M. (1933) Ursprung und Auswirkung wissenschaftlicher Ideen. A lecture reproduced in
  Planck’s Vortriige und Erinnerungen, Darmstadt, 1975.
Racker, E. (1961) Adv. Enzymol. 23, 323-399.
Racker, E. (1965) Mechanisms in Bioenergetics, Academic Press, New York.
Racker, E. (1967) Fed. Proc. 26, 1335-1340.
Racker, E. (1976) A New Look at Mechanisms in Bioenergetics,        Academic Press, New York.
Racker, E. (I 977) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 46, 1006-1014.
Ragan, C. I. (1976) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 456, 249-290.
Ragan, C. I. and Heron, C. (1978) Biochem. J. 174, 783-790.
Reynafarje, B. and Lehninger, A. L. (1978) J. Biol. Chem. 253, 633l-6334.
Rich, P. R. and Moore, A. L. (1976) FEBS Lett. 65, 339-344.
Rich, P. R. and Bonner, W. D. (1978) FEBS Symp. 49, 149-158.
Rieske, J. S. (1976) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 456, 195-247.
Robertson, R. N. and Wilkins, M. J. (1948) Aust. J. Sci. Res. 1, 17-37.
Robertson, R. N. (1960) Biol. Rev. 35, 23 1-264.
Robertson, R. N. (1968) Protons, Electrons, Phosphorylation and Active Transport, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Rosen, B. P. and Kashket, E. R. (1978) in Bacterial Transport (Rosen, B. P., ed.) pp. 559-620,
  Marcel Dekker, New York.


330                                        Chemistry 1978


Rosenberg, T. (1948) Acta Chem. Scand. 2, 14-33.
Sanadi, D. R. (1965) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 34, 21-48.
Sands, R. H. and Beinert, H. (1960) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 3, 47-52.
Schreckenbach, T. and Oesterhelt, D. (1978) FEBS Symp. 45, 105-119.
Schulten, K. and Tavan, P. (1978) Nature 272, 85-86.
Seaston, A., Carr, G. and Eddy, A. A. (1976) Biochem. J. 154, 669-676.
Senior, A. E. (1979) in Membrane Proteins in Energy Transduction (Capaldi, R. A., ed.) in press,
   Marcel Dekker, New York.
Singer, S. J. and Nicholson, G. L. (1971) Science 175, 720-731.
Skulachev, V. P. (1970) FEBS Lett. 11, 301-308.
Skulachev, V. P. (1974) Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 227, 188-202.
Skulachev, V. P. (1977) FEBS Lett. 74, l-9.
Slater, E. C. (1953) Nature 172, 975-978.
Slater, E. C. and Cleland, K. W. (1953) Biochem. J. 53, 557-567.
Slater, E. C. (1958) Rev. Pure Appl. Chem. 8, 22 l-264.
Slater, E. C. and Hulsmann, W. C. (1959) in Ciba Foundation Symp., Regulation of Cell Metabo-
  lism (Wolstenholme, G. E. W. and O’Connor, C. M., eds) pp. 58-83, Churchill, London.
Slater, E. C. (1966) Compr. Biochem. 14, 327-396.
Slater, E. C. (1971) Quart. Rev. Biophys. 4, 35-71.
Slater, E. C. (1974) Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2, 39-1163.
Slater, E. C. (1975) in Electron Transfer Chains and Oxidative Phospholylution    (Quagliariello, E. et
   al., eds) pp. 3-14, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Slater, E. C. (1976) in Reflections on Biochemistry (Kornberg, A. et al., eds) pp. 45-55,
   Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Slater, E. C. (1977) in Living Systems as Energy Converters (Buvet, R. et al., eds) pp. 22l-227,
   North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Stoeckenius, W. (1977) Fed. Proc. 36, 1797-1798.
Storey, B. T. (1970) J. Theoret. Biol. 28, 233-259.
Storey, B. T. (1971) J. Theoret. Biol. 31, 533-552.
Takemori, S. and King, T. E. (1962) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 64, 192-194.
Toll, L. and Howard, B. D. (1978) Biochemistry 17, 2517-2523.
Trumpower, B. L. (1976) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 70, 73-80.
Trumpower, B. L. (1978) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 83, 528-535.
Trumpower, B. L. and Katki, A. G. (1979) in M embrane Proteins in Electron Transport (Capaldi,
   R. A., ed.) in press, Marcel Dekker, New York.
Ussing, H. H. (1947) Nature 160, 262-263.
Ussing, H. H. (1949) Physiol. Rev. 29, 127-155.
Wang, J. H. (1972) J. Bioenerg. 3, 105-114.
Weiner, M. W. and Lardy, H. A. (1974) Archs. Biochem. Biophys. 162, 568-577.
Wikstriim, M. and Krab, K. (1978) FEBS Lett. 91, 8-14.
Williams, R. J. P. (1962) J. Theoret. Biol. 3, 209-229.
Williams, R. J. P. (1970) in Electron Transport and Energy Conservation (Tager, J. M. et al., eds)
  p. 38 1, Adriatica Editrice, Bari.
Witt, H. T. (1967) in Fast Reactions and Primary Processes in Chemical Kinetics, Nobel Symp. 5,
   (Claesson, S., ed.) pp. 261-316, Interscience, London.
Witt, H. T. (1977) in Living Systems as Energy Converters (Buvet, R. et al., eds) pp. 185-197,
   Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Yu, C. A., Yu, L. and King, T. E. (1977a) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 78, 259-265.
Yu, C. A., Yu, L. and King, T. E. (1977b) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 79, 939-946.
Yu, C. A., Nagaoka, S., Yu, L. and King, T. E. (1978) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 82,
   1070-1078.
