AQUAPORIN WATER CHANNELS

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2003
by
Peter Agre
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205,
USA.




Thank you very much. I am humbled, I am delighted; I am honored. This is
every scientist’s dream: to give the Nobel Lecture in Stockholm. But I would
not be honest if I did not tell you that I am having a little anxiety being on
this platform. I have lectured a number of times in Sweden, and I thought I
would share with you some events preceding a special lecture that I gave here
a few years ago. Arriving at Arlanda Airport, I waited in line at the Pass
Control behind a group of businessmen in suits with briefcases. I heard the
first in line asked by the control officer to state the purpose of his visit to
Sweden. When the man replied “business,” the officer approved and stamped
his passport. One at a time, each stepped forward and was asked the same
thing; each answered “business” and was approved. Eventually it was my turn,
and I was dressed in rumpled clothes after spending the night in the
Economy Minus section of an SAS jetliner. The officer asked me the purpose
of my visit, and I said “I am here to give the von Euler Lecture at Karolinska
Institute.” The officer immediately looked up, stared at me, and asked, “Are
you nervous?” At that point I became intensely nervous and said “Yes, I am a
little nervous.” The officer looked up again and stated “Well, you should be!”
So if the lecturers look a little nervous, the problem is at Arlanda.


INTRODUCTION
I am going to talk about aquaporin water channels. We have studied these
proteins for several years, and we now understand that they explain how wa-
ter crosses biological membranes. Water is commonly regarded as the “sol-
vent of life,” since our bodies are 70% water. All other vertebrates, inverte-
brates, microbes, and plants are also primarily water. The organization of
water within biological compartments is fundamental to life, and the aqua-
porins serve as the plumbing systems for cells. Aquaporins explain how our
brains secrete and absorb spinal fluid, how we can generate aqueous humor
within our eyes, how we can secrete tears, saliva, sweat, and bile, and how our
kidneys can concentrate urine so effectively. These proteins are fundamental
to mammalian physiology, but they are also very important in the lives of
microorganisms and plants.

184


   I wish to discuss the background in order to give credit to the individuals
who were in this field long before we joined the field. With the recognition of
the lipid bilayer as the plasma membranes of cells back in the 1920’s, it was
correctly proposed that water could move through the membrane simply by
diffusing through the lipid bilayer. The current view is that the lipid bilayer
has a finite permeability for water, but, in addition, a set of proteins exists that
we now refer to as “aquaporins.” Their existence was suggested by a group of
pioneers in the water transport field who preceded us by decades – people in-
cluding Arthur K. Solomon in Boston, Alan Finkelstein in New York, Robert
Macey in Berkeley, Gheorghe Benga in Romania, Guillermo Whittembury in
Venezuela, Mario Parisi in Argentina – who by biophysical methods predicted
that water channels must exist in certain cell types with high water perme-
ability such as renal tubules, salivary glands, and red cells (reviewed by
Finkelstein, 1987).
   The difference between diffusional and channel-mediated water perme-
ability is fairly distinct. Diffusion is a low capacity, bidirectional movement of
water that occurs in all cell membranes, whereas the membranes of a subset of
cells with aquaporin proteins have very high capacity for permeation by water.
This permeability is selective, since water (H2O) crosses through the mem-
branes with almost no resistance, while acid, the hydronium ion (H3O+) does
not permeate the proteins. This distinction is essential to life. As I will discuss
later, our kidneys reabsorb 99% of the water from primary filtrate to prevent
us from becoming dehydrated. If our kidneys reabsorbed water plus acid, we
would develop systemic acidosis. The movement of water is directed by osmot-
ic gradients, so aquaporins are not pumps or exchangers. They form a simple
pore that allows water to rapidly pass through membranes by osmosis, a phe-
nomenon that we all learned about in middle school. There are also other dif-
ferences between diffusion and channel-mediated water transport. No in-
hibitors are known for simple diffusion. In contrast, mercurials were
discovered by Robert Macey to inhibit water transport in red cells but water
permeability was restored by treatment with reducing agents (Macey and
Farmer, 1970). These observations predicted that water channels must be pro-
teins with sulfhydryls and characteristically low Arrhenius activation energy.
   A number of investigators using very logical approaches attempted to iden-
tify the water channel molecule; identification proved a very difficult prob-
lem. Water is ubiquitous and cannot be modified to include photo-activated
side chains. Attempts by expression cloning were unsuccessful. Isotopic mer-
curials labeled several membrane proteins – the anion exchanger (band 3) by
Solomon and a group of several proteins (band 4.5) by Benga. Nevertheless,
none of the proteins were isolated, reconstituted, and shown to transport wa-
ter (reviewed by Agre et al., 1993a).


DISCOVERY OF AQP1
The field was essentially stuck, but following the well known scientific ap-
proach known as “sheer blind luck,” we stumbled upon the protein that is the

                                                                                185


answer to the question: do water channels exist? Looking through our note-
books for the earliest studies that showed there was such a protein, I found an
autoradiograph prepared by my first lab assistant, Andy Asimos. I was at that
time a hematologist, and we were studying the Rh blood group antigens. We
were attempting to raise antibodies in rabbits to the denatured partially puri-
fied Rh polypeptide. The rabbits vigorously produced antibodies that reacted
with a polypeptide of approximately 30 kDa, and a series of higher order
oligomers and glycosylated proteins. We were very excited about this, but we
failed to recognize initially that our antibody did not react with the core Rh
polypeptide that migrated at 32 kDa, seen clearly by silver staining of sodium
dodecyl sulfate polyacryamide electrophoresis gels (SDS-PAGE). Instead, our
antibodies reacted only with a 28 kDa polypeptide that we had mistakenly be-
lieved to be a breakdown product of the larger Rh polypeptide. Thus, the 28
kDa was an unrelated protein that merely contaminated our Rh preparations.
   A number of features about the 28 kDa protein created a large amount of
interest. Postdoctoral fellow Brad Denker and lab assistant Barbara Smith iso-
lated the protein by a simple approach based upon detergent solubility. Silver
staining of SDS-PAGE revealed a discrete band of 28 kDa in detergent insol-
uble extracts. No one had seen this protein before, since it failed to stain with
the conventional protein stains such as Coomassie blue. The protein was then
purified in large amounts from human red cell membranes (Denker et al.,
1988; Smith and Agre, 1991).
   The 28 kDa protein was strikingly abundant. With approximately 200,000
copies per red cell, it was one of the major proteins in the membrane. In a
way, this may be compared to the surprise one would have if, while driving
along a road in northern Sweden, one came upon a town with 200,000 people
not on the map – it certainly got our attention. Moreover, the protein had fea-
tures suggesting that it was a tetrameric membrane-spanning protein – sug-
gesting that it was a channel, but a channel for what? The purified protein
also provided us the N-terminal amino acid sequence that we used for cDNA
cloning. Using our antibody, we looked at several other tissues and found the
protein is also strikingly abundant in human kidney. We observed staining
over the apical and basolateral membranes of proximal renal tubules and the
descending thin limb of the loops of Henle, but we were still frustrated by our
failure to recognize what the protein’s function might be.
   In science, one should use all available resources to solve difficult prob-
lems. One of our most powerful resources is the insight of our colleagues. I
spoke to a dozen or more well-known biochemists and physiologists about
this protein, but none could predict what its function might be. My clinical
mentor, John C. Parker (1935–1993) at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, was the first to suggest to me that red cells and renal tubules were
exceedingly permeable to water. He recommended that we consider a role in
membrane water transport. While John did not live to see our later studies,
he did live to see our initial discovery and we celebrated together.
   Postdoctoral fellow Gregory Preston cloned the cDNA from an erythroid li-
brary (Preston and Agre, 1991). The coding region corresponded to a 269

186


Figure 1. Membrane orientation of AQP1 predicted from primary amino acid sequence.
Two tandem repeats each have three bilayer-spanning domains; the repeats are oriented
180˚ with respect to each other. The loops B and E each contain the conserved motif, Asn-
Pro-Ala (NPA).




amino acid polypeptide, predicted by hydropathy analysis to have six bilayer-
spanning domains. Interestingly, the amino terminal half (repeat-1) and the
carboxy terminal half of the molecule (repeat-2) were genetically related –
about 20% identical. Two loops B and E were more highly related to each
other, and each contained the signature motif – asparagine, proline, alanine
(NPA) [Fig. 1]. Examining the genetics database, we recognized several se-
quence-related DNAs from diverse sources: lens of cow eyes, brains of fruit
flies, bacteria, and plants. Nevertheless, none was functionally defined.
   These clues heightened our suspicion that the 28 kDa protein was a water
transporter, so we tested for possible water transport function in collabora-
tion with our colleague Bill Guggino at Johns Hopkins. We used oocytes from
the frog Xenopus laevis. This convenient expression system was particularly
useful, since frog oocytes have very low water permeability and survive even in
fresh water ponds. Control oocytes were injected with water alone; test
oocytes were injected with 2 ng of cRNA encoding our protein. After three
days of protein synthesis, the oocytes appeared essentially identical. Then we
stressed the oocytes by transferring them to distilled water, and an amazing
difference was immediately apparent. Having exceedingly low water perme-
ability, the control oocytes failed to swell. In contrast, the test oocytes were
highly permeable to water and exploded like popcorn [Fig. 2] (Preston et al.,
1992). This result produced much celebration in the laboratory; the celebra-
tions continue still. The protein was christened “aquaporin” and is now offi-
cially designated “AQP1,” the first functionally defined water channel protein
(Agre et al., 1993b).
   We confirmed the function of this protein by studying the purified AQP1

                                                                                    187


                                                  Figure 2. Functional expression of
                                                  AQP1 water channels in Xenopus
                                                  laevis oocytes. Control oocyte
                                                  (left) was injected with water;
                                                  AQP1 oocyte (right) was injected
                                                  with cRNA. The oocytes were
                                                  transferred to hypotonic buffer.
                                                  After 30 seconds (top) the AQP1
                                                  oocyte has begun to swell; after 3
                                                  minutes (bottom), the AQP1
                                                  oocyte has exploded. Modified
                                                  and reprinted from Science with
                                                  permission (Preston et al., 1992).




reconstituted into synthetic lipid vesicles of ~0.1 micron diameter prepared
by our colleague Suresh Ambudkar at Johns Hopkins (Zeidel et al., 1992).
These simple membrane vesicles were examined by freeze fracture electron
microscopy by our colleague Arvid Maunsbach, from the University of
Aarhus. When lipid was reconstituted without protein, the membrane sur-
faces were smooth; however, membranes reconstituted with AQP1 contained
many intramembraneous particles 0.01 micron diameter (Zeidel et al., 1994).
We tested the membranes for water permeability in collaboration with Mark
Zeidel at Harvard Medical School. Using stopped flow transfer to hypertonic
buffer, the simple liposomes shrank, reaching equilibrium in about one half
second; this is believed to represent the baseline water permeability. When
membranes reconstituted with AQP1 were examined, the shrinking occurred
much more rapidly, reaching equilibrium in about 20 milliseconds. The
channel-mediated flow of water was confirmed, since it was inhibited with
mercurials. We calculated the Arrhenius activation energy (<5 kcal/mol), and
we determined the unit permeability to be ~3x109 water molecules per sub-
unit per second. Importantly, we attempted to measure proton permeation of
AQP1, but despite massive water permeability, acid permeation was not de-
tected. These studies verified that we had, in fact, isolated the long-sought wa-
ter channel protein.

188


Figure 3. Hourglass model for membrane topology of AQP1 subunit.
   Left panel – Schematic folding of loops B and E overlap within the lipid bilayer to form
a single aqueous pathway.
   Right panel – Ribbon model of three dimensional structure of AQP1 subunit confirms
hourglass with single aqueous pathway. Modified and reprinted with permission from Jour-
nal of Biological Chemistry (Jung et al., 1994b) and Journal of Clinical Investigation (Kozono et
al., 2002).




STRUCTURE OF AQP1
Subsequent efforts were devoted to identifying the mercurial inhibitory site
predicted by the studies of Macey. Mercurials react with free sulfhydryls in the
amino acid cysteine. Four cysteines are found in the AQP1 polypeptide, but
only the residue in loop E (Cys-189 proximal to the second NPA motif) is in-
hibited by mercurials. We altered the AQP1 sequence by site-directed muta-
genesis and expressed the recombinants in oocytes for water permeability
studies. Mutation of this residue to serine (Cys-189-Ser) resulted in full water
permeability without mercurial inhibition. When we then replaced the ala-
nine in the corresponding position of loop B with a cysteine (Ala-73-Cys), the
protein exhibited mercurial sensitive water permeability (Preston et al.,
1993). Substitutions elsewhere in the AQP1 failed to produce this behavior.
This suggested to us that loops B and E in opposite parts of the molecule
must somehow form the aqueous pore. The model that we concocted turned
out to be schematically correct and was termed “the hourglass.” The ancient
timepiece allows sand to run from upper chamber to lower chamber; if in-
verted, the sand will flow in the opposite direction. Six bilayer spanning do-
mains were predicted to surround a central domain containing loop B, dip-
ping into the membrane from the cytoplasmic surface, and loop E, dipping
into the membrane from the extracellular surface [Fig. 3 left and right]. The

                                                                                            189


overlap of loops B and E was predicted to form a single aqueous pore down
through the center of the molecule with the NPA motifs juxtaposed and the
mercurial inhibitory site alongside (Jung et al., 1994b). The AQP1 protein is
tetrameric with a central pore in each subunit. Thus, AQP1 is structurally un-
like ion channel proteins where four subunits surround a single central pore,
as discussed by Rod MacKinnon in his lecture.
   We then sought to establish the high resolution structure of AQP1 in col-
laboration with Andreas Engel and his group at the Biozentrum in Basel. We
were later joined with Yoshinori Fujiyoshi and his group at Kyoto University.
Human red cell AQP1 protein was purified by Barb Smith in our lab;
Andreas’s student Tom Walz reconstituted it into synthetic membranes at
very high protein concentrations. Under these conditions, the AQP1 protein
forms remarkably symmetrical arrays referred to as membrane crystals. By
measuring the water permeability, we confirmed that the function was 100%
retained, giving us confidence that the structure we deduced would be the bio-
logically relevant structure (Walz et al., 1994).
   Using the techniques of cryoelectron microscopy and atomic force micro-
scopy, our colleagues in Basel and Kyoto undertook studies that provided an
electron density map of human AQP1 at 3.8 Å. Models were developed using
constraints established by our site-directed mutagenesis studies (Murata et al.,
2000). When a single AQP1 subunit is viewed in cross-section in the middle of
the membrane bilayer, a single aqueous pore is visible with hydrophobic
residues lining most of the circumference of the wall, but the two highly con-
served asparagines of the NPA motifs are aligned on the other wall. When
viewed in longitudinal section, a narrow aqueous pore is visible with the two
highly conserved asparagines. We faced the question of how a simple pore
with no moving parts could allow permit rapid transit of water with no move-
ment of protons. Exciting contributions by X-ray crystallographers in the
groups of Robert Stroud, at UCSF, and Bing Jap, at Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory, solved the atomic structures of the E. coli glycerol facilitator GlpF
(Fu et al., 2000), and bovine red cell AQP1 (Sui et al., 2001) at 2.2 Å resolu-
tion. These observations permitted molecular dynamics simulations by Bert
de Groot and Helmut Grubmüller at the University of Göttingen (2001) and
the group of Klaus Schulten at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(Tajkhorshid et al., 2002). We now understand how this protein facilitates the
movement of water but not protons. If water were simply H2O, it would be a
gas, which it is in vapor, but water in bulk solution exists as (H2O)n with hy-
drogen bonding between adjacent water molecules causing it to be a liquid. If
water existed as a column of aligned water molecules in contact with each
other, protons would rapidly jump along by a mechanism known as the
Grotthus effect – also referred to as a “proton wire.”
   The hourglass structure of the AQP1 molecule has an extracellular
vestibule and an internal vestibule where water is in bulk solution. These
vestibules are separated by a span of approximately 20 Å that is so narrow that
water moves through in single file while protons are reflected. Near the top of
this span the channel reaches its narrowest constriction – 2.8 Å. Thus, the

190


Figure 4. Functional representation for selective water flow through AQP1 subunit and
residues involved in human disease.
   Left panel – Schematic of sagittal cross-section of AQP1 reveals bulk water in extracellu-
lar and intracellular vestibules of hourglass. These are separated by a 20Å span where water
passes in single file with transient interactions with pore-lining residues that prevent hy-
drogen bonding between water molecules (bold colors). Two structures are believed to pre-
vent permeation by protons (H3O+): electrostatic repulsion is created by a fixed positive
charge from pore-lining arginine (R195) at a 2.8Å narrowing in the channel; water dipole
reorientation occurs from simultaneous hydrogen bonding of water molecule with side
chains of two asparagines residues in NPA motifs (N192 and N76). Two partial positive
charges at the center of the channel result from orientation of two non-membrane span-
ning alpha helices distal to the NPA motifs.
   Right panel – Space filling representation of water molecule at cross-section of narrowest
region of pore: AQP1 site of mercurial inhibition in pore-lining cysteine (Cys189); AQP2
mutation in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (Arg to Cys); AQP0 mutation in congenital
cataracts (Glu to Gly). Reprinted with permission from Journal of Clinical Investigation
(Kozono et al., 2002).




pore is just large enough to accommodate a single water molecule. At this
site, the side chain of a perfectly conserved arginine following the NPA motif
in loop E forms a fixed positive charge, and a conserved histidine on the other
wall forms a partial positive charge – together they serve to repel protons.
Further along, another barrier to protons exists where a single water mole-
cule will transiently undergo a transient dipole reorientation as it simultan-
eously forms hydrogen bonds with the side chains of the two asparagines in
the juxtaposed NPA motifs. In addition, the non-bilayer spanning alpha he-
lices in the distal ends of loops B and E contribute partial positive charges
that further serve to block proton conduction [Fig. 4 left] (reviewed by
Kozono et al., 2002). This also shows how mercurials inhibit water flow
through AQP1. The side chain of Cys-189 lies along the pore, so if it is
blocked by a mercurial, the channel will be occluded [Fig. 4 right].

                                                                                        191


Figure 5. Human aquaporin gene family contains two subsets. Homologs freely permeated
by water (classical aquaporins, blue) or water and glycerol (aquaglyceroporins, yellow) are
represented. E. coli has one aquaporin (AqpZ) and one aquaglyceroporin (GlpF).
Reprinted with permission from Journal of Physiology (Agre et al., 2002).




THE AQUAPORIN AND AQUAGLYCEROPORIN PROTEIN FAMILY
While we were pursuing studies of AQP1, several other research groups from
around the world became interested in what is now known to be a large fam-
ily of related proteins. The combined efforts of these labs have led to the mole-
cular identification of 12 mammalian aquaporin homologs, and several hun-
dred related proteins have been recognized in other vertebrates as well as
invertebrates, plants, and unicellular micro-organisms. The mammalian ho-
mologs may be loosely clustered into two subsets [Fig. 5]. The first is referred
to as “classical aquaporins”, since they were initially considered to be exclu-
sive water pores. The second is referred to as “aquaglyceroporins”, since they
are permeated by water plus glycerol. Interestingly, E. coli has one member of
each – AqpZ (Calamita et al., 1995), and GlpF, isolated by other investigators
much earlier. Together, the mammalian aquaporins and aquaglyceroporins
are now known to contribute to multiple physiological processes that occur
during our daily lives.


AQP1 PROTEINS IN KIDNEY
We were very fortunate to collaborate with Søren Nielsen from the University
of Aarhus, a superb microscopist with particular expertise in kidney. Each of
our two kidneys contains approximately one million nephron units working

192


in concert to eliminate toxic wastes and provide the appropriate pH and ion-
ic composition of our circulating blood. Every day, approximately 180 liters of
plasma are filtered through the capillary tufts in the glomeruli. Water and
certain solutes in this primary filtrate are then reabsorbed as the fluid makes
its way through the tubules. The proximal convoluted tubules and descend-
ing thin limbs of the loop of Henle exhibit constitutively high water perme-
ability and are responsible for the counter-current mechanism for renal con-
centration. This coincides exactly with the sites where AQP1 is expressed. The
ascending segments are permeated by certain ions and small molecules but
lack the AQP1 protein and exhibit low water permeability. Multiple nephron
units empty into collecting ducts which exhibit low water permeability in the
unstimulated state. Collecting ducts are known to become highly permeable
to water when stimulated by the antidiuretic hormone, vasopressin, that is re-
leased from brain in response to dehydration.
   Immunohistological analysis of rat kidney by Søren revealed extremely
strong labeling of proximal tubules and descending thin limbs with our affin-
ity purified anti-AQP1 (Nielsen et al., 1993c). The apical brush border stains
intensely; our analyses indicate that AQP1 comprises ~4% of the total brush
border membranes. Immunogold electron microscopy showed that AQP1 is
largely present at the apical brush border membrane surface, where water re-
absorption is known to occur, but the protein is minimally present within the
cell body [Fig. 6 left]. Thus it became clear that AQP1 is not actively traffick-
ing from intracellular sites to the plasma membrane and back to intracellular
sites. AQP1 is also abundant in the basolateral membranes of these epithelial
cells. Thus water is reabsorbed in a transcellular route from the tubular lu-
men through the apical membrane of the tubular epithelium and out
through the basolateral membrane into the interstitium where it is absorbed
into capillaries and venules that are also rich in AQP1 protein [Fig. 6 right].
In normal circumstances, water does not flow between cells, since tight junc-
tions form a barrier. The direction of the water flow through these epithelia,
from primary filtrate back into the vascular space, is determined by small,
standing osmotic gradients created by the solute transporters, and water fol-
lows passively.


AQP1-NULL HUMANS
Our student Chulso Moon in the Graduate Program in Human Genetics at
Johns Hopkins was studying the structural gene encoding human AQP1
which we located on the short arm of human chromosome seven by fluores-
cence in situ hybridization (Moon et al., 1993). We looked in Victor Mc-
Kusick’s atlas of human genetic linkages; our friend Colvin Redman at the
New York Blood Center pointed out that this location coincides with the site
of an interesting blood group system – the Colton antigens. Being a hematol-
ogist, I am very much interested in blood group antigens. While hundreds of
blood group antigens are known, they represent multiple polymorphisms in
approximately 25 different blood group systems, each system being a differ-

                                                                             193


Figure 6. Subcellular localization of AQP1 in proximal tubules from rat kidney.
   Left panel – Anti-AQP1 immunogold electron microscopy reveals labeling of apical
brush border (BB) but not cell body. 25,000 x.
   Right panel – Schematic representing transcellular passage of water: entry through
AQP1 in apical brush border; exit through AQP1 in basolateral membranes. Reprinted
with permission from Journal of Cell Biology (Nielsen et al., 1993c).




ent genetic locus. So the coincidental localization of the AQP1 gene and a hu-
man blood group antigen was a very strong clue that they correspond to the
same molecule. The Co blood group antigens are not of large clinical signifi-
cance, since most of us have the same Co blood type – approximately 90% of
us are homozygous for Coa, almost 10% are heterozygotes carrying both Coa
and Cob, and only 0.3% are homozygous for Cob. In collaboration with investi-
gators from the International Blood Group Referencing Laboratory in Bristol
UK, we found the Co antigens correspond to an alanine-valine polymorphism
at residue 45 which resides in an extracellular location of the AQP1 protein
(Smith et al., 1994).
   Surprisingly, in the entire world, the blood group referencing laboratories
have identified only a handful of individuals who lack both Co antigens. We
turned our attention to the Co-null individuals, and, with the help of John
Moulds and Jean Pierre Cartron, we obtained DNA, blood, and urine from
three different Co-null kindreds. The probands were all women who appar-
ently during childbirth became sensitized to the Co antigens on the red cells
of their babies. We hypothesized that these individuals carried mutations in
their genes encoding, AQP1. We found that the probands from each kindred
were homozygous for a unique disruption of the AQP1 gene (Preston et al.,
1994). They do not express AQP1 in red cells, renal tubule cells, or presum-
ably in choroid plexus, ciliary epithelium, or any other tissues where the pro-
tein is normally found – hence AQP1-null. The probands, however, did not

194


describe any clinical illness. Their unique blood types make it impossible for
them to receive transfusions from any other individual, so each has cryopre-
served blood in local blood banks for emergencies or if a transfusion is need-
ed during surgery.
   Their lack of clinical symptoms suggested that AQP1 is either not impor-
tant in humans or is important only in certain physiological states or clinical
settings. Studies of mice bearing targeted disruption of the gene encoding
AQP1 by Alan Verkman at UCSF and collaborating scientists at NIH indicated
that AQP1 is important for renal concentration (Schnermann et al., 1998;
Chou et al., 1999). Our colleague Landon King at Johns Hopkins designed a
series of clinical evaluations to probe for the importance of the human AQP1
protein. Two AQP1-null individuals were studied during inpatient evaluations
at the General Clinical Research Center at Johns Hopkins Hospital. Water
permeability is clearly reduced in AQP1-null red cells, but all baseline studies
were found to be normal. Then Landon performed a simple test – he thirst-
ed the patients. Every night during our sleep we become a little dehydrated;
upon arising in the morning that first taste of orange juice is so delicious. To
protect against dehydration, our kidneys respond by maximally concentrating
our urine, and all normal individuals concentrate to approximately 1,000
mosM. The AQP1-null individuals were found to have urine concentrations
reaching no higher than 450 mosM after overnight thirsting, and prolonged
thirsting to 24 hours followed by administration of the antidiuretic hormone,
vasopressin, and infusion of hypertonic sodium chloride yielded no further
response (King et al., 2001). In modern life with free access to fluids and air
conditioning, the need to concentrate above 450 mosM is not essential; how-
ever, the AQP1-null individuals would be at a profound disadvantage if they
were to reside in an environment with restricted access to fluids. Certainly
during human evolution, our progenitors did not always have free access to
water. The patients are described as having a mild form of nephrogenic dia-
betes insipidus that is usually subclinical but physiologically distinct.
   Søren Nielsen also established that AQP1 protein is extremely abundant in
human capillaries in both the luminal and abluminal endothelial membranes
(Nielsen et al., 1993b; King et al., 1996). Landon King in collaboration with
Robert Brown measured the capillary fluid permeability in AQP1-null hu-
mans (King et al., 2002). Using a technique developed by Wayne Mitzner and
Elias Zerhouni at Johns Hopkins employing high resolution computerized to-
mography of lung, they performed scans at baseline. Focusing upon small
bronchioles of 2–3 mm diameter, the cross sectional areas of the adjacent
venules were measured and the wall thicknesses determined. The scans were
repeated after rapid infusion of three liters of saline. All normal individuals
and AQP1-null individuals exhibited comparable evidence of vascular en-
gorgement following saline infusions. We then looked at the wall thickness of
the small breathing tubules and found that all normal individuals developed
an increase in the wall thickness – representing release of fluid from the
venules and accumulation in the soft tissues surrounding the bronchioles, a
situation referred to by clinicians as incipient pulmonary edema. The inter-

                                                                            195


stitial edema appears in the peribronchiolar soft tissues in all normal individ-
uals, but the AQP1-null individuals are resistant to this, indicating to us that
they have a very significant reduction in vascular water permeability. Whether
this may be beneficial or deleterious will depend on the clinical setting. At the
time of birth, lungs turn from a secretory organ to an absorptive organ. We
hypothesize that the inability of newborn infants to move fluid from the pul-
monary intersitium into the vascular space may be very harmful, possibly ex-
plaining why the AQP1-null state is such a rare phenotype.


OTHER AQUAPORINS – AQP2 IN COLLECTING DUCT
Within weeks of our original studies, other groups began to search for other
aquaporins. Particular interest in renal collecting ducts led Sei Sasaki and his
colleagues at Tokyo Medical and Dental University to isolate a cDNA encod-
ing AQP2 (Fushimi et al., 1993). Søren Nielsen and others established that
AQP2 is primarily expressed in renal collecting ducts where regulated water
permeability is known to occur (Nielsen et al., 1993a). Although my laborato-
ry was not involved in the studies of AQP2, I wish to share exciting informa-
tion published by several other investigators because I believe this has very
large potential clinical significance.
    In a definitive study, Søren Nielsen and Mark Knepper from NIH looked at
AQP2 in collecting ducts isolated from rats (Nielsen et al., 1995). The ducts
were perfused while water permeability was measured. Some of the speci-
mens were then sectioned and stained with anti-AQP2, and by immunogold
electron microscropy they found that very little of the AQP2 protein was
found in the apical plasma membrane of collecting duct principal cells, but
most of the protein appeared to be in membranes of intracellular vesicles
[Fig. 7 upper left]. When the isolated perfused tubules were pulsed with physio-
logical concentrations of vasopressin (the physiological antidiuretic hormone
released from brain), the water permeability was increased approximately
five-fold, coinciding with the expected physiological increase. When examined
by immunogold electron microscopy, the AQP2 protein had relocated to the
apical plasma membrane [Fig. 7 lower left]. When vasopressin was removed,
the AQP2 protein was re-internalized and the collecting duct water permea-
bility decreased.
    These observations closely reflect the known variations in renal collecting
duct water permeability occurring in our daily lives. On Friday afternoons,
our students celebrate the end of the week at the departmental beer party
(TGIF = Thank God it’s Friday). A student drinking 2 liters of beer has excess
fluid in his system; the alcohol inhibits release of vasopressin from brain. This
causes AQP2 to remain in intracellular vesicles, so the apical membranes of
renal collecting duct principal cells are not able to reabsorb water from the
filtrate – the diuretic state. The first place the student visits following TGIF is
the toilet where he empties his bladder of a large volume of dilute urine. The
next morning, the student lies in bed in a moderately dehydrated state with
high vasopressin levels in his circulation. This causes AQP2 to relocalize to

196


Figure 7. Subcellular localization of AQP2 in collecting duct principal cells from rat kidney.
Left panel – Anti-AQP2 immunogold electron microscopy of isolated collecting duct from
rat kidney. Before vasopressin (AVP) stimulation, most labeling occurs over intracellular
vesicles (top). 25,000 x. After stimulation with 100 pM AVP, most labeling appears at apical
membrane (bottom). 15,000 x.
   Right panel – Schematic representing AVP-dependent exocytosis of AQP2 to apical
membrane of principal cell providing transcellular passage of water: entry through AQP2
in apical membrane; exit through AQP3 (or AQP4) in basolateral membranes. Modified
and reprinted with permission from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA
(Nielsen et al., 1995) and Kidney International (Nielsen and Agre, 1995).




the apical plasma membranes, facilitating maximal reabsorption of water
from the urine. Thus, when he arises, his urine is maximally concentrated –
the antidiuretic state. These cycles may be repeated multiple times even with-
in a single day.
   In summary, vasopressin binds to V2 receptors at the basolateral mem-
brane of renal collecting duct causing activation of a G-coupled adenylyl cyc-
lase cascade resulting in protein kinase A phosphorylation of residue 256 on
the C-terminus of AQP2. The protein is then inserted into the apical plasma
membrane, as established by Nielsen and Knepper, the groups of Deen in
Nijmegen, Dennis Brown in Boston, Sasaki in Tokyo, Anita Aperia in
Stockholm, and other groups. Water in the primary urine enters the apical
membrane through AQP2 and exits from the basolateral membranes
through other aquaporins, AQP3 or AQP4, following a transcellular pathway
from the lumen into the vascular space (reviewed by Nielsen et al., 2002).
   Inherited defects in AQP2 cause very rare but severe clinical problems –
such has been the finding of Carel van Os, Peter Deen, and their colleagues
in Nijmegen the Netherlands (Deen et al., 1994). These patients are pro-
foundly affected, making up to 20 liters of urine per day in some cases.

                                                                                         197


Acquired defects in the level of AQP2 expression are commonly found in
clinical medicine. When AQP2 levels are too high, fluid retention occurs, as
shown by the Nielsen and Knepper group as well as by Robert Schrier and his
colleagues at the University of Colorado. Presumably this is happening in pa-
tients sustaining myocardial infarctions; such patients often suffer fluid re-
tention causing inadequate pulmonary function. Similarly, some women dur-
ing pregnancy experience pathological retention of fluid – causing
hypertension and neurological dysfunction. The opposite situation results
when AQP2 levels are too low, resulting in inadequate concentration of urine.
This result is found after reversal of urinary obstruction, as seen in the work
of Jørgen Frøkiaer in Aarhus, and in patients with nocturnal enuresis, as seen
in the work of Ivana Valenti in Bari. Thus, AQP2 is very important in clinical
medicine (reviewed by Nielsen et al., 2002).


AQP6 IN ACID SECRETORY CELLS
At this point we thought we knew a lot about aquaporins, but then we were
surprised. AQP6, a protein genetically closest to AQP2, was found to be a very
poor water channel and is never present in the plasma membrane. Double la-
bel immungold electron microscopy by Søren Nielsen and Tae-Hwan Kwon
showed that AQP6 co-localizes with H+ -ATPase in intracellular vesicles of
alpha intercalated cells in renal collecting duct. Upon stimulation of acid se-
cretion, H+ -ATPase becomes exocytosed to the plasma membrane, but AQP6
is fully retained in within the cell. A second surprise was that AQP6 is a very
good anion channel with particularly high permeation by nitrate when acti-
vated by low pH (Yasui et al., 1999). These cells control acid secretion, so
while AQP6 is clearly a genetic member of the aquaporin family, it apparent-
ly has a very different physiological function, as proposed by our colleague
Masato Yasui at Johns Hopkins.


AQP0 IN LENS
Another member of the aquaporin family is AQP0, expressed only in fiber
cells of lens. First recognized more than 30 years ago and labeled MIP (major
intrinsic protein), the physiological function was unknown. AQP0 has a fairly
low water permeability, but the protein may have a second function as a cell-
to-cell adhesion molecule, as proposed by Andreas Engel and his group.
   Shomi Bhattacharya, from Moorefield’s Eye Hospital in London identified
two large kindreds with congenital cataracts of dominant inheritance with
complete penetrance. While cataracts are fairly common among elderly indi-
viduals, they are very rare in small children. Each family bore a missense mu-
tation in a structurally important residue, and the physical nature of the opa-
cities was quite different (Berry et al., 2000). Members of the family with an
arginine replacing an essential threonine (Thr-138-Arg) have numerous
opacities throughout the lens. Members of the second family with a glycine
replacing an essential glutamate (Glu-134-Gly) have a single lamellar opacity

198


in the center of the lens. This distribution corresponds to the perimeter of
the lens at the time of birth, indicating that the mutation is deleterious only
at birth (Francis et al., 2000). This example illustrates how human biology is
so much more complicated than represented by simple gene disruption studies
performed on mice. Lens fiber cells survive for decades, so it is plausible that
subtle polymorphisms in the AQP0 protein may be a risk factor for develop-
ment of cataracts as individuals grow older.


AQP4 IN BRAIN
This protein is expressed in multiple tissues, including brain (Jung et al.,
1994a). Unlike peripheral capillaries that are quite leaky, capillaries in brain
are known to be much tighter due to astroglial endfeet surrounding capil-
laries in brain. In studies undertaken with Ole Petter Ottersen and his group at
the University of Oslo, and including Søren Nielsen, the protein was localized
by immunogold electron microscopy to reside at the blood-brain barrier, the
site where vascular space and brain parenchyma are juxtaposed (Nielsen et
al., 1997; Nagelhus et al., 1998). Brain capillaries are surrounded by a base-
ment membrane that is surrounded by astroglial endfeet. The AQP4 resides
almost entirely in the endfeet membranes directly in contact with the base-
ment membrane and is virtually absent in other astroglial membranes [Fig.
8A, B]. Similarly, at the surface of the brain, AQP4 is abundant at the brain
surface where liquid and brain are juxtaposed [Fig. 8C]. These locations
strongly predicted that AQP4 would be important in movement of water from
blood or cerebrospinal fluid into brain as well as in the reverse direction.
AQP4 is extremely heavily expressed at these locations forming microcrys-
talline forms referred to as “square arrays” with size of the assembly deter-
mined by the N-terminus of AQP4 (Furman et al., 2003). Other workers, in-
cluding Antonio Frigeri in Bari, also documented that movements of water in
brain and skeletal muscle may be of pathophysiological significance (2001).
   Our student John Neely recognized a protein binding motif in the C-termi-
nus of AQP4 predicting that it would associate with the dystrophin associated
proteins. In collaboration with Marv Adams and Stan Froehner in Seattle as
well as with our colleagues in Oslo, we evaluated the localization of AQP4 in
mice bearing targeted disruption in alpha-syntrophin, a member of the dys-
trophin-associated proteins (Neely et al., 2001). By immunogold electron micro-
scopy, AQP4 was found to be grossly mislocalized in the syn-null animals.
Interestingly, when stressed with brain injury resulting from middle cerebral
artery occlusion, the control animals did much worse, having significantly larg-
er areas of infarction and edema, and the syn-null animals did much better
(Amiry-Moghaddam et al., 2003). These studies suggest that if AQP4 could be
selectively inhibited, patients sustaining brain injuries might be protected
from some of the tragic consequences of brain swelling. Protection against hypo-
natremia-induced brain swelling was observed by Søren Nielsen and cowork-
ers (Vajda et al., 2002). Geoff Manley and colleagues independently estab-
lished the same conclusions with AQP4-null mice (2000).

                                                                            199


Figure 8. Polarized expression of AQP4 in rat brain.
   Panels A and B – Anti-AQP4 immunogold electron microscopy reveals AQP4 in perivas-
cular membranes of astroglial endfeet but not in membranes facing neuropil.
   Panel C – Brain surface exhibits anti-AQP4-immunogold labeling of pia. Scale bars: 0.5
µm. Reprinted from Journal of Neuroscience with permission (Nielsen et al., 1997).




AQP5 IN SECRETORY GLANDS
Cloned from submandibular salivary glands, AQP5 resides in the apical mem-
brane of acini in salivary, lacrimal, sweat, and other secretory glands (Raina et
al., 1995; King et al., 1997). This is the last membrane water crosses during the
generation of saliva, tears, and other secretions. It is known that these glands
facilitate the release of large amounts of fluid. For example, any individual
fasted for several hours will secrete massive amounts of saliva when he senses
food is available.
   AQP5 may be important in certain clinical disorders. In collaboration with
Kazuo Tsubota from Tokyo and Chris Delporte from Brussels, we examined
AQP5 distribution in gland biopsies from a small series of patients with
Sjögren’s Syndrome. This disorder affecting women at mid-life causes dry eye
and dry mouth, although the precise biological cause of the disorder is un-
known. Using our anti-AQP5 immunohistochemical labeling, the normal api-
cal staining is lost, and the protein appears to be mislocalized throughout the
cytoplasm in the Sjögren’s biopsies (Tsubota et al., 2001; Steinfeld et al.,
2001). Other investigators led by Roland Jonsson in Bergen did not find
AQP5 mislocalization in a larger series of Sjögren’s patients; however, they
noted decreased expression of AQP1 in the myoepithelia surrounding glan-
dular acini (Beroukas et al., 2002). Thus, while Sjögren’s may be heteroge-
neous, aquaporins have been implicated in these two series of patients.
   AQP5 is also abundant in sweat glands. In another collaborative study with
Søren Nielsen and his group, qualitative analysis of sweating was compared in

200


wild type mice and mice bearing targeted disruption of the the gene encod-
ing AQP5 prepared by Carissa Krane and Anil Menon at the University of
Cincinnati. While the morphology of the sweat glands was preserved, the re-
lease of amylase in sweat after pilocarpine injection was found to be greatly
diminished, indicating that AQP5 must be important for the ability to sweat
(Nejsum et al., 2002).


AQUAGLYCEROPORINS AQP7 AND AQP9
AQP7 is expressed in adipocytes. During fasting, energy stored as triglycerides
is provided by release of fatty acids, exported by special fatty acid trans-
porters, and glycerol, exported through AQP7. The preferred gluconeogenic
substrate, glycerol, passes through AQP9 in the hepatocyte plasma mem-
branes. Glycerol is converted to glucose within the hepatocytes. In the fasted
state, AQP9 expression is greatly increased, as demonstrated in the work of
Jennifer Carbrey and Dan Gorelick in our group. Multiple research groups
have reached the same conclusion that these two proteins, AQP7 and AQP9,
form an axis for energy transfer, together maintaining blood glucose levels
during starvation (Kuriyama et al., 2002; Carbrey et al., 2003).
   AQP7 and AQP9 have a very curious capacity to transport certain heavy
metals, a discovery made by Barry Rosen and his colleagues at Wayne State
University (Liu et al., 2002). Measurement of arsenic trioxide uptake was per-
formed with yeast expressing AQP7 or AQP9 as well as in oocytes expressing
the proteins. Arsenite is uncharged at neutral pH and is very toxic. Clinical
features of greatest concern in arsenic poisoning include hepatocellular dam-
age and hepatocellular carcinoma. The World Health Organization has estab-
lished that an alarming epidemic of arsenic poisoning is now occurring in the
Ganges Delta because of arsenic contamination of the groundwater. Since the
surface water is infested with Vibrio cholera, tube wells were installed, but heavy
metal determinations were apparently not performed. While our work ex-
plains why these unfortunate people are vulnerable to hepatocellular damage,
it does not provide a useful antidote. Prevention of this poisoning requires ac-
cess to pure drinking water, a basic right deserved by all persons on earth.


NON-HUMAN AQUAPORINS
Aquaporins are also important in plants. A relative of the mustard plant,
Arabidopsis thaliana, is frequently studied by plant physiologists (also known as
“the green people”). Ralf Kaldenhoff at the University of Würzburg demon-
strated this dramatically by comparing the gross morphology of a parental
Arabidopsis to a plant modified to express the rootlet aquaporin group PIP1b
at only 20% of the normal levels. Both plants exhibit similar foliage, but to
maintain the same stem turgor, the modified plant sends out more greatly ar-
borized rootlets [Fig. 9] (Kaldenhoff et al., 1998). Thus, the plants are keenly
aware of water balance. Arabidopsis thaliana has at least 35 different aquapor-
in genes, and these are presumed to participate in different physiological

                                                                               201


Figure 9. Arabidopsis thaliana rootlet aquaporins and stem turgor. Antisense RNA manipula-
tion reduces expression of aquaporin PIP1b proteins by 80%. To maintain stem turgor at
normal levels, the Aqp PIP1b deficient plant increases rootlet surface area by arborization.
Reprinted with permission from The Plant Journal (Kaldenhoff et al., 1998).




processes, including photosynthesis with carbon dioxide passing through leaf
aquaporins (Uehlein et al., 2003) and restriction of rootlet water uptake regu-
lated by low pH (Tournaire-Roux et al., 2003). These observations may be rel-
evant to human aquaporins, since similar observations have been reported
for AQP1 (Nakhoul et al., 1998) and AQP3 (Zeuthen and Klaerke, 1999).
   Aquaporins are also expressed in all forms of micro-organisms. Escherichia
coli has two – AqpZ, a classic aquaporin, and GlpF, an aquaglyceroporin. The
structures of the narrowest section of the channels are somewhat different –
narrower and more hydrophilic in aquaporins than in aquaglyceroporins.
Archaea, the third kingdom of life, also carry a gene encoding AqpM – ho-
mologous to aquaporins and aquaglyceroporins. AqpM may not exist for wa-
ter transport but may facilitate hydrogen sulfide transport (Kozono et al.,
2003). Whatever the function, their presence in all three kingdoms of life re-
inforces the fundamental importance of this family of proteins. Sacharomyces
cerevisiae have two aquaporin genes and two aquaglyceroporin genes. Exciting
studies by Stefan Hohmann at the University of Göteborg revealed interesting
functions – yeast aquaporins confer resistance to freezing, whereas the
aquaglyceroporin FPS1 protects the organisms against hypo-osmotic shock
(reviewed by Hohmann, 2002).


CONCLUSION
Discovery of the aquaporins has provided the explanation for selective trans-
port of water across the plasma membranes of cells without allowing protons

202


to also cross the membrane. Some homologs have special permeation prop-
erties for glycerol, nitrate, or arsenite. The structural models provide re-
markable insight into the biophysical functions. Aquaporins have been im-
plicated in multiple clinical disorders. Aquaporins are clearly involved in
some forms of renal vascular diseases, including nephrogenic diabetes in-
sipidus. Roles in defense against thermal stress are expected. Last summer
during the heat wave in France, 14,000 people died when the temperature
reached 40 ˚C. Many of these individuals were older, and it is likely that they
manifested age-dependent diminution of physiological processes involving
aquaporins – concentration of urine, sweating, and thirst mechanisms. While
these deficiencies may be unimportant during normal life, they may cause se-
vere problems when individuals are thermally stressed. Aquaporins have also
been associated with problems of brain edema and loss of vision.
Aquaglyceroporins are involved in the defense against starvation. These pro-
teins are expressed throughout the natural world.
   A word for the students from Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the father of neuro-
science, “In summary, there are no small problems. Problems that appear
small are large problems that are not understood” (Ramón y Cajal, 1897).
Certainly the issue of water permeation of membranes was initially assumed
to be a small problem related to diffusion. Instead it has turned out to be a
complex problem with large physiological and pathophysiological signifi-
cance.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank the past and present members of my laboratory and the many indi-
viduals with whom we have collaborated in these studies. I particularly wish to
thank my former chairmen, Victor McKusick, Department of Medicine, and
M. Daniel Lane, Department of Biological Chemistry, for hiring me onto
their faculty. I dedicate this lecture to the memory of John C. Parker, a friend
and generous mentor.


REFERENCES
Agre, P., Preston, G. M., Smith, B. L., Jung, J. S., Raina, S., Moon, C., Guggino, W. B., &
  Nielsen, S. (1993a). Aquaporin CHIP: the archetypal molecular water channel. American
  Journal of Physiology – Renal Physiology 265, F463–F476.
Agre, P., Sasaki, S., & Chrispeels J. (1993b). Aquaporins: a family of water channel proteins.
  American Journal of Physiology – Renal Physiology 265, F461.
Agre, P., King, L. S., Yasui, M., Guggino, W. B., Ottersen, O. P., Fujiyoshi, Y., Engel, A., and
  Nielsen, S. (2002). Aquaporin water channels – From atomic struture to clinical medi-
  cine. Journal of Physiology 542, 3–16.
Amiry-Moghaddam, M., Otsuka, T., Hurn, P. D., Traystman, R. J., Finn-Mogens, H.,
  Froehner, S. C., Adams, M. E., Neely, J. D., Agre, P., Ottersen, O. P., Bhardwaj, A. (2003)
  An alpha-syntropin-dependent pool of AQP4 in astroglial end-feet confers bidirectional
  water flow between blood and brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
  USA 100, 2106–2111.

                                                                                           203


Beroukas, D., Hiscock, J., Gannon, B. J., Jonsson, R., Gordon, T. P., & Waterman, S. A.
   (2002). Selective down-regulation of aquaporin-1 in salivary glands in primary Sjögren’s
   syndrome. Laboratory Investigation 82, 1547–1552.
Berry, V., Francis, P., Kaushal, S., Moore, A., & Bhattacharya, S. (2000). Missense mutations
   in MIP underlie autosomal dominant ‘polymorphic’ and lamellar cataracts linked to
   12q. Nature Genetics 25, 15–17.
Calamita, G., Bishai, W. R., Preston, G. M., Guggino, W. B., & Agre, P. (1995). Molecular
   cloning and characterization of AqpZ, a water channel from Escherichia coli. Journal of
   Biological Chemistry 270, 29063–29066.
Carbrey, J. M., Gorelick-Feldman, D. A., Kozono, D., Praetorius, J., Nielsen, S., & Agre, P.
   (2003). Aquaglyceroporin AQP9: Solute permeation and metabolic control of expres-
   sion in liver. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 100, 2945–2950.
Chou, C. L., Knepper, M. A., van Hoek, A. N., Brown, D., Yang, B., Ma, T., & Verkman, A. S.
   (1999). Reduced water permeability and altered ultrastructure in thin descending limb
   of Henle in aquaporin-1 null mice. Journal of Clinical Investigation 103, 491–496.
de Groot, B. L. & Grubmuller, H. (2001). Water permeation across biological membranes:
   mechanism and dynamics of aquaporin-1 and GlpF. Science 294, 2353–2357.
Deen, P. M., Verdijk, M. A., Knoers, N. V., Wieringa, B., Monnens, L. A., van Os, C. H., &
   Van Oost, B. A. (1994). Requirement of human renal water channel aquaporin-2 for va-
   sopressin- dependent concentration of urine. Science 264, 92–95.
Denker, B. M., Smith, B. L., Kuhajda, F. P., & Agre, P. (1988). Identification, purification,
   and partial characterization of a novel Mr 28,000 integral membrane protein from ery-
   throcytes and renal tubules. Journal of Biological Chemistry 263, 15634–15642.
Finkelstein, A. (1987). Water movement through lipid bilayers, pores, and plasma mem-
   branes: Theory and reality. New York: Wiley.
Francis, P., Chung, J. J., Yasui, M., Berry, V., Moore, A., Wyatt, M. K., Wistow, G.,
   Bhattacharya, S. S., & Agre, P. (2000). Functional impairment of lens aquaporin in two
   families with dominantly inherited cataracts. Human Molecular Genetics 9, 2329–2334.
Frigeri, A., Nicchia, G. P., Nico, B., Quondamatteo, F., Herken, R., Roncali, L., & Svelto, M.
   (2001). Aquaporin-4 deficiency in skeletal muscle and brain of dystrophic mdx mice.
   FASEB Journal. 15, 90–98.
Fu, D., Libson, A., Miercke, L. J., Weitzman, C., Nollert, P., Krucinski, J., & Stroud, R. M.
   (2000). Structure of a glycerol-conducting channel and the basis for its selectivity. Science
   290, 481–486.
Furman, C. S., Gorelick-Feldman, D. A., Davidson, K. G. V., Yasumura, T., Neely, J. D., Agre,
   P., & Rash, J. E. (2003). Aquaporin-4 square array assembly: opposing actions of M1
   and M23 isoforms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 100,
   13609–13614.
Fushimi, K., Uchida, S., Hara, Y., Hirata, Y., Marumo, F., & Sasaki, S. (1993). Cloning and
   expression of apical membrane water channel of rat kidney collecting tubule. Nature
   361, 549–552.
Hohmann, S. (2002). Osmotic stress signaling and osmoadaptation in yeasts. Microbiology
   and Molecular Biology Reviews 66, 300–372.
Jung, J. S., Bhat, R. V., Preston, G. M., Guggino, W. B., Baraban, J. M., & Agre, P. (1994a).
   Molecular characterization of an aquaporin cDNA from brain: candidate osmoreceptor
   and regulator of water balance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 91,
   13052–13056.
Jung, J. S., Preston, G. M., Smith, B. L., Guggino, W. B., & Agre, P. (1994b). Molecular
   structure of the water channel through aquaporin CHIP. The hourglass model. Journal
   of Biological Chemistry 269, 14648–14654.
Kaldenhoff, R., Grote, K., Zhu, J. J., Zimmermann, U. (1998). Significance of plasma lem-
   ma aquaporins for water-transport in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal 14, 121–128.
King, L. S., Nielsen, S., & Agre, P. (1996). Aquaporin-1 water channel protein in lung: on-
   togeny, steroid-induced expression, and distribution in rat. Journal of Clinical Investigation
   97, 2183–2191.

204


King, L. S., Nielsen, S., & Agre, P. (1997). Aquaporins in complex tissues. I. Developmental
   patterns in respiratory and glandular tissues of rat. American Journal of Physiology – Cell
   Physiology 273, C1541–C1548.
King, L. S., Choi, M., Fernandez, P. C., Cartron, J. P., & Agre, P. (2001). Defective urinary-
   concentrating ability due to a complete deficiency of aquaporin-1. New England Journal of
   Medicine 345, 175–179.
King, L. S., Nielsen, S., Agre, P., & Brown, R. H. (2002). Decreased pulmonary vascular per-
   meability in aquaporin-1-null humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
   USA 99, 1059–1063.
Kozono, D., Yasui, M., King, L. S., & Agre, P. (2002). Aquaporin water channels: atomic
   structure and molecular dynamics meet clinical medicine. Journal of Clinical Investigation
   109, 1395–1399.
Kozono, D., Ding, X., Iwasaki, I., Meng, X., Kamagata, Y., Agre, P., & Kitagawa, Y. (2003).
   Functional expression and characterization of an archaeal aquaporin: AqpM from
   Methanothermobacter marburgensis. Journal of Biological Chemistry 278, 10649–10656.
Kuriyama, H., Shimomura, H., Kishida, K., Kondo, H., Furuyama, N., Nishizawa, H.,
   Maeda, N., Matsuda, M., Nagaretani, H., Kihara, S., Nakamura, T., Tochino, Y.,
   Funahashi, T., Matsuzawa, Y. (2002). Coordinated regulation of fat-specific and liver-spe-
   cific glycerol channels, aquaporin adipose, and aquaporin 9. Diabetes 51, 2915–2921.
Liu, Z., Shen, J., Carbrey, J.M., Mukhopadhyay, R., Agre, P., & Rosen, B. (2002). Arsenite
   transport by mammalian aquaglyceroporins AQP7 and AQP9. Proceedings of the National
   Academy of Sciences of the USA 99, 6053–6058.
Macey, R. I. & Farmer, R. E. L. (1970)Inhibition of water and solute permeability in human
   red cells. Biochemica Biophysica Acta 211, 104–106.
Manley, G. T., Fujimura, M., Ma, T., Noshita, N., Filiz, F., Bollen, A. W., Chan, P., &
   Verkman, A. S. (2000). Aquaporin-4 deletion in mice reduces brain edema after acute
   water intoxication and ischemic stroke. Nature Medicine 6, 159–163.
Moon, C., Preston, G. M., Griffin, C. A., Jabs, E. W., & Agre, P. (1993). The human aqua-
   porin-CHIP gene. Structure, organization, and chromosomal localization. Journal of
   Biological Chemistry 268, 15772–15778.
Murata, K., Mitsuoka, K., Hirai, T., Walz, T., Agre, P., Heymann, J. B., Engel, A., & Fujiyoshi,
   Y. (2000). Structural determinants of water permeation through aquaporin-1. Nature
   407, 599–605.
Nagelhus, E. A., Veruki, M. L., Torp, R., Haug, F. M., Laake, J. H., Nielsen, S., Agre, P., &
   Ottersen, O. P. (1998). Aquaporin-4 water channel protein in the rat retina and optic
   nerve: polarized expression in Muller cells and fibrous astrocytes. Journal of Neuroscience
   18, 2506–2519.
Nakhoul, N. L, Davis, B. A., Romero, M. F., & Boron, W F. (1998). Effect of expressing the
   water channel aquaporin-1 on the CO2 permeability of Xenopus oocytes. American
   Journal of Physiology – Cell Physiology 274, C297–298.
Neely, J. D., Amiry-Moghaddam, M., Ottersen, O. P., Froehner, S. C., Agre, P., & Adams, M.
   E. (2001). Syntrophin-dependent expression and localization of Aquaporin-4 water
   channel protein. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 98, 14108–14113.
Nejsum, L. N., Kwon, T. H., Jensen, U. B., Fumagalli, O., Frokiaer, J., Krane, C. M., Menon,
   A. G., King, L. S., Agre, P., & Nielsen, S. (2002). Functional requirement of aquaporin-5
   in plasma membranes of sweat glands. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
   USA 99, 511–516.
Nielsen, S., DiGiovanni, S.R., Christensen, E.I., Knepper, M.A., & Harris, H.W. (1993a).
   Cellular and subcellular immunolocalization of vasopressin-regulated water channel in
   rat kidney. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 90, 11663–11667.
Nielsen, S., Smith, B. L., Christensen, E. I., & Agre, P. (1993b). Distribution of the aqua-
   porin CHIP in secretory and resorptive epithelia and capillary endothelia. Proceedings of
   the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 90, 7275–7279.




                                                                                           205


Nielsen, S., Smith, B. L., Christensen, E. I., Knepper, M. A., & Agre, P. (1993c). CHIP28 wa-
   ter channels are localized in constitutively water-permeable segments of the nephron.
   Journal of Cell Biology 120, 371–383.
Nielsen, S. & Agre, P. (1995). The aquaporin family of water channels in kidney. Kidney
   International 48, 1057–1068.
Nielsen, S., Chou, C. L., Marples, D., Christensen, E. I., Kishore, B. K., & Knepper, M. A.
   (1995). Vasopressin increases water permeability of kidney collecting duct by inducing
   translocation of aquaporin-CD water channels to plasma membrane. Proceedings of the
   National Academy of Sciences of the USA 92, 1013–1017.
Nielsen, S., Nagelhus, E. A., Amiry-Moghaddam, M., Bourque, C., Agre, P., & Ottersen, O.
   P. (1997). Specialized membrane domains for water transport in glial cells: high- resolu-
   tion immunogold cytochemistry of aquaporin-4 in rat brain. Journal of Neuroscience 17,
   171–180.
Nielsen, S., Frokiaer, J., Marples, D., Kwon, T. H., Agre, P., & Knepper, M. A. (2002).
   Aquaporins in the kidney: from molecules to medicine. Physiological Reviews 82, 205–244.
Preston, G. M. & Agre, P. (1991). Isolation of the cDNA for erythrocyte integral membrane
   protein of 28 kilodaltons: member of an ancient channel family. Proceedings of the
   National Academy of Sciences of the USA 88, 11110–11114.
Preston, G. M., Carroll, T. P., Guggino, W. B., & Agre, P. (1992). Appearance of water chan-
   nels in Xenopus oocytes expressing red cell CHIP28 protein. Science 256, 385–387.
Preston, G. M., Jung, J. S., Guggino, W. B., & Agre, P. (1993). The mercury-sensitive residue
   at cysteine 189 in the CHIP28 water channel. Journal of Biological Chemistry 268, 17–20.
Preston, G. M., Smith, B. L., Zeidel, M. L., Moulds, J. J., & Agre, P. (1994). Mutations in
   aquaporin-1 in phenotypically normal humans without functional CHIP water channels.
   Science 265, 1585–1587.
Raina, S., Preston, G. M., Guggino, W. B., & Agre, P. (1995). Molecular cloning and char-
   acterization of an aquaporin cDNA from salivary, lacrimal, and respiratory tissues. Jour-
   nal of Biological Chemistry 270, 1908–1912.
Ramon y Cajal, S. (1897). Advice to a Young Investigator (translated by N. Swanson and L.
   W. Swanson, 1999) Cambridge, MIT Press.
Schnermann, J., Chou, C. L., Ma, T., Traynor, T., Knepper, M. A., & Verkman, A. S. (1998).
   Defective proximal tubular fluid reabsorption in transgenic aquaporin-1 null mice.
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 95, 9660–9664.
Smith, B. L. & Agre, P. (1991). Erythrocyte Mr 28,000 transmembrane protein exists as a
   multisubunit oligomer similar to channel proteins. Journal of Biological Chemistry 266,
   6407–6415.
Smith, B. L., Preston, G. M., Spring, F. A., Anstee, D. J., & Agre, P. (1994). Human red cell
   aquaporin CHIP. I. Molecular characterization of ABH and Colton blood group anti-
   gens. Journal of Clinical Investigation 94, 1043–1049.
Steinfeld, S., Cogan, E., King, L. S., Agre, P., Kiss, R., & Delporte, C. (2001). Abnormal dis-
   tribution of aquaporin-5 water channel protein in salivary glands from Sjögren’s syn-
   drome patients. Laboratory Investigation 81, 143–148.
Sui, H., Han, B. G., Lee, J. K., Walian, P., & Jap, B. K. (2001). Structural basis of water-spe-
   cific transport through the AQP1 water channel. Nature 414, 872–878.
Tajkhorshid, E., Nollert, P., Jensen, M. O., Miercke, L. J., O’Connell, H., Stroud, R. M., &
   Schulten, K., (2002). Control of the selectivity of the aquaporin water channel family by
   global orientational tuning. Science 296, 525–530.
Tournaire-Roux, C., Sutka, M., Javot, H., Gout, E., Gerbeau, P., Luu, D. T., Bligny, R. &
   Maurel, C. (2003). Cytosolic pH regulates root water transport during anoxic stress
   through gating of aquaporins. Nature 425, 393–397.
Tsubota, K., Hirai, S., King, L. S., Agre, P., & Ishida, N. (2001). Defective cellular trafficking
   of lacrimal gland aquaporin-5 in Sjögren’s syndrome. Lancet 357, 688–689.
Uehlein, N., Lovisolo, C., Siefritz, F., & Kaldenhoff, R. (2003). The tobacco aquaporin
   NtAQP1 is a membrane CO2 pore with physiological functions. Nature 425, 734–737.



206


Vajda, Z., Pedersen, M., Fuchtbauer, E.-M., Wert, K., Stodkilde-Jorgensen, H., Sulyok, E.,
   Doczi, T., Neely, J. D., Agre, P., Frokiaer, J., & Nielsen, S. (2002). Delayed onset of brain
   edema and mislocalization of aquaporin-4 in dystrophin-null transgenic mice. Proceedings
   of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 99, 13131–13136.
Walz, T., Smith, B. L., Zeidel, M. L., Engel, A., & Agre, P. (1994). Biologically active two-di-
   mensional crystals of aquaporin CHIP. Journal of Biological Chemistry 269, 1583–1586.
Yasui, M., Hazama, A., Kwon, T. H., Nielsen, S., Guggino, W. B., & Agre, P. (1999). Rapid
   gating and anion permeability of an intracellular aquaporin. Nature 402, 184–187.
Zeidel, M. L., Ambudkar, S. V., Smith, B. L., & Agre, P. (1992). Reconstitution of function-
   al water channels in liposomes containing purified red cell CHIP28 protein. Biochemistry
   31, 7436–7440.
Zeidel, M. L., Nielsen, S., Smith, B. L., Ambudkar, S. V., Maunsbach, A. B., & Agre, P.
   (1994). Ultrastructure, pharmacologic inhibition, and transport selectivity of aquaporin
   channel-forming integral protein in proteoliposomes. Biochemistry 33, 1606–1615.
Zeuthen, T. & Klaerke, D. A. (1999). Transport of water and glycerol in aquaporin 3 is gat-
   ed by H(+). Journal of Biological Chemistry 274, 21631–21636.




                                                                                           207
