                                 PETER D    EBYE



 Methods to determine the electrical and geometrical
               structure of molecules
                        Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1936


Long before we had at our disposal the means offered to us today by the
quantum theory to discuss the structure of atoms and molecules, it was clear
that in debating this subject we had to deal with electrical structures. Starting
from this point of view it seemed appropriate to me in 1912, therefore, to
 establish what conclusions could be reached with regard to the distribution
 of electricity in the molecule on the basis of experience with the action of
 the simplest conceivable electrical disturbance by means of a static field1.
 Since Faraday had introduced the measurement of this disturbance by the
aid of the dielectric constant it was usual to consider the reason for the
polarization occurring in every insulator on which the dielectric effect is
 based to be the displacement of the charges produced in the molecule by the
field and which disappears again as the field disappears. This concept is still
valid today. We know, indeed, that the deformation of the charge structure,
which occurs with the normal experiments, is extremely small. For instance,
in the helium atom, the displacement of the electron cloud against the nucleus
in a field of 300 volts/cm only amounts to about 2.104 cm, i.e. a small
fraction of the nucleus diameter. Owing to the size of the elementary charge,
this tiny displacement is, nevertheless, still large enough to produce easily
observable dielectric effects. If, however, a list of the dielectric constants of va-
rious bodies is considered, preferably based on measurements for the gaseous
state, because there are no complications to be feared here owing to recip-
rocal influence of the molecules, abnormally large susceptibilities will be
found for many molecules, and a particularly great mobility of the charges
cannot be regarded as the cause of these. Thus, for example, the molecules
of NH3 and H2O show a susceptibility which is some 40 times greater than
that of the Ne atom, although the three mentioned particles contain the
same number of electrons. The fact that a powerful loosening of the electron
bond representing the hydrogen valency is not happening will be seen if
the susceptibility of the molecules of H2 and CH4 is used as a comparison,
as they both show only a normal small value. By working on observations


384                             1936 P.DEBYE

of this nature we can come to the conclusion that often besides the deforma-
tion there must also exist another cause of the observed electrical polariza-
tion. Now even before 1912 paramagnetic polarization and its diminu-
tion, observed by Curie, with an increase in temperature were explained in
the theory of Langevinz by orientation of permanent elementary magnets.
I therefore conjectured that molecules in the state of equilibrium can also be
carriers of a permanent electric moment and so the electric polarization in
general must be attributed to two simultaneously effective causes, a deforma-
tion and an orientation. Molecules with abnormally great electric suscepti-
bility are, then, those with a relatively large permanent moment and its
orientation causes the large polarization. This same hypothesis was published
a few years later by J. J. Thomson3.
   As both effects are added in the dielectric constant measured, a method
had now to be found of observing them separately. A first process for this
purpose results in the transference of Langevin’s calculation to the electrical
case. The orientation obtainable in a field is the result of an equilibrium be-
tween the field effect, which is striving for an orderly arrangement of the
dipole directions, and the effect of the heat movement, which is creating
disorder. With increasing temperature the mean moment arising from the
orientation and produced through a uniform field must therefore decrease,
 and this is also the result of the theory which for this mean moment gives
the value           where is the permanent moment in electrostatic units, k
is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the absolute temperature. The assumption
here is that the potential energy of a dipole in the field is small against the
mean thermal energy of a molecule, otherwise proportionality between the
field strength and the polarization produced does not exist. This condition
is in fact fulfilled in the great majority of the measurements. From the
size of the elementary charge and the dimensions of the molecules it can be
deduced that should have values of the order 10-18 (in electrostatic units),
and this means that in a field of 300 volts/cm the thermal energy at room
temperature is still always about 40,000 times as large as the above-men-
tioned potential energy. Originally the theory was purely classical. Since the
appearance of the quantum theory doubts have arisen regarding the numer-
ical factor of in the formula for the mean moment; actually other numer-
ical factors were calculated. Since, in the meantime, the methods of calcula-
tion of the quantum theory have been definitely formulated in wave
 mechanics, the factor has been re-established as correct4. A further question
which still required an answer was whether the moment produced by the


              MOLECULAR STRUCTURE DETERMINATIONS                             385
  deformation was not also susceptible to temperature. In agreement with the
  conceptions which were prevalent 25 years ago, it was at that time shown
  that the quasi-elastically bound electrons through their displacement produce
 a moment which is independent of the temperature. Today we would
 prefer to attribute the actual insusceptibility of displacement against increase
  of temperature to the fact that the difference in energy between the basic
 distribution of the electrons and that under excited conditions is in general
 so great that the latter do not occur in any noticeable frequency.
    Expectations have been confirmed by experiments on the dependency of
 the dielectric constant of different gases upon the temperature, conducted
 by Bádeker5 even before the theory appeared, and by Jona at my suggestion
 after its appearance, and then, when electron tubes were available by beautiful
 and exact measurements by Sänger7 and C. T. Zahn8, inter alia. The ob-
 servable mean moment of a molecule produced through an electric field is
 in fact a linear function of I/T; the experimentally determined factor of I/T
 in this presentation yields numerical values of the dipole moment of the
 order of 10-18. We shall later come back to the connection of the measured
 moments with the molecular structure. At this point let us make just one
 remark on the relative significance of deformation and orientation. Very
 often the latter is the decisive one; a good example is given by the NH,
 measurements from which it is seen that at room temperature 90% of the
 susceptibility are due to the orientation of the permanent dipole and only
 10% to the deformation.
    We come to a second method of determining the dipole moment if the
question is considered of the dispersion of the dielectric constant. If we now
first confine ourselves to considering the gaseous state again, there exist rela-
tively sharply defined quantum stages of rotation, between which transitions
will take place under the influence of the incident radiation. This means that
a series of absorption lines exists, of which the first will lie for molecules
with larger moments of inertia at a wavelength of the order of I cm. If we
now pass through the infrared in the direction of increasing frequency, the
refractive index in the neighbourhood of each absorption line will show the
well-known breaks, and for the determination of its size the influence of the
rotation and of the permanent moment will more and more disappear. The
orientation can no longer be established, therefore, with high frequencies,
and the frequencies of visible light must be considered as such. Only the in-
fluence of the deformation is left, for in general the electrons only cause ab-
sorption in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum. According to Maxwell’s


386                              1936 P.DEBYE

relation therefore, the square of the optical refractive index (possibly after
extrapolation to infinitely long waves, without taking into consideration
the above-mentioned ultrared absorption lines) may be regarded as that part
of the dielectric constant which is only based on deformation. In this way a
separation of the two effects is again achieved and a determination of the
dipole moment obtained. The method is clearly very simple, for it requires
only the formation of the difference of the dielectric constant and the square
of the optical refractive index. It is in fact always usable with good success
if the molecule is sufficiently strongly polar. With low polarity the errors of
estimation of the static deformation fraction become too important9.
     A third interesting method is offered by the observation of the deflection
 of a molecular ray in an inhomogeneous electric field. As a result of the
 deformation alone there is a deflection of the ray only in the direction of an
 increasing square value of the deflecting field strength. The existence of a
permanent dipole moment, creates a widening of the ray. Experiments of
this nature were conducted by Wrede10, by Estermann11 and, recently, by
 Scheffers 12. Exact determinations of the dipole moment are so difficult to
 obtain because its size has to be concluded from the widening of the ray.
 The method is, however, very valuable for special cases which would
 otherwise not be accessible by the usual methods. It did good service in
 the elucidation of the peculiar behaviour of pentaerythritol and substitu-
 tion products” and also in the determination of the large moments of alkali-
 halogenide molecules            = 6.3 · 10-18 for KCl) 12.
     In discussing the methods so far mentioned I have restricted myself ex-
 clusively to measurements on gases, because only thus is it possible in a com-
 pletely unobjectionable way to denote the field strength actually acting upon
 the molecule, and because only in gases of low density can the orientation
 of the molecules be regarded as entirely free. On the other hand, the material
 accessible in such experiments is very essentially limited. For this reason I
 decided in 1916 to ignore the objections and to determine moments by
 measurements on diluted solutions of polar substances in non-polar sol-
        9
 vents . It is now first of all necessary to estimate the influence of the neigh-
 bouring molecules. This was done by applying the relation of Clausius and
 Mosotti. It is then shown that the susceptibility of the molecule now no
 longer follows immediately from the excess of the dielectric constant above
  I. Now        times the moment produced in the n molecules of the unit of
 volume under the effect of the unit field strength is measured by the fraction
            + 2). The excellent constancy established experimentally of the


              MOLECULAR STRUCTURE DETERMINATIONS                            387
 molecular refraction calculated according to the Lorentz-Lorenz formula
in the transition from the gaseous to the liquid state guarantees that, at least
for non-polar molecules, the Clausius-Mosotti method of calculation may
also still be applied for the frequency o. Nevertheless it is always essential
throughout the experiment to see that the reciprocal influence of the polar
molecules is infinitesimally small. This will be achieved if, to determine the
moment, only sufficiently diluted solutions are used, or by extrapolation to
infinite dilution of the measured values, limiting values are obtained for the
dielectric effect of the dissolved molecules. A second condition is that the
polar molecule should not be influenced either in its moment or in the free-
dom of its adjustment by the surrounding non-polar molecules of the sol-
 vent.
   The method consists, then, in the determination, by measurements of the
dielectric constant of diluted solutions, of the mean moment of the polar
molecule in a unit field, and next in the separation, by measuring the
 refraction, of the orientation fraction from the deformation fraction. As a
 variant it was later proposed by Errera 1 3 to infer the last-named fraction
from measurements on solids.
   After the first measurements of this kind had been made at my suggestion
by Miss Lange (Göttingen thesis, 1911)14 and later measurements had been
very much simplified by the introduction of electron tubes and the beat-
method, in the course of time a very large number of molecules had been
investigated regarding their polarity by many observers, amongst whom I
would like to mention in particular Ch. P. Smyth 15 and J. W. Williams16.
In an article in the Handbuch und Jahrbuch der Chemischen Physik for 1935,
O. Fuchs and K. L. Wolf17 published a list of the dipole moments of 1,100
substances; 12% of these proved to be non-polar. A very valuable summary
of dipole moments has also been published by the Faraday Society, edited
by Sidgwick18.
   We can also consider investigating the diluted solutions at different tem-
peratures and then, as with gases, from conclusions on their polarity from the
temperature coefficients of the susceptibility of the dissolved molecules. This
is indeed the most exact method of moment determination when applied
to gases. In the case of solutions, however, solvent influences appear which
are not taken care of in the simple theory and although they do not make
the method unusable, its accuracy is affected and it cannot be given pref-
erence over the dispersion method. As the latter is also far simpler to operate,
the temperature method has only occasionally been used for solutions.


388                              1936 P.DEBYE

    With this remark we now touch upon a section of the development to
which increased attention has been paid of late. As an assumption for the
completely faultless functioning of the dispersion method, a second condi-
tion was mentioned above as required, viz. that there should be no influences
of any kind of the solvent upon the dissolved molecules. The validity of this
assumption was of course tested at the outset of the development of the
method by J. W. Williams, inter alia 19. The question was whether for a def-
inite molecule the same moment was found in different solvents. At that time
the validity of this assumption was found within the experimental limits of
error. When, more recently, H. Müller2O at my suggestion carried out more
exact measurements with improved experimental methods, it was shown that
there does exist an unmistakable though small influence of the solvent, which
means that for the same molecule in different solvents not exactly the same
moment is found. The results of the experiments were also confirmed from
another source, and different authors tried to substantiate and to evaluate
theoretically the influence of the solvent. I do not have the impression that in
this point we succeeded in obtaining full clarity, and I therefore tried last year
to obtain an insight into the dielectric behaviour of pure and undiluted polar
fluids, in which the reciprocal influence of the molecules is particularly
strong, and in which we are compelled to expect large effects. It is in fact
impossible to predict the dielectric behaviour of liquids, such as water, alco-
hols, nitrobenzene, etc. on the basis of the theory valid for gases. The mole-
cules behave in these cases throughout as if their moment is smaller than that
observed for free particles. Exactly similar conditions are present with the
 Kerr effect. Here too, experiment showed that even non-polar molecules,
when near each other in the liquid, behave as if the differences of their polar-
izability are smaller in different directions (upon which the Kerr effect is
 based) in the liquid than in the gas. Obviously we can think just as little in
 this case of a real change of the electron structure of the molecule as of a real
 change of moment in the case of the polar molecules, for the refraction
 which depends on the sum of the polarizabilities in the three main directions
 is scarcely influenced by the liquefaction. Now from the clear interferences,
 which monatomic liquids themselves produce, when they scatter X-ray
 light, and also from the fact that monochromatic visible light is split by
 ordinary Rayleigh scattering into a narrow triplet, we must conclude that
 there is already present in the liquid state a quasi-crystalline structure of the
 molecular arrangement which limits the molecular movement. From this it
 follows that just as little as the translatory motion, can the rotation of the


              MOLECULAR STRUCTURE DETERMINATIONS                              389
molecules in the liquid be considered as free. In fact, as I have tried to show,
we can understand the dielectric behaviour of polar liquids if we pay atten-
tion to the limitation of the free rotation and use the well-known dielectric
constants in co-operation with the measured moments in the gaseous state
to estimate the potential energy which hinders free molecular rotation.
Values were found21 for this energy which can amount to a multiple of the
thermal energy kT.
   These considerations are also of particular importance for an other effect
which is characteristic in general for the existence of an orientation of the
molecules. Small field strengths produce a polarization through orientation
which is proportional to the field strength. But if a very strong constant
field is applied and then a measurement is taken of the additional polarization
produced by a superimposed weak field, then according to the dipole theory
we must now expect that a lower polarization effect will take place, for the
molecules are in part already adjusted by the strong field. Herweg 22 was the
first person able to show experimentally that in fact this so-called saturation
effect does exist and that its order of magnitude for ethyl ether is as ex-
pected. It was found, however, in experiments by Malsch23 on strongly
associating liquids such as water, the alcohols, etc., that the effect was very
much smaller than is to be expected from the theory of freely rotating di-
poles. In this case the consideration of the quasi-crystalline structure of the
liquids again gives the explanation. The partly extremely large differences
observed follow quantitatively on the basis of the same values for the energy
involved in the hindering of rotation as they must be introduced to explain
the values observed for the dielectric constants of the liquids24.
    Simultaneously with the development of the dispersion method in its
application to liquids, the important question comes to the fore: how then
in this case does the disappearance of the orientation take place in detail with
increasing frequency? There cannot be any occurrence of sharp energy
stages of a free rotation in a liquid, as there is with a gas. The idea of the
polar molecule being compared to a fairly large particle, to which frictional
resistances are opposed in its rotation, would correspond more to reality.
But if this is the case, then it will be characteristic for the polar liquids that
an orientation produced by an outer field does not adapt itself immediately
to the new conditions when the field suddenly disappears, but needs some
time to go over again to complete disorder. Or, in other words: there does
exist a time of relaxation, and its magnitude is determined by the dimensions
of the polar molecule and by the viscosity of the liquid. On this basis a


390                                1936 P.DEBYE

 theory can be built up of orientation under the influence of any time-
 dependent fields. In its application to periodically changeable fields this leads
 on the one hand to the result that the degree of orientation will be less at
 higher frequencies, that is to say: an anomalous dispersion of the dielectric
 constant must exist for all polar liquids. The range of frequency which is
 decisive for the decrease of the dielectric constant, in the case of ordinary
 liquids of not too high a viscosity, should correspond to electric waves of a
 few centimetres of wavelength. On the other hand, owing to the phase
 difference between field strength and polarization, the anomalous dispersion
 should be connected with the appearance of dielectric losses25.
    It was exactly these phenomena which were discovered by Drude in a
 series of non-conducting liquids, and there can be no doubt that they are
indeed caused by the polar structure of the molecules. The marked tem-
perature sensitivity of the anomalous dispersion and absorption corresponds
 to the large temperature coefficients of the macroscopically measured vis-
cosity, as was proved particularly clearly by experiments conducted by
Mizushima 26. This means that the transference of the usual viscosity laws
 to particles of molecular dimensions is not devoid of all justification. We
 can make more exact quantitative predictions in particular for relatively
large molecules. This is an interesting connection, for in this way, by ob-
servation of the dielectric dispersion and of the losses with high frequency,
we obtain a means of determining the dimensions of large molecules. Re-
cently experiments are being made to determine the relaxation time from
the dielectric losses of diluted solutions of polar substances in non-polar sol-
vents, and to bring it into relationship with the molecular constants. I have
the impression that in these experiments as in the case of the losses shown by
pure polar liquids, the theoretical approach to the actual conditions can be
improved by the consideration of the quasi-crystalline structure of the
 liquids 21,25 . This thought is so much more obvious since conversely disper-
sion and absorption are observed in fixed bodies, as was first discovered by
Errera 27 for ice. In this and in similar cases, as stressed by Pauling 28 in partic-
ular, we have to do with crystals in which atom groups can more or less
freely rotate, and which are consequently internally partly "liquid".
    After having tried in the preceding part to give a survey of the methods
of determining the dipole moments and their part in the elucidation of the
dielectric phenomena, we must now discuss their significance for problems
 of the actual molecular structure. In view of the extension which this branch
has assumed it is impossible to offer a comprehensive presentation. I must


             MOLECULAR STRUCTURE DETERMINATIONS                             391
be satisfied with pointing out the guiding principles by means of some
characteristic examples17,18 .
    The atoms of the inert gases are non-polar, corresponding to the centrally
symmetrically structure of their electron clouds. In the same way diatomic
molecules consisting of two equal atoms (N2O 2) have been proved to be
non-polar. On the other hand, polarity immediately appears as soon as the
two atoms are different. This polarity is small if both atoms are close to each
other in the periodic table (CO) and it only becomes large in the case of
molecules like HCl. The magnitude of the moment, however, does not in
any way correspond to the value which would be proper to a structure
which would consist of a H-ion and a Cl-ion at their actual nuclear distance.
The actual moment,            = 1.04 · 10-18 , is only about of that value. If we
consider a HCl molecule as having been created by two ions brought into
close proximity, there is then a considerable penetration of the H-nucleus
into the electron cloud of the Cl-ion, by which 5/6 of the originally existing
moment is compensated. An actual quantum-theoretical calculation of the
moments does not appear to be easy. In any case, up to now the calculation
 of Kirkwood 29 for the molecules HF, HCl, HBr and HI is the only one
 which has led to a result.
    Molecules which consist of three atoms can be divided into two groups:
 CO 2 and CS2 are non-polar, but the molecules H2O, H2S and SO2 have a
 permanent moment. The explanation is that in the first case the arrangement
 of the atoms in the molecule is linear, whereas in the second case the atoms
 are situated at the corners of a triangle. The moments of inertia, resulting
 from the analysis of the band spectra, provide an independent proof of those
 structures. Similarly, the observed polarity of the molecules NH 3, PH3 and
 AsH 3 leads to a structure in which N, P, or As are placed at the apex of a
 three-sided pyramid and the three H atoms at the corners of its base.
     From the measurements by Sänger7 on the series CH4, CH3Cl, CH2Cl 2,
 CHCl 3, and CCl4, it follows that the first and also the end members of this
 series are non-polar, but the intermediate members are all polar. This fits in
 beautifully with the views introduced into organic chemistry by Van ‘t Hoff
 on the carbon valencies.
     In the case of the ethylenes doubly substituted with Cl or Br, the cis-form
 has a considerable moment, as shown by Errera30, whilst the symmetrical
  trans-form is non-polar, again in agreement with the structural formula. The
  measurement of the polarity, generally speaking, in many cases of cis-trans-
  isomerism forms an excellent and easy means of determining the two forms.


392                               1936 P.DEBYE

  For the rest, it should be stressed that neither the double bond nor the triple
  bond between two C atoms has in itself any polarity. Both ethylene and
  acetylene are non-polar.
     In the same way all saturated hydrocarbons are non-polar, whether with
  branched or non-branched chains. We shall certainly have to award a mo-
  ment to the CH bond as such, but nevertheless all the molecules are non-
 polar, as Smyth stresses , if we adhere to the tetrahedral valency orienta-
                             15



  tions, because then every CH3 group is precisely able to compensate a CH
 bond electrically.
     Thus we have made a start with a division of the entire moment into
 individual moments of the bonds, which are combined by means of vecto-
 rial addition to a resultant moment, like forces. (Absolute values for the
 individual bonds were given in detail for the first time by Eucken 31). This
 construction, stipulated by the nature of the electric moment, has proved
 reliable throughout all the discussion of the molecular structure based on
 moment measurements. It is true that this description is only an approxima-
 tion in so far that on more intimate inspection due consideration must be
 given not only to an additional influence of the adjacent valency orientations,
 but also to the electrical influence of the molecular structure arising from the
 moments. This does not, however, prevent the simple method from being
 a highly valuable means of achieving a first and good approximation.
    The first instance which I know of as arising from this point of view,
and which was indeed discussed by J. J. Thomson 32, was that of the disub-
stitution products of benzene. If, for example, the moment of monochloro-
benzene is known, we should be able to calculate the moments of ortho-,
meta- and paradichlorobenzene by combining to a resultant two equal mo-
nochlorine moments vectorially with angles of 60°, 120°, and 180°, based
upon the structure of benzene characterized by the regular hexagon of the
C atoms. It is correct that the para-substitution product is in fact non-polar;
on the other hand, the calculated numerical values of the two other products,
and particularly those of the ortho-substituted benzene, are not quite in
agreement with the experimental findings. Obviously we have to deal in
this instance with a reciprocal influence of closely adjacent groups, which
leads to a spreading-out of the valence directions.
    If two different atoms or groups are substituted in para-position, the
resultant moment can be both equal to the sum and equal to the difference
of the individual moments. One would expect this, for whether the sum
or the difference occurs, will depend on whether, in the substituted groups,


              MOLECULAR STRUCTURE DETERMINATIONS                           393
 like or unlike charges show externally. A means is thus obtained of distin-
 guishing positive and negative groups (in the purely electrostatic definition)
 one from another.
    Finally, it can even happen in the substitution of two equal groups in
 para-position that a polar molecule does occur, nevertheless. For instance,
 the moment of hydroquinone-dimethylether, in which two O-CH3 groups
 are substituted in para-position at the benzene ring, is I.73·10-18. Such and
 similar results are explainable by the fact that the moment of the individual
 groups does not lie in the plane of the benzene ring. It is clear that the two
valence directions of the O atom form a smaller angle than 180°, as is the
 case with the H2O molecule. This, together with the more or less free
rotatability of each group around the axis, which is present from the C
 atom of the benzene nucleus to the O atom, means that apart from entirely
special positions of the two O-CH3 directions the molecule will always have
 a resultant moment, and therefore in the experiment a mean moment must
 be observed. It is clear that by combinations of measurements on suitable
 substitution products we can draw valuable conclusions both regarding the
valency angle and the greater or lesser freedom of the rotation, and in fact
in many cases polarization measurements have been used for this purpose.
    A particularly interesting case occurs when the potential energy which
restricts the freedom of rotation is comparable with the thermal energy of
the surrounding temperature. Such a case is, inter alia, I-2-dichloroethane,
in which a rotation of the two CH2Cl groups can take place round the
C-C bond. The position with the least potential energy in this instance is
the trans-position, to which as such the moment zero is proper. With in-
creasing temperature the amplitudes of distortion become increasingly great-
er and finally, with a sufficiently high temperature, all the distortion angles
are equally justified. A moment is however associated with this situation
and hence we must expect that the "permanent" moment of the molecule
observed at different temperatures will not be constant, but will increase
with increasing temperature to a limiting value. In fact that is the result of
the observation; the temperature curve can be utilized to deduce quantitative
statements regarding the amount of work required for the rotation of the
groups 33.
   The conviction of chemists that the structural formula is in fact a rep-
resentation of the spatial arrangement of the atoms in the molecule which
corresponds to nature is obviously brilliantly confirmed by the previous
discussion. Often the only thing lacking is that the representation is not ac-


394                             1936 P.DEBYE

cording to scale. A method should therefore be sought to carry out meas-
urements of the distances within the molecule. Since the discovery by von
Laue 34 of crystal interferences we know that the wavelengths of X-rays are
small enough to be suitable for this purpose. If, however, we wish to examine
free molecules, the difficulty arises that we have to operate with particles
which cannot be fixed in a definite orientation in space, like a crystal.
Fortunately, however, I was able to show35 that every atomic structure ir-
radiated with X-rays must produce recognizable interferences in its scattered
radiation, even when it changes its orientation in space continuously and
uncontrollably. I was led by this consideration, when together with Scher-
rer36, the interferences of crystalline powders and of liquids were discovered.
These experiments were a preliminary step to the first attempt to produce
interferences by scattering on CCl4 vapour, carried out in 1928 together
with Bewilogua and Ehrhardt37,42.
   The basis for the interpretation and evaluation of such scattering curves is
based on the following calculation. The intensity of the scattered X-ray light
decreases gradually with increasing angle 6 between the primary and second-
ary ray as well for atomic as for molecular gases and it does so as a result of
an interference effect. In the case of the atoms, this decrease follows a smooth
curve, but in the case of molecules, on the other hand, actual maxima and
minima occur in the scattering curve occasionally reduced to undulations
only. Such a scattering curve can be constructed by superposition of as many
individual curves as there are atomic distances in the molecule. If the mole-
cule consists, for instance, of N atoms, for which an enumeration I . . . m or
n . . . N is assumed, then for the intensity the following expression is ob-
tained, neglecting a factor, which here is unessential:




The magnitude xmn is here proportional to the distance lmn from atom m
to atom n and, if the primary wavelength is used for irradiation, it is
defined by the relation:




The magnitudes       or    are the so-called atomic form factors of the atoms
m or n respectively, and represent the amplitudes dispersed by those atoms.


              MOLECULAR STRUCTURE DETERMINATIONS                            395
    Every atomic distance in the molecule therefore produces for itself an
intensity which increases and decreases with the increasing angle          in ac-
cordance with the function sin x/x. For large atomic distances, the maxima
lie close together, they get farther apart for small distances. The relative
importance of the different atomic distances is measured by the product of
the atomic factors These can be calculated by various methods (Thomas-
Fermi, Pauling-Sherman38) or they can be taken with greater accuracy from
the tables drawn up by Hartree39 . For small angles such an atomic form
factor is simply proportional to the number of electrons contained in the
atom. Consequently, for the distribution of intensity, the distances between
the atoms of fairly large atomic weight have the most importance; the dis-
 tances between the light and heavy atoms are of less importance and the
least important are the distances between light atoms.
    We must also take into consideration that with scattering, polarization of
 the radiation occurs, and so the intensity in the neighbourhood of the 90°
 direction is reduced. Furthermore, each diagram has a background of inco-
 herent radiation which in accordance with the Compton effect has changed
 its wavelength and does not contribute to the interferences. No allowance
 was made in the formula for these circumstances, which are to be considered
 more as corrections.
     The fact that the first experiment was conducted on CCl4 gas was not
 an accident. If we take the tetrahedron as the basis for the structure of this
 molecule there occur in it four equal distances between the heavy Cl atoms
 beside four distances which are equal between the light C and the heavy
 Cl atoms, though according to what we stated above, these latter distances
  are much less important. It could therefore be hoped that there would be
 a distribution of intensity which would show relatively pronounced maxima
 and minima of intensity, and the experiment confirmed this expectation. To
  determine the atomic distances in the molecule, we need only compare the
  observed angular position of the maxima and the minima with that resulting
  from the theoretical representation. With a known wavelength of the pri-
 mary radiation, a proper choice of the atomic distances has to be made in
 order to obtain agreement between theory and experiment. This is particu-
  larly simple in the case of CCl 4, as the tetrahedron is completely determined
  by a single length, the length of edge for instance. In making an exact com-
  parison we must of course require that not only attention is paid to the
  position of the maxima and minima, but that the intensity curve throughout
 its entire length coincides with the theoretically calculated curve. Careful


396                              1936 P.DEBYE

 experiments in this direction, using purely monochromatic primary radia-
 tion obtained by crystal reflection, were carried out by Van der Grinten in
 the Leipzig laboratory40 . The excellent agreement shown in this instance
 can be regarded as direct experimental proof of the regular tetrahedral
 structure of the CCl4 molecule.
    After the scattering experiments with X-rays37,42 had shown that inter-
ferences can be obtained from the individual molecule, Mark and Wierl pub-
 lished in 193041 the first results of similar experiments with cathode rays.
 Since, according to de Broglie, electron rays can interfere with one another
 with the wavelength = h/p (h = Pl anck’s quantum constant, p = electron
 impulse), this method was also successful. If both methods are compared,
 the advantage of the cathode-ray method lies in the fact that, because of the
 much stronger interaction of the electrons with the electric charges in the
 atom, the exposure times here are much smaller (of the order of one second),
 whereas in the case of X-rays they amount to hours. Secondly, with the
 usual voltages the wavelength of the cathode rays (0.07 Å with 30,000 volts)
 is essentially smaller than that of the X-rays utilized (about 1Å). As a result,
 the interferences can be taken and followed up to higher orders. On the
other hand, the X-rays have the advantage that recordings for complete in-
tensity curves can be obtained without much difficulty. In addition, there
is the fact that the background arising from the incoherent radiation increases
with increasing angle starting from zero at zero angle in the case of X-rays,
whereas in the electron-case the largest intensity occurs for small angles. Con-
sequently, with X-rays the maxima are more strongly pronounced.
    The question now arises, with what accuracy the distances in the molecule
can be determined from the maxima which are only indistinct in any case
because of the low number of the interfering atoms. We can establish this
very well on the basis of experiments of both kinds on the CCl 4 molecule,
which has gradually become a kind of standard substance. Bewilogua42 finds
2.99 Å for the Cl-Cl distance in 1931 with X rays, and Wierl 43 2.98 Å
shortly afterwards with cathode rays. The next two years, 1932 and 1933,
bring three further publications with cathode rays, which lead to the values
2.98, 2.97, and 2.98. Work with cathode rays is continued in more places;
in 1933 one publication gives the smaller value 2.91, and then in 1934 there
are four further results with cathode rays which yielded the still smaller
values 2.87, 2.86, 2.85, and 2.87 47,48,49,50 . This induced me, when I was
Francqui Professor at Liége to build an X-ray and a cathode-ray apparatus
in order to check the problem of the exact value of the distance again.


              MOLECULAR STRUCTURE DETERMINATIONS                             397
Degard and Van der Grinten find 2.86Å in 1935 with cathode rays, and
                              44,45



Piérard and Van der Grinten44,46 obtain 2.85Å with X-rays. It is therefore
quite certain that the value found at the start of the development was about
4% too high, and that the value 2.86 Å, with a tolerance of ± 0.01 Å, is to
be regarded as the correct one. The above-mentioned measurements from
1934 by Brockway and Paulin g 4 7, Cosslett and de Laszlo48, by Cosslett49
and by Brockway and Wall50 are also in agreement with this.
   In the seven years which have elapsed since 1929 many other molecules
besides CCl4 have been investigated interferometrically; in a handbook ar-
ticle by Hengstenberg and Wolf51 in 1935, a list of 66 substances has been
given, and in an article by Brockway in the Review of Modern Physics52 in
1936, there is a list of 143 substances. Exact distance details, as contained in
such tables, are of special interest, because they allow interesting conclusions
on the nature of the bond as emphasized for instance by Pauling. Moreover,
the picture we receive of the spatial structure is of importance. Here we
have only space for a few incomplete details which should be enough to
create a general impression.
   Bewilogua, in publication of 1931 42, had already shown for the series CCl4,
C H C l3, CH2C l2, and CH3Cl how with decreasing Cl-content the diagram
changes as expected from the tetrahedral structure. At the same time the con-
clusion was drawn that an increase of the Cl-Cl distances goes together with
a reduction of the number of Cl substitutions. The latter result has been
doubted at times, but newer measurements with both methods show un-
animously 53,54 that, to begin with, in the case of chloroform the Cl-Cl
distance is in fact 3.5% greater than in CCl3, i.e. by the same relative amount
which Bewilogua deduced. There is therefore a repulsion between the Cl
atoms, as one would expect from the observed dipole moments.
   Wierl 43 has shown, and other observers have confirmed, that besides CCl4
the analogous molecules SiCl4, TiCl4, GeCl4, and SnC14 possess the tetrahe-
dral structure. It is interesting that the same applies for Ni(CO) 4, as recently
found by Brockway and Cross 5 5. The molecules CO2 and CS2 are shown
by interferometric measurements to be linear, in agreement with the fact
that their dipole moment is zero. It has also been possible to prove that in
the molecules SF6, SeF6, and TeF6, the fluorine atoms occupy the corners
of a regular octahedron51,52.
   That the interferometric methods are able to distinguish between cis-trans-
isomers has been shown for the dichloroethylenes. The trans-form has sub-
stantially larger Cl-Cl distance than the cis-form, which is what it ought to


398                              1936 P.DEBPE

have. If there is a single bond between the two C atoms, instead of a double
bond, the question again comes to the fore, as in the case of the dipoles, of
the freedom of rotation around the C-C bond. It is of particular interest
that it is also possible to prove interferometrically the preference of the trans-
position, as was likewise inferred from the temperature dependence of the
dipole moment56.
   For the benzene molecule, and particularly beautifully for hexachloro-
benzene, it can be proved that the six-membered ring is planar and that it
corresponds to the carbon ring of graphite and not to that in the diamond57.
This is also indicated by the C-C distance itself, which has a value of 1.54
Å in aliphatic compounds, but only 1.41 Å in aromatic compounds. It be-
comes still smaller with double or even triple bonds51,52 .
   Finally, two general questions may be raised which so far have not been
answered in full.
   Is it possible by using interferometric methods to measure the thermal
oscillations of the atoms in the molecule? Experiments and measurements
by James58 led to the result that in the molecule SiCl4, which was selected
because the Cl atoms are somewhat more loosely bound than in CCl 4, the
 oscillations are too small to allow certain proof with the aid of X-ray inter-
ferences. From Raman-effect measurements the conclusion can be drawn
that in most molecules the elastic constants are in fact relatively large; for
instance, the C-C bond in aliphatic hydrocarbons is as hard as it is in the
diamond. Recently Van der Grinten44 has explained the flattening of the
intensity curve for CCl4 in the vicinity of the 5th maximum (obtained with
electrons) as due to the influence of atomic oscillations. So it seems possible
that by the investigation of the intensity curve of electron recordings in the
neighbourhood of suitably selected interference maxima of high order, the
atomic oscillations can be traced.
   Can we determine by interferometric methods the position of the hydro-
gen atoms? It will hardly be possible to do so with X-rays, for as the X-ray
scattering is due to the electrons, it is necessary for these to be present in a
satisfactory concentration in concentric distribution around the nucleus
whose position is to be measured. This is, however, not the case with the
H-nucleus. On the contrary, as recent experiments by Thomer59 show, the
molecules Ne, H2O, NH3, and CH4 with the same total nuclear charge all
scatter almost like monatomic gases. The only thing clearly indicated is, that
the electron cloud is the more extended, the more the total nuclear charge
 of IO unit charges is distributed on individual nuclei. It has not yet been


           MOLECULAR         STRUCTURE       DETERMINATIONS                  399
decided experimentally whether the electron scattering, which with larger
angles chiefly takes place at the nucleus, can be better utilized here. Provision-
ally it is in any case more practical to replace such hydrogen atoms (the posi-
tion of which is of particular interest) chemically by heavier atoms, such
as Cl.
   In summary I would like to emphasize that the physical methods dis-
cussed here besides furnishing a precise definition of atomic positions have
given a brilliant confirmation of structures obtained by purely chemical
means.


400                                 1936 P.DEBYE

 1. P.Debye, Physik. Z., 13 (1912) 97; Verhandl. Deut. Pkysik. Ges., 15 (1913) 777.
     Summary in: Polare Molekeln (Polar Molecules), Leipzig, 1929; Handbuck der
     Radiologie, Vol. VI, Part 2, 2nd ed., 1934.
 2. P. Langevin, J. Phys., 4 (1905) 678; Ann. Chim. Phys., 8 (1915) 70.
 3. J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mug., [6] 28 (1914) 757.
 4. J. H. van Vleck, Phys. Rev., 29 (1927) 727 and 30 (1927) 31.
 5. K. Bädeker, Z. Physik. Chem., 36 (1901) 305.
 6. M. Jona, Physik. Z., 20 (1919) 14.
 7. R. Sänger, summarizing in Leipziger Vorträge (Leipzig Lectures), 1929, p. 1.
 8. C. T. Zahn, Phys. Rev., 24 (1924) 300; 27 (1926) 455.
 9. P. Debye, Polare Molekeln (Polar Molecules), Leipzig, 1929.
10. E. Wrede, Z. Physik., 44 (1927) 261.
11. I. Estermann, Z. Physik. Chem., B 1 (1928) 134 and B 2 (1929) 287.
12. H. Scheffers, Physik. Z., 35 (1934) 425.
13. J. Errera, Polarisation diélectrique (Dielectric Polarization), Paris, 1928.
14. L. Lange, Z. Physik., 33 ( 1925) 169.
15. C. P. Smyth, summarizing in: Dielectric Constant and Chemical Structure, NewYork,
     1931.
16. J. W. Williams, Physik. Z., 29 (1928) 174.
17. O. Fuchs and K. L. Wolf, Handb. Jahrb. Chem. Physik, Vol. 6, IB (1935).
18. Dipole Moments, N.V. Sidgwick (Ed.), Faraday Society, 1934.
19. J. W. Williams, Physik. Z., 29 (1928) 174.
20. H. Müller, Physik. Z., 34 (1933) 689.
21. P. Debye, Physik. Z., 36 (1935) 100.
22. J. Herweg, Z. Physik., 3 (1920) 36; J. Herweg and W. Potzsch, Z. Pkysik., 8
     (1921) I.
23. I. Malsch, Physik. Z., 30 (1929) 837.
24. P. Debye, Physik. Z., 36 (1935) 103.
25. P. Debye, Physik. Z., 35 (1934) 101.
26. S. Mizushima, Sci. Papers Inst. Phys. Chem. Research (Tokio), 5 (1927) 201; 9
     (1928) 209.
27. J. Errera, ,J. Phys., [6] 5 (1924) 304.
28. L. Pauhng, Phys. Rev., 36 (1930) 430.
29. J. Kirkwood, Physik. Z., 33 (1932) 259.
30. J. Errera, Compt. Rend., 182 (1926) 1623.
31. A. Eucken and L. Meyer, Physik. Z., 30 (1929) 397.
32. J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag., [ 6] 46 ( 1923 ) 513.
33. L. Meyer, Z. Physik. Chem., B 8 (1930) 27 and C. T. Zahn, Phys. Rev., 38 (1931)
     521.
34. M. v. Laue, Münchener Ber., (1912) 303.
35. P. Debye, Ann. Physik., 46 (1915) 809;J. Math. Phys., 4 (1925) 133 and Physik. Z.,
     28 (1927) 135; compare on this point also P. Ehrenfest, Verslag Koninkl. Akad.
     Wetenschap., 23 (1915) 1132.
36. P. Debye and P. Scherrer, Kristallpulver (CrystalPowder), Gött. Nachr., 1916, p- I;
     Physik. Z., 17 (1916) 277; Flüssigkeiten (Liquids), Gött. Nachr., 1916, p. 16.


               MOLECULAR STRUCTURE DETERMINATIONS                                401
37. P. Debye, L. Bewilogua, and F. Ehrhardt, Physik. Z., 30 (1929) 84; Sächs. Akad.
     Ber., 81 (1929) 29.
38. L. H. Thomas, Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc., 23 (1927) 542; E. Fermi, Z. Physik., 48
     (1928) 73; L. Pauling and J. Sherman, Z. Krist., 81 (1932) I.
39. D. R. Hartree, Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc., 24 (1928) 89; Tables in: R.W. James and
     G. W. Brindley, Phil. Mag., [7] 12 (1931) 81.
40. W. van der Grinten, Physik. Z., 34 (1933) 609.
41. H. Mark and R. Wierl, Naturwiss., 18 (1929) 205.
42. L. Bewilogua, Physik. Z., 32 (1931) 265.
43. R. Wierl, Ann. Physik., 8 (1931) 521.
44. Ch. Degard, J. Pitrard, and W. van der Grinten, Nature, 136 (1935) 142.
45. Ch. Degard and W. van der Grinten, Bull. Soc. Roy. Sci. Liege, No. 4-5 (1935).
46. J. Piénard and W. van der Grinten, 2. Congr. Natl. Sci., 1935.
47. L. 0. Brockway and L. Pauling, J. Chem. Phys., 2 (1934) 867.
48. V. E. Cosslett and H. de Laszlo, Nature, 134 (1934) 63.
49. V. E. Cosslett, Trans. Faraday Soc., 30 (1934) 981.
50. L. 0. Brockway and F. T. Wall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 56 (1934) 2273.
51. J. Hengstenberg and K. Wolf, Handb. Jahrb. Chem. Physik., Vol. 6, I A (1935).
52. L. 0. Brockway, Rev. Mod. Phys., 8 (1936) 231.
53. C. Degard, Bull. Soc. Roy. Sci. Liége, 4 (1935) 315.
54. J. Piérard, Bull. Soc. Roy. Sci. Liége, 5 (1936) 205.
55. L. 0. Brockway and P. C. Cross, J; Chem. Phys., 3 ( 1935) 828.
56. F. Ehrhardt, Physik. Z., 33 (1932) 605.
57. R. Kaiser, Physik. Z., 36 (1935) 92.
58. R. W. James, Physik. Z., 33 (1932) 737.
59. G. Thomer, Physik. Z., 38 (1937) 48.
