                           RI C H A R D L . M . SY N G E


        Applications of partition chromatography
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1952



This lecture is intended to depict some of the applications and consequences
of the invention of partition chromatography. Before embarking on this,
though, I should explain how I came to be taking part in the collaborative
work which Dr. Martin has just described.

While still at school I heard tell of the science of biochemistry, which should
draw together two aspects of nature into a common study. I had long been
fascinated by living things (particularly the wild plants), and more recently
by chemistry. This last was probably more for the appeal to the senses of the
chemist’s activities than for the knowledge of the nature of things which
chemistry imparts. It was particularly reading in the newspaper Sir Frederick
Hopkins’ presidential address to the British Association for the Advancement
of Science at Leicester in 1933 that impressed on me the idea that living
things must have wonderfully precise and complicated working parts on the
molecular scale and that the biochemist had the best chance of finding out
how these are put together and do their work. As I was to begin studying
natural science at Cambridge University in the same year, the ambition of
studying in Prof. Hopkins’ laboratory could easily be realized. Nevertheless,
experiences in that laboratory in the elementary course taken by medical stu-
dents did not give the impression of biochemistry being a refined or precise
science. It was with a rather blind faith in the ultimate justification of Hop-
kins’ ideas that, after several months of indecision, I embarked on the ad-
vanced course in his laboratory (Part II of the Natural Sciences Tripos).
Here, immediately, one came in contact with exciting facts and exciting
ideas. The latter outnumbered the former, usually. However, at an early
stage in the course the student engaged in some quite rigorous isolative work
under the guidance of Mr. N. W. Pirie. Pirie used to enliven the long hours
at the bench with caustic anecdotes from the history of biochemistry which
helped, quite as much as the isolative work itself and his comments thereon,
to develop the critical faculty in those who possessed a rudiment of it. On
graduating in 1936 I continued in the laboratory as a research student under


          APPLICATIONS OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                          375
Pirie’s supervision, and he suggested that I should make a chemical study of
the glycoproteins, a class of substances then, as now, obscure in chemical
nature and of great physiological interest. Soon I found my knowledge both
of carbohydrate and protein chemistry was inadequate to the task, and began
some synthetic work with Dr. D. J. Bell which involved preparing partially
substituted derivatives of glucose. Among many useful things, I learnt from
Bell the power of liquid-liquid extraction, with and without salting out, for
separating methylated sugars according to the extent of their methylation. I
returned to work on glycoproteins, with the idea of studying them by meth-
ylation. This brought me into contact with Dr. A. Neuberger, who was
then working in Prof. C. R. Harington’s laboratory at University College
Hospital, London. Neuberger had developed an ingenious method for iso-
lating the carbohydrate moiety from digested egg albumin by N-acetylating
the digests and then removing N-acetyl amino-acids and peptides by ex-
 haustive extraction with chloroform. He then O-acetylated the residue,
 whereupon the acetylated carbohydrates became extractable.
   About this time, in 1937, Dr. Hedley R. Marston (then, as now, director
of the C. S. I. R. Nutrition Laboratory at Adelaide, South Australia) came
to the Biochemical Laboratory in Cambridge for a year as a guest. He was
given bench space in the room where Pirie and I were working. He brought
with him apparatus much more complicated than most workers in that labor-
atory were accustomed to, including an "artificial rumen" for microbial
digestion of cellulose and a long fractionating column for distilling the esters
of the resulting fatty acids. This by no means occupied his whole time, and
we were impressed by the large number of letters which he wrote and by
the frequent recurrence of his birthdays, which he celebrated by inviting
numerous colleagues to very lively scientific discussions in a nearby public
house. After about six months I began better to understand Marston’s extra-
mural activities when he told me that he was advising an organization called
the International Wool Secretariat. This was given funds by the wool grow-
ers of Australia, New Zealand and South Africa for the purposes of publicity
and research; they were worried both by the contemporary slump and by
the advent of various synthetic fibres which it was then thought might prove
to be effective substitutes for wool. Marston’s advice was to apply some of
their money to fundamental studies of the nature of wool, and he suggested
that part should be given to me as a Studentship to study in detail the amino-
acid composition of wool, beginning by improving the methods of amino-
 acid analysis. "If you work steadily at that for five years, you will revolu-


376                          1952 R.L.M.SYNGE

tionize the whole of protein chemistry" he said. The Studentship was on
unusually generous financial terms, and as I also thought it would fit in with
acquiring a more detailed knowledge of the protein side of the glycoprotein
problem, I readily agreed. I began work in 1938 by studying the distribution
of acetyl amino-acids between chloroform-water phases as a possible analyt-
ical procedure, directly suggested by Neuberger’s experiments. The partition
coefficients showed very encouraging differences, and I was advised from
all sides to consult Dr. A. J. P. Martin as to how best to conduct the separa-
tions, since his bizarre-looking apparatus for purifying vitamin E at the Dunn
Nutritional Laboratory had attracted widespread notice in Cambridge.
   Dr. Martin has told you how our collaboration then developed. It might
well have been effective in any case, but it was made enormously easier be-
cause Martin’s appointment at Leeds had also been financed by the Interna-
tional Wool Secretariat and their scientific adviser, Sir Charles J. Martin,
kept in close touch at all times with our work. Both during and after the
time I was working in Cambridge I received much very valuable advice
from Sir Charles and he made it easy for my Studentship to be transferred
when it became desirable to join Archer Martin in the laboratories of the
Wool Industries Research Association at Leeds.

I will discuss in most detail the application of partition chromatography to
the study of proteins. Partly because of intense interest of biochemists in
proteins and partly because the earliest work with the method was in this
field, the results obtained with partition chromatography have been espe-
cially striking here, although the method has similar capabilities in other
branches of biochemistry.
   First, the method has given the possibility of exhaustive analysis of com-
plete hydrolysates of proteins. For qualitative work the two-dimensional
procedures using paper have been most convenient. For quantitative work
the procedures using starch grains elaborated by S. Moore and W. H. Stein
have permitted accurate and complete analyses on a few mg of hydrolysed
protein (Fig. 1). Latterly these workers have found ion-exchange resins to
have advantages over starch. Apart from the positive value to protein
chemistry of having convenient methods for carrying out the fundamental
operations, the use of partition chromatography has helped firmly to es-
tablish that the vast majority of proteins yield on hydrolysis only the well-
known amino acids and that these account for the entire substance of the
protein molecule. This generalization is fundamental for the future devel-


          APPLICATIONS OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                                 377




Fig. I. Separation of a mixture of amino-acids on a starch chromatogram, as shown
by analysis of the effluent. (S. Moore and W. H. Stein, J. Biol . Chem., 178 (1949) 53.)

opment of the study of proteins and was too often taken on trust in the past.
    In parallel with studies of amino acids in protein hydrolysates, partition
chromatography has thrown much light on the free amino acids and related
compounds found in living organisms and products derived therefrom. This
work has shown how certain compounds are found in the tissue juices of all
living organisms. Fig. 2 shows a two-dimensional chromatogram of potato
juice, by C. E. Dent and colleagues. A number of new metabolites have been
 recognized and isolated by these means, and considerable light has been
 thrown on metabolic relationships, distribution of amino acids in different
tissues and so forth. Unfortunately, the standards of identification used by
 many workers with paper chromatography have often been inadequate and
the new meaning of the term "paper chemistry" is often not so far from the
 old one.
    Partition chromatography has likewise been valuable for assessing the pu-
 rity of amino acids and simple peptides and for studying the actions of en-
zymes so far as such simpler molecules are concerned. Previously unsuspected
"transpeptidations" and syntheses have been revealed by this means.
    The method has proved useful for the various procedures for allocating
 free functional groups within molecules of proteins or peptides; thus at pres-
ent we have procedures for recognition of free amino groups by substitution
 with dinitrophenyl and other radicals, and of carboxyl groups by reduction
 to the corresponding alcohols or by enzymic hydrolysis of terminal amino-
 acids. These methods nearly always use partition chromatography as a final
 stage in the identification.
    Finally, partition chromatography is of great importance for ascertaining
the sequence of amino-acid residues in the peptide chains of proteins. Martin


378                            1952 R.L.M.SYNGE




Fig. 2. Two-dimensional paper chromatogram of an extract of potato, coloured with
ninhydrin showing free amino-acids, etc. (C. E. Dent, W. Stepka, and F. C. Steward,
                             Nature, 160 (1947) 682.)

and I had this use particularly in mind throughout our work. If a peptide
chain is partially degraded to dipeptide and tripeptide fragments, etc. it
should be possible, by identifying these, to recognize the original compound
from which they are derived; thus in a simple case the peptide chain rep-
resented A-B-C-D-E will give rise to the fragments A-B, B-C,
C-D, and D-E, permitting an unequivocal reconstruction. Martin and I,
with R. Consden and A. H. Gordon, were able in this way, mainly using
partition-chromatographic methods, to determine the amino-acid sequence
in gramicidin-S, which is probably a cyclic decapeptide (Fig. 3). Subse-
quently F. Sanger and colleagues have elucidated by similar methods what
may be the entire peptide sequences in the structure of ox insulin, the min-
imum molecule of which embodies 51 amino-acid residues. One of the two
sequences established is shown in Fig. 4.
   In the study of carbohydrates partition chromatography has played a very
similar       It can be used for determining ultimate hydrolysis products of
polysaccharides qualitatively and quantitatively, it permits analysis of natur-
ally occurring free sugars and their esters, and also the determination of the


         APPLICATIONS OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                         379

                                       H




                   Fig. 3. Probable formula of gramicidin-S.


mode of linkage of the component parts of more complicated molecules by
substitution methods or by partial hydrolysis methods. Special mention
should be made of the discovery of series of complicated fructosan-like oligo-
saccharides in the juices of various plants by means of paper partition chro-
matography (cf. Fig. 5). Partition chromatography has also proved almost
ideally adapted for analysing the hydrolysis products of methylated polysac-
charides, and permits more accurate analysis with much smaller quantities of
material, thereby greatly increasing the scope of the methylation method as
a step in determining the structure of natural polysaccharides. It gives me
great pleasure that my teacher D. J. Bell was the first to use the method for
this purpose.
   It is evident that partition chromatography has considerable application in
the study of the nucleic acids and their breakdown products, the third great
chemical family of biological importance. Here the method can fulfil a sim-
ilar group of functions. However, owing to the ionic nature of so many of
the compounds concerned, methods using electrical transport or chromato-
graphy on ion-exchange materials seem likely to assume greater importance
with these compounds.
   With the lipides there is not the problem of chemical study of giant mole-


co


          APPLICATIONS OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                                 381




choke (Heliunthus tuberosus L.) showing fructosan-like oligosaccharides. (J. S. D. Bacon
                     and J. Edelman, Biochem. J., 48 (1951) 114.)



cules. However, partition chromatography is admirably adapted to effecting
separations within homologous series, and the use of non-aqueous or multi-
component two-phase liquid systems combined with the various procedures
for determining which phase in the chromatogram shall be stationary have
greatly increased the scope of the method for dealing with lipides in recent
years. I would like here to pay tribute to the usefulness of gas-liquid chro-
matography as developed by James and Martin for analysing the lower fatty
acids, which are the main nutrients absorbed by the ruminant animal from
its intestinal tract. The possibility of rapid simultaneous analysis of all mem-
bers of this group will help to increase our understanding of important prob-
lems in the physiology of these animals.
   Partition chromatography has now been used for studying a wide variety
 of other substances of biological interest. Time prevents detailed discussion,


382                           1952 R.L.M.SYNGE

but mention should be made of alkaloids, glycosides, amines, alcohols, alde-
hydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and their derivatives, tannins and a wide
variety of natural pigments, as well as many of the highly assorted chemical
substances included in the groups coenzymes, vitamins, hormones and anti-
biotics.
   Before leaving the biochemical uses of partition chromatography I would
like to give an illustration of how the method can be useful in pharmacologi-
cal and similar studies. R. A. Peters and colleagues have studied in detail the
toxic effects of fluoroacetic acid on living tissues, and partition-chromato-
graphic methods were used to show that fluoroacetic acid is transformed into
another substance which acts directly on an enzyme system in the tricar-
boxylic acid cycle. The chromatographic behaviour further gave preliminary
evidence of the chemical nature of the transformation compound (a fluo-
rinated tricarboxylic acid) before this had been isolated in quantities suitable
for chemical study. The fact that the method works just as well with ultra-
micro-quantities as on the ordinary scale implies that it has an important
future for studying the mode of action and fate of substances of very high
biological activity.
    Outside biochemistry, it is probably the technological applications of par-
tition chromatography that are most important. However, the method, par-
ticularly using cellulose, has proved useful for a wide variety of separations of
metals and inorganic ions, and the fact that it can be used to handle minute
quantities of carrier-free radioactive isotopes gives it considerable scientific
importance. However, the main importance of the method seems to be to-
wards making easier, cheaper and quicker the various analytical operations
used in industrial research and routine control of production. The applica-
tions in metallurgy are obviously considerable, and the method is useful for
control of intermediates in organic-chemical industry generally, whether
concerned with dyestuffs, drugs, explosives, plastic materials, or other prod-
ucts. The gas-liquid chromatogram, representing fractional distillation push-
ed to its logical conclusion, obviously has an important future role in indus-
trial research and control wherever mixtures of volatile compounds have to
be handled, as in the fermentation, tar-distilling and petroleum industries.
Here the method seems likely to compete with mass spectrometry. Except
possibly with the most expensive drugs, partition chromatography has had
little use as a method for actual production, on account of the large bulk of
apparatus,’ chromatographic materials and solvents in relation to the sub-
stances being separated.


         APPLICATIONS OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                             383
   Partition chromatography facilitates in many obvious ways the work of
those engaged in the control of foods and drugs, in clinical laboratories and
generally in the safeguarding of the public health, while making more dif-
ficult the work of adulterators and other criminals. The dietitian and food
technologist, as well as the pure biochemist, also gain by being able more
cheaply and quickly to assay chemically a wide variety of foodstuffs for their
essential constituents and to be able to ascertain the effects on these of pro-
cessing, cooking and so forth. A striking recent use of the method was the
isolation from flour processed with nitrogen trichloride ("Agene" process)
of a toxic derivative of methionine, which was shown to be responsible for
the "running fits" induced in dogs fed on this flour. For some reason gov-
ernmental action towards prohibitingthis treatment first occurred in our
country when this chemical evidence became available. Irrespective of this
particular case, one cannot help, in these days of increasing sophistication of
foodstuffs, feeling proud at having aided the analyst in his increasingly com-
plicated duties.
    There are two new trends in analytical work which I must deal with
 briefly, although they are not essentially connected with partition chromato-
 graphy. However, the fact that partition chromatography permits the separa-
 tion on paper of such a wide variety of substances has made it of decisive
importance for this work.
    The first is the use of radioactive isotopes as tracers. Radioactive chromato-
graphic zones are particularly conveniently studied on paper, either by scan-
ning with a counter or by radioautographic contact printing. The use of
radioactive tracers in combination with paper chromatography has enor-
 mously helped in discovering metabolic pathways in living organisms. The
first studies of this kind were done with 131I by R. M. Fink, C. E. Dent and
 K. Fink (1947). S ince then a number of workers have elucidated the metab-
 olism of this element in the thyroid gland, culminating with the recent ob-
servation by J. Gross and R. V. Pitt Rivers that triiodothyronine and not thy-
roxine may be the physiologically active form of the thyroid hormone. 14C
has of course a wider field of application in biochemistry; its most striking
 use so far in conjunction with chromatography has been the use by M. Cal-
vin and colleagues of radioautographic printing of two-dimensional filter-
paper chromatograms to follow the fate of 14C from 14CO 2 during different
 time intervals after its assimilation by the photosynthesizing green plant.
 These observations, although not leading to any simple picture of the photo-
 synthetic process, have provided a wealth of facts sufficient to disprove all


384                             1952 R.L.M.SYNGE




Fig. 6. Radioautographs of two-dimensiona paper-chromatograms of extracts of
Scenedesmus after 10 sec (left) and 4 min (right) photosynthetic assimilation of carbon
               dioxide labelled with I4C. (Courtesy of Prof. M. Calvin.)


detailed theories of photosynthesis previously advanced and they suggest
new directions for future experiments (Fig. 6).
   Mention should also be made of the ingenious use of radioactive elements
in a substituent grouping for extending the isotope dilution method of anal-
ysis to the ultramicro scale. A. S. Keston, S. Udenfriend and M. Levy sub-
stituted the unknown amino-acid sample with p-iodobenzenesulphonyl
groups having radioactive I and added a known quantity of the synthetic
derivative having radioactive S. Differential counting of 35S and 131I in a
single spot on a paper chromatogram thus permitted accurate analysis for
    quantities of amino acid. The ratio of the activities at different regions
of the spot provided rather rigorous evidence of the chemical identity of
the compounds prepared.
   The second special application of paper chromatograms is for locating
substances affecting the growth of micro-organisms "bioautographically".
Following the work of R. R. Goodall and A. A. Levi with the penicillins this
procedure has been widely used in studying antibiotics and growth factors
for normal and mutant organisms. An agar plate is impregnated with the
test organism, and the developed paper chromatogram is laid on it. Diffusion
of substances from paper to plate is allowed to occur at low temperature for
a suitable time. The plate is then incubated and the different active substances
are identified as zones of stimulated or inhibited growth (Fig. 7). Such pro-
cedures have helped quickly to reveal the complicated variety of chemical
substances often responsible for a single biological effect. Striking examples
are provided by recent research in the vitamin B12 and coenzyme A groups.


           APPLICATIONS OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                                  385




Fig. 7. Bioautographic detection in agar plates of zones of inhibition of bacterial growth
due to penicillins separated on paper-strip chromatograms. (R. R. Goodall and A. A.
                             Levi, Analyst, 72 (1947) 277.)


   What I have said gives some idea of the scope and field of application of
partition chromatography. But it does less than justice to the hundreds of
workers who have helped in the past decade to explore rather thoroughly
the possibilities of the method. One should bear in mind also the parallel
development of bulk countercurrent distribution between two liquid phases
for which L. C. Craig and colleagues have perfected the technique. While
these procedures lack either the simplicity or else the resolving power of
partition chromatograms, they will conveniently handle greater quantities of
material and the form of the distribution curve can give a rather rigorous
test of homogeneity. Craig’s methods have another important advantage
which I will deal with later.
   It must further be remembered that these partition methods are only one
group in a wide family of refined physicochemical separation procedures
developed during the present century and especially during the past decade.
Adsorption chromatography, using M. S. Tsvett’s elution development and
such agents as alumina and charcoal, is a very powerful method giving useful
separations, in many cases where partition chromatography is not very effec-
tive. Its field of application has been considerably extended by the displace-


386                           1952 R.L.M.SYNGE

ment and carrier-displacement development procedures originated by A.
Tiselius and colleagues. Further, it is only in recent years that the potential-
ities of the newer ion-exchange materials for chromatography have at all
fully been realized. And leaving aside chromatography altogether, there are
a variety of electrical-transport procedures which will effect refined separa-
tions of charged substances. With all these methods at his disposal it has be-
come, for the analyst, essentially a routine matter to separate any pair of
substances of molecular weight lower than, say, 500.
   But biochemists, although they value these recently acquired powers, are
not content with them. They are deeply concerned with purifying sub-
stances of still higher molecular weight and are finding the methods at pres-
ent available to be increasingly inadequate to their requirements. Efforts to
use partition chromatography for separating larger molecules have often
been unsuccessful. Two main reasons for this are becoming apparent.
   First, the larger molecules have either very high or very low partition
coefficients in the simple two-phase two-component systems. The theoret-
ical reason for this was clearly expounded by J. N. Brønsted in 1931. Conse-
quently one must use more complicated, multicomponent systems with the
larger molecules. This involves many trials and much error. Second, the
solids most used hitherto for partition chromatography (cellulose, starch, sil-
ica gel, etc.) have pores of molecular dimensions which will not admit the
larger molecules. Kieselguhr, where the spicules entangle droplets of liquid
phase, is largely free from this defect, and it is surely no accident that the
most successful separations of larger molecules by partition chromatography
have been those of some simpler proteins by A. J. P. Martin and R. R. Porter
using kieselguhr. The bulk distribution techniques of Craig and colleagues
have also been successful with larger peptides and some smaller proteins.
Here even the interface between the two liquid phases as well as the kiesel-
guhr surface can very largely be eliminated as sites for adsorption.
   However, despite these potentialities, it seems to me that the liquid - liquid
methods are likely, when we come to these larger molecules, to be less easy
 of extension than the other techniques which I have mentioned. And there
are also possibilities for new techniques based on diffusion, molecular-sieve
effects and so forth. Irrespective, though, of the future importance to the
biochemist of partition chromatography as an analytical technique, I think
it will be found in future years to have had an influence on biochemistry
which is not very widely appreciated at present, when so many biochemists
are using it simply as an analytical method for skimming the cream of their


         APPLICATIONS OF PARTITION CHROMATOGRAPHY                        387
science. And here of course the method is giving to the biochemist some-
thing akin to what the microscope gave to earlier biologists, permitting a
recognition of that characteristic interplay of diversity and uniformity that
seems to be found in living things whether the student’s measure is graduated
in cm, or Å. But each RF value or partition coefficient determined in each
solvent system gives a new fact (or confirms a prediction) about the sec-
ondary-valence interactions of certain small molecules, and hence adds to the
general body of knowledge of intermolecular forces. When the effects with
small molecules are better understood we shall be much better able to under-
stand from the structure of the larger molecules what is their function in
terms of such intermolecular forces. Then chemistry really will begin to
merge with biology as closely as it has already merged with physics. Parti-
tion chromatography may well be remembered for this contribution long
after it is quite obsolete as an analytical method.
