                      RICHARD W         ILLSTÄTTER


                         On plant pigments
                          Nobel Lecture, June 3, 1920



I accept with pleasure the invitation with which the Royal Swedish Academy
of Sciences has honoured me to speak about my investigations on plant pig-
ments. My task is lightened by the fact that several years have elapsed since
the completion of this work. Consequently, it is as if I were able today to
conduct this chosen audience to a height from which a survey can be made
of the main lines of research without having to weary you by wandering
through the twisted and tortuous paths which I have trod. The intention
behind my work was to establish the constitutional characteristics of the
most widely distributed plant pigments, of chlorophyll in particular, and to
gain some criteria with regard to its chemical function.
    Although a considerable literature was already in existence on the pig-
ments of green leaves, my work is actually linked with that of Berzelius, who
in 1837 and 1838 conducted the first chemical investigation of leaf pigments.
 The method used by Berzelius was to treat the chlorophyll with acids and
 alkalis, and in this method lies also the basis of my work. From the innumer-
 able investigations by Berzelius there is actually only one result which is
 outstanding, which Hoppe-Seyler found and which Schunck and March-
 levski have stressed, viz. the recognition of a certain relationship between the
 pigments of the blood and of leaves, or more correctly, between the struc-
 tural materials of their molecules. But the first questions with regard to chlo-
 rophyll were still unanswered: what features in the composition and struc-
 ture distinguish chlorophyll from haemin analogous to the basically different
 functions of the leaf pigment and the blood pigment? Is there only one chlo-
 rophyll, or are there several or many? Gautier had laid down the principle
 that chlorophyll was different in monocotyledons and dicotyledons, and in
  a much admired work which appeared in 1906, Etard claimed to show that
 in a single plant there exists a large series of quite different chlorophylls and
 in the entire plant world an unlimited number of the most different leaf
  pigments. In this work every green-coloured wax or fat was regarded as a
 chlorophyll, whereas Berzelius had already clearly distinguished the leaf
 green from the resins, waxes, and fats.


302                           1915   R.M. WILLSTÄTTER

    In one point, however, my first experiments have already led me to take
up a different view from that of Berzelius. According to him, chlorophyll
should not be decomposable either by strong acids or by alkalis. This was an
error, caused by the chlorophyll-green colour which is precisely special to
the salts of the decomposition products formed with strong acids and al-
kalis. But chlorophyll itself does not produce a salt; it is inert in its intact
state towards both acids and bases. It is extremely easily transformable, and
it can be decomposed hydrolytically by acids and bases alike. Even in its
neutral solutions, e.g. in alcohol or ether, it undergoes extraordinarily easily
a substantial transformation - I designated it allomerization - which is not, it
is true, revealed in the colour.
    Chemical indifference, ease of change, and ease of solubility of the leaf pig-
ment, which is mixed with yellow and a huge number of colourless accom-
panying substances - all these were obstacles to its isolation. Our method of
work was, first of all, without isolating and investigating the chlorophyll it-
self, to deduce the peculiarities of its constitution by two methods of decom-
position, i.e. from the examination of the two series of derivatives which are
produced from the reactions with acid and with alkali.
    Even a test-tube experiment shows that as a result of the action of alkali
hydroxide on the neutral chlorophyll an acid is produced which forms salts
soluble in water; the colour of these salts is still chlorophyll-green. This
means that by this reaction, without a significant optical change, a compo-
nent which was bound to an acid group must have been hydrolytically
liberated.
    It is evidently another part of the molecule onto which is directed the ac-
tion of the acid, and the mildest action at that. The chlorophyll colour
changes during this process into olive and at the same time the fluorescence
is diminished. Whilst this is taking place there is not as yet a salt-forming
 group formed; this means that saponification is avoided here. Consequently
it is possible when splitting by acid to spare that component of the chloro-
phyll, and to trace it in the decomposition product, which is split off by alka-
 lies and which is lost in the mother liquors, that is, in the substances accom-
panying the extracts. Conversely, the alkali derivatives of the pigment must
 still present a characteristic atom group, which is destroyed so easily by acid
 and with such striking alteration of colour. This was the guiding thought of
 our work, from which it was possible, before the chlorophyll itself was
 known, to combine its features from the analysis and from the reactions of
 the derivatives formed by acid and alkali, and to do this so completely that


                                PLANT PIGMENTS                               303
the analysis produced nothing new at all when it was finally possible to pre-
pare the natural pigment in pure state.
   With the mild action of oxalic acid on the alcoholic extract of leaves, a
chlorophyll derivative - phaeophytin - difficultly soluble in alcohol, is almost
quantitatively precipitated, free from colourless and yellow accompanying
substances. It is a waxlike nitrogenous substance which leaves no ash residue,
shows a very weak alkaline reaction and has no acid properties. This sub-
stance can be saponified like an ordinary wax; the result of this proves it to
be an ester, it yields a mixture of high-molecular nitrogenous carbonic acids
which have a pigment character, and a colourless and nitrogen-free alcohol,
phytol, which corresponds to the formula C20H 39OH. This alcohol, which
has the appearance of glycerine, but is of course insoluble in water, is pri-
mary, unsaturated and aliphatic; its carbon chain has several branches, it is
oxidized by ozone, with the loss of three carbon atoms, to a ketone.
   This phytol occurs constantly as a component of chlorophyll and forms a
third of its molecule. One of the first changes produced by the alkalies on the
chlorophyll molecule is, therefore, the saponification of the phytol ester
group. The phaeophytin, and therefore the chlorophyll itself, contains also a
COOCH 3 group, which is subsequently hydrolysed. Furthermore, there is
still a characteristic change resulting from the action of the alkalis, which is
revealed by a striking change of colour, by the so-called brown phase. When
 an alcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide is added, the green solution
 immediately turns into an intense brown, then a few minutes later the origi-
nal colour of the fluid returns. This behaviour, which the chlorophyll loses
by allomerization when its solutions are merely left to stand, is to be attribu-
 ted to the solution of an easily hydrolysable atom group and the formation
 of a similar group ; it can probably be explained as a re-lactamization, i.e. as
 the opening of an existing lactam ring and the closing of a new ring, similar
indeed but resistant to alkalies.
    When chlorophyll is saponified by potassium hydroxide, very easily de-
 composable chlorophyll-green carboxylic acids are produced-the chloro-
 phyllins. They can be separated from the accompanying substances by the
 solubility in water of their salts and by transfer into ether upon acidification,
 and can be purified by careful transfer from the ether into disodium phos-
 phate as an alkali, and liberated with monosodium phosphate as an acid.
 Analysis showed that the chlorophyllins are magnesium compounds. They
 contain the metal in an electrically non-dissociable state, as haemoglobin
 contains iron, it is bound in them to nitrogen with a complex bond. This


304                          1915 R.M.WILLSTÄTTER

magnesium-containing group is very sensitive to acids, but is stable in
an alkaline medium. Consequently, it remains intact during fundamental
changes of the molecule, by which even the carboxyls of the chlorophyllins
are split off, one after the other. The assumed type of bonding of the mag-
nesium was confirmed during the prolonged action of the alkalies, i.e. by the
decomposition of the chlorophyll with concentrated alcoholic alkalies at
temperatures up to 250o. The series so produced consists of decomposition
products which crystallize well, have splendid colours and fluoresce inten-
sely-acids with three, two and finally with only one carboxyl group, are
the so-called phyllins, e.g. glaucophyllin, rhodophyllin, pyrrophyllin. All
contain magnesium and are moreover free acids; they have one atom of
magnesium to four atoms of nitrogen. The atom group ( I) with the basic
metal




is the essential feature of chlorophyll and is to be regarded as the actual car-
rier of the chlorophyll function in the synthesizing life of the green plant.
   The magnesium content of the chlorophyll is constant, close to 3%. It has
been found to be similar in land and water plants of the most varied classes.
   To the complete comparison of the leaf pigments of different origin there
belongs also the analysis of the intricately composed nitrogenous carboxylic
acids which appear upon decomposition, whether upon the hydrolysis of the
phaeophytin by alkalis or upon the splitting of the chlorophyllins and other
phyllins by acids. This was at first always a very complicated mixture of pig-
ments of an acid nature. Its disentanglement and then the simplification of
the results of the decomposition were only possible by a method of analysis,
the development of which was initiated by my investigations. The method
of determining and separating chlorophyll derivatives is based upon the al-
kaline properties of these amino acids, which are extremely varied, and upon
the different distribution between ether and diluted hydrochloric acid. The
more cautious and uniform were the conditions during hydrolysis, but also
during the preparation of the extracts containing the chlorophyll, the more
 simple in its composition became the mixture of the alkaline cleavage prod-
ucts. Finally it was possible to conduct the production of the phaeophytin


                               PLANT PIGMENTS                                305
and to arrange its splitting in such a way that there always appeared only
two magnesium-free carboxylic acids,

            Phytochiorin e with the composition C 34H 34O 5N 4
            Phytorhodin g with the composition C 34H 34O 7N 4

the former being olive-green and the latter a splendid red in neutral solu-
tions.
    The determining factor for the identity of the chlorophyll when compar-
ing preparations from over 200 plants of numerous classes of cryptogamia
and phanerogamia, was therefore the content of magnesium and of phytol
and the elucidation of the two characteristic cleavage products, phytochlorin
and phytorhodin. With regard to the obstacles which had to be overcome
in this comparison, it is noteworthy that the phytol content of the phaeo-
phytin preparations at first showed great fluctuations; it often, indeed, reached
one third of the molecule, but sank considerably in other cases, even to a
small percentages and still smaller figures. For these differences, however,
only one transformation was to blame which the pigment underwent during
the extraction from the fresh or dried leaves with alcohol under the action of
an enzyme. This enzyme, chlorophyllase, which belongs to the esterases, ac-
companies the chlorophyll in the green parts of the plant, often occurring
very sparsely, but often very richly. Under its effect, which once recognized
could be easily avoided, the phytol is replaced by ethyl or methyl alcohol or
in an aqueous medium is removed by saponification. The action of this
chlorophyllase also explained the appearance of the so-called crystallized
chlorophyll, the remarkable and magnificent green crystals which Borodin
had first observed in 1881 in microscopic leaf sections. The crystallized
 chlorophyll is ethylchlorophyllide; it originates through ethanolysis from
 the phytol compound. The formation of the crystallized chlorophyll was
now no longer accidental; on the contrary, the effect of the chlorophyllase
 was utilized to an extensive degree for the purposes of preparation, also for
partial synthesis of the chlorophyll from chlorophyllide and phytol.
    The same characteristics which serve for comparing the leaf pigments
 from whichever starting material allow us also to decide whether, in the
 course of the preparatory work, the chlorophyll remains unchanged in the
 finer details of its molecule. Hence this characterization was the basis for
preparing the chlorophyll itself in an uninjured and pure state and for con-
 firming, by analysis, the conclusions which had first been reached from the


306                           1915 R.M. WILLSTÄTTER

investigation of its derivatives. The isolation of the chlorophyll relied upon
calorimetric determination of the degree of purity of its solutions, and de-
pended upon the systematic increase of this purity by methods of distribu-
tion between several immiscible solvents, such as petroleum ether and aque-
ous alcohol. By this method, colourless admixtures and the yellow pigments
of the leaves were separated. The simultaneous occurrence of these yellow
pigments, the carotenoids, with the green pigments, which seemed to indi-
cate a special physiological role of the substances because of their great affini-
ty to oxygen,gave rise to the preparation of the yellow substances in the
pure state and their analysis. Two well-crystallized and nitrogen-free pig-
ments occur in every green part of the plant and in many yellow parts. One
of these, identical with the long-known carotene of carrots, is an unsaturated
hydrocarbon of the formula C40H 56. Its partner, xanthophyll, was still un-
known in structure, although it predominates in leaves; according to com-
position and properties it is a carotene oxide (C40 H 56 0 2). Only in the
Phaeophycae are carotene and xanthophyll accompanied and repressed in
quantity by a third carotenoid, richer in oxygen, fucoxanthin, which can be
isolated in crystal form and has the composition C 40H 560 6.
    Whilst chlorophyll in the plant extracts is accompanied by other substan-
ces, as much as fifteen to eight times in quantity, solutions of about 70% pure
chlorophyll can be obtained by separation methods. From this point on, a
surprising observation helped to solve the problem. When the substance has
reached a certain degree of purity, it reveals its true solubility characteristics,
which were distorted before by the admixures. Pure chlorophyll is not sol-
uble in petroleum ether and is precipitated from the alcoholic solvent when
the alcohol is washed away. The procedure permits, with good yields, the
isolation of pure chlorophyll from dried or fresh leaves just as easily as that
of any other plant substance, alkaloid or sugar.
    However, this pure chlorophyll is not as yet a simple substance. The oc-
currence of phytochlorin e and phytorhodin g in the mixture upon its de-
composition could also have been attributed to a cleavage of the phaeophy-
 tin into the two products or to successive decomposition to these. But in the
 course of the demixing operations which were used for the isolation it appear-
 ed - as had already been observed by the English physicist Stokes in 1864 in
 the course of small-scale experiments - that the chlorophyll consists of two
 differently coloured and differently soluble components, which are distribu-
 ted unequally. between methyl alcohol and petroleum ether. By means of
systematic fractionation with these solvents the two pure chlorophyll com-


                             PLANT PIGMENTS                              307
ponents were finally obtained from the mixture. One of them, chlorophyll
a, is blue-green; and the other, chlorophyll b, is yellow-green; component a
predominates; to almost three molecules of chlorophyll a in the leaves there
is only one molecule of chlorophyll b. Despite the optical difference, the
composition is similar. The difference is due to a different degree of oxida-
tion. What the formulae of phytochlorin and phytorhodin allowed us to
foresee is confirmed by the chlorophyll: the compounds of series b are deri-
ved probably from a by the fact that two atoms of hydrogen are replaced by
one atom of oxygen, corresponding to the formulae:




   With a specific reducing agent, magnesium alkylhaloid, the compound
which is richer in oxygen can be converted to derivatives of the u-series. The
decomposition of the chlorophyll by an alkali has also led, by way of differ-
ent intermediate products, to the same end-products, and finally to one and
the same carboxyl-free and altogether oxygen-free parent substance, aetio-
phyllin, of the formula C31H 34N 4Mg, from which is derived the magne-
sium-free aetioporphyrin of the formula C31H 56N 4 - just as the carboxylic
acids of the series, when acted upon by acid, are converted into analogous
magnesium-free compounds, the porphyrins.


308                         1915   R.M. WILLSTÄTTER

   This parent substance became even more important because we were also
able to decompose the blood pigment to the very same aetioporphyrin; thus
for the first time a common transformation product has been obtained from
haemin and chlorophyll, with its molecule still in close relationship to the
pigments. From oxidation and reduction experiments it is clear that the
molecule of the simplest porphyrin is built up from four multi-substituted
pyrrole nuclei. Although there are as yet no definite details about the way
in which these pyrrole nuclei are bound, nor any exact statements with re-
gard to certain details of their substitution, we may be allowed nevertheless
to draw a provisional picture, Formula (II), of the structure of aetioporphy-
rin, based on considerations of probability.




   As with the proteins and the nucleic acids, so with haemoglobin and with
chlorophyll there are still many difficult problems to solve regarding the
detailed determination of their constitution. Nevertheless, the broad features
of chemical knowledge of the leaf pigments already gained open new paths
for the treatment of biological questions and for the investigation of the
function of chlorophyll in the process of assimilation.
   The English botanist Wager had submitted the hypothesis that chlorophyll
is consumed in the assimilation process, that it builds up its molecule with
carbon dioxide and forms its reduction product by its complete disintegra-
tion. The quantitative determination of the chlorophyll content allows us
to make a decision on the correctness of this concept. It has been shown, how-
ever, that the chlorophyll content of a leaf remains absolutely constant
throughout a long-continued and maximal assimilatory performance. We
could therefore relate the assimilatory performance of the plant at a favour-
able temperature and moistening and with an excess supply of carbon diox-
ide and light to the amount of chlorophyll and check the proportion of the
assimilated carbon dioxide to the amount of chlorophyll. This is subject to


                              PLANT PIGMENTS                                309
great fluctuations according to the chlorophyll concentration in the leaves,
and further to the growth and to the season of the year. From an examina-
tion of the cases in which this quotient differs very widely from the norm,
we must conclude that in the assimilation process the chlorophyll works in
collaboration with another internal factor, i.e. one of an enzymatic nature,
an enzyme which is probably engaged with the decomposition of an inter-
mediate product formed from chlorophyll and carbon dioxide. Chlorophyll,
that is to say, each of the two components, indeed combines in a colloid
state with carbon dioxide to form an addition product, which can be disso-
ciated. This observation can form the basis of a theory of assimilation which
assumes that the light which is absorbed does its chemical work in the chlo-
rophyll molecule itself, of which carbon dioxide has become a part by at-
tachment to the magnesium complex, in that by a regrouping of the valen-
ties the carbon dioxide molecule is rearranged into a form which is suitable
for spontaneous decomposition, which occurs in such a manner that the
whole of the oxygen of the carbon dioxide is liberated.
   It is therefore the knowledge of the complex nitrogen-magnesium group
of the chlorophyll which contributes to the determination of its physiologi-
cal function. In investigating the lesser or non-vital natural pigments, such
as indigo blue and madder red, the analytical work was rewarded by the sug-
gestions which were allotted to the organic synthesis by combinations which
the imagination of the scientist would certainly not easily have invented. The
easily crystallizing and stable plant pigments were the ones which the earlier
generation of chemists succeeded in elucidating. What remained enigmatical
were the wonderful but easily disappearing decorative and enticing colours
of the vegetable kingdom which surround us in the flowers with their gay
colours, in fruits and roots, in the barks and the red leaves. The first experi-
ments led us to expect that in those cases we might be dealing with a class of
pigments with many members. But here, as in the case of the assimilatory
pigments, the laboratory of the plant cell works sparingly with chemical
combinations and to some extent disappoints the chemist by the simplicity
which is the basis of the natural wealth of colour. A fascinating problem of
constitution was presented to me by the flower pigment in the test-tube
when, during a holiday, I took a rose from my Zurich garden into the labor-
atory. The aqueous solution of the pigment prepared from this rose changed
with sodium carbonate from red to emerald green; if, however, the antho-
cyanin solution was first acidified with a drop of mineral acid, then the col-
our changed with alkali suddenly from red to deep blue. Between the red


310                         1915 R.M.WILLSTÄTTER

of the acid solution and the blue of the alkali solution there appeared a violet
neutral colour, a puzzling phenomenon with a nitrogen-free pigment, but
soon explained in the course of our work by the observation that the antho-
cyanins are quinoid compounds with tetravalent oxygen, that is to say, in
Nature widely distributed representatives of the class of oxonium salts, the
first examples of which were recognized by Collie in synthetically obtainable
compounds of the pyrone series. The isolation of the anthocyanins in a pure
state and their analysis are therefore founded upon their basic nature and
through the preparation of well-crystallized salts with hydrochloric or picric
acid. These acidic compounds are red, the alkali salts are blue, and the violet
neutral forms are to be regarded as inner salts, as phenol betaines. Many va-
riations of flower colours are caused solely by the occurrence of these three
forms of compound. The neutral and alkaline solutions fade rapidly; this
fading is caused by the conversion of the oxonium bases to carbinols, whose
alkali salts are yellow and mix with the blue of the colour salt to form green.
   The anthocyanins proved to be glucosides, in which the actual pigments,
compounds with phenolic hydroxyl groups, are paired with one or two (or
even more) molecules of sugars, with glucose, galactose, and rhamnose. The
constitution of the sugar-free substances, the anthocyanidins, is elucidated by
decomposition through fusion with alkali; the molecule is split into two
pieces, into phloroglucin or one of its methyl ethers and an aromatic hydr-
oxy-acid, p-hydroxybenzoic acid, protocatechuic acid or bile acid or a
methyl ether of these phenolcarboxylic acids. If the variants are disregarded
which are caused by the occurrence of the different methyl ethers, by the
variety of the sugar components and their different ways of bonding, most
of the anthocyanins can be traced back to only three closely related antho-
cyanidins, viz. pelargonidin, cyanidin and delphinidin, which are hydr-
oxylated phenyl compounds of the benzopyrilium synthesized by Decker and
von Fellenberg-cf. Formulae (III), (IV ), (v), and (V I).
    The assumptions of these constitutions were confirmed in several ways-
by synthesis of cyanidin and pelargonidin from phloroglucinaldehyde as the
starting-material, and by the reduction of quercetin with magnesium amal-
gam to the cyanidin, thus bridging a gap between the flavone pigments oc-
curing throughout Nature and the anthocyanins.
    The cyanidin appears in combination with two molecules of glucose, e.g.
as pigment of the rose, the cornflower and the poppy; with one molecule of
glucose in the anthocyanin of the aster and the chrysanthemum; and with
galactose as the pigment of the cranberry. Pelargomdin is the base of the


                               PLANT PIGMENTS                                311
anthocyanins of the pelargonium, the red sages and of certain dahlias; del-
phinidin gives the deep colours of the larkspur, the woodmallow, the pe-
tunia, the bilberry and the grape.




My students were actually planning to extend and complete the investiga-
tions of the series of the basic pigments when the World War broke out and
destroyed the leisure time of the scientific workshops. The cultures in the
flower-beds at Dahlem were neglected, and soon we were carrying baskets
full of purple-red asters to the hospitals for the wounded soldiers.
   The combination of the synthetic methods with analytical checks was also
of decisive importance for the isolation of the anthocyanins. It was of two-
fold dependency; at every step from the vegetable starting material to the
chemical compound it consisted in quantitative determination of yield and
quantitative pursuit of the degree of purity and concentration of the sub-
stance. This method of working, and in other respects also the described
work in this field will, I hope, contribute still more to the solution of further
problems of biochemistry. It seems to me that the most important future


312                         1915 R.M.WILLSTÄTTER

problem of physiological chemistry is that of enzyme research, which has
been successfully pioneered in this Laboratory of the Stockholm University
by von Euler and his students. Will efforts be successful in making accessible
as chemical individuals these most remarkable and active agencies of the
animal and plant cell, whom we know only from their effects, and the nature
of whose substance is not known at all? May the Swedish Academy of
Sciences which has shown such goodwill towards the investigation of vege-
table pigments devote its stimulating interest also to the chemical investiga-
tion of the enzymes, and may a successful and fortunate professional col-
league soon be able on this spot to unveil the secret of the chemical nature of
the enzymes!
