OLEFIN METATHESIS CATALYSTS FOR THE
PREPARATION OF MOLECULES AND MATERIALS
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2005
by
Robert H. Grubbs
California Institute of Technology (Caltech), The Division of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Pasadena, CA, 91125, USA.




This is a story of our exploration of the olefin metathesis reaction, a reaction
that has been the major emphasis of my independent research. As with all
stories of scientific discovery, there are three components: the discoveries,
the resulting applications, and, perhaps the most important of all, the people
involved. Starting from observations made from seemingly unrelated work,
our investigations into the fundamental chemistry of this transformation
have been an exciting journey, with major advances often resulting from
complete surprises, mistakes, and simple intuition. Ultimately, these efforts
have contributed to olefin metathesis becoming the indispensable synthetic
tool that it is today.1
   Much of modern organometallic and polymer chemistry, as we know it,
started with a chance observation made in the early 1950’s by reseachers in
the Ziegler laboratory in Mulheim, Germany.2 During this time, Ziegler was
continuing work that had been initiated during WW II in exploring the use of
alkyl aluminum complexes for the oligomerization of ethylene to produce
lubricating oils. On one occasion, it was noted that this reaction produced 1-
butene from ethylene instead of the C10–C20 hydrocarbons normally ob-
served. Subsequent analysis of the reaction autoclave found the presence of
nickel. When nickel salts were deliberately added to this reaction, 1-butene
was again observed. This discovery has since served as the foundation for an
amazing array of nickel chemistry and catalysis. In addition, as nickel had
been found to possess unexpected reactivity, other metal salts were also invest-
igated. In particular, when titanium and zirconium halides were used in com-
bination with alkyl aluminums, a new form of polyethylene was obtained.
Natta further demonstrated that similar catalysts could promote the forma-
tion of stereoregular polymers from propylene. The 1963 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry was awarded to Ziegler and Natta for this work.
   The application of Ziegler-Natta-type systems toward the polymerization of
cyclic olefins afforded additional unexpected results. A group at DuPont ob-
served that the polymerization of norbornene did not produce a saturated
polymer as expected, but instead afforded an unsaturated polymer in which
one of the rings had been opened. While surprising, the origin of this unex-

194


pected polymeric structure was not to be pursued until later. Natta subse-
quently observed a similar result when he attempted to polymerize cyclopen-
tene using tungsten and molybdenum halides – he, too, obtained a ring-
opened, unsaturated polymer. Finally, Banks and Bailey of Phillips Petroleum
Co., while investigating the possible polymerization of propylene over cobalt
molybdate, found instead the formation of ethylene and 2-butene. These
three observations, seemingly unrelated, were beginning to indicate a funda-
mentally new olefin transformation.3
   My involvement with this puzzle started in 1968–69 while I was a postdoc-
toral fellow at Stanford. Jim Collman, my postdoctoral mentor, had just re-
turned from a trip to Phillips Petroleum, where he had learned of an amaz-
ing reaction that converted propylene into ethylene and 2-butene. During a
group meeting (Barry Sharpless, Nobel Prize 2001 was also a member of the
Collman group at that time), we began to discuss possible mechanisms for
this transformation. With my earlier training in mechanistic organic chem-
istry as an undergraduate and master’s student in the laboratories of Merle
Battiste, and as a doctoral student with Ron Breslow, I felt this unknown reac-
tion mechanism would be an ideal problem to study.
   Around this time, N. Calderon and his group at Goodyear had developed a
soluble catalyst system that could not only induce polymerization via ring-
opening, but also convert propylene into ethylene and 2-butene. Calderon’s
observations established that the polymerization of cyclic olefins observed by
DuPont and Natta and the scrambling of acyclic olefins observed by Banks
and Bailey were similar reactions. He also established that the mechanism of
this reaction involved the cleavage of carbon-carbon double bonds rather
than a transfer of alkyl groups between olefins via single-bond cleavage. This
first critical mechanistic observation set the stage for subsequent studies.
Banks and Bailey went on to propose a “quasicyclobutane” mechanism to ac-
count for their interchange reaction that was also consistent with Calderon’s
results. Other mechanisms were also proposed to account for this transforma-
tion, now termed olefin metathesis. What all these mechanisms had in com-
mon was the pairwise involvement of carbons in reaction intermediates.
Theoretical studies of this reaction carried out by Frank Mango at Shell sup-
ported this pairwise exchange of two-carbon fragments.4
   My independent career started at Michigan State University in 1969, where
I proposed an alternative pairwise mechanism and initiated experimental
work. Shortly thereafter, however, a growing body of evidence against such a
mechanism began to appear. While investigating the effect of acyclic olefins
in determining the molecular weight of polypentenamers, Chauvin and
Hérrison observed products that were not consistent with the diolefin metal
complexes proposed in the “quasicyclobutane”-type mechanisms. They in-
stead proposed that the reaction did not go through a diolefin metal com-
plex, but rather via a one-carbon metal carbene complex and metallocyclobu-
tanes, intermediates that contain an odd number of carbons. In a similar
study, Katz proposed an analogous mechanism where he was able to rational-
ize the observations that Chauvin had found to be inconsistent with his non-

                                                                           195


         Scheme 1. RCM of 1,7-octadiene

                CD2                                          Predicted Ratio
                                                          Chauvin       Pairwise
                CD2    metathesis              D2C CD2       1             1
            +           catalyst                  +
                CH2                            H2C CD2        2                0 -1.6
                                                  +
                                               H2C CH2        1                1
                CH2

 Scheme 1. RCM of 1,7-octadiene.



 pairwise mechanism. Chuck Casey subsequently went on to find a model for
 this transformation utilizing preformed metal carbene complexes, and
 Schrock was able to determine that metal carbene complexes could, in fact,
 be generated under conditions similar to those used to prepare Ziegler-Natta-
 type catalysts.5 Incorporating this new information into our mechanistic con-
 sideration, we designed an experiment that would allow most of the ambigu-
 ities of the Chauvin experiment to be addressed in detail. Rather than using
 a cross-metathesis reaction that would require us to analyze the role of alkyl
 groups on the intermediates, we instead selected to study the simplest system
 possible: isotopic substitution on a ring-closing metathesis (RCM) reaction.
    The RCM of 1,7-octadiene generates cyclohexene and ethylene (Scheme
 1). Cyclohexene is one of the few simple cyclic olefins that will not undergo
 subsequent metathesis reactions. Consequently, the fate of the two olefins in
 1,7-octadiene can be determined via examination of the metathesis products.
 If the pairwise mechanisms involving even numbers of carbons were involved,
 the other two carbons would be required to couple together. In contrast, the
 Chauvin mechanism would be expected to scramble the two terminal car-
 bons. A mixture of 1,1,8,8-tetradeutero-1,7-octadiene and 1,7-octadiene was
 used to investigate this. In the simplest case, the even carbon mechanisms
 should produce only ethylene and tetradeuteroethylene, while the odd car-
 bon mechanisms should afford a statistical mixture of ethylene, dideutero-
 ethylene, and tetradeuteroethylene in a 1:2:1 ratio. Careful analysis of all of
 our experiments found that a statistical mixture of ethylenes was kinetically
 formed in this reaction, a result consistent with the prediction made using
 the Chauvin mechanism. Subsequent studies by Katz on related systems pro-
 vided additional support for this conclusion.6
    By determining the key reaction intermediates in olefin metathesis, these
 combined mechanistic studies now enabled the use of rational design for fur-
 ther catalyst
Scheme            optimization.
        2. Preparation                Prior to this time, metathesis catalysts were pro-
                       of an isolable metallacycle
 duced utilizing inconsistent, ill-defined systems. By confirming the non-pair-
 wise mechanism of Chauvin, the identification of new metal alkylidene
         Cl                              DMAP            CH2
     Ti      AlMe2 + CH                               Ti
                           2=C(CH3)2 capable of promoting    CMe
 (metal CHcarbene)
           2
                        complexes                        CH2  olefin metathesis
                                                                2 + DMAP-AlMe
                                                                              2Cl
                                                                                  now be-
 came our target for further improving reaction efficiency.
    Fred1 Tebbe, a coworker of Schrock during2his time at DuPont, developed
 one of the first well-defined metathesis systems. Now known as the Tebbe
 reagent, titanium- complex 1, a metal carbene precursor, was found to ex-
 hibit metathesis activity in addition to its ability to promote Wittig-type

 196


    Scheme 2. Preparation of an isolable metallacycle



                Cl                          DMAP             CH2
          Ti       AlMe2 + CH2=C(CH3)2                  Ti       CMe2
               CH2                                           CH2        + DMAP-AlMe2Cl


                1                                            2

Scheme 2. Preparation of an isolable metallacycle.



reactions on esters. As the Tebbe catalyst was well-defined, both the starting
and propagating carbene species could now be observed during a metathesis
reaction, making it an ideal system for mechanistic study. In particular, we
became interested in investigating the stereochemistry of the intermediate
metallacycle. Our initial efforts to isolate a metallacycle complex proved
unsuccessful until Tom Howard was able to serendipitously isolate metalla-
cycle 2 by employing DMAP, which facilitated aluminum removal (Scheme
2). Tom was later able to demonstrate this metallacycle to be the low-energy
state for this catalyst system. In addition, 2 was found to be an active metathesis
catalyst. This observation provided the first example of a metallacycle inter-
mediate and demonstrated that metallacycles could function as kinetically
competent catalysts for olefin metathesis.7
   Utilizing the well-defined Tebbe system, additional mechanistic and syn-
thetic studies were carried out. Laura Gilliam found that metathesis conduct-
ed using this system was inherently “living,” allowing for the preparation of
polymers with defined structures. Polymer preparation and analysis conse-
quently became a major focus within my group to further explore these ob-
servations. It was during this period that Schrock spent a 4-month sabbatical
at Caltech, where we coauthored a paper demonstrating that one of his tanta-
lum catalysts could also serve as a living initiator. In fact, it is now well estab-
lished that virtually all defined metathesis initiators can be used to make poly-
mer structures via living polymerization.8
   Subsequent studies in the Schrock laboratory resulted in the design and
synthesis of a number of very efficient molybdenum and tungsten metathesis
catalysts, the historical development of which will be discussed in his lecture.
Despite the activity of Schrock systems, the use of these early-metal catalysts
had a major limitation: the oxophilicity of the metal center afforded poor
functional group tolerance and necessitated catalyst preparation and hand-
ling under an inert atmosphere. To fully exploit the potential of metathesis,
we believed that the development of new, functional group-tolerant catalysts
would be crucial. Once again, serendipity would play a role in achieving this
objective.
   The development of ruthenium-based metathesis catalysts started with the
goal of preparing interesting polymeric structures. Polymer chemistry pro-
vides an excellent means of studying metathesis catalysts: miniscule catalyst
loadings have the capacity to generate large amounts of polymeric material,
the structure of which can provide a historical record of catalyst activity. The
polymer program within my group was focused on understanding the basic

                                                                                     197


 Scheme 3. Preparation of the first well-defined ruthenium carbene catalyst

                                                PPh3                                PCy3
                         Ph                       Cl                 PCy3             Cl
 RuCl2(PPh3)3 +                                Ru          Ph                      Ru      Ph
                         Ph               Cl                                  Cl
                                               PPh3         Ph                     PCy3    Ph
                                                                Cy = cyclohexyl
      3                                         4                                   5
Scheme 3. Preparation of first well-defined ruthenium carbene catalyst.



principles of living metathesis polymerization. From this knowledge, we
hoped to develop novel polymers that possessed interesting structures and
physical properties. During the course of this work, model building had sug-
gested that the ring-opened polymer from 7-oxo-norbornenes could be used
to produce ionophoric membranes for selective ion transport. Bruce Novak
took on the challenge of making these desired polymers. Much to our dis-
may, however, none of the available catalysts were found to promote this reac-
tion. Examining the literature, Bruce came upon reports by Michelotti9 and
later Natta, where late-transition metal catalysts had been used to polymerize
strained olefins in protic media. Returning to the lab, Bruce was able     Figureto
                                                                                  1. First-generation
demonstrate that these systems could also effectively promote the formationcommercial catalyst

poly-7-oxo-norbornenes. More importantly, he went on to discover thatPCy3
                                                                                       Cl
ruthenium (II) complexes could serve as much more active polymerizationRu
                                                                               Cl           Ph
catalysts. The outcome of Bruce’s investigations resulted in the developmentPCy3
of a robust catalyst system that tolerated most functional groups and aqueous 6
media. Despite the activity of these ruthenium salt catalysts, however, only a
small percentage of the ruthenium added to a reaction was found to produce
an active catalytic center. In addition, as the structure of the active catalysts
was totally undefined, it was impossible to make rational changes for further
improvements.10 However, this work defined the path forward; a ruthenium
(II) complex and a strained olefin were found to be required to form an ac-
tive catalyst system.
   Assuming that olefin metathesis must occur via the formation of metal car-
benes, we felt that the development of well-defined ruthenium carbene com-
plexes was vital for further catalyst optimization. It took a few years, but even-
tually graduate student Son Binh Nguyen was able to prepare air-stable
carbene complex 4 via the reaction of ruthenium(II) phosphine complex 3
with cyclopropene (Scheme 3). To our surprise, complex 4 was found to be
an effective catalyst for the polymerization of norbornenes in protic media.
Although 4 was not very active, its structure was well-defined, finally provid-
ing us with a scaffold by which to make structural changes for catalyst opti-
mization. While many modifications have since been made (e.g. ligand ex-
change using tricyclohexylphosphine to generate the more active catalyst 5),
the basic structure of our catalyst systems still resembles that of our original
“Son Binh Catalyst.” This well-defined family of catalysts is distinguished by its
amazing tolerance to oxygen and water, making it ideal for application to or-
ganic synthesis.11
   In the early 1990’s, Greg Fu joined our group as a postdoctoral scholar

198


                      Figure 1. First-generation                  Figure 2. Second-generation
                      commercial catalyst                         commercial catalyst
                               PCy3
                                                                              N       N
                                  Cl
                               Ru
                                                                                      Cl
                          Cl           Ph                                     Ru
                               PCy3                                      Cl                Ph
                                                                                  PCy3
                               6
                                                                                  7

         Figure 1. First-generation commercial        Figure 2. Second-generation commercial
         catalyst.                                    catalyst.



         from Dave Evan’s group at Harvard and began investigating the activity of
         various metathesis polymerization catalysts in organic synthesis. Relatively
         quickly, he was able to demonstrate that the Schrock molybdenum catalysts
         were effective for a number of important organic transformations, particular-
         ly those involving ring-closing reactions. Just prior to leaving the group to
         join the faculty at MIT, he was able to demonstrate that our newly prepared
         ruthenium systems could perform the same transformations on the bench-
         top without the use of a glovebox. In addition, many previously unreactive
         substrates were found to readily undergo ruthenium-catalyzed olefin
         metathesis in high yields.12
            In our earlier work with the Tebbe reagent, we had found that its general
         use had been limited due to its air sensitivity and difficult preparation. In
         contrast, our user-friendly ruthenium catalysts were in high demand, and ef-
         forts now had to be made to make them readily available. Unfortunately, the
         Son Binh synthesis was difficult to run on large scale. Eventually, building off
         of work performed by Marcia France, Peter Schwab was able to develop a
         method based on the use of a diazo precursor. Although this reagent is po-
Scheme 4. Commercial application of RCM
         tentially explosive, Mike Giardello developed a procedure to tame this
                  O                                              O
              O
         reagent,                                            O
                 S allowing   Br complex 6 to be commercially   S      made  Br on multikilogram
         scalesO (Figure 1).O13 With commercial sources,Othe organic        O
                                                                              synthetic communi-
         ty found a wide      array  of    [Ru]
                                        creative uses of olefin metathesis     catalysts in the syn-
                        H         O                                     H
                        N                toluene                        N      O
         thesis of complex structures.
                N                                              N
        O O                                              O O
                     O
            Ruthenium’s       preference for soft Lewis       bases Oand Lewis-acids, such as
            N
      O olefins,                                            N
                   over hard bases, such as oxygen-based
                                                       O          ligands, is responsible for its
         high tolerance to air and water. It also makes ruthenium catalysts fundamen-
                                                                    kg scale
         tally different from titanium-, tungsten- and400molybdenum-based                  systems.
         Consequently, the rules learned in the development of early-metal catalysts
         no longer applied: for example, as ruthenium possesses a metal center rich in
         d electrons, strongly electron-donating ligands, rather than electron-poor
         ones, are required for high catalyst activity. Detailed mechanistic studies to
         obtain an understanding of the catalyst’s structure/activity profile were there-
         fore required. During the course of such investigations, we found that five-
         coordinate complexes, such as 5 and 6, are catalytic precursors. In order to
         generate the metathesis-active species, one of the neutral ligands must be
         lost. The remaining neutral ligand of the resulting 14-electron complex
         is responsible for catalyst turnover. This knowledge was used to rationalize
         why bulky, basic tricyclohexylphosphine ligands are more effective than

                                                                                                199


  Scheme 4. Commercial application of RCM

                        O                                             O
                   O                                             O
                       S            Br                               S              Br
                   O                                             O
                                    O                                             O
                                              [Ru]
                                H        O                                    H
                                N            toluene                          N          O
                       N                                             N
             O O                                           O O
                            O                                             O
         O     N                                       O     N


                                                                     400 kg scale

Scheme 4. Commercial application of RCM.




triphenylphosphine ligands in the ruthenium-catalyzed metathesis of
cyclooctene.14
    Further catalyst tuning via the substitution of one of the phosphine lig-
ands on 6 with an N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) ligand resulted in a series of
highly active catalysts (e.g. catalyst 7; Figure 2). This increase in metathesis ac-
tivity was attributed to an increased rate of catalyst turnover due to the favor-
able electron donation and steric bulk of the NHC ligand. Additional modi-
fication by replacing the phosphine in 7 with a weaker ligand, such as
pyridine, resulted in an increase in activity up to a factor of 104 relative to
catalyst 6. 15 A number of other research groups have played a role in further
optimizing these catalytic systems.
   One of the most rewarding aspects of my research has been the opportuni-
ty to study the potential applications of a new catalyst. The facile preparation
of our ruthenium catalysts, coupled with their functional group tolerance
and environmental stability, enabled olefin metathesis to finally realize its
broad potential. Although this reaction was already commercially utilized in
the processing of hydrocarbons, the application of olefin metathesis in organ-
ic synthesis and in the preparation of highly functionalized polymers had yet
to be fully developed.
   Most commercial products that contain organic molecules possess at least
one carbon-carbon double bond or, if one is not present, it is likely that an
olefin was used in its preparation. This being the case, the potential applica-
tions of olefin metathesis are endless. To date, commercial products range
from a wooden baseball bat, treated with metathesis-based polymers to im-
prove durability, to the preparation of highly functionalized pharmaceutical
agents, many of which are in the advanced stages of testing. For example,
Boehringer Ingelheim recently reported the use of olefin metathesis for the
commercial preparation of 400 kg of a compound under investigation to
treat hepatitis C (Scheme 4).16
   Some of the earliest commercial applications of olefin metathesis involved
the ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) of monomers contain-
ing strained, unsaturated rings. The polymerization of dicyclopentadiene
(DCPD) is one of the best-known examples of this (Scheme 5). DCPD is an
attractive monomer for polymer production, as it is inexpensive, and the re-

200


          Scheme 5. ROMP for the preparation of DCPD polymers


                           [Ru]
           n                                      n                n
                                                      cross-link
               DCPD                                                m

Scheme 5. ROMP for the preparation of DCPD polymers.



sulting polymer products are useful for a variety of applications. Hercules and
Goodrich developed one of the first commercial processes for this reaction,
where early metal complexes were combined with alkylaluminum to form
catalysts to produce DCPD polymers via injection molding. Unfortunately,
the extreme sensitivity of these catalysts toward air and water mandated the
use of rigorous processing conditions and highly purified monomers.
   In contrast, the functional and environmental tolerance of the ruthenium
catalysts enables DCPD polymerization to be carried out in open molds in the
presence of numerous additives. In addition, DCPD monomers bearing func-
tional groups for further synthetic elaboration can also be utilized. A wide va-
riety of products, such as the composite baseball bats discussed previously, as
well as bathroom fixtures, ballistic panels, and large equipment panels, are
currently in/or being developed for production utilizing ruthenium-
catalyzed ROMP.17
   The ruthenium systems can also be used to prepare polymers with well de-
fined structures. Like the Tebbe complex, ruthenium olefin metathesis cata-
lysts can be used for the production of living polymers. In these cases,
strained olefins are ring open polymerized by the metal center to produce a
polymer that contains an active ruthenium alkylidene at the end of the poly-
mer chain. After the first monomer added to the catalyst is consumed, a sec-
ond monomer can be added and the polymers start to grow again. If the
monomers contain different functional groups, the different segments of the
polymer will have different properties and functions. Since the systems are
living, if all the chains are initiated at the same time, the length of the chain
and therefore the molecular weight is controlled by statistics and produces a
very narrow distribution of chain lengths. Consequently, both the functional-
ity and molecular weight of polymers produced using the ruthenium systems
can be controlled. Since the ruthenium systems have been demonstrated to
tolerate many functional groups on other applications, the polymers pre-
pared using ruthenium initiators can contain many functionalities for use in
a wide variety of applications. For example, if one of the blocks of the poly-
mer is water soluble and the other is insoluble, the block polymers will form
micelles that are nanoparticles that are being explored for applications in
medical diagnostics. If the two blocks are incompatible, the solids formed
from the block polymers will have microphase separated structures that are
important for a number of applications in materials science.
   Ring-closing metathesis (RCM) and, to a lesser extent, cross metathesis
(CM) have now become standard transformations in organic synthesis. As
ruthenium catalysts will tolerate most functional groups, protection-deprotec-

                                                                             201


 Scheme 6. Olefin metathesis for the preparation of "magic" rings

                   PF6–                                                              O O
              +                                                                              PF6–
              N                                                                  O    + O
                                          O   O
              H2                                                                      N
  O                           O       O           O       [Ru]                   O    H2 O
                                  +                                    O                            O
      O                   O           O           O
                                                                           O                  O



                                                                               up to 75% yield

Scheme 6. Olefin metathesis for the preparation of “magic” rings.



tion strategies – which often hinder the application of other reaction
methodologies – are seldom required. In addition, ruthenium-catalyzed
olefin metathesis is ideal for use during the late stages of a total synthesis due
the chemoselectivity exhibited by the catalyst and the mild reaction condi-
tions required. Ruthenium metathesis catalysts are also ideally suited for use
in tandem reactions involving acetylenes and ring systems, as they are stable
toward a variety of reaction conditions and reagents and, often, their pres-
       will7. Commercial
  Scheme
ence          not impede      subsequent
                         application              productiontransformations.
                                               reaction
                                     of CM in the            of "green" compoundsThis favorable
combination of reactivity and functional group compatibility has resulted in
the extensive use of olefin metathesis by the chemical community,             OAc      which is re-
                   [Ru] − CH2=CH2                             [Ru] − CH2=CH2
flected in large number of citations to the use of ruthenium based metathe-
                                                                                        OAc
sis catalysts.                            + AcO

   A useful feature of olefin metathesis      [Ru] lies in the reaction’s reversibility. Olefin
metathesis is a thermodynamically controlled reaction; therefore, the self-as-
                                                               OAc
sembly of the most stable product+ of a metathesis reaction                        be attained
                                                                              can85:15
                                                                        50% yield;     E/Z      by
                                                               OAc
simply allowing the reaction to reach equilibrium. This feature has proven to
be advantageous for a variety of applications, particularly in the use of RCM to
produce interlocked, “magic” ring systems in high yield (Scheme 6).18
   In a modern industrial setting,   OAc + the use of efficient chemical           OH processes,
                  83%                                              17%
preferably those with minimal impact on the environment, is essential. The
                                a pheromone
                     mixture is has
term “green chemistry”               evolvedof as    peach
                                                 thean     twig borerconcept to represent this
                                                        umbrella
general approach to conducting reactions. Metathesis attains the goals of
green chemistry in three ways: (1) by providing a more efficient route over
traditional methods to carbon-carbon bond formation and avoiding by-prod-
uct formation; (2) through enabling the use of renewable resources; and (3)
by providing a means to attain environmentally friendly products. For in-
stance, the processing of seed oils represents an excellent example of the first
two goals. Using solvent-free conditions, olefin metathesis enables vegetable
oils to be efficiently processed into compounds that can serve as renewable
sources of petroleum product alternatives.19
   The solvent-free CM of 1-hexene with hexenylacetate (Scheme 7) repre-
sents an example of the use of metathesis to generate environmentally-friend-
ly products. The product of this reaction can be readily converted into a
peach twig borer pheromone, which can be used as an environmentally-
friendly means of insect control in lieu of the use of broad-spectrum pesti-
cides. CM is currently under investigation for the commercial preparation of

202


   Scheme 7. Commercial application of CM in the production of "green" compounds


                                                                           OAc
                    [Ru]   − CH2=CH2                        [Ru]    − CH2=CH2
                                                                                          OAc
                                          + AcO

                                               [Ru]

                                                             OAc
                                           +                             50% yield; 85:15 E/Z
                                                             OAc




                                     OAc +                                           OH
                   83%                                             17%

                      mixture is a pheromone of the peach twig borer

Scheme 7. Commercial application of CM in the production of “green” compounds.



other pheromones, as this route represents an efficient means to generate
these compounds starting from inexpensive starting materials.20
  Beginning as merely an interesting anomaly over forty years ago, the olefin
metathesis reaction has transitioned into one of chemistry’s most valuable re-
actions for carbon-carbon bond formation. In the early days of trying to un-
derstand this fundamental process, we never envisioned that this reaction
would one day achieve the import that it has today. Our exploration of this re-
action has been a fascinating journey, and it is one that is ongoing. As work
on olefin metathesis continues in both industry and academia, we can look
forward to exciting future developments.
  I would like to thank the over 200 coworkers who have contributed to my
work, as well as all the other interesting people I have interacted with during
my career in chemistry. I would also like to thank the group at Materia Inc.
who has played a significant role in making this technology available for
many commercial applications. You have all made the journey very interest-
ing. I especially want to thank my wife Helen and our kids (Barney, Brendan
and Katy) who have provided the support that has made it all possible and
worthwhile.


REFERENCES
 1. R. H. Grubbs, Tetrahedron 2004, 60, 7117–7140 Handbook of Metathesis, 3 Volumes.; R. H.
    Grubbs, Ed., Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Weinheim, 2003.
 2. “The Chain Straighteners: Fruitful Innovation: The Discovery of Linear and
    Steroregular Synthetic Polymers.” Frank M. McMillan, London, MacMillan, 1979.
 3. W. L.Truett, D. R. Johnson, I. M. Robinson J. Am. Chem. Soc, 1960, 2337.
 4. N. Calderon, E. A. Olfsead, J. P. Ward, W. A. Judy, K. W. Scott, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
    1968,90, 4133.; R. L.. Banks and G. C. Bailey, I & EC Product Research and Development,
    1964, 170.
 5. J. L. Herisson, Y. Chauvin Makromol. Chemie, 1971, 141, 162.; T. J. Katz, J. McGinnis, J.
    Am. Chem. Soc.,1975, 97, 1592.; C. P. Casey, T. J. Burkhardt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1974,96,
    7808.

                                                                                                203


 6. R. H. Grubbs, D. D. Carr, C. Hoppin and P. L. Burk, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1976, 98, 3478.;
    R. H. Grubbs, P. L. Burk and D. D. Carr, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1975, 97, 3265.; T. J. Katz and
    R. Rothchild, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1976, 98, 2519.
 7. T. R. Howard, J. B. Lee and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980,102, 6876.; S. H.
    Pine, R. Zahler, D. A. Evans and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980,102, 3270.; J. R.
    Stille, R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1986, 108, 855.; F.N. Tebbe, G. W. Parshall, G. S.
    Reddy, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1978, 100, 3611.
 8. L. R. Gilliom and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1986, 108, 733.; R. R. Schrock, J.
    Feldman, L. F. Cannizzo and R. H. Grubbs, Macromolecules 1987, 20, 1169.
 9. F. W. Michelotti, W. P. Keaveney, J. Poly. Sci., Part A, 1965, 895.
10. B. M. Novak and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1988, 110, 960.
11. S. T. Nguyen, L. K. Johnson, R. H. Grubbs, and J. W. Ziller, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992, 114,
    3974.; S. T. Nguyen, R. H. Grubbs, and J. W. Ziller, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1993, 115, 9858.
12. G. C. Fu, S. T. Nguyen, and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1993, 115, 9856–9857; G. C.
    Fu and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992, 114 (18), 7324–7325.
13. P. Schwab, M. B. France, J. W. Ziller, and R. H. Grubbs, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.
    1995, 34, 2039. (Angew. Chem. 1995, 107, 2179).; T. E. Welhelm, T. R. Belderrain, S. N.
    Brown, R. H. Grubbs, Organometallics, 1997, 16, 3867.
14. E. L. Dias, S. T. Nguyen, and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1997, 119, 3887–3897.; M.
    S. Sanford, M. Ulman, and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2001, 123, 749–750.; M. S.
    Sanford, J. A. Love, and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2001, 123, 6543–6554.
15. M. Scholl, S. Ding. C. W. Lee, R. H. Grubbs, Org. Lett. 1999, 1, 953.; C. W. Bielawski, R.
    H. Grubbs. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2000, 39, 2903.; T. M. Trnka, J. P. Morgan, M. S.
    Sanford, T. E. Wilhelm, M. Scholl, T-L. Choi, S. Ding, M. W. Day, R. H. Grubbs, J. Am.
    Chem. Soc. 2003, 125 (9), 2546.; J. A. Love, M. S. Sanford, M. W. Day, R. H. Grubbs, J.
    Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 10103.
16. T. Nicola, M. Brenner, K. Donsbach, P. Kreye, Organic Process and Development, 2005,
    27.; I. Kodota, H. Takamura, K. Sato, A. Ohno, K. Matusuda, Y. Yamamoto, J. Am.
    Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 46.
17. Patent No. 6,310,121 B1, issued 10/30/01. C. S. Woodson, Jr. and R. H. Grubbs,
    Patent No. 5,939,504, issued 8/17/99. C. S. Woodson, Jr., R. H. Grubbs.
18. J.-P. Sauvage, B. Mohr, R. H. Grubbs, and M. Weck. Angew. Chem. 1997, 36 (12),
    1308–1310.; A. F. M. Kilbinger, S. J. Cantrill, A. W. Waltman, M. W. Day, and R. H.
    Grubbs, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2003, 42, 3281.; E. N. Guidry, S. J. Cantrill, J. F.
    Stoddart, R. H. Grubbs, Org. Let. 2005, 7, 2129.
19. Frost &Sullivan’s Industrial Bioprocessing Alert, Sept. 9, 2005;
    http://www.epa.gov/greenchemistry/whats_gc.html.
20. Patent No. 6,696,597, issued 2/24/04. R. L. Pederson, R. H. Grubbs,; Patent No.
    6,215,019 B1, issued 4/3/01. R. L. Pederson, R. H. Grubbs.

Portrait photo of Robert H. Grubbs by photographer R. Paz.




204
