A STRUCTURAL BASIS OF LIGHT ENERGY AND
ELECTRON TRANSFER IN BIOLOGY
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1988

by
ROBERT HUBER
Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, 8033 Martinsried




Dedicated to Christa



ABBREVIATIONS
PBS, phycobilisomes; light harvesting organelles peripheral to the thylakoid
membrane in cyanobacteria, which carry out oxygenic photosynthesis and
have photosystems I and II;
PE, PEC, PC, APC, phycoerythrin, phycoerythrocyanin, phycocyanin, allo-
phycocyanin; biliprotein components in PBS with covalently attached tetra-
pyrrole (bilin) pigments;
PS I, II; photosynthetic reaction centers in chloroplasts and cyanobacteria;
EBP; retinol binding protein;
BBP, bilin (biliverdin IX); binding protein in Pieris brassicae;
A Rps. viridis, bacteriochlorophyll-b containing purple bacterium carrying
out anoxygenic photosynthesis;
RC, reaction centre;
C, H, L, M; the four subunits of the reaction centre from Rps. viridis: the
cytochrome c subunit (C), with 4 haems displaying two redox potentials
             is located on the periplasmic side of the membrane; the L- and M-
subunits are integrated in the membrane and their polypeptide chains span
the membrane with 5                   each, labelled A, B, C, D, E; they bind the
bacteriochlorophyll-b (BChl-b or BC), bacteriopheophytin-b (BPh-b or BP),
menaquinone-9 (QA), ubiquinone-9 (UQ,QB) and Fe2+ cofactors; the sub-
scripts P, A, M, L indicate pair, accessory, M-, L-subunit association, respec-
tively; the H-subunit is located on the cytoplasmic side and its N-terminal α−
helical segment (H) spans the membrane;
P680, P960; primary electron donors in PS II and the RC of Rps. viridis,
respectively, indicating the long wavelength absorption maxima;
        electronically excited states of P and D A;
LHC, light harvesting complexes;
         light harvesting protein pigment complexes in BChl-a,b containing
bacteria;


                                    R. Huber                                 575


Car, carotenoids;
Sor; Soretbands of Chl and BChl;
PCY, plastocyanin; electron carrier in the photosynthetic apparatus of
plants;
LAC, laccase; oxidase in plants and fungi;
AO, ascorbate oxidase; oxidase in plants;
CP, ceruloplasmin; oxidase in mammalian plasma.


SUMMARY
Aspects of intramolecular light energy and electron transfer will be dis-
cussed for three protein cofactor complexes, whose three-dimensional
structures have been elucidated by X-ray crystallography: Components of
light harvesting cyanobacterial phycobilisomes, the purple bacterial reac-
tion centre, and the blue multi-copper oxidases. A wealth of functional data
is available for these systems which allow specific correlations between
structure and function and general conclusions about light energy and
electron transfer in biological materials to be made.
                                      *
INTRODUCTION
All life on Earth depends ultimately on the sun, whose radiant energy is
captured by plants and other organisms capable of growing by photosynthe-
sis. They use sunlight to synthesize organic substances which serve as
building materials or stores of energy. This was clearly formulated by L.
Boltzmann, who stated that ‘there exist between the sun and the earth a
colossal difference in temperature . . . . The equalization of temperature
between these two bodies, a process which must occur because it is based on
the law of probability will, because of the enormous distance and magnitude
involved, last millions of years. The energy of the sun may, before reaching
the temperature of the earth, assume improbable transition forms. It thus
becomes possible to utilize the temperature drop between the sun and the
earth to perform work as is the case with the temperature drop between
steam and water . . . . To make the most use of this transition, green plants
spread the enormous surface of their leaves and, in a still unknown way,
force the energy of the sun to carry out chemical syntheses before it cools
down to the temperature level of the Earth’s surface. These chemical
syntheses are to us in our laboratories complete mysteries . . . . (Boltzmann,
1886).
   Today many of these ‘mysteries’ have been resolved by biochemical
research and the protein components and their basic catalytic functions
have been defined (Calvin & Bassham, 1962).
   I will focus in my lecture on Boltzmann’s ‘improbable transition forms’,
namely, excited electronic states and charge transfer states in modern
terminology, the structures of biological materials involved and the inter-
play of cofactors (pigments and metals) and proteins. I will discuss some
aspects of the photosynthetic centre of Rps. viridis (see the original publica-


576                                       Chemistry 1988


tions cited later and short reviews (Deisenhofer et al., 1985 a, 1986, 1989))
and of functionally related systems, whose structures have been studied in
my laboratory: Light harvesting cyanobacterial phycobilisomes and blue
oxidases. A wealth of structural and functional data is available for these
three systems, which make them uniquely appropriate examples from which
to derive general principles of light energy and electron transfer in biologi-
cal materials. Indeed, there are very few systems known in sufficient detail
for such purposes.*
   We strive to understand the underlying physical principles of light and
electron conduction in biological materials with considerable hope for
success as these processes appear to be more tractable than other biological
reactions, which involve diffusive motions of substrates and products and
intramolecular motions. Large-scale motions have been identified in many
proteins and shown to be essential for many functions (Bennett & Huber,
1983; Huber, 1988). Theoretical treatments of these reactions have to take
flexibility and solvent into account and become theoretically tractable only
by applying the rather severe approximations of molecular dynamics (Kar-
plus & McCammon, 1981; Burkert & Allinger, 1982) or by limiting the
system to a few active site residues, which can then be treated by quantum
mechanical methods.
   Light and electron transfer processes seem to be amenable to a more
quantitative theoretical treatment. The substrates are immaterial or very
small and the transfer processes on which I focus are intramolecular and far
removed from solvent. Molecular motions seem to be unimportant, as
shown by generally small temperature dependences. The components active
in energy and electron transport are cofactors, which, in a first approxima-
tion suffice for a theoretical analysis, simplifying calculations considerably.


1. Models for energy and electron transfer
To test theories developed for energy and electron transfer appropriate
model compounds are essential. Although it would be desirable these
models need not be mimics of the biological structures.
   Förster’s theory of inductive resonance (Förster, 1948, 1967) treats the
cases of strong and very weak coupling in energy transfer. Strong interac-
tions lead to optical spectra which are very different from the component
spectra. Examples include concentrated solutions of some dyes, crystalline
arrays, and the BC, discussed in Section 3.1. The electronic excitation is in
this case delocalized over a molecular assembly. Very weak coupling pro-
duces little or no alteration of the absorption spectra but the luminescence
properties may be quite different. Structurally defined models for this case

* The structure of the Rb. sphaeroides RC is closely related to the Rps. viridis RC (Allen et al.,
1986, 1987; Chang et al., 1986). A green bacterial bacteriochlorophyll-a containing light
harvesting protein is well defined in structure (Tronrud et al., 1986) but not in function. In the
multiheme cytochromes (Pierrot et al., 1982; Higuchi et al., 1984) the existence or significance
of intramolecular electron transfer is unclear.


                                        R. Huber                                    577


are scarce. The controlled deposited dye layers of Kuhn and Frommherz
(Kuhn, 1970; Frommherz & Reinbold, 1988) may serve this purpose and
have demonstrated the general validity of Förster’s theory, but with devi-
ations.
   Synthetic models with electron transfer are abundant and have recently
been supplemented by appropriately chemically modified proteins (e.g.
Mayo et al., 1986; Gray, 1986; McGoutry et al., 1987). They are covered in
reviews (see, e.g. Taube & Gould, 1969; Hopfield, 1974; Cramer & Crofts,
1982; Eberson, 1982; Marcus & Sutin, 1985; Mikkelsen et al., 1987; Ke-
barle & Chowdhury, 1987; McLendon, 1988). Figure 1 shows essential
elements of such models: Donor D (of electrons) and acceptor A may be
connected by a bridging ligand (B) with a pendant group (P) embedded in a
matrix M.




Figure 1. Determinants of electron transfer models. D: Donor, A: Acceptor, B: Bridge, P:
Pendant group, M: Matrix.
   Models with porphyrins as donors and quinones as acceptors are mimics
of the RC (Gust et al., 1987; Schmidt et al., 1988). Models with peptide
bridging ligands (Isied et al., 1985) merit interest especially in relation to
the blue oxidases. The effect of pendant groups (P), which are not in the
direct line of electron transfer (Tube and Gould, 1969) is noteworthy in
relation to the unused electron transfer branches in the RC and the blue
oxidases. It is clear, however, that the biological systems are substantially
more complex than synthetic models. The protein matrix is inhomogeneous
and unique in each case. Despite these shortcomings, theory and models
provide the framework within which the factors controlling the transfer of
excitation energy and electrons and competing processes are to be evaluat-
ed.

1.1. Determinants of energy and electron transfer
The important factors are summarized in Table I. They may be derived from
Förster’s theory and forms of Marcus’ theory (Marcus & Sutin, 1985) for
excitation and electron transfer, respectively. These theoretical treatments
may in turn be derived from classical considerations or from Fermi’s Gold-
en Rule with suitable approximations (see e.g. Barltrop & Coyle, 1978).
Excitation and electron transfer depend on the geometric relation between


578                               Chemistry 1988


Table 1




donors and acceptors. Excitation energy transfer may occur over wide
distances when the transition dipole moments are favourably aligned. Fast
electron transfer requires sufficient electronic orbital overlap. Fast electron
transfer over wide distances must therefore involve a series of closely spaced
intermediate carriers with low lying unoccupied molecular orbitals or suit-
able ligands bridging donor and acceptor. Bridging ligands may actively
participate in the transfer process and form ligand radical intermediates
(chemical mechanism) or the electron may at no time be in a bound state of
the ligands (resonance mechanism) (Hains, 19’75). The spectral overlap and
the ‘driving force’, for energy and electron transfer, respectively, have
obvious effects on the transfer rates and are largely determined by the
chemical nature and geometry of donors and acceptors. Nuclear reorgani-
zation of donor, acceptor, and the surrounding medium accompanying
electron transfer is an important factor but difficult to evaluate in a com-
plex protein system even qualitatively; we observe that the protein typically
binds donors and acceptors firmly and rigidly, keeping reactant reorganiza-
tion effects small. Surrounding polar groups may slow rapid electron trans-
fer due to their reorientation. However, a polar environment also contri-
butes to the energetics by stabilizing ion pairs (D + A-) or lowering activa-
tion and tunneling barriers and may increase ‘driving force’ and rate.
Energy transfer also depends on the medium and is disfavoured in media
with a high refractive index.
Table 2


                                           R. Huber                                       579


  Processes competing with productive energy and electron transfer from
excited states ‘lurk’ everywere (Table 2). Quite generally, they are minimized
by high transfer rates and conformational rigidity of the cofactors imposed
by the protein.
  I will discuss these factors in relation to the biological structures later on.

2. The role of cofactors
The naturally occurring amino acids are transparent to visible light and
seem also to be unsuitable as single electron carriers with the exception of
tyrosine. Tyrosyl radicals have been identified in PS II as and     interme-
diates, which are involved in electron transfer from the water splitting
manganese protein complex to the photooxidized P680+ (for reviews, see
Barber, 1987; Prince, 1988). Their identification has been assisted by the
observation that Tyr L162 lies in the electron transfer path from the




Figure 2. Cofactors in PC, BBP, AO, RC. Phycocyanobilins are covalently bound by thioether
linkages to the protein. Biliverdin IXγ is non-covalently bound to BBP. Type-l, type-2, type-3
copper ions are linked to AO by coordination to the amino acid residues indicated. 4 BChl-b and
2 BPh-b are bound to the RC. A pair of BChl-b serves as the primary electron donor, a
menaquinone-9 is the primary electron acceptor (QA) and an ubiquione-9 the secondary
acceptor (QB). The 4 haem groups are bound by thioether linkages to the cytochrome c.


580                                          Chemistry 1988


cytochrome to BCLP in the bacterial RC (Deisenhofer et al., 1985) (see
3.2.2.2 and Figure 10c). A tyrosyl radical is not generated in the bacterial
system, because the redox potential of P960+ is insufficient.
   Generally therefore cofactors, pigments and metal ions, serve as light
energy acceptors and redox active elements in biological materials.
  Figure 2 is a gallery of the pigments and metals clusters which will be
discussed further on, namely the bile pigments, phycocyanobilin and biliver-
din      in the light harvesting complexes, the BChl-b, BP-b, and quinones
in the purple bacterial RC and the copper centres in the blue oxidases.
   The physical chemical properties of these cofactors determine the coarse
features of the protein pigment complexes, but the protein part exerts a
decisive influence on the spectral and redox properties.

3. The role of the protein
The role of the protein follows a hierarchy in determining the properties of
the functional protein cofactor complexes shown in Table 3. These interac-
tions are different for the various systems and shall be described separately,
except point 1, as there are common features in the action of the protein as
a polydentate ligand ascribed to a ‘rack mechanism’.

Table 3. Hierarchy of protein cofactor interactions

1. Influence on configuration and conformation of the cofactors by the nature and geometry of
    ligands (the protein as a polydentate ligand).
2. Determination of the spatial arrangements of arrays of cofactors (the protein as a scaffold ).
3. The protein as the medium.
4. Mediation of the interaction with other components in the supramolecular biological system.


3.1. The protein as a polydentate ligand
The ‘rack mechanism’ was introduced by Lumry and Eyring (Lumry &
Eyring, 1954) and Gray and Malmström (Gray & Malmström, 1983) to
explain unusual reactivities, spectral and redox properties of amino acids
and cofactors by the distortion enforced by the protein.
   A comparison of isolated and protein-bound bile pigments gives a clear
demonstration of this effect. Isolated bile pigments in solution and in the
crystalline state prefer a macrocyclic helical geometry with configuration
ZZZ and conformation syn, syn, syn and show weak absorption in the visible
range and low fluorescence quantum yield (Scharnagl et al., 1983; Huber et
al., 1987a,b). When bound as cofactors to light harvesting phycocyanins
they have strong absorption in the visible range and high fluorescence yield
(Figure 3). The auxochromic shift, essential for the light harvesting func-
tions, is due to a strained conformation of the chromophore, which has
configuration ZZZ and conformation anti, syn, anti stabilized by tight polar
interactions with the protein (Schirmer et. al., 1985, 1986, 1987) (Figure 4).
Particularly noteworthy is an aspartate residue (A87 here) bound to the
central pyrrole nitrogens and conserved in all pigment sites. It influences
protonation, charge, and spectral properties of the tetrapyrrole systems.


                                          R. Huber                               581




Figure 3. Tetrapyrrole structures in PC and BBP and the associated optical and
circular dichroism spectra (Schirmer et al. 1987; Huber et al., 1987 b).


Tight binding is also effective against deexcitation by conformational
changes. The structure shown in Figure 3 as representative of the free
pigment is in fact observed in a bilin binding protein from insects (Huber et
al., 1987a,b). This protein serves a different function and prefers the low
energy conformer. The open chain tetrapyrrole bilins are conformationally
adaptable, a property, which makes them appropriate cofactors for differ-
ent purposes.
   The cyclic BChl in the RC is conformationally restrained but responds to
the environment by twisting and bending of the macrocycle. This may be
one cause for the different electron transfer properties of the two pigment
branches in the RC as will be discussed later. A more profound influence of


582                                      Chemistry 1988




Figure 4. Stereo drawing of phycocyanobilin A84 (thick bonds) and its protein environment
(thin bonds). All polar groups of the bilin except those of the terminal D pyrrole ring are bound
by hydrogen bonds and salt links to protein groups (Schirmer et al., 1987).

 the protein on the RC pigment system is seen in the absorption spectra,
which differ from the composite spectra of the individual components
(Figure 5). The protein binds a pair of BChl-b (BC P) so that the two BChl-b
interact strongly between their pyrrole rings I including the acetyl substitu-
ents and the central magnesium ions (Deisenhofer et al., 1984). Alignment
of the transition dipole moments and close approach cause excitonic coup-
ling which partially explains the long wavelength absorption band P960
(Knapp et al., 1985).
   The optical spectra are even more perturbed in blue copper proteins
 compared with cupric ions in normal tetragonal coordination (Figure 6 ).
The redox potential is also raised to about 300 - 500 mV vs 150 mV for
 Cu2+ (aq) (Gray & Solomon, 1981). These effects are caused by the distort-
 ed tetraedral coordination of the type-l copper (a strained conformation
 stabilizing the cuprous state) and a charge transfer transition from a ligand
 cysteine S- Cu (Blair et al., 1985; Gray & Malmström, 1983).
                   2 +



    The examples presented demonstrate the influence of the protein on the
 cofactors by various mechanisms, stabilization of unstable conformers and
 strained ligand geometries and the generation of contacts between pig-
 ments leading to strong electronic interaction.
    The fixation of the relative arrangements of systems of cofactors is the
 basis of the energy and charge transfer properties in each system.


                                           R. Huber                                       583




Figure 5. Stereodrawing of the special pair BCP in the RC (Deisenhofer et al. 1984) mainly
responsible for the spectral alterations and the long wavelength absorption of the RC of Rps.
viridis (- - -) compared with the spectra of BChl-b in ether solution (-) (spectra from Parson
et al.. 1985).

Figure 6. The type-l copper and its ligands in AO in stereo. The coordination of the copper is
to His A446, His A513, Met A518, Cys A508 (Messerschmidt et al., 1989). The optical
absorption spectra of “blue” copper in copper proteins (-) are compared with normal tetra-
gonal copper (- - -) (spectrum from Gray & Solomon, 1981).


584                               Chemistry I988


3.2. Protein as a scaffold
3.2.1. Light harvesting by phycobilisomes
The limited number of pigment molecules associated with RC would absorb
only a small portion of incident sunlight. The RC are therefore associated
with LHC, which may be located within the photosynthetic membrane, or
form layers or antenna-like organelles in association with the photosynthetic
membrane. Cyanobacteria have particularly intricate light harvesting sys-
tems, the PBS organelles peripheral to the thylakoid membrane. They
absorb light of shorter wavelengths than do PS I and II, so that a wide
spectral range of sunlight is used (Figure 7). The PBS are assembled from
components with finely tuned spectral properties such that the light energy
is channeled along an energy gradient to PS II.

3.2.1.1. Morphology
PBS consist of biliproteins and linker polypeptides. Biochemical and elec-
tron microscopy studies (Gantt et al., 1976; Mörschel et al., 1977; Bryant et
al., 1979; Nies & Wehrmeyer, 1981) lead to the model representative of a
hemidiscoidal PBS in Figure 7. Accordingly PBS rods are assembled in a
polar way from PE or PEC and PC, which is attached to a central core of
APC. APC is next to the photosynthetic membrane and close to PS II (for a
review see, MacColl & Guard-Friar, 1987). The PC component consists of α−
and P-protein subunits, which are arranged as        disc-like aggregates with
dimensions 120Å x 60Å (for reviews, see Scheer, 1982; Cohen-Bazire &
Briant, 1982; Glazer, 1985; Zilinskas & Greenwald, 1986; Zuber, 1985,
1986).
   From crystallographic analyses, a detailed picture of PC and PEC compo-
nents has emerged (Schirmer et al. 1985, 1986, 1987; Duerring, 1988;
Duerring et al., 1989). Amino acid sequence homology suggests that all
components have similar structures.


                                         R. Huber                                      585

3.2.1.2. Structure of phycocyanin
The PC α-subunit and β-subunits have 162 and 172 amino acid residues,
respectively (in Mastigocladus Zaminosus). Phycocyanobilin chromophores
are linked via thioether bonds to cysteine residues at position 84 of both
chains (A84, B84) and at position 155 of the β-subunit (B155) (Frank et al.,
1978). Both subunits have similar structures and are folded into eight α-
helices (X, Y, A, B, E, F, G, H: see Figure 13). A84 and B84 are attached to
helix E, B155 to the G-H loop. α-helices X and Y form a protruding anti-
parallel pair essential for formation of the (αβ) unit.
   The isolated protein forms               with C3 symmetry and hexamers
      as head to head associated trimers with D3 symmetry (Figure 8). The
inter-trimer contact is exclusively mediated by the α-subunits, which are
linked by an intricate network of polar bonds. The inter-hexamer contacts
within the crystal (and in the native PBS rods) are made by the β-subunits
(Schirmer et al., 1987).

3.2.1.3. Oligomeric aggregates: spectral properties and energy transfer
The spectral properties, absorption strength and quantum yield of fluores-
cence of biliproteins depend on the state of aggregation. The absorption
spectrum of the       unit resembles the sum of the spectra of the constitu-
ent subunits, but the fluorescence quantum yield is somewhat higher. Upon
trimer formation, the absorption is red-shifted and its strength and the
quantum yield of fluorescence increased (Glazer et al., 1973; Mimuro et al.,

Figure 8. Stereodrawing of the polypeptide chain fold of a    hexamer of PC seen along the
disk axis (upper panel). The scheme (lower panel) indicates the packing of subunits in the
hexamer seen from the side.


586                                      Chemistry 1988




Figure 9a. Arrangement of chromophores and preferred energy transfer pathways in
trimers,       hexamers and stacked hexamers based on Table 10 in Schirmer et al.. (1987). For
the trimer the detailed structures of the chromophores are drawn, otherwise their approximate
transition dipole directions are indicated. For the trimer and hexamer the view is along the disk
axis; for the stacked hexamers it is perpendicular. In the stacked hexamers only the inter-
hexamer transfers are indicated. The strength of coupling is indicated by the thickness of the
connecting lines. Transfer paths within and between the trimers are represented by full and
broken lines, respectively.


                                    R. Huber                               587


 1986; for a review, see Glazer, 1985). In the                 complexes, the
 fluorescence is further increased and the absorption spectrum further
altered (Lundell et al., 1981).
    These observations can be rationalized by the structure of the aggregates.
Formation of          units causes little change in the environment of the
chromophores. They remain quite separated with distances > 36Å (Figure
 9a). Upon trimer formation, the environment of chromophore A84 changes
profoundly by approach of chromophore B84 of a related unit (Figure 9a,
upper panel). In the hexamer (Figure 9a, middle panel) the A84 and B155
chromophores interact pairwise strongly across the trimer interface. Also
the molecular structures become more rigid with increasing size of the
aggregates as seen in the crystals of the trimeric and hexameric aggregates
 (Schirmer et al., 1986, 1987). Rigidity hinders excitation relaxation by
isomerization and thus increases the fluorescence quantum yield.
    The chromophores can be divided into subsets of s (sensitizing) and f
 (fluorescing) chromophores (Teale & Dale, 1970; Zickendraht-Wendelstadt
et al., 1980). The s-chromophores absorb at the blue edge of the absorption
band and transfer the excitation energy rapidly to the f-chromophores. This
transfer is accompanied by depolarization (Hefferle et al., 1983). Excitation
at the red absorption edge (f-chromophores), however, results in little
depolarization, suggesting that the energy is transferred along stacks of
similarly oriented f-chromophores (Gillbro et al., 1985). The assignment of
the chromophores to s and f was made by steady-state spectroscopy on
different aggregates (Mimuro et al., 1986), by chemical modification guided
by the spatial structure (Siebzehnriibl et al., 1987) and conclusively by
measurement of linear dichroism and polarized fluorescence in single cry-
stals (Schirmer & Vincent, 1987). Accordingly B155 is the s-, B84 the f-, and
A84 the intermediate chromophore.
    Light energy is transferred rapidly within 50 to 100 psec from the tips of
the PBS to the core (for a review, see e.g. Glazer, 1985; Porter et al., 1978;
Searle et al., 1978; Wendler et al., 1984; Yamazaki et al., 1984; Gillbro et
al., 1985; Holzwarth, 1986). The transfer times from the periphery to the
base are several orders of magnitude faster than the intrinsic fluorescence
life-times of the isolated components (Porter et al., 1978; Hefferle et al.,
1983). The distances between the chromophores within and between the
hexamers are too large for strong (excitonic) coupling, but efficient energy
transfer by inductive resonance occurs. A Förster radius of about 50Å has
been suggested by Grabowski & Gantt (1978). The relative orientations and
distances of the chromophores as obtained by Schirmer et al. (1987) were
the basis for the calculation of the energy transfer rates in Figure 9a. It
shows the preferred energy transfer pathways in           units,      trimers,
       hexamers and stacked disks as models for native antenna rods. There is
very weak coupling of the chromophores in the             units. Some energy
transfer takes place, however, as indicated by steady-state polarization
measurements (Switalski & Sauer, 1984; Mimuro et al., 1986) probably
between B155 and B84. Trimer formation generates strong coupling be-




                                                   R. Huber                         589


tween A84 and B84, but B155 is integrated only weakly. In the hexamer
many additional transfer pathways are opened and B155 is efficiently coup-
led. Hexamers are obviously the functional units, as the energy can be
distributed and concentrated on the central f-chromophores, which couple
the stacks of hexamers. Kinetic studies (Glazer et al., 1985; Gillbro et al.,
1985; Holzwarth, 1985; Mimuro et al., 1986) have confirmed the picture of
energy transfer along the rods as a random walk (trap or diffusion limited)
along a one-dimensional array of f-chromophores. Sauer et al. (1987) have
successfully simulated the observed energy transfer kinetics in PC aggre-
gates on the basis of the structures using Förster’s mechanism. The PEC
component at the tips of PBS rods is extremely similar to PC (Duerring,
1989; Duerring et al., 1989). Its short wavelength absorbing chromophore
A84 is located at the periphery (Figure 10a) as are the additional chromo-
phores in PE which is also a tip component (Figure 9b).
   The phycobilisome rods act as light collectors and energy concentrators
from the peripheral onto the central chromophores, that is, as excitation
energy funnels from the periphery to centre and from the tip to the bottom.
   We may expect functional modulations by the linker polypeptides. Some
of them are believed to be located in the central channel of the hexamers,
where they may interact with B84.

3.2.2. Electron transfer in the reaction centre*
3.2.2.1. Reaction centre, composition**
The RC of Rps. viridis is a complex of four protein subunits, C, L, M, H and
cofactors arranged as in Figure 10a. As shown by the amino acid sequence
they consist of 336, 273, 323, and 258 residues, respectively (Michel et al.,
1985; Michel et al., 1986a; Weyer et al., 1987). The c-type cytochrome has
four haem groups covalently bound via thioether linkages. The cofactors
  are four BChl-b (BCMP, BCLP, BCLA,             two BPh-b (BPM, BPI), one
menaquinone-9 (QA), and a ferrous iron involved in electron transfer. A
second quinone (ubiquinone-9) (QB), which is a component of the function-
al complex, is partially lost during preparation and crystallization of the RC.

3.2.2.2. Chromophore arrangement and electron transfer
The chromophores are arranged in L- and M-branches related by an axis of
approximately two-fold symmetry which meet at BCP (Deisenhofer et al.,
1984). This axis is normal to the plane of the membrane.
  While many of the optical properties of the pigment system are rather
well understood on the basis of the spatial structure (Knapp et al., 1985),
electron transfer is less well understood. The excited BCP is quenched by
electron transfer to BPL in 3 psec and further on to the primary acceptor
Q A in about 200 psec, driven by the redox potential gradient between
*
  A historical background of the development of concepts and key features of the purple
bacterial reaction centre is given by Parson (1978).
**
   The arrangement of the reaction centre in the thylakoid membranes of Rps. viridis as
obtained by electron microscopy is described by Stark et al. (1984).


590                              Chemistry 1988




P*/P + (about - 760 mV) and              (about - 110 mV). The redox poten-
tial of BP- is intermediate with about - 400 mV (Cogdell and Crofts, 1972;
Carithers and Parson, 1975; Prince et al., 1976; Netzel et al., 1977; Bolton,
1978; Holten et al., 1978; Woodbury et al., 1985; Breton et al., 1986).
These functional data are summarized in Figure 10a. General factors con-
trolling the transfer rates have been summarized in Table 1 and are detailed
for the RC here:
   Fast electron transfer requires effective overlap of the molecular orbitals.
The orbital interaction decreases exponentially with the edge to edge dis-
tance of donor and acceptor and is insignificant at distances larger than
about 10Å (Kavarnos and Turro, 1986; McLendon, 1988). In the RC the
distance between BCp and QA is far too large to allow fast direct electron
transfer; instead the electron migrates via BPL. BP L- is a spectroscopically
and kinetically well defined intermediate. Although located between BCP
and BPL, BCLA is not an intermediate but is probably involved in electron
                 -



transfer by a “superexchange” mechanism mediating a strong quantum
mechanical coupling (Fleming et al., 1988; for a review see Barber, 1988).
The distance between BPL and QA seems large for a fast transfer. Indeed the


                                          R.Huber                                       591




Figure 10b. Stereo drawing of the arrangement of BPL, Trp M250 and QA in the L-branch of the
RC pigment system.

gap is bridged by the aromatic side chain of Trp M250 in the L branch of
the pigment system (Figure 10b) (Deisenhofer et al., 1985; Michel et al.,
1986b), which might mediate coupling via appropriate orbitals. In addition,
the isoprenoid side chain of QA is close to BPL. Electron transfer via long
connecting chains by through-bond coupling of donor and acceptor orbitals
has been observed (Pasman et al., 1982; Moore et al., 1984; Kavarnos &
Turro, 1986) but there is only Van der Waals contact here.
  A second important factor for electron transfer is the free energy change
(∆ G), which is governed by the chemical nature of the components, by
geometrical factors, and by the environment (solvent polarity). It depends
on the ionization potential of the donor in its excited state, the electron
affinity of the acceptor, and on the coulombic interaction of the radical ion
pair, which is probably small as donor and acceptor (BCP and QA in the RC)
are far apart. The effect of the environment may be substantial by stabiliz-
ing the radical ion pair by ionic interactions and hydrogen bonds. ∆ G is a
determinant of the activation energy of electron transfer. Another is nucle-
ar rearrangements of the reactants and the environment. As the charge on
donor and acceptor develops the nuclear configurations change. These
changes are likely to be small in the RC as the BChl-b macrocycles are
relatively rigid and tightly packed in the protein and the charge is distribut-
ed over the extended aromatic electron systems. Reorientable dipolar
groups (peptide groups and side chains) may contribute strongly to the
energy barrier of electron transfer. A matrix with high electronic polariza-
bility on the other hand stabilizes the developing charge in the transition
state of the reaction and reduces the activation energy. An alternative
picture is that the potential energy barrier to electron tunnelling is de-
creased. Aromatic compounds which are concentrated in the vicinity of the
electron carriers in the RC have these characteristics (see Trp M250).
   The electron transfer from P* to QA occurs with very low activation
energy (Arnold and Clayton, 1960; Parson, 1974; Parson and Cogdell,
1975; Carithers and Parson, 1975; Bolton, 1978; Kirmaier et al., 1985;
Woodbury et al., 1985) and proceeds readily at 1°K. Thermally activated


592                                Chemistry 1988


processes, nuclear motions, and collisions are therefore not important for
the initial very fast charge separation steps. There is even a slight increase in
rate with temperature decrease either due to a closer approach of the
pigments at low temperature, or to changes of the vibrational levels which
may lead to a more favourable Franck-Condon factor.
   The electron transfer between primary and secondary quinone acceptors,
Q A and QB is rather different from the previous processes, because it is
much slower (about 6 µs at pH7, derived from Carithers and Parson, 1975)
and has a substantial activation energy of about 8 kcal mol-1. In Rps. viridis
QA is a menaquinone-9 and QB a ubiquinone-9, which differ in their redox
potentials in solution by about 100 mV. In other purple bacteria both QA
and QB are ubiquinones. The redox potential difference required for
efficient electron transfer in these cases is generated by the asymmetric
protein matrix. The protein matrix is also responsible for the quite different
functional properties of QA and QB. QA accepts only one electron (leading
to a semiquinone anion), which is transferred to QB before the next electron
transfer can occur. QB, however, accepts two electrons and is protonated to
form a hydroquinone, which diffuses from the RC (two-electron gate
(Wraight, 1982)). QB is close to Glu L212, which opens a path to the H-
subunit and may protonate QB. The path between QA and QB is very
different from the environment of the primary electron transfer compo-
nents. The line connecting QA and QB (the QB binding site has been inferred
from the binding mode of competitive inhibitors and ubiquinone-1 in Rps.
viridis crystals (Deisenhofer et al., 1985)) is occupied by the iron and its five
coordinating ligands, four histidine (M217, M264, L190, L230) and a
glutamic acid (M232) residue. His M 217 forms a hydrogen bond to QA. His
L 190 is close to QB. QAand QB have an edge to edge distance of about 15Å
which might explain the slow transfer. If electron transfer and protonation
are coupled, the observed pH dependence of the electron transfer rate of
Q A to QB (Kleinfeld et al., 1985) could be explained and nuclear motions
required for proton transfer may generate the observed activation energy
barrier. The role of the charged Fe-His 4-Glu complex in the QA to QB
electron transfer is poorly understood at present, as it also occurs in the
absence of the iron (Debus et al., 1986). Its role seems to be predominantly
structural.
   The cycle of electron transfer is closed by rereduction of the BC p* from
the cytochrome bridging a distance of about 11Å between pyrrole ring I of
haem 3 and pyrrole ring II of BCLP. The transfer time is 270 ns (Holten et
al., 1978; elder measurements in Case et al., 1970), considerably slower
than the initial processes. Tyr L162, which is located midway (Figure 10c)
may facilitate electron transfer by mediating electronic coupling between
the widely spaced donor and acceptor. The biphasic temperature depen-
dance indicates a complex mechanism in which at high temperatures nucle-
ar motions play a role (for a review see, Dutton & Prince, 1978; DeVault &
Chance, 1966).
   The favourable rate controlling factors discussed are a necessary, but not
sufficient condition for electron transfer, which competes with other


                                           R. Huber                                       593




Figure 10c. Stereo drawing of haem 3 (H3) of the cytochrome c, the special pair BC, and the
intercalating Tyr L162 (Y L162) of the L-subunit (Deisenhofer et al. 1985). The His and Met
ligands to the iron of H3 and the His ligands to the magnesium ions of the BC, are also shown.


quenching processes summarized in Table 2 and detailed for the RC:
   Energy transfer from P* back to the LHC or to other pigments may be
favourable from orientation and proximity considerations but is disfavou-
red for energetic reasons. The special pair absorbs usually (but not in Rps.
viridis where the maximal absorption of the RC and the LHC are at 960 and
1020 nm respectively, see Figure 7) at longer wavelengths than other pig-
ments of the photosynthetic apparatus and represents the light energy sink.
The natural radiative lifetime of the excited singlet state P* is around 20 ns
(Slooten, 1972; Parson and Cogdell, 1975) and may serve as an estimate of
the times involved in the other wasteful quenching processes. Clearly elec-
tron transfer is much faster. Non-radiative relaxation of BCp* by isomeriza-
tions and conformational changes is unlikely for the cyclic pigment systems
tightly packed in the protein matrix.
   The back reaction P+ Q A- to P QA has a favourable driving force (Figure
10a) and proceeds independent of temperature, but is slow and insignifi-
cant under physiological conditions (for a review see, Bolton, 1978). The
physical basis for this has yet to be explained. It may be related to a gating
function of BPL by its negative redox potential compared to QA to electron-
ic properties of P+ disfavouring charge transfer, and to conformational
changes induced by electron transfer.
   The profound influence of the protein matrix on electron transfer in the
RC is obvious in the observed asymmetry of electron transfer in the two
branches of the BChl-b and BPh-b pigments. Only the branch more closely
associated with the L-subunit is active. An explanation is offered by the fact
that the protein environment of both branches, although provided by
homologous proteins (L and M), is rather different in particular by the Trp
M250 located between BPL and QA and the numerous differences in the QA
and QB binding sites (Deisenhofer et al., 1985; Michel et al., 198613).


594                               Chemistry 1988


Asymmetry is observed in the BC, due to different distortions and hydrogen
bonding of the macrocycles and in the slightly different spatial arrange-
ments of the BCA and BP. It is suggested to facilitate electron release into
the L-branch (Michel-Beyerle et al.; 1988). The M-branch may have influ-
ence as a pendant group though.
  The protein matrix also serves to dissipate the excess energy of about 650
mV (Prince et al., 1976) of the excited special pair (P* Q A) over the radical
ion pair P+Q A-. These processes are probably very fast.
  In summary, the very fast electron transfer from BCp* to QA occurs
between closely spaced aromatic macrocyles with matched redox potentials.
The protein matrix in which the pigments are tightly held is lined predomi-
nantly with apolar amino acid side chains with a high proportion of aromatic
residues. The electron path is removed from bulk water.

3.2.3. The blue oxidases
Oxidases catalyse the reduction of dioxygen in single electron transfers
from substrates. Dioxygen requires 4 electrons and 4 protons to be reduced
to two water molecules. Oxidases must provide recognition sites for the two
substrates, a storage site for electrons and/or means to stabilize reactive
partially reduced oxygen intermediates (Malmström, 1978, 1982; Farver &
Pecht, 1984)
  The ‘blue’ oxidases are classified corresponding to distinct spectroscopic
properties of the three types of copper which they contain: Type-l Cu ++ is
responsible for the deep blue color of these proteins; type-2 or normal
Cu ++ has undetectable optical absorption; type-l and type-2 cupric ions
are paramagnetic; type-3 copper has a strong absorption around 330 nm
and is antiferromagnetic, indicating coupling of a pair of cupric ions. The
characteristic optical and electron paramagnetic resonance spectra disap-
pear upon reduction.
   Studies of the catalytic and redox properties of the ‘blue’ oxidases are
well documented in several recent reviews (e.g. for lactase, Reinhammar,
1984; for ascorbate oxidase, Mondovi & Avigliano, 1984; for ceruloplas-
min, Rydén, 1984). Basically type-l Cu++ is reduced by electron transfer
from the substrate. The electron is transferred on to the type-3 and type-2
copper ions: The second substrate, dioxygen, is associated with the type-3
and/or type-2 copper ions.

3.2.3.1. Ascorbate oxidase, composition and copper arrangement
Ascorbate oxidase is a polypeptide of 553 amino acid residues folded into
three tightly associated domains (Messerschmidt et al., 1989). It is a dimer
in solution, but the functional unit is the monomer. It belongs to the group
of ‘blue’ oxidases together with laccase and ceruloplasmin (Malkin & Malm-
ström, 1970).
   Structures of copper proteins containing only one of the different copper
types are known: Plastocyanin has a ‘blue’ type-l copper, which is coordi-
nated to two histidine residues and the sulfur atoms of cysteine and methio-


                                          R. Huber                                      595


nine as a distorted tetrahedron (Guss & Freeman, 1983). Cu-Zn-superoxide
dismutase contains a type-2 copper, which has 4 histidine ligands with
slightly distorted quadratic coordination (Richardson et al., 1975). Hemo-
cyanin of Panulirus interruptus has type-3 copper, a pair of copper ions 3.4
Å apart with 6 histidine ligands (Gaykema et al., 1984).
   In domain 3 of ascorbate oxidase (see section 4.4.) a copper ion is found
in a strongly distorted tetrahedral (approaching trigonal pyramidal geome-
try) coordination by the ligands His, Cys, His, Met as had been shown in
Figure 6. It resembles the blue type-l copper in plastocyanin. Between
domain 1 and domain 3, a trinuclear copper site is enclosed and shown in
Figure 11a. Four (-His-X-His-) amino acid sequences provide the eight
histidine ligands. The trinuclear copper site is subdivided in a pair of
coppers (Cu31, Cu32) with 2x3 histidyl (A108, A451, A507; A64, A106,
A509) ligands forming a trigonal prism. It represents the type-3 copper
pair, as a comparable arrangement is observed in hemocyanin. The remain-
ing copper (Cu 2) has two histidyl ligands (A62, A449). It is type-2 copper.
The trinuclear copper cluster is the site where dioxygen binds, but the
structural details including the presence of additional non-protein ligands
require clarification. The close spatial association of the three copper ions
in the cluster suggests facile electron exchange. It may function as an
electron storage site and cooperative three-electron donor to dioxygen, to
irreversibly break the O - O bond.

3.2.3.2. Intramolecular electron transfer in ascorbate oxidase
Electrons are transferred from the type-l copper to the trinuclear site. The
shortest pathway is via Cys-A508 and His-A507 or His-A509. The (His-X-
His-) segment links electron donor and acceptor bridging a distance of 12Å




Figure 11a. Stereo drawing of the trinuclear copper site in AO. Coordination bonds between
the copper ions and the protein residues are marked (- - - -) (Messerschmidt et al., 1989).


596                                     Chemistry 1988




Figure 11b. Stereo drawing of the tridentate peptide ligand (-His 507-Cys 508-His 509-) bridg-
ing type-l copper (Cu 1) and the trinuclear cluster (Cu 31, Cu 32, Cu 2) (Messerschmidt et al.
1989).


(Figure 11b). The cysteine sulfur and the imidazole components of the
bridging ligand have low lying unoccupied molecular orbitals and may
favour a chemical mechanism of electron transfer but the intervening
aliphatic and peptide chains are unlikely to form transient radicals and may
participate by resonance. The optical absorption of the blue copper as-
signed to a cysteine S             charge transfer transition supports the
suggested electron pathway.
   The putative electron path branches at the      atom of Cys A508. Model
compounds have shown inequivalence and faster transfer in the N-C direc-
tion of amide linking groups (Schmidt et al., 1988). This may apply also to
the blue oxidases and cause preferred transfer to A507.
   The redox potential differences between the type-l copper and the type-3
copper are -40 mV in ascorbate oxidase. Unfortunately, there are no
direct measurements of the intramolecular electron transfer rates available.
The turnover number serves as a lower limit and is 7.5 X 10 3 sec -1 in AO
(Dawson, 1966; Get-win et al., 1974) indicating a quite rapid transfer despite
the long distance and small driving force. The electron pathway is intramo-
lecular and removed from bulk water.
   The characteristic distribution of redox centres as mono- and trinuclear
sites in the blue oxidases may be found also in the most complex oxidase,
cytochrome oxidase (see the hypothetical model of Holm et al., 1987) and in
the water-splitting manganese protein complex of PS II, which carries out
the reverse reaction of the oxidases. For its (Mn) 4 cofactor either two
binuclear or a tetranuclear metal centre is favoured (Babcock, 1987), but
mono- and trinuclear arrangements can not be excluded.


                                         R. Huber                                      597


3.3. The protein as medium
The boundary between the action of the protein as ligand and as medium is
fluid. The protein medium is microscopically extremely complex in struc-
ture, polarity and polarisability, which may influence energy and electron
transfer. There is no obvious common structural scheme in the protein
systems discussed except a high proportion of aromatic residues (particular-
ly tryptophans) bordering the electron transfer paths in RC and AO and
their wide separation from bulk water by internal location within the pro-
tein and the hydrocarbon bilayer (in RC). These effects have been men-
tioned in sections 1.3 and 3.2.2.2.

4. Structural relationships and internal repeats
All four protein systems mentioned show internal repetition of structural
motifs or similarities to other proteins of known folding patterns. This is a
quite common phenomenon and not confined to energy and electron
transfer proteins. It is also not uncommon that these relationships often
remained undetected on the basis of the amino acid sequences, ultimately a
reflection of our ignorance about the sequence structure relationships. An
analysis of structural relationships will shed light on evolution and function
of the protein systems and is thus appropriate here.

4.1. Retinol and bilin binding proteins
The simplest case is shown in Figure 12, where BBP (Huber et al., 1987) is
compared to RBP (Newcomer et al., 1984). The structural similarity is
obvious for the bottom of the P-barrel structure, while the upper part which
is involved in binding of the pigments, biliverdin and retinol, differs greatly.
The molecule is apparently divided in framework and hypervariable seg-
ments which determine binding specificity in analogy to the immunoglobu-
lins (Huber, 1984). The relationship suggests carrier functions for BBP as
for RBP, although it serves also for pigmentation in butterflys.




Figure 12 . Comparison of the polypeptide chain folds of BBP and RBP with bound cofactors.


598                                      Chemistry 1988


4.2. Phycocyanin
The PC consist of two polypeptide chains α and β which are clearly related
in structure (Figure 13) and originate probably from a common precursor.
   The α-subunit is shorter in the .GH turn and lacks the s-chromophore
B155 (see section 3.2.1.3.). The loss or acquisition of chromophores during
evolution may be less important than differentiation of the and subun-
its, which occupy non-equivalent positions in the           trimer, so that the
homologous chromophores A84 and B84 are non-equivalent with B84 lying
on the inner wall of the disk. In addition the α and β subunits play very
different roles in the formation of the      hexamer as had been shown in
Figure 8. Symmetrical precursor hexamers might have existed and could




Figure 13. Polypeptide chain folds of the a- and P-subunits of phycocyanin (Schirmer et al.
1987) (lower part, left and right) and comparison of the arrangements of a-helices in myoglobin
and phycocyanin (upper part, left and right).


                                           R. Huber                                       599


have formed stacks, but would lack the differentiation of the chromo-
phores, in particular the inequivalence and close interaction of A84 and
B84 in the trimer. Functional improvement has probably driven divergent
evolution of the and β-subunits. .
  A most surprising similarity was discovered between the PC subunits and
the globins shown in Figure 23. The globular helical assemblies A to H show
similar topology. The N-terminal X,Y            forming a U-shaped exten-
sion in PC is essential for formation of the  substructure. The amino acid
sequence comparison after structural superposition reveals some homology
suggesting divergent evolution of phycobiliproteins and globins (Schirmer
et al., 1987), however, what function a precursor of light harvesting and
oxygen binding proteins might have had remains mysterious.

4.3. Reaction centre
The RC lacks symmetry across the membrane plane, not surprising for a
complex, which catalyses a vectorial process across the membrane. How-
ever, there is quasi-symmetry relating the L- and M subunits and the
pigment system. Structural similarity and amino acid sequence homology




Figure 14. Stereo drawing of the polypeptide fold of the RC subunits and the cofactor system.
The membrane-spanning α-helices of the L- and M-subunits (A, B, C, D, E in sequential and A,
B, C, E, D in spatial order) and the H-subunit (H) are labelled (Deisenhofer et al., 1985).


600                              Chemistry 1988


between the L- and M-subunits suggest a common evolutionary origin. This
relationship is extended to the PS II components Dl and D2 on the basis of
sequence homology and conservation of residues involved in cofactor bind-
ing (for reviews, see Trebst, 1986;. Michel & Deisenhofer, 1988). The
putative precursor was a symmetrical dimer with identical electron transfer
pathways. The interaction with the H subunit introduces asymmetry, par-
ticularly noteworthy at the N-terminal transmembrane α-helix of the H-
subunit (H), which is close to the E transmembrane α-helix of the M-subunit
and the L-branch of the pigment system and QA (Figure 14). The improve-
ment of the interaction with the H-subunit, which appears to play a role in
the electron transfer from QA to QB and in protonation of QB might have
driven divergent evolution of the L- and M-subunits at the expense of the
inactivation of the M pigment branch. However, the electron transfer from
BC, to QA is extremely fast and not rate-limiting for the overall reaction.
The evolutionary conservation of the M branch of pigments may be of
functional significance in light harvesting and electron transfer as a pendant
group. There are also structural reasons, as its deletion would generate void
space.
   The cytochrome subunit adds to the asymmetry of the L-M complex and
shows itself an internal duplication (Deisenhofer et al., 1985). All four heme
groups are associated with a helix-turn-helix motif, but the turns are short
for haem groups 1 and 3 and long for 2 and 4.

4.4. Blue oxidases
Gene multiplication and divergent evolution is most evident in the blue
oxidase, ascorbate oxidase. Figure 15 shows the polypeptide chain of 553
amino acid residues folded into 3 closely associated domains of similar
topology (Messerschmidt et al., 1989). Although nearly twice as large, they
resemble the simple, small copper protein plastocyanin (Guss & Freeman,
1983) (Figure 16). In the blue oxidase domains I and III enclose the
trinuclear copper cluster in a quasi-symmetrical fashion, but only domain
III contains-the type 1 copper, the electron donor to the trinuclear site. A
potential electron transfer pathway in domain I is not realized, reminiscent
of the M-branch of pigments in the RC. Similar to the H subunit in the RC,
the linking domain II introduces asymmetry in AO, which might have driven
evolutionary divergence of domains I and III.
   The proteins plastocyanin, ascorbate oxidase, laccase, and ceruloplasmin
are members of a family of copper proteins as indicated by structural
relations and sequence homology (Messerschmidt et al., 1989; Ohkawa et
al., 1988; Germann et al., 1988; Takahashi et al., 1984). They provide a
record from which an evolutionary tree may be proposed (Figure 17). The
simplest molecule is plastocyanin containing only a type-l copper. A dimer
of plastocyanin-like molecules could provide the 2x4 histidyl ligands for the
trinuclear copper cluster, representing a symmetrical oxidase. From this
hypothetical precursor the modern blue oxidases and ceruloplasmin might
have evolved following different paths of gene (domain) insertion and loss


                                          R. Huber                                        601




Figure 15. Stereo drawing of the polypeptide chain folds of AO and explosion view of its three
domains from top to bottom (Messerschmidt et al. 1989). β-strands are indicated as arrows and
α-helices as cylinders (produced by the plot program of Lesk & Hardman, 1982).


                                         Chemistry 1988




Figure 16. Stereo drawing and superposition of domain III of AO (thin lines) and PCY (thick
lines). The trinuclear copper site in AO is buried between domain I (not shown) and domain III.




Figure 17. Homologous domains in plasto-
cyanin, ascorbate oxidase, laccase and ceru-
loplasmin. The mono- and trinuclear copper
sites are indicated.


                                   R. Huber                              603


or aquisition of coppers. In both the arrangement of the N- and C-terminal
domains, which contain the functional copper cluster has been preserved.
Recombinant DNA technology has the tools to reconstruct the hypothetical
precursor oxidase. This is under investigation.

5. Implications from the structure of the reaction centre for membrane
proteins in general
The structures of water soluble proteins show a seemingly unlimited diversi-
ty, although they are built from only a few defined secondary structural
elements as helices, β-sheets and turns and despite their construction from
domains and recurring structural motifs. The proteins discussed provide
ample evidence. That there seems to be a limited set of basic folds may be
related to the evolution of proteins from a basic set of structures and/or to
constraints by protein stability and rates of folding. These basic folding
motifs do not represent rigid building blocks, however, but adapt to se-
quence changes and respond to the environment and association with other
structural elements. Adaptability and plasticity (which is not to be confused
with flexibility) is related to the fact that the entire protein and solvent
system must attain the global minimum, not its individual components.
Water is a good hydrogen bond donor and acceptor and is thus able to
saturate polar surface exposed peptide groups nearly as well as intraprotein
hydrogen bonds do (except for entropic effects).
   Membrane proteins face the inert hydrocarbon part of the phospholipid
bilayer and must satisfy their hydrogen bonds intramolecularly. Only two
secondary structures form closed hydrogen bonding arrangements of their
main chains, which satisfy this condition, namely the helix and the β-barrel.
For assemblies of α-helices packing rules have been derived which predict
certain preferred angles between the helix axes although with a broad
distribution. Similarly, the arrangement of strands in β-sheets and β-barrels
follows defined rules (Chothia, 1984).

5.1. Structure of the membrane associated parts of the RC
The structure of the RC may support some conclusions about membrane
proteins in general, of which the RC structure was the first to be deter-
mined at atomic resolution after the low resolution structure of bacterio-
rhodopsin which has some common features (Henderson & Unwin, 1975).
The RC has 11 transmembrane α-helices, which consist of 26 residues (H-
subunit) or 24-30 residues (L- and M-subunits) appropriate lengths to
span the membrane. The amino acid sequences of these segments are
devoid of charged residues (Figure 18). Few charged residues occur close to
the ends of the α-helices. Glycine residues initiate and terminate almost all
α-helical segments, both the transmembrane and the connecting a-helices.
It is well known from soluble proteins that glycine residues are abundant in
turns and often associated with flexible regions of proteins (Bennett and
Huber 1984). They may be important for the insertion into the membrane
by allowing rearrangements. The angles between the axes of the contacting


                                         Chemistry 1988




Figure 18. Stereo drawing of the polypeptide chains of the L- and M-subunits of the RC in
ribbon representation. The N-terminal residues of the membrane-spanning α-helices are la-
belled (including the prefix M and L) and the tetra-helical motif of the D and E α-helices is
marked by shading and lines. The side chains of charged residues are drawn. Asp, Glu, and
carboxy-termini as negatively charged, and Lys, Arg and amino-termini are counted as positively
charged and added for the cytoplasmic and periplasmic sides (Deisenhofer el al., 1985, 1988).


α-helices of the L- and M-complex are inclined by 20º to 30º, a preferred
angular range for the packing of the α-helices in soluble proteins. They have
features in common with buried α-helices in large globular proteins, which
are also characterized by the absence of charged residues and the prefer-
ence of glycines and prolines at the termini (Loebermann et al., 1984;
Remington et al., 1982). In addition, the D E α-helices of the L- and M-
subunits (Figure 18) find counterparts in soluble proteins. They are associat-
ed around the local diad axis and form the centre of the LM module, which
binds the iron and the BC,. The four D and E α-helices of the L- and M-
subunits are arranged as a bundle tied together by the iron ion and splay out
towards the cytoplasmic side to accommodate the large special pair. This
motif is quite common in soluble electron transfer proteins (Weber and
Salemme, 1980). I will resume this discussion later and suggest appropriate
substructures of soluble proteins as models for pore forming membrane
proteins.

5.2. Membrane insertion
The structure of the RC is similarly important for our views of the mecha-
nism of integration of membrane proteins into the phospholipid bilayer.
The RC is composed of components which are quite differently arranged
with respect to the membrane: The C-subunit is located on the periplasmic
side. The H-subunit is folded into two parts: a globular part located on the
cytoplasmic side and a transmembrane α-helix. The L- and M-subunits are


                                    R. Huber                                605


incorporated into the phospholipid bilayer. Consequently, C has to be
completely translocated across the membrane from its intracellular site of
synthesis. In the H-, L-, and M-subunits the transmembrane α-helices are
embedded in the bilayer. Only the N-terminal segment of H and the C-
termini and connecting segments of the α-helices located at the periplasmic
side of L and M (A - B, C - D) require transfer.
   It is interesting to note that only the cytochrome gene possesses a prokar-
yotic signal sequence, as indicated by the sequence of the gene (Weyer et al.,
1987). Transfer of the large hydrophilic C-subunit may require a complex
translocation system and a signal sequence, while H, L, and M may sponta-
neously insert into the bilayer due to the affinity of the contiguous hydro-
phobic segments with the phospholipids (for a review of this and related
problems see Rapoport, 1986). A “simple” dissolution still requires transfer
across the membrane of those charged residues which are located at the
periplasmic side (Deisenhofer et al., 1985; Michel et al, 1986b). The
increasingly favourable protein lipid interaction which develops with inser-
tion may assist in this process. M and L have considerably more charged
residues at the cytoplasmic side (41) than at the periplasmic side (24),
providing a lower activation energy barrier for correct insertion. The net
charge distribution of the LM complex is asymmetric with 6 positive charges
at the cytoplasmic side and 8 negative charges at the periplasmic side. As the
intracellular membrane potential is negative, the observed orientation of
the LM complex is energetically favoured (Figure 18).
   The H-subunit has a very polar amino acid sequence at the C-terminus of
the transmembrane α-helix with a stretch of 7 consecutive charged residues
(H33 - H39) (Deisenhofer et al., 1985; Michel et al., 1985) which may
efficiently stop membrane insertion. Similarly, there are 3 to 11 charged
residues in each of the connecting segments of the α-helices at the cytoplas-
mic side of the L- and M-subunits, which might stop the transfer of α-helices
or α-helical pairs (Engelman et al., 1986). As an alternative to sequential
insertion the L-, M-subunits may be inserted into the membrane as assem-
bled protein pigment complexes, because they cohere tightly by protein
protein and protein cofactor interactions.

5.3. Models of pore forming proteins
It is not obvious whether the structural principles observed in the RC apply
also to ‘pore’ or ‘channel’ forming α-helical proteins. These could, in
principle, elaborate quite complex structures within the aqueous channel
(Lodish, 1988), but available evidence at low resolution for gap junction
proteins (Milks et al., 1988) indicates in this specific case a simple hexameric
arrangement of membrane spanning amphiphilic α-helices, whose polar
sides face the aqueous channel.
   Guided by the observation that rules for structure and packing of
helices derived for soluble proteins apply also to the RC, we may derive
models for membrane pore forming proteins from appropriate soluble
protein substructures. The penta-helical pore seen at high resolution in the


606                                      Chemistry 1988


icosaedral multi-enzyme complex riboflavin synthase seems to be a suitable
model (Ladenstein et al., 1988) (Figure 19). 5 amphiphilic              of 23
residues each are nearly perpendicular to the capsid surface. The coiled coil
of           has a right-handed twist and forms a pore for the putative
import of substrates and export of products. They pack with their apolar
sides against the central 4-stranded β-sheet of the protein, which mimics the
hydrocarbon part of a phospholipid bilayer and project charged residues
into the aqueous channel.
   Similar modelling of membrane protein structures may be extended to
another class of membrane proteins which have β-structures spanning the
outer membrane, the bacterial pot-ins (Kleffel et al., 1985). In soluble
proteins β-barrels observed have 4 to 8 or more strands. The lower limit is
determined by the distortion of regular hydrogen bonds. An upper limit
may be given by the possible sizes of stable protein domains. A four-
stranded β-barrel with 4 parallel strands duplicated head to head with
symmetry D4 is seen in the ovomucoid octamer (Weber et al., 1981). The
strands lean against the hydrophobic core of the molecule and project their
(short) polar residues into the channel (which is extremely narrow here).

6. Some thoughts on the future of protein crystallography
Thirty years after the elucidation of the first protein crystal structures by
Perutz and Kendrew and after steady development, protein crystallography
is undergoing a revolution. Recent technical and methodical developments
enable us to analyse large functional protein complexes like the RC (Deisen-
hofer et al., 1985; Allen et al., 1987), large virus structures (to mention only
Harrison et al., 1978; Rossmann et al., 1985; Hogle et al., 1985), protein
DNA complexes (to mention only Ollis et al., 1985), and multi-enzyme
complexes like riboflavin synthase (Ladenstein et al., 1988).
   The significance of these studies for understanding biological functions is
obvious and has excited the interest of the scientific community in general.




Figure 19. Penta-helical pore in heavy riboflavin synthase in stereo (Ladenstein et al., 1988).


                                          R. Huber                                     607


   In addition, it was recognized that detailed structural information is a
prerequisite for rational design of drugs and proteins. For an illustration I
chose human leucocyte elastase which is an important pathogenic agent. On
the basis of its three-dimensional structure (Figure 20) (Bode et al., 1986)
and the criteria of optimal stereochemical fit potent inhibitors are now
being synthesized or natural inhibitors modified by use of recombinant
DNA technology in many scientific and commercial institutions. Other,
equally important proteins are similarly studied. This field especially bene-
fits from the facile molecular modelling software (e.g. FRODO, Jones,
1978) and a standard and depository of structural data, the Protein Data
Bank (Bernstein et al., 1977).
   Success and the new technical and methodical developments spur protein
crystallography’s progress. These new developments are indeed remark-
able: Area detectors for automatic recording of diffraction intensities have
been designed. Brilliant X-ray sources (synchrotrons) are available for very
fast measurements and now permit use of very small crystals or radiation
sensitive materials. Their polychromatic radiation is used to obtain diffrac-
tion data sets within milliseconds by Laue techniques (Hajdu et al., 1988)
and their tunability allows the optimal use of anomalous dispersion effects
(Hendrickson et al., 1988; Guss et al., 1988).
   Refinement methods including crystallographic and conformational en-
ergy terms provide improved protein models. Methods which allow the
analysis of large protein complexes with internal symmetry averaging proce-
dures were developed (Bricogne, 1976) leading from blurred to remarkably
clear pictures. A priori information of a relationship to known proteins can
be used to great advantage as it is possible to solve an unknown crystal
structure using a known model of a variant structure by a method discov-
ered and named the 'Faltmolekül' method by my teacher, W. Hoppe. It has
become a very powerful tool in protein crystallography.




Figure 20. Stereo drawing of the complex between human leucocyte elastase (thin lines) and
turkey ovomucoid inhibitor (thick lines) (Bode el al., 1986).


608                               Chemistry 1988


   With this last paragraph I wish to pay tribute to W. Hoppe who in 1957
laid the foundation to Patterson search methods by discovering that the
Patterson function (the Fourier transform of the diffraction intensities) of
molecular crystals can be decomposed into sums of intra- and intermolecu-
lar vector sets (Hoppe, 1957) from which orientation and translation of the
molecules can be derived when their approximate structure is known (Fi-
gure 21 ). Hoppe’s method was profoundly elaborated, computerized, and
reformulated (Rossmann & Blow, 1962; Huber, 1965; Crowther & Blow,
 1967). It provided a short-cut to the crystal structure of the RC of Rb.
sphaeroides which was solved on the basis of the molecular structure of the
RC of Rps. viridis and subsequently refined (Allen et al., 1986, 1987). The
molecular architectures are very similar although the Rb. sphaeroides RC
lacks the permanently bound cytochrome. The structure solution was inde-
pendently confirmed using similar methods by Chang et al., (1986). With
the Faltmolekül method the orientation and location of a molecule in a
crystal cell can be determined. The detailed molecular structure and its
deviations from the parent model have to be worked out by crystallographic
refinement, to which W. Steigemann and J. Deisenhofer (in his thesis work)
laid a foundation in my laboratory (Huber et al., 1974; Deisenhofer &
Steigemann, 1975).
   Recently, NMR techniques (nuclear magnetic resonance) have demon-
strated their capability to determine three-dimensional structure of small
proteins in solution. In one case, a detailed comparison between crystal and
solution structure has shown very good correspondance (Kline et al., 1986;
Pflugrath et al., 1986) but future developments will be needed to extend the
power of the method to larger protein structures.
   Protein crystallography is the only tool to unravel in detail the architec-
ture of the large protein complexes described here and will continue in the
foreseeable future to be the only experimental method that provides atomic
resolution data on atom-atom and molecule-molecule interactions. It is the
successful analytic method E. Fischer addressed in his 9th Faraday Lecture
by pointing out that ‘the precise nature of the assimilation process. . . will
only be accomplished when biological research, aided by improved analyt-
ical methods, has succeeded in following the changes which take place in the
actual chlorophyll granules’ (Fischer, 1907). Yet an ultimate goal for which
we all struggle is the solution of the folding problem. The growing number
of known protein structures and the design of single residue variants by
recombinant DNA technology and their analysis by protein crystallography
has brought us nearer to this goal. We are able to study contributions of
individual residue to rates of folding, structure, stability, and function. Also
theoretical analysis of protein structures has progressed (to mention only
Levitt & Sharon, 1988) but a clue to the code relating sequence and
structure is not in sight (Jaenicke, 1988). Like Carl von Linné who 250 years
ago created a system of plants on the basis of morphology (Genera plan-
tarum, Leiden 1737), we classify proteins by their shapes and structures.
Whether this may lead to a solution of the folding problem is unclear, but it


                                             R. Huber                                          609




Figure 21. Faltmolekül construct A)           (a) and    (El)      (E2) (b)
are the intra- and intermolecular vector sets of a triangular structure     respectively. Their sum
represents the Patterson function. The intramolecular vector set can be constructed from the
molecular structure, is located at the origin, and permits the determination of the orientation.
From the intermolecular vector set the translation component relative to the mirror line can be
derived. In (b) the intermolecular vector sets corresponding to two different orientations of
are shown (Huber, 1985).

B)
Drawing of the main chain of the M-, L-, H-subunits and the cofactors which served as search
model to solve the phase problem for the Rb. sphaeroides RC crystal structure. For the calcula-
tion all homologous main chain and side chain atoms were included (Allen et al., 1986).


610                                  Chemistry 1988

is certain that the end of protein crystallography will only come through
protein crystallography.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
J. Deisenhofer’s and my interest in structural studies of the photosynthetic
reaction centre of Rps. viridis was raised by the establishment of D. Oester-
helt’s department in Martinsried in 1980; he brought with him H. Michel,
with whom a fruitful collaboration on the analysis of the crystal structure of
 this large protein complex began. Later other members of my group, O.
 Epp and K. Miki, became involved. We had been studying enzymes, pro-
 teases and their natural inhibitors, immunoglobulins and had developed
methods to improve data collection, electron density map interpretation
and crystallographic refinement. The tools were available to attack a prob-
lem which was and still is the largest asymmetric protein analysed at atomic
resolution today.
    The “heureka” moment of protein crystallography is at the very end
when one sees for the first time a new macromolecule with the eyes of a
discoverer of unknown territories. To reach this moment much, sometimes
 tedious, work has to be done with the ever present possibility of failure. I
am deeply grateful to my collaborators, those who are with me and those
who had left, for their dedicated and patient work over many years. I
mention by name those involved in the studies of the light harvesting
cyanobacterial proteins and the blue oxidases: W. Bode, M. Duerring, R.
 Ladenstein, A. Messerschmidt, T. Schirmer. These projects were collabora-
 tive undertakings with biochemists in Switzerland (H. Zuber, W. Sidler),
 USA (M. L. Hackert) and Italy (M. Bolognesi, A. Marchesini, A. Finazzi-
Agro.
    Scientific work needs a stimulating environment which was provided at
the Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie and it needs steady financial sup-
port, which was provided by the Max-Planck-Gesellschaft and the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft.
    I thank R. Engh, S. Knof, R. Ladenstein, M. Duerring, E. Meyer for their
helpful comments on this manuscript.

LITERATURE
Allen, J. P., Feher, G., Yeates, T. O., Rees, D. C., Deisenhofer, J., Michel, H.,
    Huber, R. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 8589-8593.
Allen, J. P., Feher, G., Yeates, T. O., Kemiya, H., Rees, D. C. (1987) Proc. Natl.
   Acad. Sci. USA 84, 6162-6166.
Arnold, W., and Clayton, R. D. (1960), Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 46, 769-776.
Babcock, G. T. (1987) Oxygen-Evolving Process in Photosynthesis (J. Amesz, ed.)
    Elsevier Science Publ.
Barber, J. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci. 12, 321-326.
Barber, J. (1988) Nature 333, 114.
Barltrop, J. A. and Coyle, J. D. (1978) Principles of Photochemistry, John Wiley and
    Sons, Chichester.
Bernstein, F. C., Koetzle, T. F., Williams, G. J. B., Meyer, Jr., E. F., Brice, M. D.,


                                       R. Hubcr                                    611

    Rodgers, J. R., Kennard, O., Shimonouchi, T., Tasumi, M (1977) J. Mol. Biol.
    112, 535-542.
Bennett, W. S. and Huber, R. (1984), CRC Critical Reviews in Biochemistry 15,
    291-384.
Blair, D. F., Campbell, G. W., Schoonover, J. R., Chan, S. I., Gray, H. B., Malm-
    ström, B. G., Pecht, I., Swanson, B. F., Woodneff, W. H., Cho, W. K., English,
    A. R., Fry, A. H., Lum, V., and Norton, K. A. (1985) J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 10,
    5755-5766.
Bode, W., Wei, A., Huber, R., Meyer, E., Travis, P., Neumann, S. (1986) EMBO J. 5,
    2453-2458.
Bolton, J. R. (1978) in: The Photosynthetic Bacteria, (R. K. Clayton and W. R.
    Sistrom, eds.), Plenum Press, New York and London, pp. 419-442.
Boltzmann, L. (1886) Der Zweite Hauptsatz der mechanischen Wärmetheorie (Essay
    in Populire Schriften) L. Boltzmann-Gesamtausgabe Bd. 7 (1919) Akad. Druck-
    und Verlagsanstalt Vieweg, Wiesbaden, pp 25-46 (English translation from
    Arnon, D. L. (1961) in: Light and Life (W. D. McElroy, B. Glass, eds.) The Johns
    Hopkins Press, Baltimore, pp. 489-569.
Breton, J. (1985) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 810, 235-245.
Breton, J., Farkas, D. L., and Parson, W. W. (1985) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 808,
    421-427.
Breton, J., Martin, J.-L., Migus, A., Antonetti, A., and Orszag, A. (1986) Proc. Natl.
    Acad. Sci. USA 83, 5121-5125.
Bricogne, G. (1976) Acta Crystallogr. A 32, 832-847.
Bryant, D. A., Guglielmi, G., Tandeau de Marsac, N., Castets, A.-M. & Cohen-
    Bazire, G. (1979) Arch. Microbial. 123, 113-127.
Burkert, U., Allinger, N. L. (1982) Molecular Mechanics, American Chemical
    Society.
Calvin, M. and Bassham, J. A. (1962) in: The Photosynthesis of Carbon Compounds,
    Benjamin, New York, pp. 1-127.
Carithers, R. P., and Parson, W. W. (1975) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 387, 194-211.
Case, G. D., Parson, W. W., and Thomber, J. P. (1970) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 223,
    122-128.
Chang, C.-H., Tiede, D., Tang, J., Smith, U., Norris, J., Schiffer, M. (1986) FEBS
    Lett. 205, 82-86.
Chothia, C. (1984) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 53, 537-572.
Cogdell, R. J. and Crofts, A. R. (1972) FEBS Lett. 27,176-178.
Cohen-Bazire, G. & Briant, D. A. (1982) in: The Biology of Cyanobacteria (Cat-r, N.
    G. & Whitton, B. eds.), Blackwell, London, pp. 143-189.
Crowther, R. A. & Blow, D. M. (1967) Acta Cryst. 23, 544-548.
Cramer, W. A., and Crofts, A. R. (1982) in: Electron and Proton Transport in
    Photosynthesis: Energy Conversion by Plants and Bacteria Vol 1, Academic Press
    Inc., pp. 387.
Dawson, C. R. (1966) in: The Biochemistry of Copper (Peisach, J., Aison, P. and
    Blumberg, W. E., eds.), Academic Press, New York, pp. 305-337.
Debus, R. J., Feher, G., and Okamura, M. Y. (1986) Biochemistry 25, 2276-2287.
Deisenhofer, J., Huber, R., Michel, H. (1986) Nachr. Chem. Tech. Lab. 34, 416-
    422.
Deisenhofer, J., Steigemann, W. (1975) Acta Cryst. B 31, 238-280.
Deisenhofer, J., Epp, O., Miki, K., Huber, R., and Michel, H., (1984) J. Mol: Biol.
    180,385-398.
Deisenhofer, J., Epp, O.. Miki, K., Huber, R., and Michel, H., (1985) Nature 318,
    618-624.
Deisenhofer, J., Michel, H., and Huber, R. (1985a) Trends Biochem. Sci. 10, 243-
    248.


612                                   Chemistry 1988

Deisenhofer, J., Huber, R., Michel, H. (1989) in: Prediction of Protein Structure
    and the Principles of Protein Conformation (G. D. Fasman, ed.) Plenum Pub.
    Corp., New York, (in press.).
DeVault D., and Chance, B. (1966) Biophys. J. 6, 825-847.
Duerring, M. (1988) Thesis, Technical University, Miinchen.
Duerring, M., Bode, W., Huber, R., Ruembeli, R., Zuber, H. (1989) to be submit-
    ted.
Duerring, M., Huber, R. and Bode W. (1988) FEBS Letters, 236, 167- 170.
Dutton, P. L., and Prince, R. C. (1978) in: The Photosynthetic Bacteria (R. K. Clay-
    ton and W. R. Sistrom, eds.), Plenum Press, New York and London, pp. 525-
    565.
Eberson, L. (1982) Adv. Phys. Org. Chem. 18, 79-185.
Engelman, D. M., Steitz, T. A., and Goldman, A. (1986) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Chem.
    15, 321-353.
Farver, O., Pecht, I. (1984) in: Copper Proteins and Copper Enzymes (R. Lontie,
    ed.) 1, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 183-214.
Fischer, E. (1907) J. Chem. Soc. 91, 1749-1765.
Fleming, G. R., Marti, J. L. and Breton, J. (1988) Nature 333, 190-192.
Forster, T. (1948) Ann. Physik 2, 55-75.
Förster, T. (1967) in: Comprehensive Biochemistry (M. Florkin, E. H. Stotz, eds.),
    Vol 22, pp. 61-80, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Frank, G., Sidler, W., Widmer, H. and Zuber, H. (1978) Hoppe-Seyler’s Z. Physiol.
    Chem. 359, 1491-1507.
Frommherz, P. and Reinbold, G. (1988) Thin Solid Films 160, 347 - 353.
Gaykema, W. P. J., Hol, W. G. J., Verijken, J. M., Soeter, N. M., Bak, H. J., and
    Beintema, J. J. (1984) Nature 309, 23-29.
Gantt, E., Lipschultz, C.A., Zilinskas, B. (1976) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 430, 375-
    388.
Germann, U. A., Müller, G., Hunziker, P. E., Lerch, K. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263,
    885-896.
Gillbro, T., Sandstrom, A., Sundstrom, V., Wendler, J. and Holzwarth, A. R. (1985)
    Biochem. Biophys. Acta 808, 52-65.
Gerwin, B., Burstein, S. R., and Westley, J. (1974) J. Biol. Chem. 249, 2005-2008.
Glazer, A. N., Fang, S. and Brown, D. M. (1973) J. Biol. Chem. 16, 5679-5685.
Glazer, A. N. (1985) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Chem. 19, 47-77.
Grabowski, J. and Gantt, E. (1978) Photochem. Photobiol. 28, 39-45.
Gray, H. B., and Solomon, E. I. (1981) in: Copper proteins (T. G. Spiro, ed.) J. Wiley
    & Sons, New York, pp. l-39.
Gray, H. B., and Malmström, B. G. (1983) Comments Inorg. Chem. 2, 203-209.
Gray, H.B. (1986) Chem. Soc. Rev. 15, 17-30.
Gust, D., Moore, T. A., Lidell, P. A., Nemeth, G. A., Makings, L. R., Moore, A. L.,
    Barrett, D., Pessiki, P. J., Bensasson, R.V., Rougée, M., Chachaty, C., De
    Schryver, F. C., Van der Anweraer, M., Holzwarth, A. R., and Connolly, J. S.
    (1987) J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 109, 846-856.
Guss, J. M., Freeman, H. C. (1983) J. Mol. Biol. 169, 521-563.
Guss, J. M., Merritt, E.A., Phizackerly, R. P., Hedman, B., Murata M., Hodgson,
    K. O., Freeman, H. C. (1988) Science 241, 806-811.
Hajdu, J., Acharya, K. R., Stuart, D.A., Barford, D., and Johnson, L. (1988) Trends
    Biochem. Sci. 13, 104-109.
Hains, A. (1975) Acc. Chem. Res. 8, 264-272.
Harrison, S. C., Olsson, A. J., Schutt, C. E., Winkler, F. K., Bricogne, G. (1978)
    Nature (London) 276, 368-373.
Hendrickson, W. A., Smith, J. L., Phizackerly, R. P., Merritt, E. A. (1988) Proteins 4,
    77-88.


                                       R. Huber                                   613

 Hefferle, P., Nies, M., Wehrmeyer, W. and Schneider, S. (1983) Photobiochem.
    Photobiophys. 5, 41-51.
 Henderson, R. and Unwin, P. N. T. (1975) Nature 257, 28-32.
 Higuchi, Y., Kusunoki, M., Matsuura, Y., Yasuoka, N., Kakudo, M. (1984) J. Mol.
    Biol. 172, 109-139.
 Hogle, J. M., Chow, M., Filman, D. J. (1985) Science 229, 1358-1365.
 Holm, L., Saraste, M., and Wikström, M. (1987) EMBO J. 6, 2819-2823.
 Holten, D., Windsor, M. W., Parson, W. W. and Thomber, J. P. (1978) Biochem.
    Biophys. Acta 501, 112-126.
 Holzwarth, A. R. (1985) in: Antennas and Reaction Centers of Photosynthetic Bacte-
    ria (Michel-Beyerle, M. E., ed.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 45-52.
 Holzwarth, A. R. (1986) Photochem. Photobiol. 43, 707-725.
 Hopfield, J. J. (1974) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 71, 3640-3644.
 Hoppe, W. (1957) Acta Cryst. 10, 750-751.
 Huber, R. (1965) Acta Cryst. 19, 353-356.
Huber, R. (1985) in: Molecular Replacement. Proceedings of the Daresbury Study
    Weekend (P. Machin, ed.) Daresbury Laboratory, pp. 58-61.
 Huber, R., Kukla, D., Bode, W., Schwager, P., Bartels, K., Deisenhofer, J., Steige-
    mann, W. (1974) J. Mol. Biol. 89, 70-101.
Huber, R. (1984) in: Behring Institute Mitteilungen 76, 1-14 (Gronski, P., Seiler,
    F. R., eds.), Die Medizinische Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Marburg.
 Huber, R., Schneider, M., Epp, O., Mayr, I., Messerschmidt, A., Pflugrath, J. and
    Kayser, H. (1987a) J. Mol. Biol. 195, 423-434.
Huber, R., Schneider, M., Mayr, I., Müller, R., Deutzmann, R., Suter, F., Zuber,
    H., Falk, H. and Kayser, H. (1987b) J. Mol.Biol. 198, 499-513.
Huber, R. (1988) Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 27, 79-88.
Isied, S., Vassilian, A., Magnuson, R., and Schwarz, H. (1985) J. Am. Chem. Soc.
    107, 7432-7438.
Jaenicke, R. (1988) in: 39. Mosbacher Kolloquium (E.-L. Winnacker and R. Huber,
    eds.) pp. 16 - 36, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.
Jones, A. T. (1978) J. Appl. Cryst. 11, 268-272.
 Karplus, M., McCammon, J. A. (1981) CRC Crit. Rev. Biochem. 9, 293-349.
Kavarnos, G. J. and Turro, N. J. (1986) Chem. Rev. 86, 401-449.
 Kebarle, P., and Chowdhury, S. (1987) Chem. Rev. 87, 513-534.
 Kirmaier, Ch., Holten, D., and Parson, W. W. (1985) Biochim. Biophys.Acta 810,
    33-48.
Kirmaier, Ch., Holton, D., and Parson, W. W. (1985). Biochem. Biophys. Acta 810,
    49-61.
Kleffel, B., Garavito, R. M., Baumeister, N., Rosenbusch, J. P. (1985) EMBO J. 4,
    1589-1592.
Kleinfeld, D., Okamura, M. Y., Feher, G. (1985) Biochem. Biophys.Acta 809, 291-
    310.
Kline, A. D., Braun, W., Wüthrich, K. (1986) J. Mol. Biol. 189, 377-382.
Knapp, E. W., Fischer, S. F., Zinth, W., Sander, M., Kaiser, W., Deisenhofer, J., and
    Michel, H. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82, 8463-8467.
Kuhn, H. (1970) J.Chem. Phys. 53, 101-108.
Ladenstein, R., Schneider, M., Huber, R., Bartunik, H.-D., Wilson, K., Schott, K.,
    Bacher, A. (1988) J. Mol. Biol. 203, 1045-1070.
Levitt, M., Sharon, R. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 7557-7561.
Lesk, A. M. and Hardman, K. D. (1982) Science 216, 539-540.
Lodish, H. F. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci. 13, 332-334.
Loebermann, H., Tokuoka, R., Deisenhofer, J., Huber, R. (1984) J. Mol. Biol. 177,
    531-556.
Lumry, R., Eyring, H. (1954) J. Phys. Chem. US 58, 110-2.


614                                  Chemistry 1988

Lundell, D. J., Williams, R. C. and Glazer, A. N. (1981) J. Biol. Chem. 256, 3580-
    3952.
MacColl, R., and Guard-Friar, D. (1987) Phycobiliproteins, CRC Press, Inc., Boca
    Raton, pp. 157-173.
Malkin, R. and Malmstrom, B. G. (1970) Adv. Enzymol. 33, 177-243.
Malmström, B. G. (1978) New Trends, Bio-inorganic Chemistry, pp. 59-77, Acade-
    mic Press.
Malmström, B. G. (1982) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 51, 21-59.
Marcus, R. A. and Sutin, N. (1985) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 811, 265-322.
Mayo, S. L., Ellis, W. R., Crutchley, R. J. and Gray H. B. (1986) Science 233, 948-
    952.
McGoutry, J. L., Peterson-Kennedy, S. E., Ruo, W.Y. and Hoffman, B. M. (1987)
    Biochemistry 26, 8302-8312.
McLendon, G. (1988) Acc. Chem. Res. 21, 160-167.
Messerschmidt, A., Rossi, A., Ladenstein, R., Huber, R., Bolognesi, M., Gatti, G.,
    Marchesini, A., Petruzzelli, T., Finazzi-Agrb, A. (1989) J. Mol. Biol. 206, 513-
    530.
Michel, H., Weyer, K.A., Gruenberg, H., and Lottspeich, F. (1985) EMBO J. 4,
    1667-1672.
Michel, H., Epp, O., Deisenhofer, J. (1986b) EMBO J. 5, 2445-2451.
Michel, H., Weyer, K. A., Gruenberg, H., Dunger, I., Oesterhelt, D. and Lottspeich,
    F. (1986a) EMBO J. 5, 1149-1158.
Michel, H., Deisenhofer, J., (1988) Biochemistry 27, l-7.
Michel-Beyerle, M. E., Plato, M., Deisenhofer, J., Michel, H., Bixon, M., Jortner, J.
    (1988) Biochem. Biophys. Acta 932, 52-70.
Mikkelsen, K. V., and Ratner, M. A. (1987) Chem. Rev. 87, 113-153.
Milks, L.C., Kumar, N. M., Houghten, R., Unwin, N., Gilula, N. B. (1988) EMBO J.
    7, 2967-2975.
Mimuro, M., Fliiglistaller, P., Rümbeli, R. and Zuber, H. (1986) Biochim. Bio-
    phys. Acta 848, 155-166.
Moore, T. A., Gust. D., Mathis, P., Bialoiq, J.-C., Chachaty, C., Bensasson, R. V.,
    Land, E. J., Doizi, D., Liddell, P.A., Lehman, W. R., Nemeth, G.A., Moore,
    A. L. (1984) Nature 307, 630-632.
Morschel, E., Koller, K.-P., Wehrmeyer, W. &Schneider, H. (1977) Cytobiologie 16,
    118-129.
Mondovi, B. and Avigliano, L. (1984) in: Copper Proteins and Copper Enzymes
    (Lontie, L. ed.) 3, CRC Press Inc., Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 101-118.
Netzel, T. L., Rentzepis, P. M., Tiede, D. M., Prince, R. C., and Dutton, P. L. (1977)
    Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 460, 467-479.
Newcomer, M. E., Jones, T. A., Aqvist, J., Sundelin, J., Eriksson, U., Rask, I. &
    Peterson, P. A. (1984) EMBO J. 3, 1451-1454.
Nies, M. and Wehrmeyer, W. (1981) Arch. Microbial. 129, 374-379.
Ohkawa, J., Okada, N., Shinmyo, A. and Takano, M. (1988) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
    USA, submitted.
Ollis, D., Brick, P., Hamlin, R., Xuong, N. G., Steitz, T. A. (1985) Nature 313, 762-
    766.
Parson, W. W. (1974) Ann. Rev. Microbial. 28, 41-59.
Parson, W. W., and Cogdell, R. J. (1975) Biochem. Biophys. Acta 416, 105-149.
Parson, W. W. (1978) in: The Photosynthetic Bacteria (R. K. Clayton, W. R. Sistrom,
    eds.) Plenum Press, New York, London, pp. 317-322.
Parson, W. W., Scherz, A., Warshel, A. (1985) in: Antennas and Reaction Centers of
    Photosynthetic Bacteria (M. E. Michel-Beyerle, ed.) Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp.
    122-133,
Pasman, P., Rob, F., Verhoeven, J. W. (1982) J.Am.Chem.Soc. 104, 5127-5133.
Pflugrath, J. W., Wiegand, W., Huber, R. & Vertesy, L. (1986) J. Mol. Biol. 189,
    383-386.


                                       R. Huber                                  615

Pierrot, M., Haser, R., Frey, M., Payan, F. & Astier, J.P. (1982) J. Biol. Chem. 257,
     14341-14348.
Porter, G., Tredwell, C. J., Searle, G. F. W. and Barber, J. (1978) Biochim. Biophys.
    Acta 501, 232-245.
Prince, R. C., Leigh, J. S., and Dutton, P. L. (1976) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 440,
    622-636.
Prince, R. C. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci. 13, 286-288.
Rapoport, T. A. (1986) CRC Critical Rev. Biochem. 20, 73-137.
Reinhammar, B. (1984) in: Copper Proteins and Copper Enzymes (Lontie, L. ed.)
    Vol. 3, pp. 1-35, CRC Press Inc., Boca Raton, Florida.
Remington, S., Wiegand, G., Huber, R. (1982) J. Mol. Biol. 158, 111-152.
Richardson, J. S., Thomas, K. A., Rubin, B. H., and Richardson, D. C. (1975) Proc.
    Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72, 1349-1353.
Rossmann, M. G. and Blow, D. M. (1962) Acta Cryst. 15, 24-31.
Rossmann, M. G., Arnold, E., Erickson, J. W., Frankenberger, E. A., Griffith, J. P.,
    Hecht, H.-J., Johnson, J. E., Kamer, G., Luo, M., Mosser, A. G., Rueckert, R.,
    Sherry, B., and Vriand, G. Nature (London) 317, 145-153.
Ryden, L. (1984) in: Copper Proteins and Copper Enzymes (Lontie, L. ed.) 3,
CRC Press Inc., Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 34-100.
Sauer, K., Scheer, H., and Sauer, P. (1987) Photochem. Photobiol. 46, 427-440.
Scharnagl, C., Köst-Reyes, E., Schneider, S., Köst, H.-P., Scheer, H. (1983) Z.
    Naturforsch. 38c, 951-959.
Scheer, H. (1982) in: Light Reaction Path of Photosynthesis (Fong, F. K., ed.)
    Springer, Berlin, pp. 7-45.
Schirmer, T., Bode, W., Huber, R., Sidler, W. and Zuber, H. (1985) J. Mol. Biol.
    184, 257-277.
Schirmer, T., Huber, R., Schneider, M., Bode, W., Miller, M. and Hackert, M. L.
    (1986) J. Mol. Biol. 188, 651-676.
Schirmer, T., Bode, W., and Huber, R. (1987) J. Mol. Biol. 196, 677-695.
Schirmer, T. & Vincent M. G. (1987) Biochem. Biophys. Acta 893, 379-385.
Schmidt, J. A., McIntosh, A. R., Weedon, A. C., Bolton, J. R., Connolly, J. S.,
    Huxley, J. K., and Wasielewski, M. R. (1988) J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 110, 1733-
    1740.
Searle, G. F. W., Barber, J., Porter, G., Tredwell, C. J. (1978) Biochem. Biophys.
    Acta 501, 246-256.
Siebzehnrübl, S., Fischer, R., and Scheer, H. (1987) Z. Naturforsch. 42i, 258-262.
Slooten, L. (1972) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 256, 452-466.
Stark, N., Kuhlbrandt, W., Wildhaber, I., Wehrli, E. & Mühlethaler, K. (1984)
    EMBO J. 3, 777-783.
Switalski, S. C., and Sauer, J. (1984) Photochem. Photobiol. 40, 423-427.
Takahashi, N., Ortel, T. L., Putnam, F. W. (1984) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 81, 390-
    394.
Taube, H., and Gould, E. S. (1969) Acc. Chem. Res. 2, 321-329.
Teale, F. W. J. and Dale, R. E. (1970) Biochem. J. 116, 161-169.
Trebst, A. (1986) Z. Naturforsch. 41c, 240-245.
Tronrud, D. E., Schmid, M. F., and Matthews, B. W. (1986) J. Mol. Biol. 188, 443-
   454.
Weber, P. C., and Salemme, F. R. (1980) Nature (London) 287, 82-84.
Weber, E., Papamokos, E., Bode, W., Huber, R., Kato, F., Laskowski, M. (1981) J.
   Mol. Biol. 149, 109-123.
Wendler, J., Holzwarth, A. R., Wehrmeyer, W. (1984) Biochem. Biophys. Acta 765,
   58-67.
Weyer, K. A., Lottspeich, F., Gruenberg, H., Lang, F., Oesterhelt, D., and Michel,
   H. (1987) EMBO J. 6, 2197-2202.


616                                Chemistry 1988


Woodbury, N. W., Becker, M., Middendorf, D., and Parson, W. W. (1985) Biochem-
    istry 24, 7516-7521.
Wraight, C. A. (1982) in: Function of Quinones in Energy Conserving Systems (B. L.
    Trumpower, ed.) Academic Press, London, pp, 181-197.
Yamazaki, I., Mimuro, M., Murao, T., Yamazaki, T., Yoshihara, K., Fujita, Y. (1984)
    Photochem. Photobiol. 39, 233-240
Zickendraht-Wendelstadt, B., Friedrich, J., and Rüdiger, W. (1980) Photochem.
    Photobiol. 31, 367-376.
Zilinskas, B. A. and Greenwald, L. S. (1986) Photosynth. Res. 10, 7-35.
Zuber, H. (1985) Photochem. Photobiol. 42, 821-844.
Zuber, H. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci. 11, 414-419.
