                          R O B E R T S . M U L L I K E N*


                Spectroscopy, molecular orbitals,
                     and chemical bonding
                       Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1966


I am most deeply appreciative of the 1966 Nobel prize for chemistry awarded
for "fundamental work concerning chemical bonds and the electronic struc-
ture of molecules by the molecular-orbital method". In the title of my lecture
I have added the work spectroscopy, since it was a study of molecular spec-
troscopy which pointed the way toward molecular orbitals. I think it is ap-
propriate also to remember that in Niels Bohr’s classical 1913 papers I "On The
Constitution of Atoms and Molecules", best known for his theory of the
hydrogen atom, and in his 1922 theory of the structure of atoms and the
periodic system of the elements, atomic spectroscopy provided essential
guide-posts for the path toward the theory.
   Let me now ask, what is a molecular orbital? A really adequate answer is
unavoidably technical. However, in an effort to make matters as clear as pos-
sible, I shall begin this lecture by reviewing a number of things which may be
regarded as uninteresting old history, or else as boringly well known, at least
by physical scientists. For this approach I beg your indulgence and ask your
forgiveness.
   Let us first go back to the quantum theory of atomic structure initiated by
Bohr but shaped up in further detail by SommerfeId. In this older quantum
theory, Bohr assumed that the electrons move in orbits around the very small
but relatively very heavy positive nucleus of the atom, like planets around a
sun. Going back historically a step further, it is good to recall that the picture
of the atom as containing a small heavy positive nucleus first emerged from
Rutherford’s work at Manchester, and that Bohr began the development of
his theory while he was at Manchester in Rutherford’s laboratory1.
   As compared with the motion of planets around a sun, there were of course
several important differences in the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory of atoms in


* Distinguished Service Professor of Physics and Chemistry, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Ill., and (winters) Distinguished Research Professor of Chemical Physics,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida (U. S. A.).


 132                    1966 ROBERT S.MULLIKEN

  such matters as the sizes of the orbits and the degree to which they are crowded,
 and the strengths of the forces acting. However, there was one much more
 radical difference, namely that the possible electron orbits were assumed to be
 limited to particular sizes and shapes defined by quantum rules. (Bohr in his
 first papers mentioned elliptical orbits, but in order to get some definite results
 assumed rings of electrons moving in circular orbits with an angular momen-
 tum of         for each electron, where h is Planck’s constant.)
    Given the energies and angular momenta of the electron orbits, the Bohr-
 Sommerfeld theory continued to use the familiar laws of physics to describe
 them, in particular the principles of mechanics first set forth by Newton.
 However, quantum mechanics in 1925-1926 replaced Newtonian mechanics
 with radically new concepts for small-scale things like atoms and molecules.
 It showed the necessity in dealing with these of a new way of thinking very
 different from normal human-scale thinking. Nevertheless, it still allowed us
 to visualize an atom as a heavy positive nucleus surrounded by negative elec-
 trons in something like orbits.
    Now to attempt an answer to the question posed earlier, an orbital means,
 roughly, something like an orbit; or, more precisely, something as much like an
 orbit as is possible in quantum mechanics. Still more precisely, the term "orbital"
 is simply an abbreviation for one-electron orbital wauefunction or, preferably, for
 one-electron orbital eigen-function. The last-mentioned expression refers to any
 one of the so-called characteristic solutions or eigen-functions of Schrödinger’s
 quantum-mechanical wave equation for a single electron in an atom or mole-
 cule.
    According to a picturesque expression once used by Van Vleck, a set of
 orbitals represents a housing arrangement for electrons. A very strict rule
 (Pauli’s exclusion principle) applies to every orbital, whether atomic or
 molecular, namely that not more than two electrons can occupy it. In other
 words, it can be empty, or it can hold one electron, or it can hold two elec-
 trons. Every electron has a spin, like the earth on its axis; if there are two elec-
 trons in an orbital, their spins are oppositely directed.
    An atomic orbital (abbreviated AO) is best taken to be an eigen-function of a
 one-electron Schrödinger equation which is based on the attraction of the
 nucleus for the electron we are considering plus the average repulsion of all the
 other electrons. Following Hartree, this average field is called a self-consistent
field because of the way the calculations are made; namely, the orbital for each
 electron in turn is calculated assuming all the other electrons to be occupying
 appropriate orbitals.


             SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                                        133
   A molecular orbital ( abb reviated MO) is defined in exactly the same way,
except that its one-electron Schrödinger equation is based on the attractions
of two or more nuclei plus the averaged repulsions of the other electrons.
   An orbital (either atomic or molecular) is, strictly speaking, just a mathe-
matical function in ordinary 3-dimensional space. When an electron is occu-
pying an orbital, the form of the orbital tells us, among other things, what
fraction of time the electron in it can spend in different regions of space around
the nucleus, or nuclei. Each orbital favors some particular regions of space and
disfavors others, yet all the orbitals in a given atom or molecule extend at least
to some small extent throughout all regions of the atom or molecule*. Orbitals
differ most strikingly from the orbits of Bohr theory in the fact that they do
not specify detailed paths for electrons. They do, however, give some infor-
mation about average speeds as well as positions of electrons.
   I have always felt that a true AO or MO (sometimes I have called it a best AO
or MO) for an electron is one which corresponds to a self-consistent field as
above described. Commonly, however, the word orbital is used to refer to
mathematical functions which are only approximations to these true AO’s or
MO’s. The main reason for this fact is that until recently we have had in most
cases, especially for MO’s, only a rather roughly approximate knowledge of
the true forms.
   In the case of MO’s, the so-called LCAO approximations are rather gener-
ally familiar. However, when people have talked about the electronic struc-
tures of atoms or molecules, or of their excited states, in terms of AO’s or
MO’s, they have really been thinking in terms of the true AO’s or MO’s which
we knew must exist whether or not we knew their exact forms. Thus I would
like to maintain that in the concept of an orbital, the proper norm is that of the
true accurate self-consistent-field AO or MO**.
   Figs. 1-5 show contour maps of the true accurate valence-shell MO’s of the
oxygen molecule, as obtained by calculations at the Laboratory of Molecular
Structure and Spectra at the University of Chicago. In these "portraits" of
MO’s, each contour is marked with a number which gives the magnitude, not
of the MO itself, but of its square. This use of the square is particularly instruc-

* Except for certain infinitely thin "nodal surfaces".
**In view of the fact that a set of orbitals which are only approximate can still correspond
to a self-consistent field which is, however, like the orbitals, only approximate, many
people (including my Chicago colleagues) commonly designate true exact (or almost
exact) self-consistent-field orbitals by the name Hartree-Fock orbitals. In the case of
atomic or moleculars states with non-zero spin, there are additional complications.


134   1966 ROBERT S.MULLIKEN




               Fig. 1.




                    ,


SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS   135




                Fig. 4.


136                      1966 ROBERT S.MULLIKEN

                         MOLECULAR ORBITAL CHARGE DENSITY CONTOURS
                                 FOR THE OXYGEN MOLECULE




Figs. 1-5. Portraits of valence-shell spectroscopic MO’s of the oxygen molecule. Each
contour is marked with a number which is the square of the value of the MO on that con-
tour. Each dashed line or curve marks a boundary between positive and negative regions
of the MO itself. From an as yet unpublished paper by P.E. Cade, G.L.Malli and A. C.
                                Wahl; all rights reserved.


tive because the square of the value of the orbital at any point in space is pro-
portional to the probability of finding the electron at that point when it is in
that orbital. Thus what Figs. 1-5 show are really probability density portraits,
rather than direct pictures of the MO’s. Additional portraits of this kind, and
helpful discussion of them, are contained in two recent articles2. The neces-
sary calculations which are making MO portraits possible are extremely com-
plex and require the use of large computing machines. They have involved
the work of a number of people, of whom I shall speak later.
   A definite energy is associated with each orbital; either atomic or molecular.
The best interpretation of this orbital energy is that it is the energy required to
take the electron entirely out of the orbital, out into free space. The lowest-
energy orbitals are those which favor regions of space closest to the nucleus, in
the case of atomic orbitals, or closest to one or more nuclei in the case of
molecular orbitals.
   In what I like to call the normal state , but most people call the ground state
(German "Grundzustand", of an atom or molecule, the electrons are settled
in the lowest-energy orbitals that are available. (BohrI called it the "perma-


             SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                                      137
nent" state.) Higher in energy than the normal-state orbitals and favoring
regions of space farther from the nucleus or nuclei, there are great numbers of
vacant orbitals, into any one of which, however, any electron can go if given
enough extra energy by the right kind of a push or kick. These ordinarily
vacant AO’s or MO’s are called excited orbitals, and when one (or sometimes
more) electrons of an atom or molecule have been kicked into excited orbitals,
the atom or molecule is said to be excited. Excited states of atoms or molecules,
with some exceptions, do not last long. Instead, the molecule loses its extra
energy, generally either in collisions with other molecules, or by sending it out
in the form of electromagnetic radiation: that is, visible or infrared or ultra-
violet light or X-rays. A careful study of the spectrum of wave lengths of such
radiation gives important information about the forms and energies of the
orbitals involved, and about other properties of the atom or molecule both in
its normal and in various excited conditions.
   A prominent feature of Bohr’s 1922 theory of atoms was the Aufbauprinzip
(building-up principle) according to which if electrons are fed one by one to
an atomic nucleus and the atom is allowed to subside into its normal state, the
first electrons fall into the lowest-energy orbits, the next into those next lowest
in energy, and so on. In this way Bohr first explained the formation of suc-
cessive electronic shells and the periodic system of the chemical elements. In
the modern quantum mechanics, exactly the same description holds good
except that atomic orbitals replace orbits. In the molecular orbital method of
describing the structure of molecules, an entirely analogous use is made of an
Aufbauprinzip in which electrons are fed into molecular orbitals.
   However, there is also another way of describing molecules, usually called
the valence-bond method. This was initiated by the work of Heitler and
London on the hydrogen molecule, and developed further by Slater and
Pauling especially. In this method, each molecule is thought of as composed of
atoms, and the electronic structure is described using atomic orbitals of these
atoms. This approach, which I prefer to call the atomic orbital method*, is a valid
alternative to the MO method, which in its most general form regards each
molecule as a self-sufficient unit and not as a mere composite of atoms.
   The AO method at first appealed to chemists because it was much easier to


*To speak of the "valence-bond method" places the emphasis in chemical bonding on a
few pairs of electrons holding atoms together in the Heitler-London manner, whereas
actually the interactions of many of the other electrons often have very important effects
on the stability of molecules.


138                     1966 ROBERT S.MULLIKEN

fit into customary ways of thinking. However, it has become increasingly evi-
dent that the MO method is more useful for a detailed understanding of the
electronic structures of molecules, especially if extensive theoretical calcu-
lations are to be made, as is now increasingly feasible with the help of modern
large-scale digital computers. Also the MO method is far better suited for an
understanding of the electronic spectra of molecules and thus also of their
photochemical behavior, a subject which is now receiving increasing (and
increasingly understanding) attention.
    I have just stated that the AO and MO methods are valid alternatives to each
other, although they differ with respect to ease of understanding and of appli-
cation. But why is not one right and the other wrong? The explanation is,
roughly, that both methods correspond only to approximate solutions of the
complete equations which govern the behavior of molecules that contain more
than one electron. Starting from either method, further and in general very
difficult calculations are needed for an exact understanding.
   Why this is true can be seen in comparing an atom with a planetary system.
In a planetary system, the sun is vastly larger than any of the planets and the
gravitational attractive force it exerts on each planet is exceedingly large
compared with the small gravitational forces which the planets exert on one
another. Thus the motion of each planet in its orbit can be calculated almost as
if it were completely independent of the motions of the other planets, and the
small effects of other planets can be calculated to a satisfactory degree of
exactness by a method called perturbation theory. However, it has not proved
mathematically possible to obtain an absolutely exact solution which would
be true over very long intervals of time. The same statement holds for every
situation in which more than two objects are exerting forces on another. Such
a situation is called a many-body problem.
   Although with a sun and planets the lack of a solution of the many-body
problem is not very serious, matters are very different for an atomic nucleus
and its electrons, for two reasons: (1) the electrons in an atom, though not
really close together, are vastly more crowded than planets in a planetary
system; (2) the forces between electrons, though not as large as the force
exerted by the nucleus on each electron, are nevertheless too large to be treated
as small perturbations as could be done for planets and a sun. These difficulties
existed in the old quantum theory of electron orbits, and similar difficulties still
occur for orbitals in the modern quantum mechanics. Perturbation theory is
valuable in both the Bohr theory and in quantum mechanics, but it does not
easily solve the many-body problem. Consequently, it is an exceedingly


            SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                                 139
 difficult matter to obtain a reasonably exact understanding of the electronic
structure of atoms or, especially, of molecules, except if there is only one
 electron, as in the hydrogen atom, or (more difficult) in the positively charged
hydrogen molecule ion. In these cases, the AO (for H) or the MO (for              is
an exact solution of Schrödinger’s equation. The first fairly exact calculation
on the normal state of H2+, by Burrau3, is the earliest example of the nearly
exact calculation of the form of a true MO.
    Thus we are brought face to face with the fact that when the structure of a
typical atom or molecule is described by assigning each electron to an orbital,
this description is usually rather far from being exact. It is good enough to be
extremely useful, and in the case of atoms is sufficient to account for the main
features of atomic structure, the periodic system of the elements, and atomic
spectra, but it is by no means exact. Analogous comments apply for the de-
scription of the structure of a molecule in terms of electrons assigned to MO’s.
   The description in terms of a single set of orbitals for the electrons is called
an independent-particle model. It is a kind of model which is very nearly exact in
the case of the orbits of planets going around a sun, but is only a rather rough
approximation in the much more crowded situation, with much stronger
forces, of electrons in an atom or molecule. What is lacking is called electron
correlation. Because orbitals are based on an allowance only for the average
forces exerted by other electrons, the simple orbital description needs to be
rather strongly corrected for the fact that electrons in their motions are some-
times closer, sometimes less close than their average distance, so that the forces
between them vary accordingly, and to an important extent.
    Now let us return to the question of how it is possible that both of two
seemingly very different methods, the AO and the MO method, can represent
useful descriptions of the electronic structures of molecules in their normal
states and can help us to understand chemical bonding. The answer lies in the
fact that both methods need a considerable amount of correction for electron
correlation before their descriptions become accurate. The fact that they differ
so strongly from each other is explained by noting that they lie as it were on
opposite sides of an accurate description, which then lies between them. For a full
explanation, however, much more must be said than is possible here. Never-
theless, it seems to be true that the MO method is better suited not only as a
basis for rather accurate calculations at the degree of approximation possible in
an independent-particle method, but also that it is well suited to going further
with the necessary corrections to take electron correlation rather well into
account4.


140                     1966 ROBERT S.MULLIKEN

   Now before going further, I would like to return briefly to the historical
development of MO ideas in the early 1920’s before the time of the modern
quantum mechanics. Although Bohr in his early papers’ proposed molecular
models in which pairs of electrons rotating in a circular orbit between two
atoms served to form a chemical bond, later calculations based on this model,
even for the simplest case of the hydrogen molecule, proved as unsuccessful
as the Bohr theory of the hydrogen atom has proved successful.
   On the other hand, molecular spectroscopists in the early 1920’s found that
the excited electronic states of diatomic molecules show various features which
could be explained by postulating, resemblances to those of atoms . This
                                                                            5,6



experimental evidence suggested that the electrons in molecules, to an extent
similar to that of electrons in atoms, are moving in something like orbits and
that some sort of Aufbauprinzip is valid for the electronic structures of mole-
cules.
   My own work in 1923-25 was at first concentrated on trying to understand
the visible and ultraviolet spectra of diatomic molecules, called band spectra,
at the Jefferson Physical Laboratory of Harvard University. In learning about
this field, which at that time was completely new to me, I had the very kind
help of Professor F. A. Saunders in experimental spectroscopy, and Professor
E. C. Kemble in quantum theory. I also benefited greatly from correspond-
ence with Professor R.T.Birge of the University of California. It is very
interesting at this point to note that in those days basic spectroscopy and the
theory of molecular electronic structure were being studied primarily by
physicists (my papers until the advent of the Journal of Chemical Physics were
published in the Physical Review or the Reviews of Modern Physics). Now, how-
ever, these subjects, as well as the newer branches of spectroscopy (nmr, esr,
etc.) which were born in physics laboratories, are generally considered to be-
long primarily to chemistry. These circumstances account for the fact that,
although my B. S. and Ph.D. degrees were in chemistry, I have for a long time
been a member of physics departments, where I am classified as a molecular
physicist. Only rather recently have I become formally associated also with
chemistry departments, thereby giving recognition to the migration of mo-
lecular spectroscopy and MO’s from physics toward chemistry. Nevertheless,
the basic facts of these areas of science do still lie in the border region between
physics and chemistry.
   Now to return to my early efforts to understand diatomic band spectra: the
detailed structures of these spectra fell into several distinct types which indi-
cated the existence of several types of molecular electronic states. Moreover,


            SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                                      141
these types appeared to differ, as did the atomic states of Bohr-Sommerfeld
theory, in respect to angular momentum properties*. Following a suggestion
of Birge, I called them S, P, D states, using the same symbols as for atomic
states, although the characteristic described by the symbol was not total orbital
angular momentum as in the case of the atomic symbol, but only the axial
component of angular momentum.
   With the advent of quantum mechanics about 1926, the short-comings of
the old quantum theory of atoms and its inability to deal seriously with mole-
cules were quickly removed. Among other changes, atomic electron orbits
were replaced by atomic orbitals, although the name orbital was given only
later, in 1932. My friend Friedrich Hund, whom I first met in Göttingen in
1925, and with whom I had many discussions then and in 1927 and later, ap-
plied quantum mechanics to a detailed understanding of atoms and their
spectra, and then to the spectra and structure of molecules5. Using quantum
mechanics, he quickly clarified our understanding of diatomic molecular
spectra, as well as important aspects of the relations between atoms and mole-
cules, and of chemical bonding. It was Hund who in 1928 proposed the now
familiar Greek symbols              , for the diatomic molecular electronic states
which I had been calling S, P, and D. Molecular orbitals also began to appear
in a fairly clear light as suitable homes for electrons in molecules in the same
way as atomic orbitals for electrons in atoms. MO theory has long been
known as the Hund-Mulliken theory in recognition of the major contribution
of Professor Hund in its early development.
   I have emphasized already that a true AO or MO is properly considered as
one which is appropriate for an electron assumed under the influence of the
average electric field of the other electrons, all in accurate self-consistent-field
orbitals. However, for MO’s there are also several very useful approximations
to the exact method. These approximations can be briefly characterized as
corresponding to varying degrees of localization or delocalization. The purest
and most accurate MO method, yielding true MO’s; involves the maximum
amount of delocalization, with every MO spread to some extent** over the
whole molecule. These pure MO’s I like to call spectroscopic MO’s, since it is


* The major structural features of diatomic spectra are dominated by the existence of
molecular vibrations and rotations, but the detailed structures depend on the interaction
of molecular rotation with electronic orbital and spin angular momenta.
** To be sure, often some (or even most) of them turnout to be mainly (or, in some cases,
almost wholly) concentrated near particular atoms or groups of atoms.


142                        1966 ROBERT S.MULLIKEN

 they which are particularly important for understanding electronic spectra in
molecules. They are also of especial importance for understanding ionization
processes; each of the simplest ionization processes corresponds to removal of
an electron from a particular spectroscopic MO.
    Several types of more or less localized MO methods, although they rep-
resent somewhat less accurate descriptions, are also useful, especially in
understanding and describing chemical bonding. On starting with a localized-
MO description, and afterward proceeding to one or more successive steps of
delocalization, and then finally introducing electron correlation, we can often
gain much added insight by this step-wise approach into the chemical conse-
quences of what the electrons are doing. The most fully localized sets of MO’s
include bond MO’s localized between two or sometimes three or four atoms,
taken together with some MO’s so strongly localized that they are just AO’s
(but often hybrid AO’s) on single atoms; we note here that, after all, an AO
can be considered as a special type, the simplest possible type; of MO. These
localized MO’s I like to call chemical MO’s (or just chemical orbitals because of
the fact that some of the orbitals used are now really AO’s). In simple mole-
cules, electrons in chemical MO’s usually represent the closest possible quan-
tum-mechanical counterpart to G. N. Lewis’ beautiful pre-quantum valence
theory with its bonding electron pairs, lone pairs, and inner shells. It is the
inner-shell and the lone-pair electrons which are in AO’s when chemical
MO’s are used.
   It was Hund in a paper on chemical bonding7 who first referred to and
bonds: a single bond is a bond, a double bond is a plus one bond**, a
triple bond is a plus two bonds, and each bond corresponds to a pair of
electrons in a bond MO localized around the two atoms of the bond. While,
as I have already said, it is necessary for a thorough understanding to take the
effects of all the electrons into account, a consideration just of electrons as-
signed to localized bond MO’s does give a useful approximate understanding
of important aspects of chemical bonding, -for example, the existence of
nearly free rotation around single bonds but restriction of the bonded and
neighboring atoms to a plane in the case of double bonds.


* According to their original definition, valid for diatomic (or linear) molecules, π
orbitals are two-fold degenerate. That is, there are two varieties of orbitals which
differ only by a 90º rotation around an axis of cylindrical symmetry. But in the case of
double bonds, only one of these is used and the other no longer exists as such but is mixed
with orbitals. The       orbitals of double bonds really ought to have a different name.


            SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                             143




   Before going further, I should like to show four slides* to illustrate the
relation of G. N. Lewis’ theory to MO theory using chemical orbitals, and
also to summarize some other historical relationships. Fig.6 is more or less
selfexplanatory. It is designed to show, first of all, how Lewis resolved the
long-standing conflict between, on the one hand, ionic and charge-transfer
theories of chemical bonding and, on the other hand, the kind of bonding
which is in evidence in bonds between equal atoms, for example, in H 2, or
C-C in C2H 6: Lewis represented each bond by a pair of electrons placed
between the two bonded atoms, with the electron pair located closer to one
atom than to the other in the case of polar bonds. Figs. 7 and 8 show some
examples of Lewis structures, including examples of coordination compounds
like H3N·BH 3 or ( as pointed out later by Sidgwick) CO (NH3)6 . In coor-
                                                                     3+



dination compounds, Lewis lone pairs belonging to electron- donor molecules,
for example NH3, are shared to some extent withelectron- deficient molecules
or ions like BH3 or CO3+, forming "dative bonds" or partial dative bonds.
* These slides have been borrowed from my 1965 Silliman lectures at Yale.


144                     1966 ROBERT S.MULLIKEN




                               LEWIS BOND FORMULAS




                                       Fig. 8.
Figs. 7 and 8. Examples of G.N.Lewis bond formulas, showing also pair or octet com-
  pletion by sharing. From the author’s 1965 Silliman Lectures at Yale University.

   Lewis made use of an Aufbauprinzip in terms of electron shells (pairs and
octets mainly) which could in part be obtained by sharing, so that the same pair
of electrons could be counted in the shells of both of two atoms, as suggested by
circles in Figs. 7 and 8 (not shown in every case). For individual atoms, Lewis’
electron shells were three-dimensional, in contrast to Bohr’s planar electron
orbits, in this respect being closer to the present quantum mechanics than the
Bohr theory. However, of course Lewis’ theory was empirical, schematic,
and purely qualitative, and gave no explanation of how the electrons might
be moving or why and how they should station themselves between atoms to
form bonds, or in pairs or octets in shells. Bohr’s early papers’ included some
pictures of pains of electrons (the electrons of each pair moving on opposite


            SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                                  145
sides of a single circular orbit) forming chemical bonds between atoms, for
example in H2 and in CH4 in three-dimensional arrangements.
   The Heitler-London AO theory of the chemical bond is rather generally
regarded as the quantum-mechanical counterpart of Lewis’ electron-pair
bond. However, a pair of electrons in a bond MO represent an approximately
equally good counterpart in the case of a symmetrical (homopolar) bond,
while for a polar bond ( as in HCI, or in H2O) they represent a much better
counterpart.
   The justification for this last statement can be seen most easily by writing
the bond MO in the LCAO approximate from                          where xa and xb are
AO’s of atoms a and b. For homopolar bonds, a =            but for polar bonds α and
   are unequal to an extent which matches the polarity of the bond, for
example, α < for an HCl or NaCl molecule, if atom α is H or Na, with a much
greater inequality for NaCl than for HCl. (Pure ionic NaCl would be rep-
resented by = o,            I, but actually the NaCl molecule is not quite pure
ionic, or if one wants to call it pure ionic, it is necessary to say also that the Cl-
ion is strongly polarized.) Thus the chemical-MO theory has the same flexi-
bility as the Lewis theory in representing polar bonds, while the AO theory
has to assume mixtures of Heitler-London and ionic bonding to represent
polar bonds. The chemical-MO theory also furnishes the counterpart of
Lewis’ lone pairs (NH3 is a good example), and also shows they can be mod-
ified into pairs occupying polar bond MO’s in coordination compounds.
   Fig. 6, after illustrating Lewis’ synthesis ofearlier ideas, goes on to show how
the intervention of quantum mechanics in 1926 permitted further progress by
MO theories, and then indicates the necessity of the final step of electron
correlation for accurate descriptions. It also shows the alternative route via
AO theories of atoms and AO bond theory, followed by electron correlation
again as a final step to give accurate wave functions identical in content, if
not necessarily in form, with those obtained via MO theory.
   Fig.9 illustrates for the CH4 molecule how chemical MO’s and spectro-
scopic MO’s are related, and shows also how chemical MO’s could be used
instead of spectroscopic MO’s for an atom like neon. The figure depicts for
the neon atom just one of four localized or chemical AO’s which are identical
except for their orientation; each one is symmetrical about a line directed
toward one of the four comers of a tetrahedron, marked 1,2,3, and 4. The
four BMO’s (bond MO’s) of CH4 if they were depicted (instead a pair of dots
as in a Lewis formula is shown for each) would be similar in appearance to the
chemical AO’s of neon except that each one would spread out somewhat


 146                     1966 ROBERT S.MULLIKEN




 Fig. 9. Chemical and spectroscopic MO’s, illustrated by the neon atom and the methane
         molecule. From the author’s 1965 Silliman Lectures at Yale University.

 more around its appropriate H nucleus. LCMAO expressions (the extra M
 means modified, - see discussion near the end of this paper) are given for these
 BMO’s, and also for the spectroscopic MO’s of CH4.
    Next I must mention the simple LCAO (linear combination of AO’s) pro-
 cedure which for many years represented the usual way of trying to approx-
 imate the forms of MO’s, whether of localized or delocalized type 6. For
 metals, Bloch in 1928 used fully delocalized MO’s extending throughout the
 metal, constructed approximately as linear combinations of valence-electron
 AO’s of all the atoms. Lennard-Jones in 1929 pointed out the general use-
 fulness of simple LCAO expressions in approximating valence-shell diatomic
 MO’s; for inner shells he used AO’s*. Herzberg then emphasized that the
 number of bonds in a diatomic molecule can be set equal to half the difference
 between the number of electrons in bonding MO’s (which have additive
LCAO forms, that is, α and β of the same sign                     the number in
 antibonding MO’s (which have subtractive LCAO forms,.that is, α and of
 opposite signs). Hückel developed his very simple LCAO treatment for the
   electrons in unsaturated and organic molecules, a procedure which while
 rough and subject to some serious limitations, has been very useful to the
 organic chemists for many years. Before they became much interested, how-

* Perhaps the first example of the LCAO type of description was its use by Pauling for
Hz+, - which, however, can be considered as an example of the AO equally as well as of
the MO method.


                SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                               147
     ever, the subject had been developed further by Coulson, Longuet-Higgins,
    Dewar, and others, and presented rather forcefully to them by Dewar.
       I must not take too long for matters of historical interest, since I want to say
    something about current developments and about the future, so I will now
    give only a condensed account of some of the further developments of MO
    theory.
       I have already mentioned the use of the LCAO method for the rather
    roughly approximate visualization of MO’s of diatomic molecules and of
    metals, and also (although until recently for n electrons only) for many of the
    important molecules of organic chemistry. In the years 1932-1935 I turned
    my attention to the exciting possibilities ofunderstanding the electronic struc-
    tures and spectra of small polyatomic molecules, many of them as prototypes
    of larger organic and inorganic molecules. In so doing, I used molecular
    symmetry properties and the LCAO method. At that time J. H. van Vleck
    called my attention to the applicability of Bethe’s group-theoretical deter-
    mination of the irreducible representations for the orbitals of an atom in a
    crystal to the classification of MO’s. For the different species of MO’s I then
    adopted a system of symbols nearly like that in a paper on Raman spectra by
    Placzek of which I secured a proof copy8. A particularly appealing type of
    molecules for understanding by the MO method was that of the complex
    ions of high symmetry, but after a briefmention, I postponed going into these,
    saving them as a choice tidbit for some future occasion which, however, got
    indefinitely postponed. In recent years others have done full justice to this
    subject of ligand-field MO theory.
       Among later aspects of my own work was an interest in the absolute in-
    tensities of molecular spectra, in particular intramolecular charge-transfer
.   spectra. Growing out of that were some ideas on conjugation and hyper-
    conjugation in organic-chemical molecules. Later on, in trying to explain
    some new spectra of iodine in solutions in benzene or other related com-
    pounds, I became interested in the interaction of molecules with one another
    involving the partial transfer of an electron from a donor to an acceptor mol-
    ecule to form a molecular complex. In this connection I got into a study of
    intermolecular charge e-transfer spectra, of which the benzene-iodine spec-
    trum of Benesi and Hildebrand is the classic example.
       I mention all these things together because they are all concerned with what
    happens to our understanding of molecules when less and less localized ap-
    proximate MO’s are used. I have said earlier that the best or truest MO’s are
    those which are fully delocalized. However, it is very instructive to start with


148                    1966 ROBERT S. MULLIKEN

localized MO’s, and see what we can learn at each step as the theoretical
description is made more accurate in successive steps of delocalization. Con-
sider for example the 1,3-butadiene molecule. The simplest set of chemical
orbitals would here consist of a K shell (IS) MO on each of the four carbon
atoms, six     bond MO’s for carbon-hydrogen bonds, three carbon-carbon
σ-bond MO’s and two carbon-carbon p-bond MO’s corresponding to the
chemical formula




The -electron part of the electron configuration would then consist in two
pairs of electrons occupying two bond MO’s                  describable in
LCAO approximation as follows:



where the four χ’s are AO’s on atoms 1,2,3, and 4 of the chemical formula.
The pair in the MO 12 forms a bond between atoms I and 2, that in 34
forms an exactly similarn bond between atoms 3 and 4.
   However, a distinctly improved approximate wave function9 is obtained
if the two localized p-bond MO’s        and      are replaced by two new
fully delocalized MO’s (spectroscopic MO’s) as follows, each extending
over all four atoms:




with c somewhat larger than b and c’ somewhat smaller than b’ (b, c, b’, c’ all
positive). Both      and       given bonding between atoms I and 2, and be-
tween 3 and 4, so that the total bonding in the original bonds is not much
changed, but now the electrons in        give bonding between atoms 2 and 3,
while those in       give antibonding between 2 and 3, but because c > b and
b’ < c’, the net bonding effect of the pair of electrons in outweighs the an-
tibonding effect of those in        giving some net bonding between atoms
2 and 3. Without delocalization, then electron pairs in 12 and 34 would
have created a net antibonding effect9 (repulsion) between atoms 2 and 3.


           SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                             149
   Delocalization here results in a small decrease in the calculated energy but,
more important, it accounts for the stability of the arrangement of the atoms
in one plane, and predicts certain differences in chemical properties as com-
pared with those which would be expected if there were no delocalization.
When two double bonds are separated by one single bond, as in butadiene, the
double bonds are called conjugated. Conjugated π-electron molecules are
characterized by special properties which are understandable by MO theory
in terms of π-electron delocalization, as just described. Of course the actual
molecule shows those properties which correspond to conjugation            delo-
calization; the localized description is an approximation which much less
accurately describes the character of the actual molecule.
   Finally, in a completely delocalized description the various localizedo MO’s
are replaced by spectroscopic MO’s, which are fully delocalized MO’s of
various symmetry types extending over the whole molecule. This final stage
of delocalization can be categorized as a variety of hypereonjugation, although
not one of the most typical or important kinds.
   In the 30’s I tried to deduce all I could about MO’s from qualitative con-
siderations of energy and symmetry taken together with empirical evidence
from molecular spectra and other properties. During this period and up to the
time of the war in the early 40’s, molecular spectroscopy was a major activity
in our laboratory, under the able guidance in particular of Dr.Hans Beutler
and then of Dr.Stanislaus Mrozowski. Toward the end of this period the
enthusiastic assistance of Mrs. C. A. Rieke made possible many desk-machine
calculations on hyperconjugation and on -electron systems using the Hückel
LCAO method. The contents of several notebooks from this work were never
published because of the break caused by war-time activities.
   Another subject of our interest beginning at this time was the importance of
overlap integrals, which in the Hückel method until then everyone was
neglecting because they made the calculations more complicated. After the
war I took up this matter again, and wrote about various relations of overlap
integrals to chemical bonding. I began also to be very dissatisfied with other
inadequacies of Hückel-method calculations6.
   C. C. J. Roothaan had come to me as a graduate student in physics in 1947,
already so well prepared in his studies with R. L. Kronig at Delft that I could
only make some suggestions to him about problems on which calculations
would be interesting. One study that he made by the Hückel method dealt
with the structure of the ethylene molecule and its excited states and their
behavior on twisting the molecule. The theoretical calculation confirmed the


150                      1966 ROBERT S. MULLIKEN

qualitative conclusion that twisted ethylene is strongly stabilized by hyper-
conjugation.
    I tried to induce Roothaan to do his Ph.D.thesis on Hückel-type calcula-
tions on substituted benzenes. But after carrying out some very good calcula-
tions on these he revolted against the Hückel method, threw his excellent
calculations out the window, and for his thesis developed entirely indepen-
dently his now wellknown all-electron LCAO SCF self-consistent-field
method for the calculation of atomic and molecular wave functions, now
appropriately referred to, I believe, as the Hartree-Fock-Roothaan method.
After a short period at Catholic University, Roothaan returned to our labora-
tory, where he expressed an unquenchable ambition to conquer the calcu-
lation of some of what then seemed almost incredibly difficult electron-repul-
sion integrals, and which had been one of the main obstacles to converting the
molecular-orbital theory from a descriptive and semi-empirical to a more
nearly quantitative theory. Another very importantcontributor to this en-
deavor at that time was Klaus Ruedenberg, who since then has added very
much to our insights into the nature of chemical bonding.
    I shall return shortly to the theme of the purely theoretical calculation of
molecular structures and properties, but first wish to mention another devel-
opment which has been very fruitful. Robert Parr spent the summer of 1949 at
Chicago, and together we worked out some interesting applications of the
semi-empirical π-electron - only LCAO SCF method (pioneered by Goep-
pert- Mayer and Sklar in 1939) for -electron organic molecules. Somewhat
later Parr and his student Pariser developed the Pariser-Parr method to deal
with -electron molecules in a way which (along with the rather similar
Pople method) represented a great improvement on the Hückel method, and
which has proved extremely fruitful for an improved understanding of mole-
 cules of importance in organic chemistry and biology.
     In the late 40’s it was not yet clear that really accurate theoretical calculations
 on molecules would be feasible, and we were happy to make progress by
 semi-empirical methods . We did not realize that the big modern digital
                              10



 computers would become available and be rapidly improved in size and
 flexibility, and would transform theoretical computations into a tool which
 has already begun to compete with or in some cases even to go beyond
 experimental work in the laboratory. The rest of my speech will be devoted
 to some of the progress which has already been made in that direction.
     What I shall now present to you will not be my own work, but that of those
 who have been my associates in our group at Chicago. Let me also say that it


           SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                               151
is only because of lack of time that I shall say very little about the many others
at other institutions in various countries who have also made major contribu-
tions; I hope they will forgive me for this omission.
   Here let me quote briefly, with minor changes, from a 1958 paper II which
is already out of date because of the rapid development of bigger and better
computers.
   "Dirac once stated that, in principle, the whole of chemistry is implicit in
the laws of quantum mechanics, but that in practise, prohibitive mathematical
difficulties stood in the way..."
   "In the early days of quantum mechanics, many of the world’s best theo-
retical physicists engaged in calculations on molecules using the then new tool
of quantum mechanics, in the hope of understanding and explaining molec-
ular properties. But except in the simplest cases, those of the helium atom and
the hydrogen molecule, the computations proved to be complicated and
laborius without yielding more than roughly approximate results. Frustrated
and repelled, many of the theorists turned to other problems."
   "Perhaps the most forbidding difficulty was that of the evaluation and
numerical computation of certain integrals representing the energies of re-
pulsion between electrons in different orbitals. After the early years of quan-
tum mechanics, the work of a number of Japanese, English, American, and
other investigators was directed toward breaking the bottleneck of the difficult
integrals but it was only in the 50’s that really substantial progress was made.
Among the most active workers were Kotani and his group in Japan, Boys in
Cambridge, Coulson and his group at Oxford, Löwdin and his group in
Uppsala, Slater’s group at M. I. T. and our own group at Chicago."
    "A major and indeed crucial step beyond the development of formulas for
molecular integrals was the programming for large electronic digital com-
puters of the otherwise still excessively time-consuming numerical computa-
tion of these integrals, and of their combination to obtain the desired molec-
ular wave functions and related molecular properties; The pioneering work in
this field was that of C. F. Boys at Cambridge, England."
    Now let me turn to the work at Chicago in the area of large-scale machine
 computations, for which my colleague Roothaan has been primarily respon-
sible together with his students and co-workers. This work has gone through
successive stages of development with increasingly powerful machines. The
 calculations to which I shall refer are so-called non-empirical, in other words,
purely theoretical, calculations in which all the electrons in the atom or mole-
 cule are included, as contrasted with the still extremely valuable semi-empir-


152                    1966 ROBERT S. MULLIKEN

ical methods already mentioned which took specific account only of the
valence electrons. A major improvement in depth of understanding is added
when all the electrons, inner shell as well as outer shell, as well as        are
included in the calculation.
   The first all-electron calculation at Chicago was done by C. W. Scherr for
his Ph.D. thesis published in 1955; it was a Roothaan-type LCAO SCF cal-
culation on the nitrogen molecule using, however, only what might be called
a skeleton crew of AO’s in his LCAO expressions, a so-called minimal basis set.
This calculation done by Scherr on desk computers with the help of two
assistants took him two years. The same computation could now be repeated
in about two minutes with the largest computers now available, - provided of
course, that the preliminary work of writing the machine program had been
done.
   Writing a good machine program for molecular electronic structure calcu-
lations is, however, a very difficult and time-consuming operation. Two
generations of machine programs have been developed at Chicago under
Roothaan’s direction, and a third is now being prepared.
   Extensive computations have been made using the first two of these pro-
grams for diatomic molecules, especially by Dr. B. J. Ransil and associates with
the first program, and by Dr.Paul E. Cade, Dr. Winifred M. Huo, and Dr.
A. C. Wahl and associates with the second program, - for whose preparation
Wahl, Huo and others were largely responsible. There were also machine
programs and very extensive computations for atoms.
   In the second machine program, provision was made for building up the
MO’s from a large number of Slater-type orbitals, or better stated (as proposed
by Roothaan and others), Slater-type functions (STF’s). This LC·STF ap-
proach represents the use of the Roothaan method in its general form to build
up MO’s.
   LCAO calculations until recently have for the most part been minimal-
basis-set calculations, in which the number of AO’s used inconstructing MO’s
has been equal to the number of occupied AO’s of the atoms from which the
molecule can be formed, or at most includes one more valence-shell AO per
atom. For example, the minimal basis set for LCAO MO’s of Li 2, of 1s and 2s
AO’s, just as in the Li atoms, plus a     AO, which is not used in the free atom
in its normal state. Inclusion of the       AO permits 2s-2pσ hybridization,
which is important if reasonably good LCAO MO’s are to be obtained. For
N2, the minimal basis set consists of 1s, 2s,     and      AO’s for each atom,
all of which are occupied in the normal state of the free atom. In the earlier


           SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                             153
calculations, each AO in an LCAO MO expression was approximated by a
single Slater AO (which is an STF of a size governed by certain very useful
simple empirical rules which Slater set down in 1930) 12. Much more accurate
MO’s can be obtained if SCF AO’s are used instead of Slater AO’s in the
LCAO expressions; these might be called LC· SCFAO MO’s. Such LCAO
expressions are, however, not yet adequate to describe really accurate true
SCF MO’s. But if in the usual LCAO expressions, suitably modified SCF AO’s,
which can be called MAO’s are used, it is possible to reproducers the true SCF
MO’s. The required modifications consist of scaling,-shrinking or expanding
the size, - and polarization or hybridization. One can then think of the true
SCF MO’s as being described by simple LCMAO, instead of by simple
LCAO expressions. For computational purposes, however, extended linear
combinations of a rather large number of STF’s, or of GF’s (Gaussian func-
tions), are used. Nevertheless, for conceptual purposes, simple LCMAO ex-
pressions are especially illuminating.
   In the actual computations, each MAO is, in effect, expanded into a linear
combination of, in general, a number of STF’s or GF’s. Roothaan’s method is
thus really a LC·STF method using extensive linear combinations of STF’s.
In this way it became possible to obtain almost perfectly the forms of the true
or spectroscopic MO’s of which I have spoken earlier. And from the cor-
responding SCF-MO wave functions, the values of several molecular prop-
erties, some of them hitherto not generally known from experimental work,
have been computed with a considerable degree of accuracy. I have already
shown pictures (Figs. 1-5) of the valence-shell MO’s of the oxygen molecule,
as determined by the calculations of Cade, G.L.Malli, and Wahl, and wish
now to show three figures (Figs. 10-12) to illustrate some of the results of
the computation of molecular properties from SCF-MO wave functions. I
am indebted especially to Dr. Cade for permission to reproduce these figures.
   Fig. 10 shows dipole moments for all the first-row and second-row di-
atomic hydride molecules, as computed by Cade and Huo from their accurate
SCF-MO wave functions14. One sees that the agreement of computed with
experimental values in the five cases where the latter are known (LiH, HF,
HCl, OH and CH) is very good, giving considerable confidence that the
computed values in the other cases are also rather accurate. Most of these other
cases are radicals, for which measurement is difficult. Here we have a good
example of a situation that will become increasingly frequent, namely that
molecular properties, especially for radicals, may be more easily obtainable
from theoretical calculations than from experiments.


154                       1966 ROBERT S. MULLIKEN




Fig. 10. The dipole moment for the ground state of the first-and second-row hydrides;
first-row calculated values       second-row calculated values (A), and experimental
values ( o ). Right-hand scale for small inset figure and left-hand scale for large figure.
Reproduced by permission of the authors 14 and of the American Institute of Physics.




Fig. II. Reproduced by permission of Dr. Paul E. Cade, from unpublished work.


           SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                               155
   Fig. II shows quadrupole moments of first-row homopoIar diatomic mol-
ecules and radicals, as computed (Cade, unpublished) from accurate SCF-
MO wave functions obtained by several investigators (Cade, Wahl, Malli,
K.D. Sales and J.B. Greenshields) at Chicago by the use of the second machine
program. Here the sign of the quadrupole moment is sometimes positive,
sometimes negative, and until recently was not known experimentally in any
case. In Fig. II, the black circles are the computed values and the white circles
are recent experimental values: for N2 by A.D. Buckingham, for O2 by
microwave work, with sign uncertain; however, recently Buckingham has
obtained an experimental value for O2 which on the scale of the curve is
coincident with the computed value.
   Fig. 12 shows computed electric field gradients (nuclear quadrupole coup-
ling constants) at the A and H (or D) nuclei in the first-row hydride mole-
cules and radicals (from a forthcoming paper by Cade and Huo). Here ex-
perimental data are available for qD in LiD and HD, but only indirectly from
measured eqQ values and the nuclear quadrupole moment of the Deuteron,
from accurate measurements and calculations on HD or D2.
   Having accurate SCF-wave functions with spectroscopic MO’s, one can
ask, how well do these answer the questions with which chemists are con-




                                                           F


156                     1966 ROBERT S. MULLIKEN

cerned? I have already referred to dipole moments and quadrupole moments,
where agreement with true values is within 5 or 10% in the examples where
comparison was possible*. A similar degree of agreement is found for ioniza-
tion potentials. Moreover, all the ionization potentials which correspond to
removal of a single electron from any outer or inner shell can be computed.
In all these cases we are dealing with properties that depend on one electron at
a time. For such cases there is a theorem which states that values computed
from accurate SCF wave functions should be correct to first order.
   But how about binding energies (dissociation energies) of molecules?
These are of very special interest to chemists. Here we can subtract the SCF
energy (the calculated energy of the SCF molecular wave function) from the
sum of the SCF energies of the component atoms, and one might think that the
difference should be the dissociation energy. However, the agreements are
generally poor; the calculated dissociation energies are often only half as large
as they should be, or occasionally even come out less than zero:
   There is a good reason for these disagreements, namely the fact that the
electron-correlation energy of which I have spoken earlier is generally larger
in a molecule than in the corresponding atoms. In fact, as Clementi has pointed
out, there is a more or less standard extra correlation energy in a molecule for
each chemical bond that is formed. To deal with these needed corrections to
the SCF-computed dissociation energies, we can use empirical estimates, but
a better way is also now in prospect. Namely, instead of being satisfied with a
SCF-wave function, which corresponds to a definite electron configuration.
that is, one definite assignment of electrons to MO’s as in the Aufbauprinzip,
we can go further by mixing into the wave function suitable amounts of wave
functions corresponding to other judiciously chosen electron configurations.
In this way Das and Wahl4 at Chicago have made progress toward obtaining
good theoretically calculated dissociation energies, and Clementi and others
are pushing this work farther.
   All the work on molecules so far described has been on diatomic molecules.
But most of chemistry is concerned with much larger molecules. Some inter-
esting progress was made by McLean at Chicago in constructing a machine
program for linear polyatomic molecules, with which McLean and Clementi
made some all-electron LC·STF approximate SCF MO calculations on car-
bon dioxide, acetylene, cyanogen, hydrogen cyanide, and a number of other
molecules.
* Of course an agreement in terms of percentage is no longer relevant in cases where the
value of the quantity is near zero.


           SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                                 157
    Recently several groups have been using linear combinations of a different
type of basis functions, namely Gaussian functions, instead of STF’s, to build
up approximate SCF-MO’s. For comparable accuracy, at least twice as many
 Gaussians as STF’s must be used. This procedure was first proposed by S. F.
Boys of Cambridge, England. Although Gaussians are intrinsically much
poorer building blocks than STF’s for constructing true MO’s, calculations
with them are easier, and it has proved possible to use them successfully to get
rather good approximations to true SCF-MO wave functions. Among those
who have been using Gaussians recently are Moskowitz and Harrison using a
machine program which was constructed by Harrison while working with
Slater at M.I.T.; Allen and associates at Princeton; and recently Clementi,
who spent most of the year 1966 at Chicago on leave from IBM’s San José
Research Laboratory.
   During 1966 Clementi, with some cooperation of others, and with the use
of copious amounts of machine time mostly at IBM’s Yorktown laboratory,
has carried through all-electron SCF-MO calculations of considerable ac-
curacy on a notable array of molecules: ammonia, ethane, pyrrole, benzene,
pyridine, and pyrazine. Further, he has examined in detail what happens to
MO’s, to energies, and to charge distributions when a hydrogen chloride
molecule approaches an ammonia molecule.
   This last is of particular interest, but let me first mention the topic of popu-
lation analysis15. That technique makes it possible in a fairly meaningful way
to calculate how the total population of electrons is distributed among the
atoms in a molecule. Among other things the procedure gives for each atom a
number which can be identified as the electrical charge on that atom. It also
yields so-called overlap populations, which are found to be well correlated
with the strengths ofchemical bonds. I am sorry there is no time to explain the
method here. In a way it seems to contradict my basic theme that a molecule
can better be thought of as an individual rather than a collection of atoms.
However, the molecule does contain atomic nuclei, and the so-called charge
on each atom in a molecule can be considered as an old-fashioned and familiar
terminology for describing how electrical charge is distributed in the neigh-
borhood of each nucleus.
   The SCF-MO wave functions obtained at Chicago and elsewhere have
yielded many interesting results when subjected to population analysis, but I
will refer here only to one particularly interesting example, based on Clemen-
ti’s calculation of what happens when an HCl approaches an NH3 molecule.
This case can be considered as an example of the formation of a molecular


158                      1966 ROBERT S. MULLIKEN

 complex of a type which is particularly interesting, and is very important in
 biological systems, namely a hydrogen-bonded complex. It has long been a
 moot question as to how the distribution of electrical charges changes during
 the approach of the two partners in a hydrogen-bonded complex. Clementi’s
 wave functions, when subjected to a population analysis, give an answer to this
 question, and his calculations also show how the energy changes during the
 approach.
   What Clementi calculated were spectroscopic or true MO’s for the combined
system NH3 + HCI. This procedure, the whole-complex MO method, which
could also be used with equal validity in understanding the electronic structure
of any electron-donor electron-acceptor molecular complex*, represents
another example of the improved understanding and accuracy which can
result in going over from localized to delocalized MO’s, - in this case from
MO’s of the two molecules to MO’s of the complex as a whole.
   To justify the use of whole-complex MO’s here, we note that each of the
separate molecules NH3 and HCl has, in terms of MO’s, a closed-shell electron
configuration. Now when two atoms in closed-shell AO configurations ap-
proach, for example, two helium atoms, the SCF-MO approximation re-
mains a good approximation at all distances of approach. In other words,
there is then no large increase in electron correlation energy such as occurs
when two atoms with unpaired valence electrons, for example two H atoms,’
or two N atoms, approach to form a molecule; it will be recalled that this
increase in correlation energy on typical molecule formation had as a result that
SCF-MO energies compared with SCF-AO energies do not give good values
for dissociation energies. By analogy with the case of two closed-shell atoms,
it appears, however, that the SCF-MO approximation should be valid with-
out any strongly varying electron correlation corrections when molecules
with MO closed shells come together; the fact that two He atoms do not form
a stable molecule does not matter for the present argument. Thus Clementi’s
SCF-MO calculations on NH3 + HCl should throw important light on the
changes which occur in hydrogen bonding. Actually, Clementi’s calculations

* Up to now I have used mainly a different procedure16 with a wave function corre-
sponding partly or largely to an electron configuration of MO’s of the free donor and
acceptor, but with some mixing in of a second configuration in which an electron has
been transferred from the donor to the acceptor. For loose complexes the two proce-
dures are roughly equivalent, but the whole- complex method is becoming advantageous
now that all-electron SCF computations are becoming feasible for relatively large molec-
ular systems.


            SPECTROSCOPY AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS                                    159
 show a gradual transfer of charge from the NH3 to the Cl atom, accompanied
 by some stretching of the H-Cl distance, until at equilibrium a structure ap-
 proaching that of an NH4+Cl- ion-pair, but with considerable polarization of
 the Cl- (H-bonding of NH4+ to Cl-) is attained. The NH3 + HCl system is
 thus apparently an example of ion-pair formation rather than ordinary loose
 hydrogen bonding; however, the changes in charge distribution during the
 early stages of approach of the HCl and NH3 should probably be similar to
 those in ordinary H-bonding, and thus instructive for the latter.
    In conclusion, I would like to emphasize strongly my belief that the era of
 computing chemists, when hundreds if not thousands of chemists will go to
 the computing machine instead of the laboratory for increasingly many facets
 of chemical information II, is already at hand. There is only one obstacle,
 namely that someone must   .   pay for the computing time. However, it seems
 clear that the provision of adequate funds by government and other organiza-
 tions for computing molecular structures has at least as high an order of
justification as the provision of adequate funds for the cyclotrons, betatrons,
 and linear accelerators used in studying nuclear structure and high-energy
 particles, or for rockets to explore the moon, planets, and interplanetary space.
 Chemistry, together with the physics of solid matter on the earth; deal with
 the foundations of the material world on which all our life is built. Yet at the
 present time the rapid progress which could be made even with existing
 machine programs is not being made, simply because available funds to pay
for machine time are far too limited. Computing time is rather expensive, yet
 the amounts of time needed to make adequate use of existing and future
 machine programs would be trivially small compared with the amounts now
 being spent on nuclear and high-energy problems and on outer space.




 1. The reader is referred to the reprinted 1913 papers with a valuable historical intro-
     duction and discussion by L.Rosenfeld, published by Munksgaard, Copenhagen and
    Benjamin, New York, in 1963.
 2. A.C. Wahl, Science, 151 (1966) 961; W.M. Huo, J. Chem. Phys., 43 (1965) 624.
 3. O. Burrau, Kgl. Danske Videnskab. Selskab, 7 (1927)1.
 4. For some simple diatomic examples, see G. Das and A. C. Wahl, J. Chem. Phys., 44
    (1966) 87.
 5. Details and references are given in an article entitled "Molecular Scientists and
     Molecular Science: Some Reminiscences", J.Chem. Phys., 43 (1965) S2-11.


160                    1966 ROBERT S.MULLIKEN

 6. See the introduction to *Report on Molecular Orbital Theory*, J. Chim. Phys., 46
    (1949) 497, and references given there.
 7. F. Hund, Z. Physik., 73 (1931) 1.
 8. On the classification ofmolecular states, see J. Chem. Phys., 23 (1955) 1997-2011.
 9. R. S. Mulliken, J. Phys. Chem., 66 (1962) 2306.
10. R. S. Mulliken, Chem. Rev., 4I (1947) 201.
11. R. S. Mulliken and C. C. J. Roothaan, "Broken Bottlenecks and the Future of Molec-
     ular Quantum Mechanics", Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 45 (1959) 394-398.
12. For a review of Slater’s work, see R. S. Mulliken, Quantum Theory of Atoms, Molecules,
     and Solid State, Academic Press, New York, 1966, pp. 5-13.
13. See R.S. Mulliken, J. Chem. Phys., 36 (1962) 3428, Sec.11, 1-3, and 43 (1966) S39.
14. P.E. Cade and W.M. Huo, J. Chem. Phys., 45 (1966) 1063; detailed papers to be
     submitted for publication shortly.
15. R.S. Mulliken, J.Chem.Phys., 23 (1955) 1833-1840, 1841-1846, 2338-2342, 2343-
     2346.
16. R. S. Mulliken, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 74 (1952) 811; J. Chem. Phys., 60 (1964) 20.
