                             R . B . WO O D W A R D


            Recent advances in the chemistry of
                     natural products
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1965


The Nobel Prize in Chemistry for 1965 has been awarded for contributions to
the art of chemical synthesis. It gives me much pleasure to record here my
gratification with the citation, which properly signalizes an exciting and signif-
icant aspect of synthetic activity. But that aspect is one which is more readily
- and I dare say more effectively - exemplified and epitomized than it is
articulated and summarized. Having here this morning the responsibility of
delivering a lecture on a topic related to the work - for which the Prize was
awarded, I have chosen to present an account of an entirely new and hitherto
unreported investigation which, I hope, will illuminate many facets of the
spirit of contemporary work in chemical synthesis.
   Cephalosporin C, a product of the metabolism of Cephalosporium acre-
monium, was isolated in 1955 by Newton and Abraham1 in an investigation
notable for its perspicacity as well as its painstaking attention to detail. The
investigation of the structure of the metabolite was successfully concluded in
1961 through studies in which both chemical2 and X-ray crystallographic3
techniques were employed. The molecular array (I) thus laid bare strikes one




at once as having affinities with a hitherto well-known class of substances
which has constituted one of the most challenging and recalcitrant synthetic
objectives of our generation. I refer of course to the penicillins, of which
penicillin G (II) - one of the earliest known and one which has been widely
used in medicine - may serve as an example. There can be few organic chemists


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                              101




who do not know the fascinating history of the penicillins4. How, following
up an early observation of Alexander Fleming, Chain and Florey isolated the
first penicillin shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War. How the
powerful practical desiderata of those trying times led to the establishment of
a mammoth British/American program which had as its objectives the deter-
mination of the structure and the synthesis of the penicillins. How the chemical
investigations, and especially the X-ray crystallographic studies of Dorothy
Hodgkin conquered the structural problem, and how despite the best efforts
of probably the largest number of chemists ever concentrated upon a single
objective the synthetic problem had not been solved when the program was
brought to a close at the end of the War. Many chemists continued to be
fascinated by the problem, and some were still willing to gamble their skill
against its obstinacy. In 1959, after more than a decade of intensive investi-
gation, John Sheehan5 succeeded in the development of methods by which
penicillins could be prepared by total synthesis. That these methods have not
come into practical use does not detract from this major achievement, but
only emphasizes that the challenge presented to the synthetic chemist by the
penicillins has not been exhausted.
   A parenthesis is probably desirable at this point in order to allay some con-
cern among those who have not been initiated in these matters. I have used
the plural term "penicillins" because Nature provides several closely related
substances, differing only in the acyl group attached to the nitrogen atom
which is itself situated a to the lactam carbonyl group of the general structure
(III). Furthermore, chemists have found ways of removing these acyl groups
from the natural representatives of the class, and attaching entirely new and




                                      III


102               1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD




different groupings to the nitrogen atom thus freed. In this way, many hun-
dreds of artificial penicillins have been prepared. The situation is similar in
respect to cephalosporin C, in that a whole class of cephalosporins has been
created by replacement of the                                      residue of the
natural metabolite by numerous other acyl groups. In both classes - the peni-
cillins and the cephalosporins - some of the derived substances possess prop-
erties which confer on them special utility in medicine. Thus, cephalosporin
C itself possesses antimicrobial activity of a relatively low order of magnitude,
which, however, early attracted special interest because it persisted against
organisms which had become resistant to the penicillins. In some of the derived
cephalosporins this especially interesting aspect of the antimicrobial activity
is retained, while at the same time the level of activity is much heightened.
Further, the activity extends over the range of Gram-negative and Gram-
positive organisms. Consequently, some of these substances, of which ceph-
alothin (IV) may serve as an example , have already achieved utility in
                                            6



medicine as broad-spectrum antibiotics of low toxicity, effective against
penicillin-resistant organisms.




in considering the development of a plan for the synthesis of any compli-
cated substance, it is always desirable to look at the problem from an entirely
fresh point of view. Nevertheless, in the case at hand, it was pertinent to
examine whether the experience gained and the results achieved in synthetic
studies on the penicillins might be usefully applicable to the structurally
related cephalosporins. We rejected this possibility at the outset for several
reasons. I have already alluded to the fact that the known penicillin syntheses,


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                                103
hard-won, brilliant achievements though they are, are lacking in practicality.
Further, the problems which had had to be overcome in devising methods for
penicillin synthesis had been quite difficult enough without adding to them
the intricacies which would have been associated with the achievement of
stereospecificity in the creation of asymmetric intermediates, and this aspect
had been slighted. Finally, a special chemical point was of much importance.
The -lactam ring common to the penicillins and the cephalosporins is highly
susceptible to hydrolytic cleavage. In the case, for example, of penicillin G
(II), the product of this hydrolysis is penicilloic acid (V). The synthesis of




penicilloic acid and its analogs, at least by non-stereospecific methods, was a
relatively simple problem, and by far the largest number of attempts to syn-
thesize penicillins - and the only successful ones - involved the deceptively
simple task of removing the elements of water from penicilloic acid analogs,
with closure of the four-membered               ring. In the case of the cephalo-
sporins the situation is strikingly different. Here the               ring is also
easily cleaved, but the proximate product of the hydrolysis, which must have
the structure (VI), is not a known substance. Its intricate and delicate con-




stitution is such that it does not survive even the mild conditions of its genera-
tion from the corresponding lactam. Clearly then, it would be unwise to
essay the synthesis of a cepahalosporin from such a hitherto unknown and
obviously highly fugitive precursor.
    Often in the course of synthetic work one or two key ideas set the style,


104               1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD

development, and outcome of the investigation, while providing the flexi-
bility essential for any long journey through unknown territory, beset with
perils which at best can be only dimly foreseen. In planning our synthesis of
cephalosporin the first of these definitive concepts was our choice of L(+) -
cysteine (VII) as our starting material. This readily available substance pos-




nitrogen atom and a β-sulfur atom-in short, it presents in ready-made fashion
a large portion of the crucial substituted               moiety of the cephalo-
spot-ins. Furthermore, it is optically active, and the groups arranged about its
one asymmetric carbon atom (starred in VII) are oriented in an absolute
stereochemical sense precisely as are the similar groups in the objective; that is
to say, as soon as the decision to use cysteine had been made, our stereochem-
ical problem was in a sense already halfsolved, since the cephalosporin nucleus
contains only one further asymmetric center (cf. stars in I and IV). On the
other hand, advantageous as this choice obviously was in many ways, it was
also clear that associated with it was a special problem which could by no
means be viewed lightly. The cysteine molecule is a tightly assembled pack-
age of highly reactive groupings. The amino group, the sulfhydryl group, the
carboxyl group, and the α-methine group each possess characteristic features
of chemical reactivity, and represent points at which ready modification of
the molecule might be expected. But the only remaining feature of the mole-
cule, the simple saturated                   group, represents a point at which
there is little or no precedent for chemical attack. And yet, in the light of our
plan we must in some way introduce a nitrogen atom at that point, preferably
in a stereospecific manner ( cf. arrow in VII). Further, even assuming that a
method should be discovered for overcoming the defences of the molecule at
that strong point, it was clear that we should be dealing with intermediates
containing two electronegative atoms bound to the same carbon atom - a
situation well known for its potentialities in conferring sensitivity and insta-
bility upon molecules so constituted. In sum, our initial decision placed us in
the exhilarating position of having to make a discovery, and of being prepared
to deal with substances of an especially precarious constitution.


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                              105
  Our first actual operations consisted quite naturally in so modifying the
cysteine structure as to depress the reactivity of the amino, sulfhydryl, and
carboxyl groups. Thus, the amino acid was first converted by reaction with
acetone into the thiazolidine (VIII)‘, which in its turn reacted with tert-




butyloxycarbonyl chloride in the presence of pyridine to give the correspond-
ing N-tert-butyloxycarbonyl compound (IX). Some special interest attaches
to the fact that the acylation reaction undoubtedly takes place through internal
delivery of the N-tert-butyloxycarbonyl group, which first becomes at-
tached at the carboxyl site to give the mixed anhydride (X). The acylated
thiazolidine was next converted into the methyl ester (XI) with diazomethane.




These three simple changes had sufficed to convert the cysteine molecule into
one whose methylene group (arrow in XI) might now enjoy a far better
relative position in respect to reactivity as compared with that same grouping
in the original cysteine. But they also served another function: by incorpo-
rating the methylene group in a ring, and thereby rendering rotation about
the      carbon-carbon bond impossible we had set the stage for bringing
about transformations at the methylene group in a stereospecific manner.
   I shall not detail here the many weapons which were brought into play
against that still expectedly recalcitrant methylene grouping. Suffice it to say
that the protected ester (XI) reacted with excess dimethyl azodicarboxylate
at 105º during forty-five hours to give the hydrazo diester (XII) in almost
quantitative yield. It is of special interest that we have been able to assemble


106              1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD




evidence which suggests that this novel reaction involves initial attack of the
sulfur atom upon the azo grouping, and that the formation of this bond may
be concerted with migration of hydrogen from the methylene group to the
second nitrogen atom (cf. XIII+ XIV-+ XV). Thus, if substances containing




free active hydrogen, such as the acid (IX), and the benzenesulfonyl amide
(XVI) are brought into reaction with dimethyl azodicarboxylate, attack upon




a methylene group is not observed, and the products (XVII and XVIII)


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                              107
contain an actual sulfur-nitrogen bond (cf. XIX). Further, we have been
unable to observe an intramolecular version of the reaction - for example,
with the compound (XX) - a circumstance which we connect with the very
unfavourable geometry, in this case, of a transition state in which hydrogen
moves as sulfur attacks nitrogen. Another special point of interest is that the




                                                        Me Me
                                                           x x

conditions for the reaction, simple though they are, must be adhered to
rigorously. At lower temperatures reaction is too slow to be useful, while if
the temperature is raised only a small amount, the reaction is much less clean,
and among the products is the N-methylated derivative (XXI) ! In any event,




the new reaction was propitious in that we had achieved a substitution at the
desired site, and in that the newly attached grouping was one which might be
expected to exhibit selective reactivity. A very important point is that the
reaction is stereospecific; the hydrazo diester grouping is introduced solely
on one side of the ring. Clearly, this result is associated with the presence in
(XI) of the carbomethoxyl grouping, whose bulk deprives the attacking
moiety of the opportunity for attachment on the alternative side of the rela-
tively rigid five-membered ring. Of course, the stereospecificity here ex-
hibited was in a way of precisely the wrong kind, since what we required was
the introduction of a nitrogen atom on the same side of the ring as the carbo-
methoxyl group. But this simply meant that we must now replace the newly
introduced group with inversion of configuration at the                  atom, a


108               1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD

task which we might have taken in hand with little apprehension had it not
been for the presence of the sulfur atom, whose attachment to the center at
which inversion was required might render invertible intermediates non-
existent or malefactory.
  When the hydrazo diester (XII) was oxidized in boiling benzene for two
hours, using somewhat more than two moles of lead tetraacetate, and the
resulting reaction mixture was treated with excess anhydrous sodium acetate
in boiling dry methanol for twenty-four hours, the trans-hydroxy ester
(XXII) was produced. This sequence is not as simple as it might at first appear,




and we know some of the intermediary stages through which it proceeds. It
is reasonable to suppose that the hydrazo compound, like all hydrazine deriv-
atives, is susceptible to removal of two electrons by an oxidant. The resulting
species (XXIII) must lose a carbomethoxyl group (starred) very readily to an




available nucleophile. The product (XXIV) is of a type which would be
expected to be transformed further by lead tetraacetate into an acetoxyazo
compound (XXV); the spectroscopic evidence for the presence of such an


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                             109
intermediate after the conclusion of the lead tetraacetate oxidation is con-
vincing, when compared with the parallel characteristics of a similar com-
pound (XXVI), isolated in the crystalline state and fully characterized, after




oxidation of the sulfonamide (XXVII). The next change is the loss of a second
carbomethoxyl group, again under nucleophilic attack (arrows in XXV),
followed by loss of elementary nitrogen, and accession of a proton to the -
carbon atom. The final change is a simple base-catalyzed methanolysis of the
acetoxy group. Special note should be made of the fact that these trans-
formations involve a replacement at an asymmetric center. This replacement
is stereoselective, in that by far the major product is the trans-acetoxy ester
(XXVIII); no doubt the bulk of the adjacent carbomethoxyl group plays its
role in forcing the acetoxy group into the more spacious location. None the
less, a small amount of the cis-acetoxy ester (XXIX) is produced, but for
reasons which will be developed shortly, this minor departure from stereo-
specificity is corrected almost at once.




The very existence of the trans-hydroxy ester (XXII) deserves special com-
ment. It should first be noted that its structure was established with defin-
itive rigor through its preparation by the action of diazomethane upon the
corresponding acid (XXX). This acid was synthesized by a series of reactions
similar to those outlined above, except that the carboxyl group of the thia-
zolidine (IX) was protected by the attachment of a             -trichloroethyl


110               1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD




grouping ( cf. XXXI), which was removed reductively after introduction of
the              group. The structure of the hydroxy acid was established
beyond any question by a complete three-dimensional X-ray crystallo-
graphic study, brilliantly executed by Dr. Gougoutas in Cambridge. We
have already alluded to the potentiality for instability inherent in the attach-
ment of more than one electronegative atom to the same carbon atom, and it
will be useful at this point to illustrate in some detail the factors which might
have hurled us from the plateau on which we were-now standing. Thus, the
hydroxy ester (XXII) .is an obvious candidate for participation in ring-chain
tautomerism with an open-chain isomer (XXXII), which in its turn, pos-
sessing as it does a                  system, could readily undergo essentially
irreversible tautomerization to a stable                           ester (XXXIII).




This same substance might alternatively be reached directly through a ready
               of the sulfur atom. Either of these sulfhydryl tautomers might
well lose thioacetone to give the corresponding N-monosubstituted ure-
thane. Finally, it would not have been surprising if the newly introduced
hydroxyl group, or indeed any of the newly introduced                  group-


              THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                                   111

ings along the way, had been susceptible of ready elimination with the for-
mation of the thiazoline (XXXIV). That the hydroxy ester is in the event a
stable manipulable compound-that it does not too readily succumb to these
potentialities for its self-destruction - was a major new result of our investi-
gation so far. We can in fact say something more about these potentialities at
this time. It was mentioned above that at one stage in the replacement of the
hydrazo diester grouping by the hydroxyl group, a certain amount of cis-
acetoxy ester (XXIX) is produced at an intermediary stage. Yet the sole
product of the whole sequence is the trans-hydroxy ester (XXII). From our
work with the trichloroethyl ester (XXXI), the cis- and trans-acetoxy acids
(XXXV) and (XXVI) h ave been isolated in the pure, crystalline state. Each




of these stereoisomeric substances is transformed on hydrolysis into the same
trans-hydroxy compound (XXX)*. Thus, it is clear that the hydroxy com-
pounds do participate in ring-chain tautomerism, but that reclosure of the
open-chain aldehyde (cf. XXXII) is so much favored over enolization of the
aldehyde group, or loss of thioacetone, that these latter changes, which
would have been fatal to our prospects, do not obtrude.




The hydroxy ester (XXII) was now transformed by treatment in dimethyl-
formamide with excess diisopropylethylamine and methanesulfonyl chloride,
followed by concentrated aqueous sodium azide, to the cis-azido ester
( X X X V I I ) , which was in its turn reduced in methanol solution by aluminum
* Subsequent to the delivery of this lecture, we have demonstrated explicitly that the
pure cis-acetoxy ester (XXIX) is converted in high yield to the trans-hydroxy ester
(XXII) under our methanolysis conditions.


112               1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD

                      during twenty-four hours to the cis-amino ester
(XXXVIII). The structure of the latter was again confirmed by a complete
X-ray crystallographic study carried out by Dr. Gougoutas. It is clear that this
sequence of changes involves the intermediacy of the methanesulfonyl deriva-
tive (XXXIX), which does in the event undergo normal bimolecular nucleo-




philic displacement with inversion, in the classic mold, when attacked by
azide ion. The dread possibility that the intermediary sulfonate might be too
readily susceptible of ionization to a cation (XL), which would have led on to
the thiazoline (XXXIV), or to stereochemically indiscriminate or undesired
substitution at the             atom, was fortunately not manifest. No doubt
avoidance of this danger is associated with the predictable relatively high
energy of the electronic configuration (XII).




At this point we had succeeded in the major objective of introducing a
properly oriented nitrogen atom into the               of the cysteine moiety.
In short, the entire stereochemical problem presented by the cephalosporins
had now been solved. It is appropriate here to introduce the second of the key
ideas upon which our general plan was based. It was that we should attempt
the preparation of the - lactam (XLII), having it in mind that this substance,


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                              113
 if procurable, would contain the basic structural elements common to the
 cephalosporins and the penicillins, and that it might serve as the source of a
wide variety of known - and new - substances through the fusion of new
rings at the presumably reactive nitrogen and sulfur atoms (arrows in XIII).
 The cis- amino ester (XXXVIII) now in hand differed from the desired lactam
only by the elements of a molecule ofmethanol. The attachment of the amino
 and carbomethoxyl groups in (XXXVIII) to a relatively rigid ring system
might be expected to favor formation of a new ring, and it was an interesting
feature of the X-ray crystallographic study that the distance between the
amino nitrogen atom and the carbonyl carbon atom was unusually low (2.82
A). In all these circumstances, we felt that the stage had been well set, and we
were gratified to find that when the cis-amino ester was treated with triiso-
butylaluminum in toluene it was in fact converted into the desired -lactam
(XIII). Again, the very existence of this substance, containing as it does
potentialities for annihilation parallel to those discussed above in some detail
for the hydroxy ester (XXII), further compounded by the considerable strain
within the             ring, represents a major result of our investigation. In
view of the importance of the intermediate its structure was established in
detail and with complete rigor through yet a further three-dimensional X-
ray crystallographic investigation by Dr. Gougoutas.
    Our success with the remarkable series of substances I have described must
tend to obscure the venturous spirit without which their investigation could
not have been taken in hand. Lest it still be felt that our concern with the
lability and versatility of our intermediates had been chimerical, it may be
mentioned that the phosphinimine (XLIII), prepared from the azido ester
(XXXVII) and tri-n-butylphosphine, gave on hydrolysis even under the
mildest conditions, in addition to the cis-amino ester (XXXVIII), appreci-




able quantities of the trans- amino ester (XLIV) and the stable, non-cyclizable
open-chain isomer (XIV)! Clearly, the formation of these substances in-
volves subtly determined tautomeric changes closely parallel to those dis-
cussed in detail above in respect of the hydroxy ester (XXII).


                 1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD




We were now ready to reduce to practice our presumption that the
tam (XIII) would be a versatile intermediate, capable of further develop-
ment through fusion of further atomic groupings at the reactive nitrogen and
sulfur atoms. In order to procure a suitable component for combination with
the            d- tartaric acid was converted into its
ester and the latter was oxidized, using sodium metaperiodate in aqueous
methanol, to           -trichlorethyl glyoxylate (XLVI), isolated as the cor-




responding hydrate. This substance was condensed in aqueous solution with
the sodium salt of malondialdehyde to give an aldol of the structure (XL,VII).
The aldol-condensation product in its turn lost a molecule of water when it
was heated in normal octane, and the novel, highly reactive dialdehyde
(XLVIII) was produced. This powerful electrophile was chosen in the hope




that it might combine directly with a substance containing active hydrogen
in a concerted cycloaddition process requiring no catalysis (cf. XLIX). The
desire to avoid catalysts in reactions involving the        was of course a


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                              115
consequence of our apprehension that such substances might well mobilize
one or more of the capacities for self-destruction inherent in the intricate
construction of our key intermediate.




octane at 80º during sixteen hours, combination took place in the desired
fashion, and the adduct (L) was produced. The latter in its turn, when allowed
to stand in trifluoroacetic acid at room temperature during two and one- half
hours, was transformed to the amino aldehyde (LI). The general nature of the
processes involved in this latter change is clear. In particular, the crucial
closure of the new six-membered ring is a consequence of the attack of the
strongly electrophilic carbon atom of a protonated carbonyl group upon the
nucleophilic sulfur atom (arrows in LII). The course of the ancillary changes




need not be specified in detail. A number of more-or-less equivalent schemes
may be considered, among which those portrayed in (LIII) and (LTV) should
be included; a special point is that the amino group which is ultimately freed
very probably appears at some time during reaction as the corresponding
Schiff base (LV) - and we have found that Schiff bases are readily cleaved in
trifluoroacetic acid solution. In any event, from the practical point of view it
was most gratifying that the protecting groups - that is, the N-tert-butyl-


116              1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD




oxycarbonyl group and the bridging isopropylidene group which had so well
served their several purposes and were now no longer wanted - were removed
concomitantly with the crucial formation of the new six-membered ring.




Mention should be made at this point of a special stereochemical detail.
The adduct (L) contains one asymmetric carbon atom (starred in L) in addi-
tion to those present in the -lactam. The combination reaction gives both of
the a priori possible products, which have been separated and carefully char-
acterized. Although the matter is under active study, we cannot as yet make
rigorous stereochemical assignments for the two isomers. In any event, the
point is not an important one from the practical point of view, since as we
shall see shortly, asymmetry at the center under discussion is expunged in
subsequent operations.
   The amino aldehyde (LI) was next acylated in benzene solution with
thiophene-2-acetyl chloride in the presence of pyridine, and the resulting
amide (LVI) was reduced, using diborane in tetrahydrofiuane solution, to the


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                            117
alcohol (LVII). The latter was acetylated in the normal way with acetic
anhydride and pyridine to give isocephalothin        -trichloroethyl ester




(LVIII). In its turn this    -unsaturated ester was smoothly equilibrated with
the corresponding         -unsaturated isomer - cephalothin         -trichloro




ethyl ester (LIX) - when it was allowed to stand in anhydrous pyridine solu-
tion at room temperature for three days. Although the                   iso-
mer is favored in this equilibrium             = 1/3), the two isomers were




found to be readily separable by chromatography on silica gel. The conjugated

temperature, and cephalothin (IV     LX) was obtained. The properties of the


118              1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD

synthetic substance were identical in all respects with those of material pre-
pared from natural cephalosporin C6.
   The final step in our synthesis of cephalothin, namely, the reductive re-
moval of the β,β,β-trichloroethyl grouping is worthy of special comment. In
planning our work it had been clear that the group destined to become the
free carboxyl function of the final cephalosporin must appear in some pro-
tected form during the intermediary stages. Further, the protection must be
such that it could be removed without doing violence to the highly sensitive
          ring, which is especially prone to hydrolytic attack. Some years be-
fore, in Cambridge, Mr. Robert Kohler, faced with a not dissimilar problem,
at my instigation investigated in a preliminary way the action of reductants
upon                         derivatives, with very encouraging results. The
idea had been that an electron source could bring about a concerted elimina-
tion process (arrows in LXI) which might be highly favored on statistical
grounds, and as well through the capacity of the chlorine atoms not directly




involved in the elimination process to facilitate electron accession in the
transition state. As we have seen, and as further examples in the sequel will
show, the grouping served the desired function admirably in our work in the
cephalosporin field, and we suggest that it may well find some general utility;
indeed, Dr. Fritz Eckstein, encouraged by his knowledge of our early studies,
has very recently shown how it can be put to very good effect in work with
the nucleotides8.
  We turn now to the completion of the synthesis of cephalosprin C itself.
The amino aldehyde (LI) was in this case condensed in tetrahydrofurane
solution with N-β,β,β-trichloroethyloxycarbonyl-D-(-)-α-aminoadipic
acid (LXII) in the presence of dicyclohexylcarbodiimide. The resulting crude


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                              119
reaction mixture was then esterified directly, using      -trichloroethanol in
methylene chloride in the presence of dicyclohexylcarbodiirnide and pyridine.
This sequence of reactions gave two main products, which were readily
separated by chromatography on silica gel using benzene/ethyl acetate (3/1)
as eluant. The more polar of the two products was (LXIII), since it was




converted by reduction in tetrahydrofurane with diborane, followed by acet-
ylation with acetic anhydride/pyridine to the    -unsaturated ester (LXIV).




As in the cephalothin series, this unconjugated ester was smoothly equilibrated
with the conjugated isomer (LXV) when it was allowed to stand in pyridine


120                 1965 ROBERT BURNS WOODWARD

at room temperature for three days             = 1/4). Again, the two isomeric
esters were readily separated, and the conjugated isomer was reduced by zinc
dust and 90% aqueous acetic acid at 0º during two and one-half hours to
synthetic cephalosporin C (LXVI = I). The identity of the synthetic material




was in this case established through examination of its paper chromato-
graphic behavior in several systems as well as through observation of its
antibacterial activity against Neisseria catarrhalis, Alcaligenes faecalis, Staphylo-
coccus aureus and Bacillus subtilis. Further the synthetic crystalline barium
salt was identical in optical and spectroscopic properties with the salt of
natural cephalosporin C.

It remains to express my very warm appreciation of the privilege of having
been associated in the work which I have described with an outstanding group
 of colleagues at the Woodward Research Institute in Basel. Drs. Karl Heusler,
Jacques Gosteli, Peter Naegeh, Wolfgang Oppolzer, Robert Ramage, Subra-
mania Ranganathan, and Helmut Vorbrüggen are those whose high experi-
 mental skill and unflagging spirit brought this investigation to its successful
 conclusion, and I am glad to have this opportunity to express my admiration
for their achievement.




1. G.G.F. Newton and E.P. Abrabam, Nature, 175 (1955) 548; Biochem. J., 62 (1956) 651.
2. E.P. Abraham and G.G.F. Newton, Biochem. J., 79 (1961) 377.
3. D.C. Hodgkin and E.N. Maslen, Biochem. J., 79 (1961) 393.
4.H.T .Clarke, J.R. Johnson and R. Robinson (Eds.), The Chemistry of Penicllin, Prince-
    ton University Press, 1949.
5. J.C. Sheehan and K.R. Henery-Logan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 81 (1959) 5838; 84 (1962)
    2983.


             THE CHEMISTRY OF NATURAL PRODUCTS                               121
6.R.R. Chauvette, E.H. Flynn, B.G. Jackson, E.R. Lavagnino, R.B. Morin, R.A. Muel-
   ler, R.P. Pioch, R.W. Roeske, C.W. Ryan, J.L. Spencer and E. van Heyningen, J.
   Am. Chem.Soc., 84 (1962) 3402.
7.G.E. Woodward and E.F. Schroeder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 59 (1937) 1690.
8. F. Eckstein, Angew. Chem., 77 (1965) 912.
