POTASSIUM CHANNELS AND THE ATOMIC BASIS
OF SELECTIVE ION CONDUCTION

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2003
by
Roderick MacKinnon
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology
and Biophysics, Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York,
NY 10021, USA.




INTRODUCTION
All living cells are surrounded by a thin, approximately 40 Å thick lipid bilay-
er called the cell membrane. The cell membrane holds the contents of a cell
in one place so that the chemistry of life can occur, but it is a barrier to the
movement of certain essential ingredients including the ions Na+, K+, Ca2+
and Cl-. The barrier to ion flow across the membrane – known as the dielec-
tric barrier – can be understood at an intuitive level: the cell membrane inte-
rior is an oily substance and ions are more stable in water than in oil. The en-
ergetic preference of an ion for water arises from the electric field around the
ion and its interaction with neighboring molecules. Water is an electrically
polarizable substance, which means that its molecules rearrange in an ion’s
electric field, pointing negative oxygen atoms in the direction of cations and
positive hydrogen atoms toward anions. These electrically stabilizing interac-
tions are much weaker in a less polarizable substance such as oil. Thus, an ion
will tend to stay in the water on either side of a cell membrane rather than en-
ter and cross the membrane. And yet numerous cellular processes, ranging
from electrolyte transport across epithelia to electrical signal production in
neurons, depend on the flow of ions across the membrane. To mediate the
flow, specific protein catalysts known as ion channels exist in the cell mem-
brane. Ion channels exhibit the following three essential properties: (1) they
conduct ions rapidly, (2) many ion channels are highly selective, meaning only
certain ion species flow while others are excluded, (3) their function is regu-
lated by processes known as gating, that is, ion conduction is turned on and
off in response to specific environmental stimuli. Figure 1 summarizes these
properties (figure 1).
   The modern history of ion channels began in 1952 when Hodgkin and
Huxley published their seminal papers on the theory of the action potential
in the squid giant axon (Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952a; Hodgkin and Huxley,
1952b; Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952c; Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952d). A funda-
mental element of their theory was that the axon membrane undergoes
changes in its permeability to Na+ and K+ ions. The Hodgkin-Huxley theory

214


Figure 1. Ion channels exhibit three basic properties depicted in the cartoon. They conduct
specific ions (for example K+) at high rates, they are selective (a K+ channel essentially ex-
cludes Na+), and conduction is turned on and off by opening and closing a gate, which can
be regulated by an external stimulus such as ligand-binding or membrane voltage. The rel-
ative size of K+ and Na+ ions is shown.




did not address the mechanism by which the membrane permeability
changes occur: ions could potentially cross the membrane through channels
or by a carrier-mediated mechanism. In their words ‘Details of the mecha-
nism will probably not be settled for some time’ (Hodgkin and Huxley,
1952a). It is fair to say that the pursuit of this statement has accounted for
much ion channel research over the past fifty years.
   As early as 1955 experimental evidence for channel mediated ion flow was
obtained when Hodgkin and Keynes measured the directional flow of K+ ions
across axon membranes using the isotope 42K+ (Hodgkin and Keynes, 1955).
They observed that K+ flow in one direction across the membrane depends
on flow in the opposite direction, and suggested that ‘the ions should be con-
strained to move in single file and that there should, on average, be several
ions in a channel at any moment’. Over the following two decades Armstrong
and Hille used electrophysiological methods to demonstrate that Na+ and K+
ions cross cell membranes through unique protein pores – Na+ channels and
K+ channels – and developed the concepts of selectivity filter for ion discrim-
ination and gate for regulating ion flow (Hille, 1970; Hille, 1971; Hille, 1973;
Armstrong, 1971; Armstrong et al., 1973; Armstrong and Bezanilla, 1977;
Armstrong, 1981). The patch recording technique invented by Neher and
Sakmann then revealed the electrical signals from individual ion channels, as
well as the extraordinary diversity of ion channels in living cells throughout
nature (Neher and Sakmann, 1976).
   The past twenty years have been the era of molecular biology for ion chan-
nels. The ability to manipulate amino acid sequences and express ion chan-
nels at high levels opened up entirely new possibilities for analysis. The ad-
vancement of techniques for protein structure determination and the devel-
opment of synchrotron facilities also created new possibilities. For me, a sci-
entist who became fascinated with understanding the atomic basis of life’s
electrical system, there could not have been a more opportune time to enter
the field.

                                                                                         215


MY EARLY STUDIES: THE K+ CHANNEL SIGNATURE SEQUENCE
The cloning of the Shaker K+ channel gene from Drosophila melanogaster by Jan,
Tanouye, and Pongs revealed for the first time a K+ channel amino acid se-
quence and stimulated efforts by many laboratories to discover which of these
amino acids form the pore, selectivity filter, and gate (Tempel et al., 1987;
Kamb et al., 1987; Pongs et al., 1988). At Brandeis University in Chris Miller’s
laboratory I had an approach to find the pore amino acids. Chris and I had
just completed a study showing that charybdotoxin, a small protein from scor-
pion venom, inhibits a K+ channel isolated from skeletal muscle cells by plug-
ging the pore and obstructing the flow of ions (MacKinnon and Miller, 1988).
In one of those late night ‘let’s see what happens if’ experiments while taking
a molecular biology course at Cold Spring Harbor I found that the toxin – or
what turned out to be a variant of it present in the charybdotoxin prepara-
tion – inhibited the Shaker K+ channel (MacKinnon et al., 1988; Garcia et al.,
1994). This observation meant I could use the toxin to find the pore, and it
did not take very long to identify the first site-directed mutants of the Shaker
K+ channel with altered binding of toxin (MacKinnon and Miller, 1989). I
continued these experiments at Harvard Medical School where I began as as-
sistant professor in 1989. Working with my small group at Harvard, including
Tatiana Abramson, Lise Heginbotham, and Zhe Lu, and sometimes with Gary
Yellen at Johns Hopkins University, we reached several interesting conclu-




Figure 2. Early picture of a tetramer K+ channel with a selectivity filter made of pore loops.
A linear representation of a Shaker K+ channel subunit on top shows shaded hydrophobic
segments S1 to S6 and a region designated the pore loop. A partial amino acid sequence
from the Shaker K+ channel pore loop highlights amino acids shown to interact with ex-
tracellular scorpion toxins (*), intracellular tetraethylammonium (↑) and K+ ions (+). The
pore loop was proposed to reach into the membrane (middle) and form a selectivity filter
at the center of four subunits (bottom).

216


Figure 3. The K+ channel signature sequence shown as single letter amino acid code (blue)
is highly conserved in organisms throughout the tree of life. Some K+ channels contain six
membrane-spanning segments per subunit (6TM) while others contain only two (2TM).
2TM K+ channels correspond to 6TM K+ channels without the first four membrane-span-
ning segments (S1-S4 in figure 2).




sions concerning the architecture of K+ channels. They had to be tetramers in
which four subunits encircle a central ion pathway (MacKinnon, 1991). This
conclusion was not terribly surprising but the experiments and analysis to
reach it gave me great pleasure since they required only simple measure-
ments and clear reasoning with binomial statistics. We also deduced that each
subunit presents a ‘pore loop’ to the central ion pathway (figure 2)
(MacKinnon, 1995). This ‘loop’ formed the binding sites for scorpion toxins
(MacKinnon and Miller, 1989; Hidalgo and MacKinnon, 1995; Ranganathan
et al., 1996) as well as the small-molecule inhibitor tetraethylammonium ion
(MacKinnon and Yellen, 1990; Yellen et al., 1991), which had been used by
Armstrong and Hille decades earlier in their pioneering analysis of K+ chan-
nels (Armstrong, 1971; Armstrong and Hille, 1972). Most important to my
thinking, mutations of certain amino acids within the ‘loop’ affected the
channel’s ability to discriminate between K+ and Na+, the selectivity hallmark
of K+ channels (Heginbotham et al., 1992; Heginbotham et al., 1994).
Meanwhile, new K+ channel genes were discovered and they all had one ob-
vious feature in common: the very amino acids that we had found to be im-
portant for K+ selectivity were conserved (figure 3). We called these amino
acids the K+ channel signature sequence, and imagined four pore loops
somehow forming a selectivity filter with the signature sequence amino acids
inside the pore (Heginbotham et al., 1994; MacKinnon, 1995).
   When you consider the single channel conductance of many K+ channels
found in cells you realize just how incredible these molecular devices are.
With typical cellular electrochemical gradients, K+ ions conduct at a rate of
107 to 108 ions per second. That rate approaches the expected collision fre-
quency of K+ ions from solution with the entryway to the pore. This means
that K+ ions flow through the pore almost as fast as they diffuse up to it. For
this to occur the energetic barriers in the channel have to be very low, some-
thing like those encountered by K+ ions diffusing through water. All the more

                                                                                     217


remarkable, the high rates are achieved in the setting of exquisite selectivity:
the K+ channel conducts K+, a monovalent cation of Pauling radius 1.33 Å,
while essentially excluding Na+, a monovalent cation of Pauling radius 0.95 Å.
And this ion selectivity is critical to the survival of a cell. How does nature ac-
complish high conduction rates and high selectivity at the same time? The an-
swer to this question would require knowing the atomic structure formed by
the signature sequence amino acids, that much was clear. The conservation of
the signature sequence amino acids in K+ channels throughout the tree of
life, from bacteria (Milkman, 1994) to higher eukaryotic cells, implied that
nature had settled upon a very special solution to achieve rapid, selective K+
conduction across the cell membrane. For me, this realization provided in-
spiration to want to directly visualize a K+ channel and its selectivity filter.


THE KCSA STRUCTURE AND SELECTIVE K+ CONDUCTION
I began to study crystallography, and although I had no idea how I would ob-
tain funding for this endeavor, I have always believed that if you really want to
do something then you will find a way. By happenstance I explained my plan
to Torsten Wiesel, then president of Rockefeller University. He suggested that
I come to Rockefeller where I would be able to concentrate on the problem.
I accepted his offer and moved there in 1996. In the beginning I was joined
by Declan Doyle and my wife Alice Lee MacKinnon and within a year others
joined including João Morais Cabral, John Imredy, Sabine Mann and Richard
Pfuetzner. We had to learn as we went along, and what we may have lacked in
size and skill we more than compensated for with enthusiasm. It was a very
special time. At first I did not know how we would ever reach the point of ob-
taining enough K+ channel protein to attempt crystallization, but the K+
channel signature sequence continued to appear in a growing number of
prokaryotic genes, making expression in Escherichia coli possible. We focused
our effort on a bacterial K+ channel called KcsA from Streptomyces lividans, dis-
covered by Schrempf (Schrempf et al., 1995). The KcsA channel has a simple
topology with only two membrane spanning segments per subunit corre-
sponding to the Shaker K+ channel without S1 through S4 (figure 2). Despite
its prokaryotic origin KcsA closely resembled the Shaker K+ channel’s pore
amino acid sequence, and even exhibited many of its pharmacological prop-
erties, including inhibition by scorpion toxins (MacKinnon et al., 1998). This
surprised us from an evolutionary standpoint, because why should a scorpion
want to inhibit a bacterial K+ channel! But from the utilitarian point of view of
protein biophysicists we knew exactly what the scorpion toxin sensitivity
meant, that KcsA had to be very similar in structure to the Shaker K+ channel.
   The KcsA channel produced crystals but they were poorly ordered and not
very useful in the X-ray beam. After we struggled for quite a while I began to
wonder whether some part of the channel was intrinsically disordered and in-
terfering with crystallization. Fortunately my neighbor Brian Chait and his
postdoctoral colleague Steve Cohen were experts in the analysis of soluble
proteins by limited proteolysis and mass spectrometry, and their techniques

218


Figure 4. Electron density (2Fo-Fc contoured at 2 ) from a high-resolution structure of the
KcsA K+ channel is shown as blue mesh. This region of the channel features the selectivity
filter with K+ ions and water molecules along the ion pathway. The refined atomic model is
shown in the electron density. Adapted from (Zhou et al., 2001b).




applied beautifully to a membrane protein. We found that KcsA was as solid
as a rock, except for its C-terminus. After removing disordered amino acids
from the c-terminus with chymotrypsin the crystals improved dramatically,
and we were able to solve an initial structure at a resolution of 3.2 Å (Doyle et
al., 1998). We could not clearly see K+ in the pore at this resolution, but my
years of work on K+ channel function told me that Rb+ and Cs+ should be
valuable electron dense substitutes for K+, and they were. Rubidium and Cs+
difference Fourier maps showed these ions lined up in the pore – as Hodgkin
and Keynes might have imagined in 1955 (Hodgkin and Keynes, 1955).
   The KcsA structure was altogether illuminating, but before I describe it, I
will depart from chronology to explain the next important technical step. A
very accurate description of the ion coordination chemistry inside the selec-
tivity filter would require a higher resolution structure. With 3.2 Å data we
could infer the positions of the main-chain carbonyl oxygen atoms by apply-
ing our knowledge of small molecule structures, that is our chemical intu-
ition, but we needed to see the selectivity filter atoms in detail. A high-resolu-
tion structure was actually quite difficult to obtain. After more than three ad-
ditional years of work by João and then Yufeng (Fenny) Zhou we finally man-
aged to produce high-quality crystals by attaching monoclonal Fab fragments
to KcsA. These crystals provided the information we needed, a structure at a
resolution of 2.0 Å in which K+ ions could be visualized in the grasp of selec-

                                                                                       219


                      In




                     In


Figure 5. (A) A ribbon representation of the KcsA K+ channel with its four subunits colored
uniquely. The channel is oriented with the extracellular solution on top. (B) The KcsA K+
channel with front and back subunits removed, colored to highlight the pore-helices (red)
and selectivity filter (yellow). Electron density in blue mesh is shown along the ion pathway.
Labels identify the pore, outer, and inner helices and the inner helix bundle. The outer
and inner helices correspond to S5 and S6 in figure 2.


tivity filter protein atoms (figure 4) (Zhou et al., 2001b). What did the K+
channel structure tell us and why did nature conserve the K+ channel signa-
ture sequence amino acids?
   Not all protein structures speak to you in an understandable language, but
the KcsA K+ channel does. Four subunits surround a central ion pathway that
crosses the membrane (figure 5A). Two of the four subunits are shown in fig-
ure 5B with electron density from K+ ions and water along the pore. Near the
center of the membrane the ion pathway is very wide, forming a cavity about
10 Å in diameter with a hydrated K+ ion at its center. Each subunit directs the
C-terminal end of a ‘pore helix’, shown in red, toward the ion. The C-termi-
nal end of an α-helix is associated with a negative ‘end charge’ due to car-
bonyl oxygen atoms that do not participate in secondary structure hydrogen
bonding, so the pore helices are directed as if to stabilize the K+ ion in the
cavity. At the beginning of this lecture I raised the fundamental issue of the
cell membrane being an energetic barrier to ion flow because of its oily inte-
rior. KcsA allows us to intuit a simple logic encoded in its structure, and elec-
trostatic calculations support the intuition (Roux and MacKinnon, 1999): the
K+ channel lowers the membrane dielectric barrier by hydrating a K+ ion
deep inside the membrane, and by stabilizing it with α-helix end charges.

220


Figure 6. Detailed structure of the K+ selectivity filter (two subunits). Oxygen atoms coordi-
nate K+ ions (green spheres) at positions 1 to 4 from the extracellular side. Single letter
amino acid code identifies select signature sequence amino acids. Yellow, blue and red cor-
respond to carbon, nitrogen and oxygen atoms, respectively. Green and gray dashed lines
show oxygen-K+ and hydrogen bonding interactions.




    How does the K+ channel distinguish K+ from Na+? Our earlier mutagene-
sis studies had indicated that the signature sequence amino acids would be re-
sponsible for this most basic function of a K+ channel. Figure 6 shows the
structure formed by the signature sequence – the selectivity filter – located in
the extracellular third of the ion pathway. The glycine amino acids in the se-
quence TVGYG have dihedral angles in or near the left-handed helical region
of the Ramachandran plot, as does the threonine, allowing the main-chain
carbonyl oxygen atoms to point in one direction, toward the ions along the
pore. It is easy to understand why this sequence is so conserved among K+
channels: the alternating glycine amino acids permit the required dihedral
angles, the threonine hydroxyl oxygen atom coordinates a K+ ion, and the
side-chains of valine and tyrosine are directed into the protein core sur-
rounding the filter to impose geometric constraint. The end result when the
subunits come together is a narrow tube consisting of four equal spaced K+
binding sites, labeled 1 to 4 from the extracellular side. Each binding site is a
cage formed by eight oxygen atoms on the vertices of a cube, or a twisted
cube called a square antiprism (figure 7). The binding sites are very similar to
the single alkali metal site in nonactin, a K+ selective antibiotic with nearly
identical K+-oxygen distances (Dobler et al., 1969; Dunitz and Dobler, 1977).
The principle of K+ selectivity is implied in a subtle feature of the KcsA crystal
structure. The oxygen atoms surrounding K+ ions in the selectivity filter are
arranged quite like the water molecules surrounding the hydrated K+ ion in
the cavity. This comparison conveys a visual impression of binding sites in the
filter paying for the energetic cost of K+ dehydration. The Na+ ion is appar-
ently too small for these K+-sized binding sites, so its dehydration energy is
not compensated.
    The question that compelled us most after seeing the structure was exactly

                                                                                         221


Figure 7. A K+ channel mimics the hydration shell surrounding a K+ ion. Electron density
(blue mesh) for K+ ions in the filter and for a K+ ion and water molecules in the central cav-
ity are shown. White lines highlight the coordination geometry of K+ in the filter and in wa-
ter. Adapted from (Zhou et al., 2001b).




how many ions are in the selectivity filter at a given time? To begin to under-
stand how ions move through the filter we needed to know the stoichiometry
of the ion conduction reaction, and that meant knowing how many ions can
occupy the filter. Four binding sites were apparent, but are they all occupied
at once? Four K+ ions in a row separated by an average center-to-center dis-
tance of 3.3 Å seemed unlikely for electrostatic reasons. From an early stage
we suspected that the correct number would be closer to two, because two
ions more easily explained the electron density we observed for the larger al-
kali metal cations Rb+ and Cs+ (Doyle et al., 1998; Morais-Cabral et al., 2001).
Quantitative evidence for the precise number of ions came with the high-res-
olution structure and with the analysis of Tl+ (Zhou and MacKinnon, 2003).
Thallium is the most ideally suited ‘K+ analog’ because it flows through K+
channels, has a radius and dehydration energy very close to K+, and has the
favorable crystallographic attributes of high electron density and an anom-
alous signal. The one serious difficulty in working with Tl+ is its insolubility
with Cl-. Fenny meticulously worked out the experimental conditions and de-
termined that on average there are between two and two and a half conduct-
ing ions in the filter at once, with an occupancy at each position around one
half.

222


Figure 8. The selectivity filter can adopt two conformations. At low concentrations of K+ on
average one K+ ion resides at either of two sites near the ends of the filter, which is col-
lapsed in the middle. At high concentrations of K+ a second ion enters the filter as it
changes to a conductive conformation. On average, two K+ ions in the conductive filter re-
side at four sites, each with about half occupancy.




   We also observed that if the concentration of K+ (or Tl+) bathing the crys-
tals is lowered sufficiently (below normal intracellular levels) then a reduc-
tion in the number of ions from two to one occurs and is associated with a
structural change to a ‘collapsed’ filter conformation, which is pinched
closed in the middle (Zhou et al., 2001b; Zhou and MacKinnon, 2003). At
concentrations above 20 mM the entry of a second K+ ion drives the filter to
a ‘conductive’ conformation, as shown in figure 8. Sodium on the other hand
does not drive the filter to a ‘conductive’ conformation even at concentra-
tions up to 500 mM.
   The K+-induced conformational change has thermodynamic consequences
for the affinity of two K+ ions in the ‘conductive’ filter. It implies that a frac-
tion of the second ion’s binding energy must be expended as work to bring
about the filter’s conformational change, and as a result the two ions will bind
with reduced affinity. To understand this statement at an intuitive level, rec-
ognize that for two ions to reside in the filter they must oppose its tendency to
collapse and force one of them out, i.e. the two-ion ‘conductive’ conforma-
tion is under some tension, which will tend to lower K+ affinity. This is a de-
sirable property for an ion channel because weak binding favors high con-
duction rates. The same principle, referred to as the ‘induced fit’ hypothesis,
had been proposed decades earlier by enzymologists to explain high speci-
ficity with low substrate affinity in enzyme catalysis (Jencks, 1987).
   In the ‘conductive’ filter if two K+ ions were randomly distributed then they
would occupy four sites in six possible ways. But several lines of evidence hint-
ed to us that the ion positions are not random. For example Rb+ and Cs+ ex-
hibit preferred positions with obviously low occupancy at position 2 (Morais-
Cabral et al., 2001; Zhou and MacKinnon, 2003). In K+ we observed an un-
usual doublet peak of electron density at the extracellular entryway to the se-
lectivity filter, shown in figure 9 (Zhou et al., 2001b). We could explain this
density if K+ is attracted from solution by the negative protein surface charge
near the entryway and at the same time repelled by K+ ions inside the filter.
Two discrete peaks implied two distributions of ions in the filter. If K+ ions

                                                                                       223


Figure 9. Two K+ ions in the selectivity filter are hypothesized to exist predominantly in two
specific configurations 1,3 and 2,4 as shown. K+ ions and water molecules are shown as
green and red spheres, respectively. Adapted from (Zhou et al., 2001b).



tend to be separated by a water molecule for electrostatic reasons then the
two dominant configurations would be 1,3 (K+ ions in positions 1 and 3 with
a water molecule in between) and 2,4 (K+ ions in positions 2 and 4 with a wa-
ter molecule in between). A mutation at position 4 (threonine to cysteine)
was recently shown to influence K+ occupancy at positions 2 and 4 but not at
1 and 3, providing strong evidence for specific 1,3 and 2,4 configurations of
K+ ions inside the selectivity filter (Zhou and MacKinnon, 2004).
   Discrete configurations of an ion pair suggested a mechanism for ion con-
duction (figure 10A) (Morais-Cabral et al., 2001). The K+ ion pair could dif-
fuse back and forth between 1,3 and 2,4 configurations (bottom pathway), or
alternatively an ion could enter the filter from one side of the membrane as
the ion-water queue moves and a K+ exits at the opposite side (the top path-
way). Movements would have to be concerted because the filter is no wider
than a K+ ion or water molecule. The two paths complete a cycle: in one com-
plete cycle each ion moves only a fraction of the total distance through the fil-
ter, but the overall electrical effect is to move one charge all the way. Because
two K+ ions are present in the filter throughout the cycle we expect there
should be electrostatic repulsion between them. Together with the filter con-
formational change that is required to achieve a ‘conductive’ filter with two
K+ ions in it, electrostatic repulsion should favor high conduction rates by
lowering K+ affinity.
   Absolute rates from 107 to 108 ions per second are truly impressive for a
highly selective ion channel. One aspect of the crystallographic data suggests
that very high conductance K+ channels such as KcsA might operate near the
maximum rate that the conduction mechanism will allow. All four positions
in the filter have a K+ occupancy close to one half, which implies that the 1,3
and 2,4 configurations are equally probable, or energetically equivalent, but
there is no a priori reason why this should be. A simulation of ions diffusing
around the cycle offers a possible explanation: maximum flux is achieved
when the energy difference between the 1,3 and 2,4 configurations is zero be-

224


           A                                         B




Figure 10. (A) Through-put cycle for K+ conduction invoking 1,3 and 2,4 configurations.
The selectivity filter is represented as five square planes of oxygen atoms. K+ and water are
shown as green and red spheres, respectively. (B) Simulated K+ flux around the cycle is
graphed as a function of the energy difference between the 1,3 and 2,4 configurations.
Adapted from (Morais-Cabral et al., 2001).




cause that is the condition under which the ‘energy landscape’ for the con-
duction cycle is smoothest (figure 10B). The energetic balance between the
configurations therefore might reflect the optimization of conduction rate by
natural selection (Morais-Cabral et al., 2001). It is not so easy to demonstrate
this point experimentally but it is certainly fascinating to ponder.


COMMON STRUCTURAL PRINCIPLES UNDERLIE K+ AND
Cl- SELECTIVITY
The focus of this lecture is K+ channels, but for a brief interlude I would like
to show you a Cl- selective transport protein. By comparing a K+ channel and
a Cl- ‘channel’ we can begin to appreciate familiar themes in nature’s solu-
tions to different problems: getting cations and anions across the cell mem-
brane. ClC Cl- channels are found in many different cell types and are associ-
ated with a number of physiological processes that require Cl- ion flow across
lipid membranes (Jentsch et al., 1999; Maduke et al., 2000). As is the case for
K+ channels, ClC family genes are abundant in prokaryotes, a fortunate cir-
cumstance for protein expression and structural analysis. When Raimund
Dutzler joined my laboratory he, Ernest Campbell and I set out to address the
structural basis of Cl- ion selectivity. We determined crystal structures of two
bacterial members of the ClC Cl- channel family, one from Escherichia coli
(EcClC) and another from Salmonella typhimurium (StClC) (Dutzler et al.,
2002). Recent studies by Miller on the function of EcClC have shown that it is
actually a Cl- – proton exchanger (Accardi and Miller, 2004). We do not yet
know why certain members of this family of Cl- transport proteins function as
channels and others as exchangers, but the crystal structures are fascinating
and give us a view of Cl- selectivity. Architecturally the ClC proteins are unre-
lated to K+ channels, but if we focus on the ion pathway certain features are
similar (figure 11). As we saw in K+ channels, the ClC proteins have -helices
pointed at the ion pathway, but the direction is reversed with the positive

                                                                                        225


Figure 11. The overall architecture of K+ channels and ClC Cl- transport proteins is very dif-
ferent but certain general features are similar. One similarity shown here is the use of α-he-
lix end charges directed toward the ion pathway. The negative C-terminal end charge (red)
points to K+. The positive N-terminal end charge (blue) points to Cl-.




charge of the N-terminus close to Cl-. This makes perfect sense for lowering
the dielectric barrier for a Cl- ion. In ClC we see that ions in its selectivity fil-
ter tend to be coordinated by main chain protein atoms, with amide nitrogen
atoms surrounding Cl- instead of carbonyl oxygen atoms surrounding K+ (fig-
ure 12). We also see that both the K+ and Cl- selectivity filters contain multiple
close-spaced binding sites and appear to contain more than one ion, perhaps
to exploit electrostatic repulsion between ions in the pore. I find these simi-
larities fascinating. They tell us that certain basic physical principles are im-
portant, such as the use of α-helix end charges to lower the dielectric barrier
when ions cross the lipid membrane.


TRYING TO SEE A K+ CHANNEL OPEN AND CLOSE
Most ion channels conduct when called upon by a specific stimulus such as
the binding of a ligand or a change in membrane voltage (Hille, 2001). The
processes by which ion conduction is turned on are called gating. The con-
duction of ions occurs on a time scale that is far too rapid to involve very large
protein conformational changes. That is undoubtedly one of the reasons why
a single KcsA structure could tell us so much about ion selectivity and con-

226


Figure 12. K+ and Cl- selectivity filters make use of main chain atoms to coordinate ions: car-
bonyl oxygen atoms for K+ ions (green spheres) and amide nitrogen atoms for Cl- ions (red
spheres). Both filters contain multiple close-spaced ion binding sites. The Cl- selectivity fil-
ter is that of a mutant ClC in which a glutamate amino acid was changed to glutamine
(Dutzler et al., 2003).




duction. Gating on the other hand occurs on a much slower time scale and
can involve large protein conformational changes. The challenge for a struc-
tural description of gating is to capture a channel in both opened (on) and
closed (off) conformations so that they can be compared.
   In the KcsA K+ channel gating is controlled by intracellular pH and lipid
membrane composition, but unfortunately the KcsA channel’s open proba-
bility reaches a maximum value of only a few percent in functional assays
(Cuello et al., 1998; Heginbotham et al., 1998). At first we had no definitive
way to know whether a gate was open or closed in the crystal structures. In
the 1970s Armstrong had proposed the existence of a gate near the intracel-
lular side of the membrane in voltage dependent K+ channels because he
could ‘trap’ large organic cations inside the pore between a selectivity filter
near the extracellular side and a gate near the intracellular side (Armstrong,
1971; Armstrong, 1974). Following these ideas we crystallized KcsA with a
heavy atom version of one of his organic cations, tetrabutyl antimony (TBA),
and found that it binds inside the central cavity of KcsA (Zhou et al., 2001a).
This was very interesting because the ~10 Å diameter of TBA far exceeds the
pore diameter leading up to the cavity: in KcsA the intracellular pore entry-
way is constricted to about 3.5 Å by the inner helix bundle (figure 5B). Seeing
TBA ‘trapped’ in the cavity behind the inner helix bundle evoked Arm-
strong’s classical view of K+ channel gating, and implied that the inner helix
bundle serves as a gate and is closed in KcsA. Mutational and spectroscopic
studies in other laboratories also pointed to the inner helix bundle as a pos-
sible gate-forming structural element (Perozo et al., 1999; del Camino et al.,
2000).
   Youxing Jiang and I hoped we could learn more about K+ channel gating
by determining the structures of new K+ channels. From gene sequence
analysis we noticed that many prokaryotic K+ channels contain a large C-ter-

                                                                                           227


Figure 13. The MthK K+ channel contains an intracellular gating ring (bottom) attached to
its ion conduction pore (top). Ca2+ ions (yellow spheres) are bound to the gating ring in
clefts in between domains. The connections between the gating ring and the pore, which
were poorly ordered in the crystal, are shown as dashed lines.




minus that encodes what we called RCK domains and we suspected that these
domains control pore opening, perhaps through binding of an ion or a small-
molecule. Initally we determined the structure of isolated RCK domains from
an Escherichia coli K+ channel, but by themselves they were not very informa-
tive beyond hinting that a similar structure exists on the C-terminus of eu-
karyotic Ca2+-dependent ‘BK’ channels (Jiang et al., 2001). We subsequently
determined the crystal structure of MthK, complete K+ channel containing
RCK domains, from Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicus (figure 13) (Jiang et
al., 2002a). This structure was extremely informative. The RCK domains form
a ‘gating ring’ on the intracellular side of the pore. In clefts between domains
we could see what appeared to be divalent cation binding sites, and the crys-
tals had been grown in the presence of Ca2+. In functional assays we discov-
ered that the open probability of the MthK channel increased as Ca2+ or Mg2+
concentration was raised, giving us good reason to believe that the crystal
structure should represent the open conformation of a K+ channel.
   In our MthK structure the inner helix bundle is opened like the aperture of
a camera (figure 14) (Jiang et al., 2002b). As a result, the pathway leading up
to the selectivity filter from the intracellular side is about 10 Å wide, explaining
how Armstrong’s large organic cations can enter the cavity to block a K+ chan-
nel, and how K+ ions gain free access to the selectivity filter through aqueous
diffusion. By comparing the KcsA and MthK channel structures it seemed that
we were looking at examples of closed and opened K+ channels, and could
easily imagine the pore undergoing a conformational change from closed to
open. To open, the inner helices would have to bend at a point halfway across

228


Figure 14. KcsA and MthK represent closed and opened K+ channels. Three subunits of the
closed KcsA K+ channel (left) and opened MthK K+ channel (right) are shown. The inner
helices of MthK are bent at a glycine gating hinge (red), allowing the inner helix bundle to
open. Partial amino acid sequences from a variety of K+ channels with different gating do-
mains are compared. Colors highlighting the selectivity filter sequence (gold) and inner
helix glycine hinge (red) match colors used in the structures. Adapted from (Jiang et al.,
2002b).




the membrane as their C-terminus is displaced laterally away from the pore ax-
is by conformational changes in the gating ring. A glycine amino acid facili-
tates the bending in MthK by introducing a hinge point in the middle of the
inner helix. Like MthK, KcsA and many other K+ channels contain a glycine at
the very same location; its conservation suggests that the inner helices move in
a somewhat similar manner in many different K+ channels (figure 14).
   Gating domains convert a stimulus into pore opening. Further studies are
needed to understand how the free energy of Ca2+ binding is converted into
pore opening in the MthK channel. And the mechanistic details of ligand gat-
ing will vary from one channel type to the next because nature is very modular
with ion channels, just like with other proteins. Gene sequences show us that a
multitude of different domains can be found attached to the inner helices of
different K+ channels, allowing ions such as Ca2+ or Na+, small organic mole-
cules, and even regulatory proteins to control the conformational state of the
pore and so gate the ion channel (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/)
(Atkinson et al., 1991; Schumacher et al., 2001; Yuan et al., 2003; Kubo et al.,
1993).
   A fundamentally different kind of gating domain allows certain K+, Na+,
Ca2+ and nonselective cation channels to open in response to membrane volt-

                                                                                       229


Figure 15. Crystal structure of the KvAP K+ channel in complex with monoclonal antibody
Fab fragments. The channel is viewed along the pore axis from the intracellular side of the
membrane, with α-helical subunits colored in blue, yellow, cyan, and red. One Fab frag-
ment (green) is bound to the helix-turn-helix element of the voltage sensor on each sub-
unit. From (Jiang et al., 2003a).




age changes. Referred to as voltage sensors, these domains are connected to
the outer helices of the pore and form a structural unit within the mem-
brane. The basic principle of operation for a voltage sensor is the movement
of protein charges through the membrane electric field coupled to pore
opening (Armstrong and Bezanilla, 1974; Sigworth, 1994; Bezanilla, 2000).
Like transistors in an electronic device, voltage-dependent channels are elec-
trical switches. They are a serious challenge for crystallographic analysis be-
cause of their conformational flexibility. Youxing Jiang and I working with
Alice Lee and Jiayun Chen solved the structure of a voltage-dependent K+
channel, KvAP, from the thermophilic Archea Aeropyrum pernix (Ruta et al.,
2003; Jiang et al., 2003a) (figure 15). In the crystal of KvAP the voltage sen-
sors, held by monoclonal Fab fragments, adopted a non-native conformation.
This observation in itself is meaningful as it underscores the intrinsic flexibil-
ity of voltage sensors: in contrast Fab fragments had little effect on the more
rigid KcsA K+ channel and ClC Cl- channel homolog, both of which we deter-
mined in the presence and absence of Fab fragments (Doyle et al., 1998; Zhou
et al., 2001b; Dutzler et al., 2002; Dutzler et al., 2003). KvAP’s voltage sensors
contain a hydrophobic helix-turn-helix element with arginine residues beside
the pore (Jiang et al., 2003a), and functional experiments using tethered bi-

230


otin and avidin show that this element moves relative to the plane of the
membrane (Jiang et al., 2003b). Additional structures revealing different
channel conformations will be needed to better understand the mechanistic
details of voltage-dependent gating. But the KvAP structure and associated
functional studies have provided a conceptual model for voltage-dependent
gating – one in which the voltage sensors move at the protein-lipid interface
in response to a balance between hydrophobic and electrostatic forces. Rees
and colleagues at the California Institute of Technology determined the
structure of a voltage regulated mechanosensitive channel called MscS, and
although it is unrelated to traditional voltage-dependent channels, it too con-
tains hydrophobic helix-turn-helix elements with arginine residues apparent-
ly against the lipid membrane (Bass et al., 2002). MscS and KvAP are fascinat-
ing membrane protein structures. They do not fit into the standard category
of membrane proteins with rigid hydrophobic walls against the lipid mem-
brane core. I find such proteins intriguing.
   We are only just beginning to understand the structural principles of ion
channel gating and regulation. Electrophysiological studies have uncovered a
multitude of connections between cellular biochemical pathways and ion
channel function (Hille, 2001). New protein structures are now beginning to
do the same. Beta subunits of certain eukaryotic voltage-dependent channels
are structurally related to oxido-reductase enzymes (Gulbis et al., 1999; Gulbis
et al., 2000). PAS domains on other K+ channels belong to a family of sensory
molecules (Morais Cabral et al., 1998), and a specialized structure on G pro-
tein-gated channels forms a binding site for regulatory G protein subunits
(Nishida and MacKinnon, 2002). The interconnectedness of ion channel
function with many aspects of cell function is beginning to reveal itself as
complex and fascinating.


CONCLUDING REMARKS
I think the most exciting time in ion channel studies is just beginning. So
many of the important questions are waiting to be answered and we have the
tools in hand to answer them. I am very optimistic about the future, and for
the great possibilities awaiting young scientists who are now setting out to
study ion channels and other membrane proteins. I consider myself very for-
tunate to have contributed to some small part of the knowledge we have to-
day. Of course, my contributions would never have been possible without the
efforts and enthusiasm of the young scientists who have come from around
the world to study ion channels with me (figure 16). I also owe thanks to the
Rockefeller University, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and the
National Institutes of Health for supporting my scientific research.




                                                                            231


                        MACKINNON LABORATORY: 1989–2003

Postdoctoral              Students                   Staff Scientists      Collaborators

Laura Escobar          Lise Heginbotham              Tatiana Abramson      Gary Yellen
Zhe Lu                 Michael Root                  John Lewis            Maria Garcia
Adrian Gross           Patricia Hidalgo              Alice Lee MacKinnon   Gerhard Wagner
Kenton Swartz          Sanjay Aggarwal               Sabine Mann           Andrzej Krezel
Chul-Seung Park        James Morrell                 Richard Pfuetzner     Brian Chait
Rama Ranganathan       Alexander Pico                Anling Kuo            Steve Cohen
Chinfei Chen           Vanessa Ruta                  Minhui Long           Martine Cadene
Declan Doyle           Ian Berke                     Amelia Kaufman        Benoit Roux
John Imredy                                          Ernest Campbell       Tom Muir
João Morais Cabral                                   Jiayun Chen
Youxing Jiang
Jacqueline Gulbis
Raimund Dutzler
Francis Valiyaveetil
Xiao-Dan Pfenninger-Li
Ming Zhou
Ofer Yifrach
Yufeng Zhou
Sebastien Poget
Motohiko Nishida
Uta-Maria Ohndorf
Steve Lockless
Qiu-Xing Jiang
Seok-Yong Lee
Stephen Long

Thanks to Rockefeller University, HHMI, NIH, to the synchrotrons CHESS, NSLS, ALS,
APS and ESRF and to my assistant Wendell Chin.

Figure 16. MacKinnon laboratory from 1989 to 2003.




232


REFERENCE LIST
Accardi, A. and Miller, C. (2004) Proton-coupled chloride transport mediated by ClC-ec1,
   a bacterial homologue of the ClC chloride channels. Biophys.J. 86[1], 286a.
Armstrong, C. M. (1971). Interaction of tetraethylammonium ion derivatives with the
   potassium channels of giant axons. J. Gen. Physiol. 58, 413–437.
Armstrong, C. M. (1981). Sodium channels and gating currents. Physiol. Rev. 61, 645–683.
Armstrong, C. M. and Bezanilla,F. (1974). Charge movement associated with the opening
   and closing of the activation gates of the Na+ channels. J. Gen. Physiol. 63, 533–552.
Armstrong, C. M., Bezanilla, F., and Rojas, E. (1973). Destruction of sodium conductance
   inactivation in squid axons perfused with pronase. J. Gen. Physiol. 62, 375–391.
Armstrong, C. M. and Hille, B. (1972). The inner quaternary ammonium ion receptor in
   potassium channels of the node of Ranvier. J. Gen. Physiol. 59, 388–400.
Armstrong, C. M. (1974). Ionic pores, gates, and gating currents. Q. Rev. Biophys. 7,
   179–210.
Armstrong, C. M. and Bezanilla, F. (1977). Inactivation of the sodium channel. II. Gating
   current experiments. J. Gen. Physiol 70, 567–590.
Atkinson, N. S., Robertson, G. A., and Ganetzky, B. (1991). A component of calcium-acti-
   vated potassium channels encoded by the Drosophila slo locus. Science 253, 551–555.
Bass, R. B., Strop, P., Barclay, M., and Rees, D. C. (2002). Crystal structure of Escherichia coli
   MscS, a voltage-modulated and mechanosensitive channel. Science 298, 1582–1587.
Bezanilla, F. (2000). The voltage sensor in voltage-dependent ion channels. Physiol Rev. 80,
   555–592.
Cuello, L. G., Romero, J. G., Cortes, D .M., and Perozo, E. (1998). pH-dependent gating in
   the Streptomyces lividans K+ channel. Biochemistry 37, 3229–3236.
del Camino, D., Holmgren, M., Liu, Y., and Yellen, G. (2000). Blocker protection in the
   pore of a voltage-gated K+ channel and its structural implications. Nature 403, 321–325.
Dobler,v. M., Dunitz, J. D., and Kilbourn, B. T. (1969). Die struktur des KNCS-Komplexes
   von nonactin. Helvetica Chimica Acta 52, 2573–2583.
Doyle, D. A., Morais Cabral, J. H., Pfuetzner, R. A., Kuo, A., Gulbis, J. M., Cohen, S. L.,
   Chait, B. T., and MacKinnon,R. (1998). The structure of the potassium channel: molec-
   ular basis of K+ conduction and selectivity. Science 280, 69–77.
Dunitz, J. D. and Dobler, M. (1977). Structural studies of ionophores and their ion-com-
   plexes. In Biological aspects of inorganic chemistry, A. W. Addison, W. R. Cullen, D.
   Dolphin, and B. R. James, eds. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.), pp. 113–140.
Dutzler, R., Campbell, E. B., Cadene, M., Chait, B. T., and MacKinnon,R. (2002). X-ray
   structure of a ClC chloride channel at 3.0 Å reveals the molecular basis of anion selec-
   tivity. Nature 415, 287–294.
Dutzler, R., Campbell, E. B., and MacKinnon, R. (2003). Gating the selectivity filter in ClC
   chloride channels. Science 300, 108–112.
Garcia, M. L., Garcia-Calvo, M., Hidalgo, P., Lee, A., and MacKinnon, R. (1994).
   Purification and charaterization of three inhibitors of voltage-dependent K+ channels
   from Leiurus quinquestriatus var. hebraeus venom. Biochemistry 33, 6834–6839.
Gulbis, J. M., Mann, S., and MacKinnon, R. (1999). Structure of a voltage-dependent K+
   channel beta subunit. Cell 97, 943–952.
Gulbis, J. M., Zhou, M., Mann, S., and MacKinnon, R. (2000). Structure of the cytoplasmic
    subunit-T1 assembly of voltage-dependent K+ channels. Science 289, 123–127.
Heginbotham, L., Abramson, T., and MacKinnon, R. (1992). A functional connection be-
   tween the pores of distantly related ion channels as revealed by mutant K+ channels.
   Science 258, 1152–1155.
Heginbotham, L., Lu, Z., Abramson, T., and MacKinnon, R. (1994). Mutations in the K+
   channel signature sequence. Biophys. J. 66, 1061–1067.
Heginbotham, L., Kolmakova-Partensky, L., and Miller, C. (1998). Functional reconstitu-
   tion of a prokaryotic K+ channel. J. Gen. Physiol. 111, 741–749.



                                                                                             233


Hidalgo, P. and MacKinnon, R. (1995). Revealing the architecture of a K+ channel pore
   through mutant cycles with a peptide inhibitor. Science 268, 307–310.
Hille, B. (1970). Ionic channels in nerve membranes. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 21, 1–32.
Hille, B. (1973). Potassium channels in myelinated nerve. Selective permeability to small
   cations. J. Gen. Physiol. 61, 669–686.
Hille, B. (2001). Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes. (Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
   Associates, Inc.).
Hille, B. (1971). The permeability of the sodium channel to organic cations in myelinated
   nerve. J. Gen. Physiol. 58, 599–619.
Hodgkin, A. L. and Huxley, A. F. (1952a). A quantitative description of membrane current
   and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J. Physiol. 117, 500–544.
Hodgkin, A. L. and Huxley, A. F. (1952b). Currents carried by sodium and potassium ions
   through the membrane of the giant axon of Loligo. J. Physiol. 116, 449–472.
Hodgkin, A. L. and Huxley, A. F. (1952c). The components of membrane conductance in
   the giant axon of Loligo. J. Physiol. 116, 473–496.
Hodgkin, A. L. and Huxley, A. F. (1952d). The dual effect of membrane potential on sodi-
   um conductance in the giant axon of Loligo. J. Physiol. 116, 497–506.
Hodgkin, A. L. and Keynes, R. D. (1955). The potassium permeability of a giant nerve fi-
   bre. J. Physiol. (Lond) 128, 61–88.
Jencks, W. P. (1987). Catalysis in Chemistry and Enzymology. (Dover Publications, Inc.).
Jentsch, T. J., Friedrich, T., Schriever, A., and Yamada, H. (1999). The CLC chloride chan-
   nel family. Pflugers Arch. 437, 783–795.
Jiang, Y., Lee, A., Chen, J., Ruta, V., Cadene, M., Chait, B., and MacKinnon, R. (2003a). X-
   ray structure of a voltage-dependent K+ channel. Nature 423, 33–41.
Jiang, Y., Ruta, V., Chen, J., Lee, A., and MacKinnon, R. (2003b). The principle of gating
   charge movement in a voltage-dependent K+ channel. Nature 423, 42–48.
Jiang, Y., Lee, A., Chen, J., Cadene, M., Chait, B. T., and MacKinnon, R. (2002a). Crystal
   structure and mechanism of a calcium-gated potassium channel. Nature 417, 515–522.
Jiang, Y., Lee, A., Chen, J., Cadene, M., Chait, B. T., and MacKinnon, R. (2002b). The open
   pore conformation of potassium channels. Nature 417, 523–526.
Jiang, Y., Pico, A., Cadene, M., Chait, B. T., and MacKinnon, R. (2001). Structure of the
   RCK domain from the E. coli K+ channel and demonstration of its presence in the hu-
   man BK channel. Neuron 29, 593–601.
Kamb, A., Iverson, L. E., and Tanouye, M. A. (1987). Molecular characterization of Shaker,
   a Drosophila gene that encodes a potassium channel. Cell 50, 405–413.
Kubo, Y., Reuveny, E., Slesinger, P. A., Jan, Y. N., and Jan, L. Y. (1993). Primary structure
   and functional expression of a rat G-protein-coupled muscarinic potassium channel.
   Nature 364, 802–806.
MacKinnon, R. (1991). Determination of the subunit stoichiometry of a voltage-activated
   potassium channel. Nature 350, 232–235.
MacKinnon, R. (1995). Pore loops: an emerging theme in ion channel structure. Neuron
   14, 889–892.
MacKinnon, R., Cohen, S. L., Kuo, A., Lee, A., and Chait, B. T. (1998). Structural conser-
   vation in prokaryotic and eukaryotic potassium channels. Science 280, 106–109.
MacKinnon, R. and Miller, C. (1988). Mechanism of charybdotoxin block of the high-con-
   ductance, Ca2+-activated K+ channel. J. Gen. Physiol. 91, 335–349.
MacKinnon, R. and Miller, C. (1989). Mutant potassium channels with altered binding of
   charybdotoxin, a pore-blocking peptide inhibitor. Science 245, 1382–1385.
MacKinnon, R., Reinhart, P. H., and White, M. M. (1988). Charybdotoxin block of Shaker
   K+ channels suggests that different types of K+ channels share common structural fea-
   tures. Neuron 1, 997–1001.
MacKinnon, R. and Yellen G. (1990). Mutations affecting TEA blockade and ion perme-
   ation in voltage-activated K+ channels. Science 250, 276–279.




234


Maduke, M., Miller, C., and Mindell, J. A. (2000). A decade of CLC chloride channels:
   structure, mechanism, and many unsettled questions. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol.
   Struct. 29, 411–438.
Milkman, R. (1994). An Escherichia coli homologue of eukaryotic potassium channel pro-
   teins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91[9], 3510–3514.
Morais-Cabral, J. H., Zhou, Y., and MacKinnon, R. (2001). Energetic optimization of ion
   conduction rate by the K+ selectivity filter. Nature 414, 37–42.
Morais-Cabral, J. H., Lee, A., Cohen, S. L., Chait, B. T., Li, M., and MacKinnon, R. (1998).
   Crystal structure and functional analysis of the HERG potassium channel N-terminus: a
   eukaryotic PAS domain. Cell 95, 649–655.
Neher, E. and Sakmann, B. (1976). Single-channel currents recorded from membrane of
   denervated frog muscle fibres. Nature 260, 799–802.
Nishida, M. and MacKinnon, R. (2002). Structural basis of inward rectification:
   Cytoplasmic pore of the G protein-gated inward rectifier GIRKI at 1.8 Å resolution. Cell
   III, 957–965.
Perozo, E., Cortes, D. M., and Cuello, L. G. (1999). Structural rearrangements underlying
   K+-channel activation gating. Science 285, 73–78.
Pongs, O., Kecskemethy, N., Muller, R., Krah-Jentgens, I., Baumann, A., Kiltz, H. H., Canal,
   I., Llamazares, S., and Ferrus, A. (1988). Shaker encodes a family of putative potassium
   channel proteins in the nervous system of Drosophila. EMBO J. 7, 1087–1096.
Ranganathan, R., Lewis, J. H., and MacKinnon, R. (1996). Spatial localization of the K+
   channel selectivity filter by mutant cycle-based structure analysis. Neuron 16, 131–139.
Roux, B. and MacKinnon, R. (1999). The cavity and pore helices in the KcsA K+ channel:
   electrostatic stabilization of monovalent cations. Science 285, 100–102.
Ruta, V., Jiang, Y., Lee, A., Chen, J., and MacKinnon, R. (2003). Functional analysis of an
   archeabacterial voltage-dependent K+ channel. Nature 422, 180–185.
Schrempf, H., Schmidt, O., Kummerlen, R., Hinnah, S., Muller, D., Betzler, M., Steinkamp,
   T., and Wagner, R. (1995). A prokaryotic potassium ion channel with two predicted
   transmembrane segments from Streptomyces lividans. EMBO J. 14, 5170–5178.
Schumacher, M. A., Rivard, A. F., Bachinger, H. P., and Adelman, J. P. (2001). Structure of
   the gating domain of a Ca2+-activated K+ channel complex with Ca2+/calmodulin.
   Nature 410, 1120–1124.
Sigworth, F. J. (1994). Voltage gating of ion channels. Q. Rev. Biophys. 27, 1–40.
Tempel, B. L., Papazian, D. M., Schwarz, T. L., Jan, Y. N., and Jan, L. Y. (1987). Sequence of
   a probable potassium channel component encoded at Shaker locus of Drosophila.
   Science 237, 770–775.
Yellen, G. Jurman, M. E., Abramson, T., and MacKinnon, R. (1991). Mutations affecting in-
   ternal TEA blockade identify the probable pore-forming region of a K+ channel. Science
   251, 939–942.
Yuan, A., Santi, C. M., Wei, A., Wang, Z. W., Pollak, K., Nonet, M., Kaczmarek, L., Crowder,
   C. M., and Salkoff, L. (2003). The sodium-activated potassium channel is encoded by a
   member of the Slo gene family. Neuron 37, 765–773.
Zhou, M. and MacKinnon, R. (2004). A mutant KcsA K+ channel with altered conduction
   properties and selectivity filter ion distribution. J.Mol.Biol. 338, 839–846.
Zhou, M., Morais-Cabral, J. H., Mann, S., and MacKinnon, R. (2001a). Potassium channel
   receptor site for the inactivation gate and quaternary amine inhibitors. Nature 411,
   657–661.
Zhou, Y. and MacKinnon, R. (2003). The occupancy of ions in the K+ selectivity filter:
   Charge balance and coupling of ion binding to a protein conformational change un-
   derlie high conduction rates. J. Mol. Biol. 333, 965–975.
Zhou, Y., Morais-Cabral, J. H., Kaufman, A., and MacKinnon, R. (2001b). Chemistry of ion
   coordination and hydration revealed by a K+ channel- Fab complex at 2.0 Å resolution.
   Nature 414, 43–48.




                                                                                         235
