CONSTRUCTING AND EXPLOITING
THE FLUORESCENT PROTEIN PAINTBOX

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2008
by

Roger Y. Tsien
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California San Diego, 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0647, USA.




MOTIVATION
My first exposure to visibly fluorescent proteins (FPs) was near the end of
my time as a faculty member at the University of California, Berkeley. Prof.
Alexander Glazer, a friend and colleague there, was the world’s expert on
phycobiliproteins, the brilliantly colored and intensely fluorescent proteins
that serve as light-harvesting antennae for the photosynthetic apparatus
of blue-green algae or cyanobacteria. One day, probably around 1987–88,
Glazer told me that his lab had cloned the gene for one of the phycobilipro-
teins. Furthermore, he said, the apoprotein produced from this gene became
fluorescent when mixed with its chromophore, a small molecule cofactor
that could be extracted from dried cyanobacteria under conditions that
cleaved its bond to the phycobiliprotein. I remember becoming very excited
about the prospect that an arbitrary protein could be fluorescently tagged in
situ by genetically fusing it to the phycobiliprotein, then administering the
chromophore, which I hoped would be able to cross membranes and get
inside cells. Unfortunately, Glazer’s lab then found out that the spontane-
ous reaction between the apoprotein and the chromophore produced the
“wrong” product, whose fluorescence was red-shifted and five-fold lower than
that of the native phycobiliprotein1–3. An enzyme from the cyanobacteria was
required to insert the chromophore correctly into the apoprotein. This en-
zyme was a heterodimer of two gene products, so at least three cyanobacterial
genes would have to be introduced into any other organism, not counting
any gene products needed to synthesize the chromophore4.
   Meanwhile fluorescence imaging of the second messenger cAMP (cyclic
adenosine 3’,5’- monophosphate) had become one of my main research
goals by 1988. I reasoned that the best way to create a fluorescent sensor
to detect cAMP with the necessary affinity and selectivity inside cells would
be to hijack a natural cAMP-binding protein. After much consideration of
the various candidates known at the time, I chose cAMP-dependent protein
kinase, now more commonly abbreviated PKA. PKA contains two types of


186


subunits, regulatory and catalytic. In the absence of cAMP, the regulatory
subunits tightly bind and inhibit the catalytic subunits. When cAMP becomes
available, it binds to the regulatory subunits, which then let go of the catalytic
subunits, which in turn start transferring phosphate groups from ATP onto
selected proteins5–7. But how could activation of PKA by cAMP be made di-
rectly visible inside a single living cell? From my graduate student days I had
been fascinated by a biophysical phenomenon called fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET), in which one excited dye molecule can transfer its
energy to a close neighbor, much as a football or basketball player can pass
the ball to a teammate with diminishing probability of success the greater the
distance between the players. If we could attach one type of dye molecule to
the regulatory subunits and the other type of dye molecule to the catalytic
subunits, FRET would be possible in intact PKA, because the subunits are
in intimate contact. But once cAMP had broken up the PKA complex and
allowed the subunits to drift apart, FRET would be disrupted and a change in
fluorescence color should be observable.
   But to get these experiments to work, we needed abundant supplies of
PKA subunits and lots of advice on how to handle them, especially because
we had very little experience with protein biochemistry. I contacted Susan
Taylor, who had become one of the world’s leading experts on PKA and was
producing relatively large quantities of recombinant PKA subunits in order
to solve their crystal structure8,9 (Figure 1). The Taylor lab kindly sent ship-
ment after shipment of proteins on wet or dry ice from UCSD to Berkeley
for us to try to label with dyes, but the dyes either refused to stick, or messed
up the subunits to the point where they would no longer respond to cAMP.
The wish to facilitate this collaboration was an important part of the reason
that my lab moved from Berkeley to UCSD in 1989. Eventually, after a year
of working side by side, Dr. Stephen Adams in my lab and Ying Ji Buechler
and Wolfgang Dostmann in the Taylor lab devised a reproducible procedure
to combine fluorescein-labeled catalytic subunits with rhodamine-labeled
regulatory subunits to produce FRET-based sensors for cAMP10,11. Over the
next few years, we used these protein complexes to study several interesting
problems in cAMP signaling12–14. For example, we collaborated with Eric
Kandel’s lab to demonstrate spatial gradients of cAMP within individual sea
slug (Aplysia californica) neurons undergoing training procedures in a model
of synaptic plasticity15.




                                                                              187


Figure 1. Schematic cartoon showing how cAMP-induced dissociation of regulatory from
catalytic subunits of protein kinase A (PKA) can be reported by loss of FRET from fluores-
cein to rhodamine labels.


Although the cAMP sensor was moderately successful, the general approach
would have been very difficult to extend to other proteins because it re-
quired high level expression and purification of soluble proteins or subunits,
controlled attachment of two different dyes in vitro to distinct domains or
subunits without destroying the function of the protein, repurification, and
microinjection back into living cells. Such cells had to be large and robust
enough to tolerate poking with a hollow glass needle, and the experimenter
had to be patient and dexterous, unlike me. All of the above obstacles could
be circumvented if we had genes encoding two fluorescent proteins of the ap-
propriate colors. These genes could be fused to the genes for the protein(s)
of interest. One would still have to get the fusion genes into the cell(s) to be
studied, but standard methodology has been worked out for most cells of
interest. Introducing genes into cells (transfection) is generally much easier
than introducing proteins, because each cell needs only one or a few copies
of DNA (compared to billions of molecules of protein), the cell has plenty of
time to recover from any membrane damage, and one can selectively propa-
gate those cells that have successfully assimilated the DNA. Once in the cells,
these genes would hopefully make composite proteins in situ that would both
fluoresce and preserve native biological function.




188


Figure 2. The jellyfish Aequorea victoria or Aequorea aequorea from which aequorin and Green
Fluorescent Protein were isolated. Photo courtesy of Dr. Claudia E. Mills, Friday Harbor
Laboratories.


Knowing that Prof. Glazer’s lab was still struggling with the phycobiliprotein
approach, I sought simpler alternative fluorescent proteins. I remembered
that certain jellyfish (Figure 2) contained a green fluorescent protein (GFP),
because it was an annoying contaminant to be carefully separated away from
aequorin, the jellyfish protein that some of our competitors used to measure
calcium signals inside cells16. One day in April or May 1992, I typed “green
fluorescent protein” into Medline, the National Library of Medicine’s com-
puterized literature searching tool that had recently become accessible from
UCSD. To my astonishment, up popped a citation to a just-published paper
by Douglas Prasher and collaborators17, reporting the cloning of the gene
for GFP and the likelihood that the chromophore was an integral part of
the protein rather than being an external cofactor. I rushed to the library
to photocopy the paper (Figure 3), which conveniently listed Prasher’s
telephone number at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. I phoned
Prasher in May 1992 and was surprised to hear that he did not intend to work
on GFP any more. En route to the full-length gene, he had first obtained a
~70% length gene and tried to express it into bacteria, but no fluorescence
appeared. Because of funding difficulties and a change in career direction,
he was willing to pass the baton to us, provided that we promised to include
him as a coauthor if we succeeded. I agreed to this very reasonable request,
so he promised to send us a sample of the DNA encoding GFP, and some
frozen jellyfish tissue in which we might hunt for the enzyme(s) that we
both feared would be necessary to synthesize the chromophore within GFP.

                                                                                       189


However, I was not immediately ready to receive these samples, because no
one in the lab was experienced in molecular genetics. Stephen Adams had
learned much protein biochemistry during the collaboration with Susan
Taylor, but her lab had already laid the molecular biological foundation8,9
before we got involved. So I waited in 1992 for someone with molecular
genetics experience to join my lab. That person was Roger Heim, who was
just completing his Ph.D. in Switzerland on cloning Ca2+ pumps18,19. Heim
came strongly recommended by his mentor Prof. Ernesto Carafoli, who said
that his lab had an internal joke that if Heim could not get an experiment
to work, nobody could. Ironically, Heim wanted a diversion from molecular
biology and therefore applied to become a postdoctoral fellow in my lab to
learn and use Ca2+ imaging, but he accepted my suggestion that he also see if
he could make anything useful with Prasher’s GFP gene. He arrived at UCSD
in late September 1992.




Figure 3. Title, abstract, and acknowledgments from the paper describing the cloning of
the gene encoding Green Fluorescent Protein and the structure of GFP’s chromophore17.


INITIAL EXPERIMENTS
When I re-contacted Prasher in early October 1992 to say that with Heim’s
arrival we were ready to receive the samples, Prasher informed me that in the
months since my first phone call, Martin Chalfie at Columbia had requested
and already received the gene. Shortly thereafter, I met Chalfie at a Society
for Neuroscience meeting and heard from him that the gene could make
bacteria (E. coli) fluorescent, implying no other jellyfish-specific components

190


were required, which was a great relief. Heim therefore concentrated his ef-
forts on getting GFP to work in yeast (S. cerevisiae), partly to avoid wasteful du-
plication of Chalfie’s efforts, partly because we were getting advice and bor-
rowing equipment and reagents from my nearest neighbor at UCSD, Scott
Emr, an eminent molecular/cell biologist specializing in yeast. With the help
of Chalfie’s advice to amplify only the protein-coding region of Prasher’s
cDNA and thus discard the flanking upstream and downstream stretches
of DNA, Heim succeeded in making some yeast cells fluorescent, though
there was a huge variation in the brightness of individual cells in the popula-
tion. Heim and I showed Emr the cells under the microscope and asked if
he could suggest any biological question in yeast for which GFP could help
supply the answer. Emr was excited to see Heim’s results and he indicated
GFP may be used to track cargo protein movements through the secretory
pathway of yeast. A postdoc in the Emr lab made GFP fusion constructs to
a secreted protein and a lysosomal protein in yeast. Unfortunately, the GFP
fluorescence signals were very weak and highly variable from cell to cell. This
confirmed that wild-type GFP was too unreliable, so Emr’s lab put GFP aside
until it could be sufficiently improved.
   My original hope for fluorescent proteins was to fuse a different color to
each of the two types of subunits of PKA, so we obviously needed a second
color. Because the chromophore of GFP was mostly constructed from a
tyrosine at position 66, I asked Heim to mutate this amino acid to trypto-
phan, the other aromatic amino acid most conducive to absorbance and
fluorescence. This alteration practically destroyed the fluorescence. After the
failure of my naïve rational idea, Heim decided to mutate GFP randomly. To
our delight, he soon found a blue-fluorescing mutant (Figure 4, upper right
quadrant), which upon sequencing proved surprisingly to contain a histidine
at position 6620. Later we discovered that tryptophan at 66 gives an even
more useful and bleach-resistant cyan fluorescent protein (CFP), intermedi-
ate between blue and green, but only if additional mutations carve out extra
room inside the protein to accommodate the bulky tryptophan (Figure 4,
lower right quadrant). Even histidine at 66 benefits from its own set of com-
pensatory mutations21.




                                                                               191


Figure 4. Fluorescence from streaks of bacteria expressing (clockwise from upper right)
improved blue, cyan, green, and yellow fluorescent proteins. Each streak is labeled with
the mutation most responsible for its spectral alteration.


It still bothered me that we did not understand how the chromophore (tech-
nically, a p- hydroxybenzylideneimidazolidinone) inside GFP was spontane-
ously formed from serine 65, tyrosine 66, and glycine 6717,22. There seemed
to be no biochemical precedent for such a post-translational modification,
which not only formed a new heterocyclic ring but also dehydrogenated the
α-β single bond of tyrosine to a double bond. Dehydrogenations either evolve
hydrogen gas (H2), which I thought most unlikely in this case, or require an
oxidant to carry away the two hydrogen atoms. The only oxidant we could
directly control within the cells was atmospheric O2. Heim therefore grew
GFP-expressing bacteria under strictly anaerobic conditions and was pleas-
antly surprised to find that the protein was made but not yet fluorescent.
Upon re-exposure to air, that protein became green fluorescent over a few
hours20. We were therefore lucky that the requisite oxidant, O2, is available
in all organisms except obligate anaerobes, yet can be readily eliminated to
demonstrate its necessity. This discovery allowed us to propose a plausible
mechanism for chromophore formation (Figure 5). An important corollary
is that two hydrogens + O2 gives H2O2 = hydrogen peroxide, a potentially
toxic byproduct. I noticed this from having to balance chemical equations
in high school. Surprisingly few researchers recognized this simple conse-
quence of the conservation of matter, perhaps because detailed mass balance
is de-emphasized in most chemistry courses from university level onwards.
Much later the predicted generation of one molecule of H2O2 per molecule
of mature GFP was experimentally confirmed23.

192


Figure 5. Initial proposal for mechanism of formation of the GFP chromophore74. The
initial cyclization is analogous to the known tendency of Asn-Gly sequences to cyclize75.
Recently it has been proposed that oxidation precedes dehydration23.


We still had one other big problem before we could use FRET from the
blue mutant (“BFP”) to GFP to sense protein conformational changes or
protein-protein interactions. Ideally, GFP should be excitable only by the
same blue wavelengths as BFP emits. Then irradiation with ultraviolet (UV)
light to selectively excite BFP would either give blue emission in the absence
of FRET, or transfer the energy to GFP to glow green. However, the original
GFP was more strongly excited by UV than by blue, so that GFP was a very
poor acceptor of FRET from BFP. Why did GFP have two excitation peaks,
one big one in the UV and a much smaller one in the blue? I hypothesized
that the major UV peak was due to the chromophore structure as guessed
by Shimomura24 and Prasher17,22, whereas the minor blue peak was due to a
small fraction of the chromophores undergoing dehydration of serine 65 to
a dehydroalanine. Such dehydration would create an extra double bond in
conjugation with the rest of the chromophore and perhaps explain a shift
to longer wavelengths. To test this hypothesis, Heim mutated serine 65 to
alanine or cysteine, which I thought would respectively prevent or promote
the formation of the extra double bond, eliminating or accentuating the
blue peak. Once again I was wrong: both mutations eliminated the UV peak
and amplified the desired blue peak. Heim then tried replacing serine 65 by
threonine. Even though threonine is the amino acid most closely resembling
serine, differing only by a CH2 group, the unwanted UV peak disappeared
completely, the blue peak became 5–6 fold higher, and it even shifted ~10
nm to longer wavelengths (Figure 6)25. We therefore suggested this mutant,
“S65T”, as a general improvement on wild-type GFP (Figure 4, lower left

                                                                                    193


quadrant). This mutation greatly improved GFP’s performance in yeast26 and
thus began to address Emr’s difficulties. As an initial proof of principle21 that
FRET between GFP mutants could report biochemical signals, Heim geneti-
cally fused BFP to S65T GFP via a floppy peptide linker that could be pro-
teolyzed, e.g. by trypsin. FRET was effective in the chimeric protein before
enzyme exposure, but was disrupted after cleavage of the linker as expected
(Figure 7A). Fortunately the FPs themselves were quite resistant to proteases.
Other GFP mutants with spectra like S65T and their use as FRET acceptors
from BFP were independently developed by Youvan’s group27,28.




Figure 6. Excitation and emission spectra of wild-type (WT) GFP and several mutants of Ser
6525. The inset shows the structure of the wild-type chromophore.


In a random screen for optimal mutations of residues 55 to74, Cormack et
al.29 confirmed the value of S65T and added another mutation, F64L, which
permits folding at warmer temperatures. The resulting double mutant, “en-
hanced GFP”, was aggressively marketed by Clontech, a molecular biology
supply company, and became the basis for most subsequent applications
of GFP, even when these two mutations are not explicitly acknowledged.
Improvements like this helped repay our early debt to the Emr lab, which has
exploited the brighter GFPs for numerous studies of protein sorting in the
yeast secretory and endocytic pathways.




194


Figure 7. Schematic cartoons of genetically encoded fluorescent indicators based on FRET
from CFP to YFP, to report A) protease activity, B) Ca2+ concentrations, C) cAMP concen-
trations, and D) the balance between protein kinase and phosphatase activity.


The above improvements were all made without any three-dimensional struc-
tural information, which clearly would greatly facilitate further engineer-
ing. My group had no experience with x-ray crystallography, and tentative
approaches to local structural biologists found no takers. GFP had already
been crystallized30 well before the gene was cloned, and I had heard that
several other groups had entered the competition to solve the structure of
the wild-type protein. When Jim Remington at the University of Oregon
e-mailed me in May 1995 to get an expression vector for GFP, I suggested
that he solve the S65T structure, because that ought to be publishable even
if another group got the wild-type structure first. Within a few months, Dr.
Mats Ormö in Remington’s lab had solved the crystal structure (Figure 8),
using selenomethionine substitution for phasing. The protein was an almost
perfect cylinder, 2.4 nm in diameter by 4.0 nm long, composed of eleven
beta-strands surrounding a helix running up the central axis, into which
the chromophore was inserted. The chromophore was deeply buried at
the center of the protein, explaining how it could be shielded from solvent
and rigidified to make it fluorescent. (Once the protein is denatured, the
exposed chromophore completely loses its fluorescence.) We could also
rationalize why the chromophore had to be formed spontaneously, because
no enzyme could reach through the completely encapsulating shell formed
by the rest of GFP. Remington noticed a cavity next to the chromophore
and suggested that it could accommodate an aromatic ring in a π-stacking
relationship, which might shift the fluorescence wavelengths. To introduce

                                                                                   195


this ring, Andrew Cubitt, a new postdoc in my lab, mutated Thr 203 to vari-
ous aromatic amino acids, followed by re-annealing. Indeed, both excitation
and emission maxima increased about 20 nm, producing a noticeably more
yellowish fluorescent protein, hence dubbed YFP (Figure 4, upper left quad-
rant). These shifts made YFP a good FRET acceptor from CFP. We were glad
to have the CFP/YFP pair to replace our previous BFP/GFP combination,
because BFP was too easy to bleach and required potentially injurious UV
excitation.




Figure 8. X-ray crystal structure of the S65T mutant of GFP31. Alpha helices and beta strands
are shown as ribbons, connecting segments as tubes, and the chromophore in ball-and-
stick representation. N- and C-terminii are marked.


We felt this novel crystal structure deserved a high-profile publication, be-
cause it explained so many features of GFP and enabled immediate rational
improvement, so we submitted the work to Science. However, the referees
were not impressed. One of them acknowledged that the structure was
competently determined, but was not convinced that GFP was of sufficient
importance or significance. The other reviewer voiced disappointment that
our paper failed to answer the really important question about GFP, namely
what is the native biological function of GFP within the jellyfish. We felt it
unreasonable that a crystal structure should be expected to answer an eco-
logical question, so I appealed to the Editor, who then sent the manuscript
to a third reviewer. Many weeks elapsed without a response. Then one of the
groups working on the structure of wild-type GFP announced to the Internet
newsgroup on fluorescent proteins that they had solved the structure, which

196


would soon appear in Nature Biotechnology. I forwarded this announcement
to Science, which accepted our paper the next day without the long-awaited
third review. Fortunately, the two papers31,32, published within about a
week of each other, were in good agreement on the major features of the
structure, except that wild-type GFP was dimeric in Yang & Phillips’ crystals
whereas S65T GFP was monomeric in Ormö and Remington’s crystals grown
under different conditions. From these structures and a more detailed study
by Brejc et al.33, it became evident that the UV and blue excitation peaks in
wild-type GFP arose from the neutral and anionic forms of the chromophore
respectively, and that mutation of serine 65 to threonine re-oriented the side
chain hydroxyl enough to alter the hydrogen bonding network controlling
the ionization of the chromophore.


WATCHING INTRACELLULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Our first attempt to use FRET to measure real intracellular signals was
launched by Atsushi Miyawaki, who came to my lab from Tokyo, where he
had helped clone and characterize the receptor for inositol 1,4,5-trisphos-
phate (InsP3)34,35. I very much wanted to image this second messenger,
which is crucial for releasing Ca2+ from intracellular organelles such as the
endoplasmic reticulum. Miyawaki and I hoped to accomplish this by attach-
ing donor and acceptor FPs to opposite ends of the cytosolic domain of the
InsP3 receptor, which was supposed to undergo a conformational change
upon binding InsP3. However, none of Miyawaki’s constructs showed any
significant change in FRET in response to InsP3, and we realized we hardly
even knew where InsP3 bound within its receptor. With the invaluable help
of Dr. Mitsuhiko Ikura in Toronto, Miyawaki decided to practice on an engi-
neered receptor of known structure36, a fusion of calmodulin (CaM) with its
target peptide, “M13”, from skeletal muscle myosin light chain kinase. CaM
and M13 are relatively unstructured in the absence of Ca2+, but when free
Ca2+ concentrations increase, Ca2+ binds to CaM, causing it to wrap around
M13 in a way that is reminiscent of a hamburger bun wrapping around a
frankfurter (Figure 7B). My enthusiasm for this diversion was limited at first,
because my initial academic success had been in building and exploiting
organic synthetic indicators for Ca2+, so I did not feel that we needed more
Ca2+ reporters per se. But I conceded that this digression would be a good
rehearsal, so Miyawaki put BFP (later replaced by CFP) at the N-terminus of
CaM, while he attached S65T GFP (later replaced by YFP) at the C-terminus
of M13. This quadripartite fusion (see Figure 7B for schematic structure) in-
deed responded to Ca2+ with a FRET increase. Miyawaki dubbed these chime-
ric proteins “cameleons”, spelled without an “h” to reflect their origin from
CaM, yet alluding to their ability to change colors in response to Ca2+ and to
change that response following seemingly minor mutations37,38. Nevertheless,
genetic encodability gives cameleons some big complementary advantages:
applicability to any cell or organism into which the DNA can be introduced,
long-term continuous production of the indicator, precise targeting to spe-

                                                                           197


cific cell types within a complex tissue, precise targeting to subcellular loca-
tions, and susceptibility to improvement by rational or random mutation. For
these reasons, cameleons and their relatives have become the most popular
means to image activity of identified neurons within intact nervous systems.
A visually spectacular demonstration of dynamic Ca2+ signals seen with an im-
proved cameleon is the transient Ca2+ rise seen within each cleavage furrow
in the early development of a zebrafish embryo (Figure 9).




Figure 9. Transgenic zebrafish embryo expressing yellow cameleon 3.6076. Single confocal
z-plane, imaged every 5 sec (“mpf” = minutes post fertilization). Images selected from a
video kindly provided by Hide Mizuno & Atsushi Miyawaki, RIKEN, Japan.

What about labeling PKA, my original motivation for starting work on GFP?
Eventually this worked as well (schematic structure in Figure 7C), due mainly
to Manuela Zaccolo in Tullio Pozzan’s lab in collaboration with Charles Cho
in my lab39. Ironically, PKA proved one of the more difficult proteins to tag
with FPs, because an inordinate amount of trial and error was necessary
to find linkers that allowed fusion of the FPs without disrupting the abil-
ity of the subunits to respond to cAMP. Eventually these molecules allowed
Zaccolo and Pozzan to directly image the long hypothesized subcellular com-
partmentation of cAMP in cardiac muscle cells stimulated by an adrenaline
analog40. We and others also developed a more general approach to visualize
the dynamics of protein kinases, both those phosphorylating serines and
threonines41–46 as well as those acting on tyrosines47–49. The design principle
(Figure 7D) is a variation on the cameleons, in which M13 is replaced by a
peptide substrate (pink) for the kinase of interest, and CaM is replaced by a
protein domain (brown) that binds phosphorylated Ser, Thr, or Tyr as appro-

198


priate. Examples of such domains are 14-3-3 (for pSer or pThr), FHA1 (for
pThr), and SH2 (for pTyr). Once the kinase phosphorylates the target Ser,
Thr, or Tyr, that amino acid is intramolecularly complexed by the phospho-
amino acid binding domain, changing the distance or orientation between
the donor and acceptor FPs. An example of dynamic imaging of kinase activ-
ity is in Figure 10.




Figure 10. A fibroblast transfected with a reporter47 for the tyrosine kinase activity of the
receptor for epidermal growth factor (EGF). The extent of FRET, indicating the extent of
phosphorylation of the reporter, is shown in pseudocolors ranging from blue (negligible
phosphorylation) to red (maximal phosphorylation). These colors are superimposed
on differential interference contrast images to show cellular morphology. The colored
cell was the only one transfected within this field of view. At rest the indicator showed
negligible phosphorylation (A), but upon stimulation with EGF, phosphorylation (shown
by warmer pseudocolors) started at the periphery of the cell (B) and spread towards the
nucleus (C). After EGF was removed, the tide of phosphorylation receded back towards
the most peripheral tip at the far left end of the cell (D).




                                                                                        199


Figure 11. Chromophore structure52 of DsRed, drawn on a Petri dish using bacteria express-
ing the protein and showing its beautiful red fluorescence.


The final major expansion in the palette of FPs originated in the revelation
that they are not just accessory proteins in bioluminescent cnidaria but also
are responsible for many of the colors of nonbioluminescent corals. In a
breakthrough discovery, Matz et al. isolated a gene encoding a red fluorescent
protein (“DsRed”) from a coral in a Moscow aquarium50. The rapid commer-
cial availability of this gene enabled us to discover that DsRed is an obligate
tetramer51 and that its chromophore (Figure 11) is initially the same as that
of GFP but then undergoes another dehydrogenation to generate an un-
precedented acylimine, which is stable only when buried inside the intact
protein52. Theoretical calculations by Dr. Kim Baldridge at UCSD verified
that extension of the chromophore by two double bonds could account for
the red shift in excitation and emission spectra52. The tetrameric stoichiom-
etry and chromophore structure were soon confirmed by independent X-ray
crystal structures53,54. The very tight mutual binding of the four subunits se-
verely hindered use of DsRed as a fusion tag, because any protein fusion had
to become at least tetrameric. If the fusion partner engaged in any protein-
protein interactions of its own, massive aggregation and visible precipitation
often resulted. Nevertheless, Robert Campbell succeeded over many cycles
of directed evolution in generating a monomeric red FP (RFP), which made
protein fusions much more reliable55. He, Nathan Shaner, and Lei Wang then
engineered an extensive palette of monomeric FPs whose emission maxima
covered the rest of the visible spectrum out to 648 nm (Figure 12)56,57. Other
groups have also developed a multitude of FPs with complementary desirable

200


phenotypes, including amazing and highly useful photoswitching capabili-
ties58, but space does not permit an extensive review here.




Figure 12. Monomeric or tandem dimeric fluorescent proteins derived from Aequorea GFP
or Discosoma RFP, expressed in bacteria and purified. This photo is a time exposure of
fluorescences excited at different wavelengths and viewed through different cutoff filters.


EXAMPLES OF MEDICAL AND EDUCATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE
One of the most common requests I get is to explain why GFP and related
FPs are significant, preferably in lay terms. My usual answer has been that
their genetically encoded fluorescent colors can make many key biochemical
processes directly visible inside living cells and organisms. Using standard
molecular biological tricks to connect host cell genes to FP genes, we can
watch when and where those host cell genes get switched on and off, when
the protein products are born, where they travel, with what other proteins
they interact, and how long they survive. Even when we cannot directly tag
the signals of interest, e.g. Ca2+, cAMP, protease or kinase activities, we can
often engineer FP-based indicators as in Figure 7 to image those signals in-
directly. These generalized explanations seem too abstract for many people,
who would prefer more specific applications of relevance to major medical
problems. I therefore mention a few rather arbitrarily chosen examples:
   A vaccine against AIDS that would eradicate the disease from already-
infected patients would be extremely desirable. Tagging of the causative
virus with GFP and high-resolution time-lapse microscopy of infected T cells
contacting naïve cells shows that the virus can pass directly from one cell to
another through specialized transient adhesions dubbed virological synapses

                                                                                      201


(Figure 13). If the virus can really spread between host cells without even
transiently exposing itself to the extracellular milieu where antibodies could
neutralize it, then the task of any post-infection vaccine will be much harder.




Figure 13. GFP labeling of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) shows that the virus can
spread from cell to cell through virological “synapses” without exposure to antibody neu-
tralization. Reprinted with permission from Figure 6A,B of Chen et al.77.


There is much interest in the hypothesis that some of the pathology in
Alzheimer’s disease results from chronic elevations in cytosolic Ca2+ in the af-
fected neurons59, but the evidence has come from neurons in culture rather
than intact animals. The genetic encodability of cameleons has now enabled
imaging of Ca2+ in the brains of normal mice vs. transgenic mice with a mod-
el for Alzheimer’s disease60. In normal animals, free Ca2+ in neurons at rest is
tightly regulated around 80 nM, whereas in the disease models, about 20% of
the dendrites show much higher Ca2+ centered around 400 nM, particularly
in the neighborhood of Alzheimer’s plaques (Figure 14). This observation
provides direct evidence in vivo for dysregulation of neuronal Ca2+ during
Alzheimer’s disease.




202


Figure 14. Two-photon imaging of yellow cameleon 3.6076 in brains of transgenic mice,
without or with APP1/presenilin mutations to generate plaques modeling Alzheimer’s
disease. Low to high cytosolic [Ca2+] level are shown in blue to red pseudocolors respec-
tively. In the disease model, 20% of neurons show a distinctly higher cytosolic [Ca2+], espe-
cially in the vicinity of disease plaques. Figure donated by Dr. Brian Bacskai and related to
Kuchibhotla et al.60.


An example of the use of FPs in drug discovery comes from efforts to find
small molecules that inhibit the aggregation of the Alzheimer’s disease
peptide Aβ into β-amyloid. When Aβ is fused to the N-terminus of GFP, the
aggregation of Aβ is fast enough to prevent the GFP from folding and becom-
ing fluorescent. Candidate drugs that prevent aggregation of Aβ allow GFP
fluorescence to develop, constituting a simple high-throughput way to screen
combinatorial libraries (Figure 15)61.




                                                                                        203


Figure 15. High-throughput screening of combinatorial drugs to find inhibitors of aggrega-
tion of Aβ, the Alzheimer’s disease peptide. Inhibition of aggregation allows an Aβ42-GFP
fusion to become fluorescent. Reprinted with permission from Figure 1 of Kim et al.61.




Figure 16. Frames chosen from a time-lapse video of HEK293 cells growing and dividing in
tissue culture while transfected with a two-color reporter of cell cycle progression. Green-
fluorescing cells are actively undergoing mitosis, whereas red-fluorescing cells are in inter-
phase62. Video courtesy of Asako Sawano & Atsushi Miyawaki, RIKEN, Japan.



204


A final example comes from indicators of the mitotic cell cycle. Certain
protein domains tell cells to accumulate those proteins at particular phases
of the cell cycle and to destroy them at other phases. If these domains are
grafted onto FPs of different colors, the cells can be made to fluoresce one
color (say green) while they are actively dividing and another color (say red)
while resting62. In cell culture, these cells display spectacular oscillations like
an aerial view of asynchronized traffic lights (Figure 16). If tagged cells from
a benign tumor line (e.g. NMuMG) are transplanted into an animal, the tu-
mor initially looks yellow at low magnification (Figure 17) because it contains
a mixture of green- and red-fluorescing cells. Over several days, the tumor
shifts to all red, telling us that the cells have stopped dividing, which is why
the tumor is benign. If tagged cells from a malignant tumor line (e.g. HeLa)
are similarly transplanted, the tumor persists in its yellow color. Higher mag-
nification views show the cell cycle phase pattern of the tumor cells around
blood vessels. Since the pattern depends on several factors, including the
maturity of vessels and the degree of necrosis in the surrounding tissues, this
experiment provides a visually powerful lesson on the importance of new
blood vessel formation in permitting cancer cells to proliferate.




Figure 17. Reporter of cell-cycle progression applied to benign (NMuMG) and malignant
(HeLa) tumor implants in vivo. Figure 3A–H from Sakaue-Sawano et al.62, reprinted with
permission.

Multicolored FPs are helpful in education as well as research. Simple ex-
periments with FPs enable secondary school students (Figure 18) to see with
their own eyes how DNA can transform cells, when mutations have occurred,
how proteins behave biochemically, and so on. After Jeremy Babendure

                                                                                 205


completed a Ph.D. in my lab, he began a very successful program (biobridge.
ucsd.edu) to make experiments like these accessible to high school science
classes, initially starting close to UCSD but now spreading wherever teachers
and students are interested.




Figure 18. High school science classes using fluorescent proteins as laboratory exercises as
part of the BioBridge program (biobridge.ucsd.edu).

TRANSCENDING THE LIMITATIONS OF EXISTING FPs
FPs have obvious major limitations:
1. All FPs with structures homologous to jellyfish GFP and coral RFP, i.e.
   cylinders comprising 11 β-strands, contain >200 amino acids. Occasionally
   this size proves too large and perturbative when fused to the protein of
   interest63–65; also the time required for FPs to fold and form their chro-
   mophores is sometimes too slow66,67. In such cases FPs can be replaced by
   much shorter sequences, e.g. the 12 residue peptide FLNCCPGCCMEP68,
   which bind dyes containing two appropriately placed arsenic atoms that
   link to the four cysteine sulfhydryls.
2. The O2 requirement for chromophore maturation prevents applications
   in organisms that cannot tolerate even transient exposure to any O2. Aside
   from the tetracysteine/biarsenical system just mentioned, flavin-binding
   proteins offer another potential solution69.
3. For imaging of transfected cells and organs inside live mammals, excita-
   tion and emission wavelengths > 600 nm would be very advantageous
   because hemoglobin and other pigments tremendously attenuate shorter

206


   wavelengths. Unfortunately, it has been very difficult to find or evolve
   coral FPs that retain high brightness with excitation wavelengths > 600
   nm. As mentioned at the outset, some phycobiliproteins from blue-green
   algae have such long wavelengths and high brightness. More recently,
   plant phytochromes have been mutated into long-wavelength FPs dubbed
   phytofluors70,71. However, none of these has been successfully expressed
   in mammalian cells, perhaps because the pigment cofactors are foreign.
   Recently, Xiaokun Shu in my lab discovered that bacterial phytochromes
   can also be mutated into FPs with excitation maxima in the far red, e.g.
   684 nm, and emissions >700 nm72 (Figure 19). The crucial advantage of
   bacterial phytochromes is that they spontaneously incorporate their cofac-
   tor, biliverdin, the initial product of heme catabolism in all aerobic organ-
   isms including humans. Thus we now have infrared FPs that work in intact
   animals such as mice and flies, which I find particularly satisfying given my
   early unsuccessful interest in exploiting phycobiliproteins.




Figure 19. An infrared-fluorescing protein (IFP) can be evolved from a phytochrome from
Deinococcus radiodurans. Upper left: crystal structure of the wild-type phytochrome (PDB:
1ztu)78 with its chromophore, biliverdin, in purple, and residues targeted for mutagenesis
labeled. Lower left: Normalized excitation (blue) and emission (red) spectra of IFP1.4.
Right: Liver fluorescence of intact living mice injected with adenoviruses encoding IFP1.1,
mKate (an RFP previously advocated for in vivo imaging79), or an enhanced GFP. Biliverdin
(250 nmol) was injected intravenously 1 hr before obtaining the IFP image. The mKate im-
age was 5-fold brightened in software to render it visible. Belly fur was removed with depila-
tory cream but the skin was left unbroken. Arrows point to the liver. Note that the GFP im-
ages are dominated by autofluorescence, rendering the livers invisible. The much greater
visibility in the highly pigmented liver of IFP compared to previous FPs demonstrates the
value of very long excitation and emission wavelengths for in vivo fluorescence imaging.



                                                                                         207


4. The crucial advantage of FPs, their genetic encodability, is of no or very
   limited value in human patients, because human gene therapy would
   have to become safe and effective, and introduction of an FP gene would
   have to benefit the patient directly. Molecular imaging in human patients
   must still rely on synthetic molecules. Furthermore, humans are even
   thicker and more opaque than mice, so whole-body scanning of patients
   requires nonoptical techniques such as X-ray computed tomography,
   positron emission tomography, and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging.
   Therefore we have been developing activatable cell penetrating peptides
   (ACPPs), which are polycationic cell penetrating peptides (CPPs) whose
   cellular uptake is minimized by a polyanionic inhibitory domain and then
   restored upon proteolysis of the peptide linker connecting the polyan-
   ionic and polycationic domains. Local activity of proteases able to cut the
   linker causes amplified retention in tissues and uptake into cells73. Tumor
   uptake of ACPPs is up to 4 fold higher with a matrix metalloproteinase
   substrate (PLGLAG) as the linker than with a negative control composed
   of D-amino acids (Figure 20). Conjugation of ACPPs to macromolecular
   carriers such as dendrimers prolongs pharmacokinetics and increases
   delivery of payload (Cy5 or Gd-DOTA or both in the same molecule) to
   tumor for far-red or MR imaging. The dual labeled probe with Cy5 and
   Gd-DOTA enables whole body MR imaging followed by fluorescence-
   guided surgery. Thrombin-cleavable ACPPs accumulate in atherosclerotic
   plaques and experimental stroke models, so vascular pathologies can also
   be imaged. Because the ability of ACPPs to deliver various cargoes with en-
   zymatic amplification to protease-expressing tissues in vivo offers clinical
   potential, this is now the dominant effort in my lab.




208


Figure 20. Activatable cell penetrating peptides (ACPPs) localize to tumors in vivo. Hep2
(human laryngeal carcinoma) tumor cells stably transfected with EGFP were xenografted
into nude mice. 3 weeks after implanting 5x106 cells subcutaneously, the tumor had
reached ~ 5 mm diameter. Top images: 6 hrs after systemic injection of an ACPP, 10 nmol
succinyl-e8-XPLGLAG- r9c(Cy5), the skin was removed over the tumor, and GFP fluores-
cence, Cy5 fluorescence, and reflected light images were acquired from the anesthetized
animal. X denotes 6-aminohexanoyl, upper case letters represent L-amino acids, lower
case letters are D-amino acids. PLGLAG is a sequence cleavable by matrix metalloprotein-
ases-2 and -973. Bottom panel: an analogous experiment with a matching negative control,
succinyl-e8-Xplglag-r9c(Cy5), in which the protease cleavage site has been changed to
D-amino acids, rendering it protease-resistant. The lack of Cy5 signal in the tumor indi-
cates that retention depends on cleavage by proteases.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A list of the collaborators most relevant to the work described here is in
Figure 21. Senior honorees often point out that the experiments were done
by younger colleagues in their lab, but I have to go further and confess that I
could not have done the experiments with my own hands because I lack the
training in the relevant methods, especially the molecular biology. So I am
particularly indebted to these key people as well as many others too numer-
ous to list here. I am also grateful to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
which has supported me from the time I moved to UCSD, as well as to the
National Institutes of Health for many years of funding. Our recent transition
to cancer research was supported by the Breast Cancer Research Program of
the Department of Defense.




                                                                                    209


Figure 21. Key collaborators for the work described in this lecture, and a glowing California
sunset in a Petri dish, drawn with multiple colors of bacteria expressing fluorescent pro-
teins.




210


REFERENCES
1.    Arciero, D. M., Bryant, D. A. & Glazer, A. N., “In vitro attachment of bilins to apo-
      phycocyanin. I. Specific covalent adduct formation at cysteinyl residues involved in
      phycocyanobilin binding in C-phycocyanin,” J. Biol. Chem. 263, 18343–18349 (1988).
2.    Arciero, D. M., Dallas, J. L. & Glazer, A. N., “In vitro attachment of bilins to apophyco-
      cyanin. II. Determination of the structures of tryptic bilin peptides derived from the
      phycocyanobilin adduct,” J. Biol. Chem. 263, 18350–18357 (1988).
3.    Arciero, D. M., Dallas, J. L. & Glazer, A. N., “In vitro attachment of bilins to apo-
      phycocyanin. III. Properties of the phycoerythrobilin adduct,” J. Biol. Chem. 263,
      18358–18363 (1988).
4.    Fairchild, C. D. & Glazer, A. N., “Oligomeric structure, enzyme kinetics, and substrate
      specificity of the phycocyanin α subunit phycocyanobilin lyase,” J. Biol. Chem. 269,
      8686–8694 (1994).
5.    Gill, G. N. & Garren, L. D., “A cyclic-3’,5’-adenosine monophosphate dependent pro-
      tein kinase from the adrenal cortex: comparison with a cyclic AMP binding protein,”
      Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 39, 335–343 (1970).
6.    Brostrom, M. A., Reimann, E. M., Walsh, D. A. & Krebs, E. G., “A cyclic 3’,5’-AMP-
      stimulated protein kinase from cardiac muscle,” Adv. Enzyme Regul. 8, 191–203
      (1970).
7.    Tao, M., Salas, M. L. & Lipmann, F., “Mechanism of activation by adenosine 3’:5’-cyc-
      lic monophosphate of a protein phosphokinase from rabbit reticulocytes,” Proc Natl
      Acad Sci U.S.A. 67, 408–414 (1970).
8.    Saraswat, L. D., Filutowicz, M. & Taylor, S. S., “Expression of the type I regula-
      tory subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase in Escherichia coli,” J. Biol. Chem. 261,
      11091–11096 (1986).
9.    Slice, L. W. & Taylor, S. S., “Expression of the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent
      protein kinase in Escherichia coli,” J. Biol. Chem. 264, 20940–20946 (1989).
10.   Adams, S. R., Harootunian, A. T., Buechler, Y. J., Taylor, S. S. & Tsien, R. Y.,
      “Fluorescence ratio imaging of cyclic AMP in single cells,” Nature 349, 694–697
      (1991).
11.   Adams, S. R., Bacskai, B. J., Taylor, S. S. & Tsien, R. Y., “Fluorescent Probes for
      Biological Activity of Living Cells – A Practical Guide”, Mason, W. T. (ed.), pp. 133–
      149 (Academic Press, New York, 1993).
12.   Civitelli, R. et al., “Single-cell analysis of cyclic AMP response to parathyroid hormone
      in osteoblastic cells,” J. Bone Miner. Res. 9, 1407–1417 (1994).
13.   Hempel, C. M., Vincent, P., Adams, S. R., Tsien, R. Y. & Selverston, A. I., “Spatio-
      temporal dynamics of cAMP signals in an intact neural circuit,” Nature 384, 166–169
      (1996).
14.   Sammak, P. J., Adams, S. R., Harootunian, A. T., Schliwa, M. & Tsien, R. Y.,
      “Intracellular cyclic AMP not Ca2+ determines the direction of vesicle movement in
      melanophores: direct measurements by fluorescence ratio imaging,” J. Cell Biol. 117,
      57–72 (1992).
15.   Bacskai, B. J. et al., “Spatially resolved dynamics of cAMP and protein kinase A sub-
      units in Aplysia sensory neurons,” Science 260, 222–226 (1993).
16.   Blinks, J. R., Wier, W. G., Hess, P. & Prendergast, F. G., “Measurement of Ca2+ concen-
      trations in living cells,” Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 40, 1–114 (1982).
17.   Prasher, D. C., Eckenrode, V. K., Ward, W. W., Prendergast, F. G. & Cormier, M.
      J., “Primary structure of the Aequorea victoria green-fluorescent protein,” Gene 111,
      229–233 (1992).
18.   Heim, R. et al., “Expression, purification, and properties of the plasma membrane
      Ca2+ pump and of its N-terminally truncated 105-kDa fragment,” J. Biol. Chem. 267,
      24476–24484 (1992).




                                                                                           211


19.   Heim, R., Hug, M., Iwata, T., Strehler, E. E. & Carafoli, E., “Microdiversity of human
      plasma-membrane calcium-pump isoform 2 generated by alternative RNA splicing in
      the N-terminal coding region,” Eur. J. Biochem. 205, 333–340 (1992).
20.   Heim, R., Prasher, D. C. & Tsien, R. Y., “Wavelength mutations and post-translational
      autooxidation of green fluorescent protein,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 12501–
      12504 (1994).
21.   Heim, R. & Tsien, R. Y., “Engineering green fluorescent protein for improved bright-
      ness, longer wavelengths and fluorescence energy transfer,” Curr. Biol. 6, 178–182
      (1996).
22.   Cody, C. W., Prasher, D. C., Westler, W. M., Prendergast, F. G. & Ward, W. W.,
      “Chemical structure of the hexapeptide chromophore of the Aequorea green-fluores-
      cent protein,” Biochemistry 32, 1212–1218 (1993).
23.   Zhang, L., Patel, H. N., Lappe, J.W . & Wachter, R. M., “Reaction progress of chro-
      mophore biogenesis in green fluorescent protein,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 4766–4772
      (2006).
24.   Shimomura, O., “Structure of the chromophore of Aequorea green fluorescent pro-
      tein,” FEBS Lett. 104, 220–222 (1979).
25.   Heim, R., Cubitt, A. B. & Tsien, R. Y., “Improved green fluorescence,” Nature 373,
      663–664 (1995).
26.   Wach, A., Brachat, A., Alberti-Segui, C., Rebischung, C. & Philippsen, P.,
      “Heterologous HIS3 marker and GFP reporter modules for PCR-targeting in
      Saccharomyces cerevisiae,” Yeast 13, 1065–1075 (1997).
27.   Delagrave, S., Hawtin, R. E., Silva, C. M., Yang, M. M. & Youvan, D. C., “Red-shifted
      excitation mutants of the green fluorescent protein,” Bio/Technology 13, 151–154
      (1995).
28.   Mitra, R. D., Silva, C. M. & Youvan, D. C., “Fluorescence resonance energy transfer
      between blue-emitting and red-shifted excitation derivatives of the green fluorescent
      protein,” Gene 173, 13–17 (1996).
29.   Cormack, B. P., Valdivia, R. H. & Falkow, S., “FACS-optimized mutants of the green
      fluorescent protein (GFP),” Gene 173, 33–38 (1996).
30.   Perozzo, M. A., Ward, K. B., Thompson, R. B. & Ward, W. W., “X-ray diffraction and
      time-resolved fluorescence analyses of Aequorea green fluorescent protein crystals,” J.
      Biol. Chem. 263, 7713–7716 (1988).
31.   Ormö, M. et al., “Crystal structure of the Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein,”
      Science 273, 1392–1395 (1996).
32.   Yang, F., Moss, L. G. & Phillips, G. N., Jr., “The molecular structure of green fluores-
      cent protein,” Nature Biotechnology 14, 1246–1251 (1996).
33.   Brejc, K. et al., “Structural basis for dual excitation and photoisomerization of the
      Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 2306–2311
      (1997).
34.   Furuichi, T. et al., “Primary structure and functional expression of the inositol
      1,4,5-trisphosphate-binding protein P400,” Nature 342, 32–38 (1989).
35.   Miyawaki, A. et al., “Structure-function relationships of the mouse inositol 1,4,5-tris-
      phosphate receptor,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 4911–4915 (1991).
36.   Porumb, T., Yau, P., Harvey, T. S. & Ikura, M., “A calmodulin-target peptide hybrid
      molecule with unique calcium-binding properties,” Protein Eng. 7, 109–115 (1994).
37.   Miyawaki, A. et al., “Fluorescent indicators for Ca2+ based on green fluorescent pro-
      teins and calmodulin,” Nature 388, 882–887 (1997).
38.   Miyawaki, A., Griesbeck, O., Heim, R. & Tsien, R. Y., “Dynamic and quantitative Ca2+
      measurements using improved cameleons,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 2135–2140
      (1999).
39.   Zaccolo, M. et al., “A genetically encoded, fluorescent indicator for cyclic AMP in liv-
      ing cells,” Nature Cell Biology 2, 25–29 (2000).
40.   Zaccolo, M. & Pozzan, T., “Discrete microdomains with high concentration of cAMP
      in stimulated rat neonatal cardiac myocytes,” Science 295, 1711–1715 (2002).

212


41.   Zhang, J., Ma, Y., Taylor, S. S. & Tsien, R. Y., “Genetically encoded reporters of protein
      kinase A activity reveal impact of substrate tethering,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98,
      14997–15002 (2001).
42.   Zhang, J. & Allen, M. D., “FRET-based biosensors for protein kinases: illuminating the
      kinome,” Mol. Biosyst. 3, 759–765 (2007).
43.   Violin, J. D., Zhang, J., Tsien, R. Y. & Newton, A. C., “A genetically encoded fluores-
      cent reporter reveals oscillatory phosphorylation,” J. Cell Biol. 161, 899–909 (2003).
44.   Gallegos, L. L., Kunkel, M. T. & Newton, A. C., “Targeting protein kinase C activity re-
      porter to discrete intracellular regions reveals spatiotemporal differences in agonist-
      dependent signaling,” J. Biol. Chem. 281, 30947–30956 (2006).
45.   Kunkel, M. T., Ni, Q., Tsien, R. Y., Zhang, J. & Newton, A. C., “Spatio-temporal dynam-
      ics of protein kinase B/Akt signaling revealed by a genetically encoded fluorescent
      reporter,” J. Biol. Chem. 280, 5581–5587 (2005).
46.   Kunkel, M. T., Toker, A., Tsien, R. Y. & Newton, A. C., “Calcium-dependent regulation
      of protein kinase D revealed by a genetically encoded kinase activity reporter,” J. Biol.
      Chem. 282, 6733–6742 (2007).
47.   Ting, A. Y., Kain, K. H., Klemke, R. L. & Tsien, R. Y., “Genetically encoded fluores-
      cent reporters of protein tyrosine kinase activities in living cells,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      U.S.A. 98, 15003–15008 (2001).
48.   Kurokawa, K. et al., “A pair of FRET-based probes for tyrosine phosphorylation of the
      CrkII adaptor protein in vivo,” J. Biol. Chem. 276, 31305–31310 (2001).
49.   Wang, Y. et al., “Visualizing the mechanical activation of Src.,” Nature 434, 1040–1045
      (2005).
50.   Matz, M. V. et al., “Fluorescent proteins from nonbioluminescent Anthozoa species,”
      Nature Biotechnology 17, 969–973 (1999).
51.   Baird, G. S., Zacharias, D. A. & Tsien, R. Y., “Biochemistry, mutagenesis, and oli-
      gomerization of dsRed, a red fluorescent protein from coral,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      U.S.A. 97, 11984–11989 (2000).
52.   Gross, L. A., Baird, G. S., Hoffman, R. C., Baldridge, K. K. & Tsien, R. Y., “The struc-
      ture of the chromophore within DsRed, a red fluorescent protein from coral,” Proc.
      Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 11990–11995 (2000).
53.   Yarbrough, D., Wachter, R. M., Kallio, K., Matz, M. V. & Remington, S. J., “Refined
      crystal structure of DsRed, a red fluorescent protein from coral, at 2.0-Α resolution,”
      Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 462–467 (2001).
54.   Wall, M. A., Socolich, M. & Ranganathan, R., “The structural basis for red fluo-
      rescence in the tetrameric GFP homolog DsRed,” Nature Struct. Biol. 7, 1133–1138
      (2000).
55.   Campbell, R. E. et al., “A monomeric red fluorescent protein,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      U.S.A. 99, 7877–7882 (2002).
56.   Shaner, N. C. et al., “Improved monomeric red, orange and yellow fluorescent
      proteins derived from Discosoma sp. red fluorescent protein,” Nat. Biotechnol. 22,
      1567–1572 (2004).
57.   Wang, L., Jackson, W. C., Steinbach, P. A. & Tsien, R. Y., “Evolution of new nonanti-
      body proteins via iterative somatic hypermutation,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101,
      16745–16749 (2004).
58.   Shaner, N. C., Patterson, G. H. & Davidson, M. W., “Advances in fluorescent protein
      technology,” J. Cell Sci. 120, 4247–4260 (2007).
59.   Marx, J., “Alzheimer’s disease – Fresh evidence points to an old suspect: Calcium,”
      Science 318, 384–385 (2007).
60.   Kuchibhotla, K. V. et al., “A beta plaques lead to aberrant regulation of calcium
      homeostasis in vivo resulting in structural and functional disruption of neuronal
      networks,” Neuron 59, 214–225 (2008).
61.   Kim, W. et al., “A high-throughput screen for compounds that inhibit aggregation of
      the Alzheimer’s peptide,” ACS Chem. Biol. 1, 461–469 (2006).



                                                                                              213


62.   Sakaue-Sawano, A. et al., “Visualizing spatiotemporal dynamics of multicellular cell-
      cycle progression,” Cell 132, 487–498 (2008).
63.   Andresen, M., Schmitz-Salue, R. & Jakobs, S., “Short tetracysteine tags to beta-tubulin
      demonstrate the significance of small labels for live cell imaging,” Mol. Biol. Cell 15,
      5616–5622 (2004).
64.   Hoffmann, C. et al., “A FlAsH-based FRET approach to determine G protein-coupled
      receptor activation in living cells,” Nat. Methods 2, 171–176 (2005).
65.   Enninga, J., Mounier, J., Sansonetti, P. & Van Nhieu, G. T., “Secretion of type III effec-
      tors into host cells in real time,” Nature Methods 2, 959–965 (2005).
66.   Rice, M. C., Czymmek, K. & Kmiec, E. B., “The potential of nucleic acid repair in
      functional genomics,” Nat. Biotechnol. 19, 321–326 (2001).
67.   Rodriguez, A. J., Shenoy, S. M., Singer, R. H. & Condeelis, J., “Visualization of mRNA
      translation in living cells,” J. Cell Biol. 175, 67–76 (2006).
68.   Martin, B. R., Giepmans, B. N., Adams, S. R. & Tsien, R. Y., “Mammalian cell-based
      optimization of the biarsenical-binding tetracysteine motif for improved fluorescence
      and affinity,” Nat. Biotechnol. 23, 1308–1314 (2005).
69.   Drepper, T. et al., “Reporter proteins for in vivo fluorescence without oxygen,” Nature
      Biotechnology 25, 443–445 (2007).
70.   Fischer, A. J. & Lagarias, J. C., “Harnessing phytochrome’s glowing potential,” Proc.
      Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 17334–17339 (2004).
71.   Murphy, J. T. & Lagarias, J. C., “The phytofluors: a new class of fluorescent protein
      probes,” Curr. Biol. 7, 870–876 (1997).
72.   Shu, X. et al., “Mammalian expression of infrared fluorescent proteins engineered
      from a bacterial phytochrome,” Science 324, 804–807 (2009).
73.   Jiang, T. et al., “Tumor imaging by means of proteolytic activation of cell-penetrating
      peptides,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 17867–17872 (2004).
74.   Cubitt, A. B. et al., “Understanding, using and improving green fluorescent protein,”
      Trends Biochem. Sci. 20, 448–455 (1995).
75.   Wright, H. T., “Nonenzymatic deamidation of asparaginyl and glutaminyl residues in
      proteins,” Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 26, 1–52 (1991).
76.   Nagai, T., Yamada, S., Tominaga, T., Ichikawa, M. & Miyawaki, A., “Expanded dynamic
      range of fluorescent indicators for Ca(2+) by circularly permuted yellow fluorescent
      proteins,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 10554–10559 (2004).
77.   Chen, P., Hubner, W., Spinelli, M. A. & Chen, B. K., “Predominant mode of human
      immunodeficiency virus transfer between T cells is mediated by sustained Env-
      dependent neutralization-resistant virological synapses,” J. Virol. 81, 12582–12595
      (2007).
78.   Wagner, J. R., Brunzelle, J. S., Forest, K. T. & Vierstra, R. D., “A light-sensing knot
      revealed by the structure of the chromophore-binding domain of phytochrome,”
      Nature 438, 325–331 (2005).
79.   Shcherbo, D. et al., “Bright far-red fluorescent protein for whole-body imaging,” Nat.
      Methods 4, 741–746 (2007).
Portrait photo of Roger Y. Tsien by photographer Ulla Montan.




214
