The molecular basis of eukaryotiC
transcription

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2006
by
Roger D. Kornberg
Stanford University, School of Medicin, Fairchild D 123, Stanford,
CA 94305-5126, USA.




I am deeply grateful for the honor bestowed on me by the Nobel Committee
for Chemistry and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. It is an honor I
share with my collaborators. It is also recognition of the many who have con-
tributed over the past quarter century to the study of transcription.


The nucleosome
My own involvement in studies of
transcription began with the dis-
covery of the nucleosome, the basic
unit of DNA coiling in eukaryote
chromosomes [1]. X-ray studies and
protein chemistry led me to propose
the wrapping of DNA around a set
of eight histone molecules in the
nucleosome (Fig. 1). Some years
later, Yahli Lorch and I found this
wrapping of DNA prevents the ini-
tiation of transcription in vitro [2].
Michael Grunstein and colleagues
showed nucleosomes interfere with
transcription in vivo [3]. The nuc­
leosome serves as a general gene
repressor. It assures the inactivity
of all the many thousands of genes
in eukaryotic cells except those
                                         Figure 1. The nucleosome, fundamental
whose transcription is brought           particle of the eukaryote chromosome.
about by specific positive regulatory    Schematic shows the coiling of DNA around
mechanisms. What are these posi-         a set of eight histones in the nucleosome,
                                         the further coiling in condensed (transcrip-
tive regulatory mechanisms? How is
                                         tionally inactive) chromatin, and uncoiling
repression by the nucleosome over-       for interaction with the RNA polymerase II
come for transcription? Our recent       (pol II) transcription machinery.


176


work has shown that promoter chromatin is transformed from a static to a
dynamic state upon gene activation [4]. Nucleosomes are rapidly removed
and reassembled in the activated state. Promoter DNA is made transiently
available for interaction with the transcription machinery.


RNA polymerase II transcription
Our studies have focused on the RNA polymerase II (pol II) transcription
machinery. Pol II is responsible for all messenger RNA synthesis in eukary-
otes. As the first step in gene expression, pol II transcription is an end point
of a great many signal transduction pathways. The intricate regulation of pol
II transcription underlies cell differentiation and development.
   Because nucleosomes are removed from promoter DNA for transcription
in vivo, we and others have been able to fractionate the components of the
transcription machinery guided by transcription assays performed with nak­ed
DNA in vitro. Robert Roeder and colleagues initiated the isolation of pol II
transcription proteins from human HeLa cell extracts [5]. This effort was
brought to fruition by Ronald and Joan Conaway, who took advantage of the
greater abundance of starting material available from a rat liver extract [6].
We at Stanford isolated the pol II machinery from yeast, in work begun by
Neal Lue in 1987, who solved the longstanding problem of preparing an ex-
tract active in pol II transcription from yeast [7]. In retrospect, our pursuit of
the problem in yeast was a fortunate choice. It proved crucial for unraveling
both the structure and regulation of the pol II machinery. There were serio­
us doubts when we began whether findings in yeast would prove relevant to
human cells. But upon fractionation of yeast and mammalian systems, the
results were the same.
   Both systems comprise six proteins: pol II, and five general transcription
factors, known as TFIIB, -D, -E, -F, and -H [8]. Pol II is capable of unwinding
DNA, synthesizing RNA, and rewinding DNA. But pol II alone is incapable of
recognizing a promoter and initiating transcription. For these essential func-
tions, the participation of the general transcription factors is required.


Mediator of transcriptional regulation
It was at first thought the set of six proteins constituted a complete tran-
scription system, that it would support not only accurately initiated but also
appropriately regulated transcription. Communication from a regulatory
protein to the transcription machinery at a promoter was believed to be
direct. We found, however, that an additional crude fraction was required
for regulation in the yeast system (Fig. 2). We referred to this activity as
Mediator [9, 10], and in 1994, Stefan Björklund and Young-Joon Kim iso-
lated the active protein as an assembly of more than twenty subunits, with a
total mass in excess of a million Daltons [11]. Thirteen of the subunits were
products of genes previously identified in screens for molecules involved in
transcriptional regulation. These were disparate screens, done on different

                                                                              177


Figure 2. Mediator of transcriptional regulation. Schematic shows the transduction of regu-
latory information from a gene activator protein bound to an enhancer DNA element to
the pol II transcription machinery at a promoter.




promoters in different labs at different times. With the isolation of Mediator,
the products of all the screens were united in a common biochemical entity.
Still the Mediator idea did not gain wide acceptance, as regulation in higher
organisms was believed to be direct, through interaction of gene activator
proteins with the so-called TAF subunits of the general transcription factor
TFIID. Finally in 1998, we and others isolated mammalian counterparts of
the yeast Mediator (reviewed in refs. 12 and 13), and TAFs were shown to
be important for promoter recognition, not regulation [14–16]. As others
have shown, 22 of 25 yeast Mediator subunits have demonstrable homologs
in higher cells [17, 18].
   We are just beginning to fathom the complexity of Mediator, but already
three points are clear. First, Mediator is not only the basis for regulated tran-
scription; it is absolutely required for almost all transcription of almost all pol
II promoters [19, 20]. Mediator is no less essential for transcription than pol
II itself. Second, Mediator interacts directly with both activator proteins and
with pol II [13]. It forms a tight complex with an activator at an enhancer,
and it subsequently contacts pol II and the general transcription factors
at the promoter to stimulate the initiation of transcription [12]. Third,
Mediator is important not only for positive but also for negative regulation
of transcription. Though Mediator is commonly referred to as a co-activator,
this is a misnomer. Mediator is a co-activator, a co-repressor, and a general
transcription factor all in one. Mediator may be viewed as a signal processor.

178


It transduces regulatory information from enhancers to promoters in the
entire range of organisms from yeast to humans.


Structural studies of the pol II transcription machinery
It has been said: if you wish to understand function, study structure. The
challenge in the case of the pol II transcription machinery lies in the great
size of the structure. A giant complex of nearly 60 proteins, with a total mass
in excess of three million Daltons, assembles at every pol II promoter prior
to the initiation of transcription (Fig. 3). We began with structure determi-
nation of pol II because it forms the core of the transcription complex. In
retrospect, this was another fortunate choice. It was preferable to pursuing
the smaller simpler transcription factors because pol II is the platform upon
which all factors are assembled. It emerged from our work that some of the
general factor proteins adopt their fully folded structures only upon interac-
tion with pol II. Knowledge of the pol II structure has proved key to under-
standing eukaryotic gene transcription.



                                       Subunits        Mass (kD)


               RNA polymerase II          12              515


              General transcription
                                          26             1560
                    factors


                    Mediator              21             1005

              Pre-initiation complex      58             3080




Figure 3. The RNA polymerase II transcription machinery. Masses are round figures for
proteins from the yeast S. cerevisiae.



Two-dimensional protein crystallography
The story of the pol II structure began in my graduate work in physical
chemistry, with nuclear resonance experiments revealing the rapid lateral
diffusion of lipid molecules in multilayers [21]. Some years later I thought
of exploiting lateral diffusion for the formation of single-layer-thick or two-
dimensional (2-D) protein crystals. The idea was to bind a protein to a lipid
layer, through interaction with the lipid head groups. The bound protein
would be constrained in 2-D but free to diffuse in the plane and crystallize
(ref. 22 and Fig. 4). Seth Darst and Al Edwards succeeded in forming 2-D
crystals of pol II in this way [23]. The crystals were initially small and poorly
ordered. They were of little use for structure determination, but they pro-

                                                                                 179


Figure 4. Two-dimensional protein crystallization on lipid layers. Schematic shows the
binding of a protein of interest (oval objects) to the head groups (red triangles) of lipid
molecules in a monolayer at the air-water interface. Rapid lateral diffusion of the lipids
leads to protein crystallization.




vided a starting point. We could take advantage of the ease, rapidity and
small amount of material required by the 2-D crystallographic approach and
use it as a structural assay, to guide the preparation of pol II that would form
better crystals. We soon found that heterogeneity due to a substoichiometric
amount of two small polymerase subunits, was the problem – although they
accounted for only 8% of the mass of the enzyme, their presence in a variable
amount was the impediment to crystallization. We turned to a deletion mut­
ant of yeast from which we could isolate pol II lacking both small subunits.
The resulting homogeneous pol II preparation formed very large, exceed-
ingly well ordered 2-D crystals [24]. Even at the low protein concentration
used for 2-D crystal growth, about 50 µg/ml, the crystals could often be seen
to add additional layers in register with the first. This propensity for epitaxial
growth could be exploited and the 2-D crystals used to seed the formation of
3-D crystals for X-ray analysis.


X-ray crystal structure of pol II
We were excited when the first 3-D crystals were obtained. I also recall a chill
of anxiety. The largest X-ray structure of an asymmetric particle at the time,
seventeen years ago, was a fifth the size of pol II, and for good reason: X-ray
beam intensities, detectors, and computational capabilities were all limiting.
Actually, the limitations of diffraction technology need not have concerned
us because the pol II crystals failed to diffract! The project would have ended
there, were it not for our noticing the crystals were faintly tinged with yellow.
The problem was oxidation, and the solution was to grow and maintain the
crystals in a glove box under argon.
   Then it emerged that the crystals were profoundly polymorphic, varying
by more than 10 Å along one unit cell direction. This variation, and the
sheer size of pol II, posed challenges for phasing the diffraction by multiple
isomorphous replacement with heavy atoms. Jianhua Fu, who discovered the
best diffracting form of pol II crystals, addressed the phase problem by data
collection from a large number of crystals and with the use of heavy atom
clusters developed by others. He found matched pairs of native and deriva-

180


Figure 5. Structure of RNA polymerase II at 2.8 Å resolution. The protein is shown in
ribbon representation, with a color code to the various subunits and interaction diagram
at the upper right. A Mg ion at the active center is depicted as a pink sphere.




tive crystals from which phases to 5 Å resolution could be derived [25]. The
resulting electron density map corresponded closely to the structure of pol II
at 16 Å resolution determined from 2-D crystals by electron microscopy and
3-D reconstruction. This marked a turning point in the solution of the pol II
problem. With reliable 5 Å phases it was possible, in principle, to locate indi-
vidual heavy atoms and solve the structure to near atomic resolution.
   Patrick Cramer and Dave Bushnell sought additional heavy atom deriva-
tives. When they changed the mother liquor of the crystals for the purpose,
the crystals shrank by 11 Å along the previously variable unit cell direction,
eliminating the problem of polymorphism and extending diffraction to 2.8
Å resolution. None of the fifty heavy atom compounds commonly used for
phase determination gave useful derivatives, but an iridium compound iden-
tified by Fu and rhenium compounds were eventually effective. The result-
ing structure comprised some 3,500 amino acids, with 28,000 nonhydrogen
atoms (refs. 26, 27 and Fig. 5).
   Where do DNA and RNA bind to pol II? The answer came from the struc-
ture determination of the polymerase in the form of a transcribing complex.
We tried to crystallize such a complex all the while we pursued the structure
of the polymerase alone. The problem was that even very highly purified
pol II contains many inactive molecules and these would contaminate any
preparation of transcribing complexes. Finally, Avi Gnatt discovered a way

                                                                                   181


                                                                 clamp

           wall




Figure 6. Structure of RNA polymerase II in the act of gene transcription at near atomic
resolution. The polypeptide chain is shown in white, orange (mobile “clamp”), and green
(bridge helix connecting the two largest subunits). Backbone models of the nucleic acids are
shown in blue (template DNA strand), green (nontemplate DNA strand), and red (RNA).




of removing the inactive molecules and succeeded in growing transcribing
complex crystals [28]. Transcription had been paused by withholding one of
the four nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs), and upon soaking the crystals in
the missing NTP, transcription resumed without loss of crystal morphology.
The crystals were very thin and gave diffraction complete to only about 6 Å
resolution. After years of trying, Avi collected a dataset complete to 3.3 Å
resolution, which was solved by molecular replacement with the 2.8 Å poly-
merase structure [29].
   DNA can be seen entering the transcribing complex in duplex form and
unwinding three bases before the active site (Fig. 6). Then the template
strand makes a sharp bend, and as a result, the next base is flipped, pointing
down towards the active site. This base is paired with that of the ribonucleo-
tide just added to the RNA strand. The structure reveals eight more DNA-
RNA hybrid base pairs and one additional base on the template DNA strand.
The remainder of the template strand, the RNA, and the nontemplate DNA
strand are not seen, due to motion or disorder.


Fidelity of transcription
How does pol II select the right nucleotide for addition to the RNA chain?

182


                                                   NTP rotates into A site
          pre-translocation




          post-translocation                            NTP enters E site
Figure 7. A cycle of nucleotide addition by RNA polymerase II. At the upper left, the struc-
ture from Fig. 6 is shown, omitting all but the DNA and RNA near the active center and the
bridge helix. The ribonucleotide in the active center, just added to the RNA chain, is yel-
low. At the lower left is the structure after translocation of DNA and RNA across the pol II
surface. At the lower right is the structure with an unmatched NTP in the entry (E) site.
At the upper right is the structure with NTP, matched for pairing to the coding base in the
template strand, in the addition (A) site.



   This is the essence of transcription, the accurate readout of the genetic
code. Our most recent work has shown how accurate readout is achieved. In
the original transcribing complex structure, the nucleotide just added to the
RNA was still in the active center. In subsequent structures, we were able to
trap the complex following translocation of the DNA and RNA across the en-
zyme surface, creating an empty site at the active center, available for binding
the next NTP (Fig. 7). Soaking crystals of this “post-translocation” complex
with NTPs resulted in additional electron density at two sites [30]. All four
NTPs were seen to bind an entry or “E” site, whereas only the NTP correctly
matched for base pairing with the coding base in the DNA was seen to bind
in the active center, at the nucleotide addition or “A” site. The orientation
of NTP in the E site was inverted with respect to that in the A site, leading to
the suggestion that NTPs in the E site rotate to sample base pairing in the A
site.
   These structures failed to reveal the basis for the fidelity of transcription.
The energy of base pairing, through two or three hydrogen bonds to the
template DNA, is far less than required to account for the selectivity of the
polymerase reaction. The mystery remained until this year, when screening

                                                                                       183


many hundreds of crystals by Dong Wang and Dave Bushnell led to improved
resolution and data quality. The structure of a transcribing complex with cor-
rectly matched NTP in the A site now included a feature termed the trigger
loop beneath the A site (ref. 31 and Fig. 8). The trigger loop was seen before
in many pol II structures, but only in the two solved this year, with correctly
matched NTP in the A site, did it appear in proximity to the A site. In all
previous structures, it was located 30 Å or more distant from the A site. The
trigger loop is evidently a mobile element, swinging like a trap door beneath
correctly matched NTP in the A site.




Figure 8. The trigger loop. Transcribing complex structures with purine nucleotide
(orange) or pyrimidine nucleotide (dark blue) in the addition site (cf. that in the upper
right panel of Fig. 7), are shown superimposed. The corresponding trigger loops are pur-
ple and yellow, and the bridge helices are green and light blue.




   The trigger loop contacts all moieties of the NTP - the base, the phosphates
and through other pol II residues, the sugar as well (Fig. 9). The resulting
network of interactions even includes the 2’-OH group of the nucleotide
just added to the end of the RNA. The importance of these interactions is
shown by mutations affecting transcription (Fig. 9). For example, mutation
of asparagine 479, hydrogen bonded to the 3’-OH group of the NTP, results
in a loss of discrimination between the normal nucleotide and one lacking
a 3’-OH group. The discrimination is not great, only about ten-fold, of the
magnitude expected for the energy of a single hydrogen bond. In contrast,
discrimination between a normal ribo NTP and a 2’-deoxy NTP is very great,
at least 1,000-fold, and is unaffected by mutation of asparagine 479. How is
such extraordinary specificity for a single OH group achieved? The answer
lies in the alignment of the trigger loop with the NTP and the precise posi-
tioning of a histidine side chain, 3.5 Å from the β-phosphate (Fig. 10). The

184


Figure 9. The trigger loop network. Trigger loop is magenta, GTP is orange, and the 3’end
of the RNA is red. Other residues of Rpb1 and Rpb2 are indicated in black and cyan. Stars
identify residues whose mutation impairs transcript elongation in vivo (blue from the
literature, red from an unpublished screen by Craig Kaplan).




Figure 10. The trigger loop couples NTP recognition to phosphodiester bond formation.
Color scheme as in Fig. 8, with side chains of Rpb2 Arg1020 and Rpb2 Arg766 in yellow.
Contacts responsible for alignment, and for the contact of histidine 1085 with the NTP
that promotes catalysis, are indicated by dashed yellow lines. Nucleophilic attack and phos-
phoanhydride bond breakage are indicated by black arrows.




                                                                                       185


histidine promotes the flow of electrons during nucleophilic attack of the
3’-OH at the chain terminus and phosphoanhydride bond breakage. It serves
as a proton donor for the pyrophosphate leaving group. It literally triggers
phosphodiester bond formation. It couples nucleotide selection to catalysis.
   The electronic transactions involved in trigger loop function require pre-
cise alignment of the interacting moieties. This is achieved for a correct NTP
by formation of the trigger loop network. In the case of an incorrect NTP, for
example a 2’-deoxy NTP, misalignment is profound. A double helix formed
with a 2’-deoxy nucleotide is 2 Å narrower than that formed by a ribonucleo-
tide. The resulting misalignment with the catalytic histidine residue is as
great as in the case of a pyrimidine-pyrimidine base mismatch, leading to a
thousand-fold reduction in the rate of phosphodiester bond formation.


Nucleic acid translocation
The significance of the trigger loop network extends beyond nucleotide se-
lection and catalysis. The network includes many contacts with the bridge he-
lix which, in turn, contacts the coding base in the template DNA strand. The
structure of bacterial polymerase, determined by Seth Darst, also includes a
bridge helix, but in contrast with that in pol II, the bridge helix in the bacte-
rial enzyme is bent (ref. 32 and Fig. 11). The bend produces a movement




                 yeast                                    bacterial




Figure 11. Straight and bent states of the bridge helix in RNA polymerase II and bacterial
RNA polymerase structures, proposed to underlie nucleic acid translocation during tran-
scription. Color code as in Fig. 6 except with bridge helix in purple.


186


of about 3 Å in the direction of the template strand, corresponding to one
base pair step along the strand. This led us to suggest that transitions of the
bridge helix between straight and bent states underlie the translocation step
in transcription. The bridge helix may serve as a kind of molecular ratchet,
allowing the polymerase to let go of the DNA and RNA for translocation,
while retaining a grip on the growing end of the DNA-RNA hybrid helix to
preserve the register of transcription. There is now a good deal of biochemi-
cal and genetic evidence to support this idea.


RNA Release
In the final step of transcription, the RNA is released. The question arises of
how the RNA is peeled off the template DNA. How is the very stable RNA-
DNA hybrid helix disrupted and the RNA discharged into solution? Our origi­
nal transcribing complex structure gave no indication of the mechanism of
this important process. A subsequent structure, determined by Ken Westover,
revealed RNA release taking place [33]. Base pair 7 of the DNA-RNA hybrid
in this structure appears normal – the bases are coplanar, with a distance ap-
propriate for hydrogen bonding between them (Fig. 12). Base pairs 8, 9, and
10, however, show increasing deviations, and consequent splaying apart of
the DNA and RNA strands. The strand separation is due to the intervention
of three protein loops, termed fork loop 1, rudder, and lid (Fig. 12). These




Figure 12. Release of RNA transcript from DNA-RNA hybrid revealed in the structure of an
RNA polymerase II transcribing complex. The upstream end of the DNA-RNA hybrid helix,
7-10 residues from the active center, is shown on the left, with distances between the DNA
and RNA bases indicated. The entire DNA-RNA hybrid helix is shown on the right, along
with protein loops involved in helix melting (rudder and lid) and stabilization (fork loop).


                                                                                       187


                                                                Wall
                                                                                  Saddle
                                             Clamp
                                                                                   IIBN




Figure 13. Structure of an RNA polymerase II-TFIIB complex. A surface representation of
pol II is shown, with the clamp and wall as in Fig. 6, a polypeptide chain trace of the amino
terminal region of TFIIB, designated IIBN, in yellow, and the region of the pol II surface
interacting with IIBN in green.



loops were disordered in all previous pol II structures. Rudder and lid lie
between the DNA and RNA strands, with rudder contacting the DNA and lid
the RNA. A phenylalanine side chain of the lid serves as an actual wedge to
maintain separation of the strands. Fork loop 1 contacts the sugar-phosphate
backbone of the hybrid helix at base pairs 6 and 7, stabilizing the helix, limit-
ing strand separation to positions 8 and beyond, preventing the DNA-RNA
hybrid from unraveling further and inhibiting transcription.


RNA polymerase II-TFIIB complex
It may be asked how the transcribing complex is formed in the first place.
How is straight duplex promoter DNA melted, bent, and inserted in the
pol II active center, enabling the initiation of transcription? These DNA
transactions are brought about by the general transcription factors TFIIB, -D,
-E, -F, and -H. Our solution of the X-ray structures of pol II-TFIIB and pol II-
TFIIF complexes has shed light on the initiation mechanism.
   The structure of the pol II-TFIIB complex [34] revealed distinct functions
of the N- and C-terminal domains of TFIIB. A polypeptide chain trace of the
N-terminal domain (yellow in Fig. 13) begins with a Zn ribbon that binds the
pol II surface adjacent to the clamp and wall. Then the polypeptide does an
amazing thing: rather than pass back into solution, it continues across the
saddle between the clamp and wall and plunges towards the active center,
from which it loops back and remerges across the saddle. The loop, which

188


Figure 14. Superposition of the DNA-hybrid helix from an RNA polymerase II transcribing
complex (Fig. 6) and the B finger from an RNA polymerase II-TFIIB complex (Fig. 13).
Conserved region of the B finger is green.




Figure 15. Model of an RNA polymerase II-TBP-TFIIB-DNA complex. The structure of the
C-terminal region of TFIIB (pink) complexed with TBP (green) and TATA-box contain-
ing DNA (red/white/blue atomic model) was docked to the structure of the pol II-TFIIB
complex (as shown in Fig. 13). The views in the left and right panels are related by a 90°
rotation about an axis between them, as indicated by the curved arrow. The direction of
view in the right panel is the same as that in Fig. 13.


                                                                                     189


we have termed the B finger, occupies almost the same location as the DNA-
RNA hybrid in a transcribing complex. Superimposing the B finger and the
DNA-RNA hybrid from the transcribing complex structure reveals no inter-
ference with the template DNA strand or with the RNA up to position 5, but
a steric clash with the RNA at positions 6 and beyond (Fig. 14).
   Biochemical experiments show the B finger is not only compatible with a hy-
brid containing five residues of RNA, but is required for stability of such a com-
plex. When the RNA grows beyond five or six residues, however, it must com-
pete with TFIIB for space on the pol II saddle. If TFIIB wins the competition,
initiation is aborted and must be tried again. If the RNA wins, TFIIB is ejected
and pol II is released from the promoter to continue and complete transcrip-
tion. The B finger thus explains two crucial but until now mysterious aspects of
pol II transcription, abortive initiation and promoter escape. In these respects,
it resembles the sigma factor in bacterial transcription [35, 36].
   Turning to the C-terminal domain of TFIIB, its location in the structure
of the pol II-TFIIB complex served as a guide for docking a structure deter-
mined long ago [37] of a ternary complex of a C-terminal TFIIB fragment,
the TATA-binding protein (TBP) subunit of TFIID, and a TATA box DNA
fragment (Fig. 15). This modeling exercise led to a moment of truth. The
TATA box DNA fragment is sharply bent by TBP. What would happen if the
ends of the bent fragment were extended with straight B-form DNA? The
result was remarkable in two respects. First, the DNA fit snugly against the
protein (Fig. 15, left panel) – TBP evidently configures promoter DNA to the
contours of the pol II surface. Second, the DNA downstream of the TATA
box ran past the saddle (Fig. 15, right panel). The distance from the TATA
box to the saddle is about 1.5 turns of the double helix, or 15 base pairs (bp).
We know from the transcribing complex structure that about 12 residues are
required to cross the saddle to the active site. The sum of 15 bp from the
TATA box and 12 residues to the active site is 27 bp, closely coincident with
the spacing of 25–30 bp from the TATA box to the transcription start site of
almost all pol II promoters. In this way, pol II-TFIIB interaction may deter-
mine the location of the transcription start site.


RNA polymerase II-TFIIF complex
A cocrystal structure of a transcribing complex with the central subunit of
TFIIF is also informative about the initiation of transcription. This work in
progress of Guillermo Calero was made possible by his mastery of the bio-
chemical behavior of TFIIF. The structure includes a complete transcription
bubble – not only the template DNA strand with associated RNA seen in
previous structures, but also the nontemplate DNA strand, and the region
upstream of the bubble where duplex DNA is reformed following transcrip-
tion (Fig. 16). The nontemplate strand and upstream duplex DNA were
revealed because of interaction with TFIIF, constraining their mobility. This
interaction of the nontemplate strand with TFIIF may trap a transient bubble
in promoter DNA, leading to the initiation of transcription.

190


Figure 16. Structure of an RNA polymerase II transcribing complex with the central sub­
unit of TFIIF (work in progress of Guillermo Calero). Pol II and the nucleic acids only are
shown on the left, while the structure including the TFIIF subunit (known as Tfg2, in yel-
low) is shown on the right. Direction of view and color scheme as in Fig. 6.




                                                             Pol

                                                    H        F      BN


                                                                           BC TBP




Figure 17. Model of an RNA polymerase II pre-initiation complex. Structures shown at the
upper left were assembled in the complex shown at the lower right. Direction of view as in
Figs. 5 and 13. “4/7” indicates pol II subunits Rpb4 and Rpb7, which were omitted from
the original structure (Fig. 5).




                                                                                      191


RNA polymerase II transcription initiation complex
The available structural information may be assembled in a preliminary pic-
ture of the pol II transcription initiation complex (Fig. 17). The structures
of pol II, TBP, and TFIIB come from X-ray crystallography, as I’ve described.
The structures of TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH are from electron crystallography
and from cryo-electron microscopy and single particle analysis.
   The picture of the complete complex provides a solution, in outline, of the
transcription initiation problem. Each of the general factors is seen to play a
simple, essential role in the initiation process: TBP bends the promoter DNA
around the polymerase and the C-terminal domain of TFIIB. The N-terminal
domain of TFIIB brings the DNA to a point on the polymerase surface from
which it need only follow a straight path and, by virtue of the conserved spac-
ing from TATA box to transcription start site in pol II promoters, the start site
is juxtaposed with the active center. TFIIE enters the complex and recruits
TFIIH, whose ATPase/helicase subunit introduces negative superhelical ten-
sion in the DNA. Thermal unwinding produces a transient bubble, which
is captured by TFIIF binding to the nontemplate strand. The DNA can now
bend in the single stranded region and descend into the pol II active center.
Initiation and the synthesis of RNA ensue, initially stabilized by the B finger.
Synthesis of a transcript greater than about 6 residues in length leads to the dis-
placement of TFIIB, promoter escape, and the completion of transcription.


Mediator and the regulation of transcription
It remains to solve the Mediator, and thus to understand transcriptional regu­
lation. The structure of a pol II-Mediator complex has been determined at
low resolution by Francisco Asturias, by cryo-electron microscopy and single
particle analysis (ref. 38 and Fig. 18). The portion of the structure due to
                                         pol II could be identified by docking
                                         the atomic model of the polymerase.
                                         The remainder of the structure, due
                                         to Mediator, was in the form of a
                                         crescent, largely enveloping pol II,
                                         with many points of contact through
                                         which regulatory information may be
                                         transmitted. Extension of the struc-
                                         ture to atomic resolution will one day
                                         reveal the regulatory mechanism.




                                          Figure 18. Cryo-EM structure of an RNA
                                          polymerase II-Mediator complex. The pol II
                                          structure was docked in the central density,
                                          and is shown in a similar direction of view
                                          and color scheme as Fig. 5.


192


Acknowledgements
The charge for this lecture was to tell the story of the work leading to the
Prize. It is also the story of many students and postdoctoral fellows, whose
skill, great effort, and willing suspension of disbelief, over a quarter century,
transformed a scientific dream into a reality. I could only mention a few by
name without interrupting the flow of the story, but the contributions of
others were not less important. I pay heartfelt tribute to them, and to all who
have shared part of their scientific lives with me (Fig. 19), in pursuit not only
of the pol II structure, but also of chromatin, transcription biochemistry,
and EM methodology. I should add that this is a lecture, not a review, and
so is personal rather than referential. The pol II structure is a culmination
of research done in many laboratories, and I am deeply indebted to those
involved.


Chris Ackerson                 Opher Gileadi                  Barbara Maier-Davis
Francisco Asturias             Avi Gnatt                      Lynne Mercer
Maia Azubel                    Dave Goldfarb                  Gavin Meredith
Brad Baer                      Joachim Griesenbeck            Larry Myers
Avital Baraket-Samish          Claes Gustafsson               Kazuko Nishikura
Stefan Björklund               Lynn Henry                     Hiroshi Nojima
Hinrich Boeger                 John Heumann                   Claudia Poglitsch
Tilman Borggrefe               Glenn Horn                     Ariel Prunell
Rick Bram                      Pablo Jadzinsky                Jeff Reidler
Andy Buchman                   Grant Jensen                   Hans Ribi
Dave Bushnell                  Yi-Wei Jiang                   Phil Robinson
Brad Cairns                    Craig Kaplan                   Alan Sachs
Guillermo Calero               Lin-Woo Kang                   Mike Sayre
Wei-hau Chang                  Don Katcoff                    Jonny Sexton
Dan Chasman                    Ray Kelleher                   Dong Shin
Joan Conaway                   Young-Joon Kim                 Henrik Spahr
Patrick Cramer                 Hirofumi Komori                Seth Strattan
Seth Darst                     Guy Lorch Kornberg             Nori Sugimoto
Peter David                    Liz Kubalek                    Jesper Svejstrup
Ralph Davis                    Yoshikazu Kurashima            Yuro Takagi
Al Edwards                     Jan LaPointe                   Herbert Tschochner
Andy Ehrensberger              Karl-Magnus Larsson            Ed Uzgiris
John Feaver                    Kerstin Leuther                Philippe Veschambre
Martha Fedor                   Alan Levine                    Daguang Wang
Peter Flanagan                 Yang Li                        Dong Wang
Jianhua Fu                     Yahli Lorch                    Ken Westover
Brian Gibbons                  Neal Lue                       Mincheng Zhang

Figure 19.




                                                                             193


References
1.	Kornberg, R.D. (1974) Chromatin structure: a repeating unit of histones and DNA.
    Science 184, 868-871.
2.	Lorch, Y., et al. (1987) Nucleosomes inhibit the initiation of transcription but allow
    chain elongation with the displacement of histones. Cell 49, 203-210.
3.	Han, M., and Grunstein, M. (1988) Nucleosome loss activates yeast downstream pro-
    moters in vivo. Cell 55, 1137-1145.
4.	Boeger, H., et al. (2003) Nucleosomes unfold completely at a transcriptionally active
    promoter. Mol. Cell 11, 1587-1598.
5.	Matsui, T., et al. (1980) Multiple factors required for accurate initiation of transcription
    by purified RNA polymerase II. J. Biol. Chem. 255, 11992-11996.
6.	Conaway, J.W., et al. (1990) Transcription initiated by RNA polymerase II and purified
    transcription factors from liver. Cooperative action of transcription factors tau and
    epsilon in initial complex formation. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 7552-7558.
7.	Lue, N.F., and Kornberg, R.D. (1987) Accurate initiation at RNA polymerase II pro-
    moters in extracts from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84, 8839-8843.
8.	Conaway, R., and Conaway, J. (1997) General transcription factors for RNA polymerase
    II. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 56, 327-346.
9.	Kelleher, I., R.J., et al. (1990) A novel mediator between activator proteins and the RNA
    polymerase II transcription apparatus. Cell 61, 1209-1215.
10.	Flanagan, P.M., et al. (1991) A mediator for activation of RNA polymerase II transcrip-
    tion in vitro. Nature 350, 436-438.
11.	Kim, Y.J., et al. (1994) A multiprotein mediator of transcriptional activation and its
    interaction with the C-terminal repeat domain of RNA polymerase II. Cell 77, 599-608.
12.	Kornberg, R.D. (2005) Mediator and the mechanism of transcriptional activation.
    Trends Biochem. Sci. 30, 235-239.
13.	Malik, S., and Roeder, R.G. (2005) Dynamic regulation of pol II transcription by the
    mammalian Mediator complex. Trends Biochem. Sci. 30, 256-263.
14.	Moqtaderi, Z., et al. (1996) TBP-associated factors are not generally required for tran-
    scriptional activation in yeast. Nature 383, 188-191.
15. Walker, S.S., et al. (1996) Transcription activation in cells lacking TAFIIs. Nature 383,
    185-188.
16.	Shen, W.-C., and Green, M.R. (1997) Yeast TAFII145 functions as a core promoter selec-
    tivity factor, not a general coactivator. Cell 90, 615-624.
17.	Conaway, R.C., et al. (2005) The mammalian Mediator complex and its role in tran-
    scriptional regulation. Trends Biochem. Sci. 30, 250-255.
18.	Bourbon, H.M., et al. (2004) A unified nomenclature for protein subunits of mediator
    complexes linking transcriptional regulators to RNA polymerase II. Mol. Cell 14, 553-
    557.
19. Thompson, C.M., and Young, R.A. (1995) General requirement for RNA polymerase II
    holoenzymes in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 4587-4590.
20. Takagi, Y., and Kornberg, R.D. (2006) Mediator as a general transcription factor. J. Biol.
    Chem. 281, 80-89.
21.	Kornberg, R.D., and McConnell, H.M. (1971) Lateral diffusion of phospholipids in a
    vesicle membrane. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 68, 2564-2568.
22.	Uzgiris, E.E., and Kornberg, R.D. (1983) Two-dimensional crystallization technique
    for imaging macromolecules, with an application to antigen-antibody-complement
    complexes. Nature 301, 125-129.
23.	Edwards, A.M., et al. (1990) Purification and lipid-layer crystallization of yeast RNA
    polymerase II. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87, 2122-2126.
24. Darst, S.A., et al. (1991) Two-dimensional and epitaxial crystallization of a mutant form
    of yeast RNA polymerase II. J. Mol. Biol. 221, 347-357.
25.	Fu, J., et al. (1999) Yeast RNA polymerase II at 5 A resolution. Cell 98, 799-810.



194


26.	Cramer, P., et al. (2000) Architecture of RNA polymerase II and implications for the
    transcription mechanism. Science 288, 640-649.
27.	Cramer, P., et al. (2001) Structural basis of transcription: RNA polymerase II at 2.8 ång-
    ström resolution. Science 292, 1863-1876.
28. Gnatt, A., et al. (1997) Formation and crystallization of yeast RNA polymerase II elon-
    gation complexes. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 30799-30805.
29. Gnatt, A.L., et al. (2001) Structural basis of transcription: an RNA polymerase II elon-
    gation complex at 3.3 A resolution. Science 292, 1876-1882.
30. Westover, K.D., et al. (2004) Structural basis of transcription: nucleotide selection by
    rotation in the RNA polymerase II active center. Cell 119, 481-489.
31. Wang, D., et al. (2006) Structural basis of transcription: role of the trigger loop in sub-
    strate specificity and catalysis. Cell 127, 941-954.
32. Zhang, G., et al. (1999) Crystal structure of Thermus aquaticus core RNA polymerase
    at 3.3 A resolution. Cell 98, 811-824.
33. Westover, K.D., et al. (2004) Structural basis of transcription: separation of RNA from
    DNA by RNA polymerase II. Science 303, 1014-1016.
34.	Bushnell, D.A., et al. (2004) Structural basis of transcription: an RNA polymerase II-
    TFIIB cocrystal at 4.5 Ångströms. Science 303, 983-988.
35.	Murakami, K.S., et al. (2002) Structural basis of transcription initiation: an RNA
    polymerase holoenzyme-DNA complex. Science 296, 1285-1290.
36.	Murakami, K.S., et al. (2002) Structural basis of transcription initiation: RNA polymer-
    ase holoenzyme at 4 A resolution. Science 296, 1280-1284.
37.	Nikolov, D.B., et al. (1995) Crystal structure of a TFIIB-TBP-TATA-element ternary
    complex. Nature 377, 119-128.
38. Davis, J.A., et al. (2002) Structure of the yeast RNA polymerase II holoenzyme:
    Mediator conformation and polymerase interaction. Mol. Cell 10, 409-415.

Portrait photo of Dr. Kornberg by Stanford University.




                                                                                          195
