                              R . G . W . NO   R R I S H




           Some fast reactions in gases studied by
                    flash photolysis and kinetic
                                spectroscopy

                         Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1967



Realisation that free radicals and atoms take part in chemical reactions has
focussed attention on the processes of photo-chemistry which are not only
paramount in the geochemistry of the upper atomosphere but are also basic
to many reactions of organic chemistry involving free radicals and the triplet
state; this realisation also has led to the development of gas lasers, and to the
esploration in detail of the intimate anatomy of reactions of pyrolysis, com-
bustion and explosion.
   Classical photochemistry emerged in 1908 with the understanding by Stark
of the distinction between the primary and secondary photochemical pro-
cesses, of which the former is the immediate result of the absorption of a light
quantum by a molecule or atom and the latter the subsequent "dark" reactions
                                          I
initiated by the products of the former . Into this simple pattern it has been
possible to fit the whole gamut of photochemical phenomena-fluorescence,
phosphorescence, photolytic and photosynthetic processes, photocatalytic
and photosensitised reactions. Determination of quantum yields led to the
distinction of endoactinic and exoactinic reactions; the former being endo-
thermic in character draw their energy requirement from the absorbed quan-
tum and rarely exceed an overall quantum yield of 2, the latter, being exo-
thermic release their "pent up" energy by photochemical initiation and are
usually of the nature of chain reactions, with high quantum-yields, and some-
times explosive characteristics. For example, the dissociation of hydrogen
iodide into its elements is 2200 cal endothermic and its quantum yield is
               2
limited to two while the synthesis of hydrogen chloride from its elements is
exothermic to the extent of 22,000 cal and may have a quantum yields as high
     6
as 10 .
  It was indeed the study of these two reactions that first led to the conclusion
that the primary reaction may involve photolysis of the reactant into atoms
(and later free radicals). In the former case we have


          F L A S H   P H O T O L Y S I S       A N D   K I N E T I C   S P E C T R O S C O P Y   207




f o l l o w e d b y t h e w e l l k n o w n H2 - C l2 c h a i n r e a c t i o n . W e o w e m u c h t o
                                                  4
Bodenstein, Warburg and Nernst by whose early work the reality of the
participation of atoms in chemical reactions was made apparent and the con-
cept of the chain reaction established. Following this, the reactions of H atoms
generated by an electric discharge through hydrogen gas were established by
               5                            6
R . W . W o o d a n d b y B o n h o e f f e r , and the production of free alkyl radicals
                                                                                          7
by the pyrolysis of metal alkyls proved unequivocably by Paneth .
   Simultaneously the growth of the study of the band spectra of gaseous
                                                                           9
molecular species in particular by Frank* and V. Henri clarified the quantum
mechanisms of the processes of thermal dissociation, photo dissociation and
predissociation, indicating the production of free radicals and atoms in both
ground and electronically excited states. It may justly be claimed that from
the marriage of photokinetics with spectroscopy there resulted a new insight
into the mechanism of chemical reactions; the part played by atoms, free
radicals and excited species as transient intermediates became abundantly
apparent. The reactions of these transients however, which together make up
the overall process of conversion of reactants to final products are so fast that
they can neither be observed nor isolated by classical means, and their nature
and participation could until recently only be deduced from the circumstantial
evidence ofreaction kinetics, quantum yields, and the spectroscopic character-
istics of the reactants.
   It therefore became of importance if further progress was to be made, to
endeavour to obtain objective evidence of the presence of short lived tran-
sients both in thermal and photochemical reactions. Using continuous sources
of the highest attainable intensity (e.g. a 10 kW high pressure mercury arc) the
author and his collaborators in 1946 attempted to obtain evidence by spectro-
scopic means of a stationary concentration of intermediates in such reactions
as the photolysis and photo oxidation of ketene without success. In no case
could any absorption spectrum which could be attributed to reacting tran-
sients be observed in the reacting system and it became apparent that their
reactivity was so great that no sufficient stationary concentration for detection
by the means then available could be achieved.


208                        1967 R. G. W. NORRISH


                   Flash Photolysis and Kinetic Spectroscopy


It was the realisation that enormously greater "instantancous" light intensities
could be obtained from a powerful light flash than from a conventional light
source, and that such a flash need not be of greater duration than the half life
of the elusive transients that led Porter and me to study the results of applying
                                                                       10
such flashes to suitable responsive photochemical systems . Using an electric
discharge from a condenser bank through inert gas, dissipating about 10 000
joules it was immediately found that the resulting light flashes of about 2-3
milliseconds duration were able to create large measures of photodecomposi-
tion in reactants such as nitrogen peroxide, chlorine, ketene, acetone and di-
acetyl, amounting to 100% in some cases. It was obvious that momentarily
there must be very high concentrations of free radicals or atoms in such re-
acting systems which by suitable means should be detectable by absorption
                                                           11
spectroscopy. This was first achieved by Porter who using a second less
                                                                                  12
powerful flash triggered mechanically by the method of Oldenberg at spe-
cific short intervals after the first was able to observe the complete dissociation
of chlorine by the disappearance of the Cl 2 absorption spectrum and its return
over a period of milliseconds as the atoms recombined.
  The modern method of flash photolysis developed from this uses an electro-
nic technique by which the first flash (photoflash) is caused photo-electrically
to trigger the second flash (specflash) at specific short intervals measured in
                                    13
microseconds and milliseconds . The photoflash is generated by discharging
a capacity of the order of 40            at 10 kV through an inert gas such as krypton
or xenon contained in a quartz tube generally 50 cm in length and 1 c m i n
diameter. The reaction vessel is a quartz tube of similar dimension with plane
quartz end plates, lying close to and parallel to the photoflash tube. The spec-
flash lamp consisting of a quartz capillary tube about          IO   cm in length is placed
"end on" to the reaction vessel, and has a plane quartz end plate so that by means
of a lens and limiting stop, a beam of light can pass longitudinally through the
reaction vessel to a suitable spectrometer to register the absorption spectrum
of the reacting system at any specific interval after the photoflash (see Fig. I) .
The discharge is made as before through inert gas.
  The energy dissipated by the discharge of a condenser is given in joules by
the relationship, E= 1 / 2 C V , where the capacity is measured in microfarads,
                                2




and the potential difference in kilovolts. For a given energy the duration of the
flash is the shorter the smaller C and the greater V; the self inductance of the
circuit must be kept as low as possible. For the photoflash, a convenient energy


        F L A S H   P H O T O L Y S I S   A N D   K I N E T I C   S P E C T R O S C O P Y   209




                      Fig. 1. Diagram of flash photolysis apparatus.

dissipation is 2000 J derived from the discharge of 40µ F at 10 kV. The halflife
of the light flash is about 10              For the specflash a discharge of 100 J is
generally used, obtained by discharging 2                   at 10 kV; its half life is of the
order of            The pressure of gas in both lamps is of the order 5-10 cm Hg.
The reaction vessel may be double walled for the introduction of gaseous
or liquid colour filters in the annular space. Both it and the photolysis lamp are
surrounded by a tubular reflector coated on the inside with magnesium oxide,
and when necessary the whole can be mounted in a tubular electric furnace.
A general description of the apparatus which throughout our work has had
several minor modifications is given in detail by Norrish, Porter and Thrush
(ref. 13); the technique at present in use, represents a compromise between all
the factors affecting its operation. Improvements have been effected by using
highly transparent "spectrosil" quartz which transmits down to 1 600 Å, end
plates of lithium fluoride, and vacuum spectrographs for detection of tran-
sients whose absorption spectra lie in the far ultraviolet. Of great importance
for the future is the reduction in the periods of the photoflash and specflash to
achieve greater time resolution, and the development of highly transparent
materials for construction of apparatus suitable for shorter wave photolysis
than is at present available.
  It may readily be calculated that the "instantaneous" dissipation of only
1 joule of energy (i.e. about 0.05% of the total output of the photoflash) by
150 ml of gas at 1.0 mm pressure will raise the temperature of the reactant by
about 5 000ºC for there is no time for cooling during the short period of the
flash. Thus the early results of flash decomposition are more properly regarded
as flash pyrolysis than flash photolysis, and unless steps are taken to neutralise
this rise in temperature by the dilution of the system by the addition of a large
excess of inert gas, we cannot expect to study the photochemical effects di-


210                        1967 R. G. W. NORRISH


vorced from thermal complications. This however is readily done: by the
introduction of inert gas at pressures of 100 to 500 times that of the reactant.
the temperature rise can be kept below 10ºC, which for practical purposes
may be regarded as isothermal, while for reactions in solution of course, there
is no problem. On the other hand we may take advantage of flash heating in
undiluted systems to administer an adiabatic shock which for many purposes
is superior and certainly simpler than the technique of shock wave kinetics.
This arises from the fact that by flash heating the whole system is instanta-
ueously and nearly homogeneously heated to high temperatures, making pos-
sible the detection of the transient products of pyrolysis and growth and decay
of intermediates in chain reactions leading to explosion in suitable systems.
Indeed, it is the homogeneity of the explosive processes which makes it pos-
sible to observe in absorption the unexcited radicals taking part; we have in fact
in a reaction vessel 0.5 m in length a "flame front" virtually 0.5 m thick which is
very different from the thin element propagating an-explosive wave. This is
important because it makes possible for the first time the observation of the
reactions of unexcited species leading to and taking part in explosion as well
as the electronically excited species to which we were limited in the past.
  Thus there are two ways in which we can employ the techniques of kinetic
spectroscopy and flash photolysis, the isothermal method and the adiabatic. The
field of their application is almost unlimited; I must content myself with
general remarks, and three specific examples.
  The first objective of flash photolysis, namely to observe the growth and
decay of radical species by kinetic spectroscopy has been achieved; following
the first demonstration of the dissociation of chlorine, the spectrum of the
ClO radical was first seen in absorption on flashing a mixture of chlorine and
oxygen. Its origin was ascribed to the almost complete dissociation ofchlorine,
and to the reaction to be expected from the chlorine atom in an atmosphere of
oxygen. It was possible to show that the sequence of reactions




in which the final state of the system is the same as the first provides a complete
basis for explaining the reaction.
                              14
  The study of this reaction constituted an early success in the application of


         F L A S H   P H O T O L Y S I S    A N D   K I N E T I C    S P E C T R O S C O P Y   211

flash photolysis to chemical kinetics and will be described in some detail today
by my colleague Professor Porter.
  Dr. Husain. has collected references to some sixty simple free radicals and
atoms whichhave been discerned and characterised in absorption, either by iso-
thermal flash photolysis or by adiabatic flash pyrolysis and explosion. Promi-
n e n t a m o n g t h e m a r e C H , C H2 , C H3 , N H , N H2 , O H , H C O , H N O , C N ,
C S , C l O , B r O , I O , N C l , N C l2 , P H , P H2 , P O , P N , S H , S O , S i O , T e O ,
TeH, W, Te, Sn, Hg, Fe, Mn and also highly vibrating states of several molec-
ular species, such as O 2 . The collection of this information is the first step
towards identifying the nature of radical reactions observed by kinetic spec-
troscopy. To illustrate this we shall now consider two examples of the appli-
cation of the isothermal technique, the first involving the primary photolysis
of nitrosyl halides, the second the secondary reactions associated with the
photolysis of nitrogen dioxide, chlorine dioxide and ozone.




The sequence of spectra shown in Fig. 2 show the course of the photolytic
dissociation of nitrosyl chloride, typical also of nitrosyl bromide, which takes
                                                                15
place in the region of 2 600 Å (Basco and Norrish ). A study of a large num-
ber of plates showed that the primary product, NO is highly vibrationally
excited in the ground state comprising all levels from                         = I I to    = o. All
these were observed in absorption in the                             and    spectra of NO; the
rotational temperature of the molecule was, however, unaffected. By using
NO as a light filter surrounding the reaction vessel it was proved that these
excited species do not have their origin in the secondary excitation of NO
molecules and after consideration of all possibilities it was concluded that
they are in fact the product of the primary photolysis of the halide, NOX:




It was found that the relative "instantaneous" population of the higher levels
of nitric oxide increased as the halide pressure decreased and that at first t h e
level     = 1 was barely detectable. The decay of the higher excited levels was
however extremely rapid and increased with the pressure of the halide
yielding ultimately the level              = 1 which accumulated and was virtually the
only excited level detectable after the photoflash. It was in fact established that


212                                         1967 R. G. W. NORRISH




Fig.2. Vibrationally excited NO produced in the flash photolysis of NOCl. Upper pic-
ture: pressure of NOC1, 1.0 mm Hg; pressure of N 2, 372 mm Hg. Lower picture: pres-
sure of NOCl, 2.0 mm Hg; pressure of N 2 , 40 mm Hg. Flash energy, 1600 J. (Basco
                                               15
                                 and Norrish )


the rate of decay is determined by the pressure of the unchanged nitrosyl
halide, and that on the other hand, the effect of inert gases was not detectable.
   The rapidity of decay of NO* and the specific effect of the parent NOX
suggests that near-resonance transfer processes are operating in deactivation
as indeed is confirmed by the fact that the vibration frequencies of NO in the
                                                                                   -1
range of levels         =   I I   to        = I lie between 1 900 and 1 600 cm w h i l e f o r b o t h
NOCl and NOBr the frequency associated with the NO bond was found by
                                  16                     -1
B u r n s a n d B e r n s t e i n to be 1 8 0 0 c m .
   At this point, however, there arises an apparent anomaly. The observation
                                       17
of Pearse and Gaydon showed that the first levels in the ground state of NO
can be populated by fluorescence as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 3. This
fluorescence which consists of the banded v = o progression                                         of
                                                                       18
NO was also seen by Basco, Callear and Norrish using the flash technique;
yet by the same means they were unable to observe levels higher than v = 1 in
absorption, with the exception of v = 2 very faintly, Fig.4. It might be postu-
lated that the higher levels are populated very weakly relatively to the first,


        F L A S H   P H O T O L Y S I S   A N D   K I N E T I C   S P E C T R O S C O P Y   213




Fig. 3. Diagrammatic representation of population of vibration levels of NO in the
                           ground state by fluorescence.




Fig. 4. NO          I)   produced by flash fluorescence of NO, showing decay. Pressure of
NO, 5 mm Hg; pressure of N2 , 600 mm Hg; flash energy, 1600 J. (Basco, Callear and
                                          18
                                   Norrish )


214                         1967 R. G. W. NORRISH


but this is not so; Pearse and Gaydon from a measurement of the intensities of
the fluorescent bands found the first five levels to be populated almost equally.
Herein lies the problem: why is only the level v = 1 seen by kinetic spectros-
copy and why do the higher levels v = 2,3,4 and 5 decay too rapidly to be
observed in absorption when the same and higher levels derived from the
photolysis of the nitrosyl halides are readily detected and their decay, albeit
rapid, easily followed in times measured in microseconds?
  The solution to this apparent anomaly may be achieved by means of the
                              19
two following hypotheses :
(1) The most favourable resonant collisions are between closely associated
levels of the vibrating species, e.g.




and owing to change in frequency of levels due to anharmonicity, the most
favourable of all will be obtained when the frequency levels differ by 2 as
above.
(2) At the instant of production from the nitrosyl halide the NO* is formed
in very highvibrating states-say v = 12, 11, or 10.
  The vibrational energy of v = 11 is 55 kcal, and since the bond strength of
NO-Cl is 38 kcal there is plenty of energy available from the light quantum
( s a y 9 8 kcal for 2 800 Å) for this to occur. The same applies for NOBr. In
consequence there is a gap between v = 10 (say) and v = 0 and in the absence of
other deactivating species (inert gases ineffective) the high vibrational levels
cannot be relaxed. This of course is an ideal conception; lower levels will be
built up by collisional deactivation by species such as the nitrosyl halides as we
have seen, but it will be a relatively slow process compared with self de-
activation. As the lower levels are populated so will resonant self-quenching
increase, but there will always be an irregular distribution which will cause a
retardation, and further, since high levels are continually fed in by the flash,
the irregular distribution will be preserved and all levels will be observed
during its operation.
  In contrast, when the first five vibrational levels of the ground state of NO
are populated by fluorescence they are populated as we have seen above,
nearly equally; thus the highly efficient process of self-quenching described
in hypothesis (1) can take place as shown in Fig. 5, and all levels are deactivated
to v = 1 when the resonant process must of necessity stop. The collapse of the
pattern is so rapid that only the first level is seen to be overpopulated, and this
can only be deactivated slowly by the inefficient process of collisional con-


        F L A S H   P H O T O L Y S I S   A N D      K I N E T I C   S P E C T R O S C O P Y        215

                    v




Fig. 5. Diagrammatic representation of relaxation of vibrational energy of NO by self
                                     quenching.




Fig. 6. Diagrammatic representation of relaxation of high levels of vibrational energy
                       of NO, restricted by isolation. (Ideal)

version to translational energy. If, however, we have a gap in the vibrational
distribution or a series of irregularities in the sequence of population of the
pattern of vibrational levels as with NO* derived from nitrosyl halides the
resonant deactivation must be brought to a halt, or slowed down, shown for
an ideal case in Fig.6. Overpopulation of all higher levels is observed.
  The overpopulation of the NO            v=1
                                                , level in the ground state by fluorescence
                                                                                               18
(Fig. 4) makes possible the q uantitative study of the relaxation reaction


216                          1967 R. G. W. NORRISH


This arises from the fact that the absolute concentration of                  can be
measured by plate photometry because the (0,1) band is visible spectroscopi-
cally in absorption with nitric oxide at atmospheric pressure, and since its
concentration at equilibrium is given by




the photometric curves can be calibrated to give absolute concentrations by
choosing one particular line in the band for measurement. In this way the
curves shown in Fig.7 were obtained; when plotted logarithmically they
give good straight lines indicating first order decay from which the uni-
molecular constant k can be obtained. I / k is the mean life time
                         3                       3
                                                                              of the
excited species, and if this suffers Z collisions per second then P t h e p r o b -
                                                                        1-0


ability of energy transfer at one collision is given by




k can be split into two terms depending on relaxation by NO, and by any
 3


added gas M. Thus




a n d k a n d k may be calculated from the various values of k d e r i v e d f r o m
      4      5                                                     3


the curves of the type shown in Fig. 7 for nitrogen. The data shown in Table       I

show preliminary figures for the quencing probabilities of various added gases,
the high value for water being probably due to chemical reaction.




                 18
Further studies ofrelaxation by CO indicated unmistakably that the process
occurs by resonant transfer of vibration




The concentration of CO* was measured by photometering the unresolved
band of the fourth positive                  system which is visible in the spec-
trum of CO at atmospheric pressure and so can be used to measure in absolute
terms the vibrational exchange between NO and CO shown in Fig. 8.


           F L A S H    P H O T O L Y S I S     A N D      K I N E T I C   S P E C T R O S C O P Y         217




S t u d i e s o f t h e p h o t o l y s i s o f ( C N )2 , C N B r a n d C N I g e n e r i c a l l y r e p r e -
sented as C N R by kinetic spectroscopy yield results similar to those described
                                                  20
f o r N O B r a n d N O C l ( B a s c o et al          ). These substances absorb at the short
end of the quartz ultraviolet below 2 300 Å and on flashing in the presence
of inert gas yield vibrationally excited CN radicals up to v = 6 which are
observed spectroscopically in absorption in the                             = o     I   and - 2 sequences


218                      1967 R. G. W. NORRISH

of the violet                 system at 3590, 3883, 4216 and 4660 Å. Decay se-
quences with time of C N* indicated the preferential production of C N* in
the higher excited vibrational states and their decay by collision with CNR as
with the analogous nitrosyl halide reactions, but owing to the very high
extinction coefficient of the C N radical itself there was also detected, using
colour filters, a high secondary population of C N* resulting from absorption
of light in the region 3500-4500 Å by CN far outside the photolytic wave
lengths of CNR. The process



is indicated involving many reversible excitations during the flash, the reverse
reaction raking place either by fluorescence or collision; but in the end only
v = 1 persists as before.




The photolysis of nitrogen dioxide, chlorine dioxide and ozone studied by the
techniques of classical photochemistry were all concluded to proceed by sim-
ilar mechanisms, involving the primary generation of oxygen atoms, as
follows21 :

Nitrogen dioside:



Chlorine dioside:




Ozone:




The quantum yield of the first two reactions in the near ultraviolet is of the
order 2. In the case of O 3 it was measured as up to 8 in the region of 2000-


        FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                                     219
2500 Å, but limited to 2 when photolysis occurs at the red end of the spec-
trum. Thus a chain reaction is indicated in the former case, which owing to the
inherent simplicity of the system must be propagated as shown by excited
oxygen molecules, considered by the earlier workers to be an electronically
excited species. On studying these reactions by isothermal kinetic spectros-
copy, we found that not only is the kinetic scheme of reactions shown above
confirmed, but that in addition highly vibrating oxygen molecules in the
ground state, cold rotationally and translationally, are produced in each case.
Thus the reactions




were indicated22,23. With NO, vibrational levels up to v = 11 were observed;
with ClO2 levels up to v = 8, and with O3 levels up to v = 17-20. In each case
more than half the exothermic energy of reaction appeared unequilibrated as
vibrational energy of the oxygen molecule observed in absorption in the
Schumann-Runge spectrum. Fig.9 shows the flash photolysis of ClO 2 in
which after flashing, the transient spectrum of the ClO radical is seen together
with the absorption by highly vibrating oxygen molecules. The production
of excited O2* is seen more clearly in Figs. IO and I I resulting from the photol-
ysis of NO2 and O3 respectively.




Fig. 9. Flash photolysis of ClO2·ClO 2 pressure, 0.5 mm Hg; N2 pressure, 580 mm Hg.
Flash energy, 320 J, showing ClO and vibrationally excited O2 (latter seen with difficulty
             owing to low dispersion). (Lipscomb, Norrish and Thrush22)


220                        1967 R. G. W. NORRISH




Fig. 10. Decay of vibrationally excited O2 resulting from the flash photolysis of NO2
under isothermal conditions. NO2 pressure , 2 mm Hg; N2 pressure, 500 mm Hg. Flash
                       energy, 2025 J. (Husain and Norrish34)




These results led McGrath and Norrish24 to the tentative generalisation that
when an atom reacts with a polyatomic molecule, a large proportion of the
exothermic energy of reaction is preferentially located initially as vibration in
the newly formed bond, i.e.



Qualitatively this seems reasonable since the main interaction must be visu-
alised as between A and B, while the elimination of CD could well occur
without much appreciable change in the interatomic distance between the
parts C and D. The generalisation has now been widely confirmed. McGrath
and Norrish24 have shown by flash photolysis that the reactions




yield highly vibrating ClO and BrO with up to six quanta of vibration, while
likewise, the reactions of ID oxygen atoms derived from ozone on reacting
with a wide range of hydrides yield vibrationally excited OH26, e.g.


       FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                             221




Other examples such as the reactions of hydrogen atoms observed by McKin-
ley, Garvin and Boudart27 and Cashion and Polyani28,




further confirm the correctness of our generalisation which invites detailed
quantitative study, and must probably await greater time resolution in our
technique before it can be achieved. For example, we cannot yet be sure
whether the vibrationally excited products are produced ab initio in their
highest vibrating state and relax subsequently, or whether a complete spec-
trum of vibrating states results directly as part of the reaction mechanism.




Fig. 11. Schumann-Runge absorption spectrum of vibrationally excited O2 produced
by flash photolysis of ozone. O3 pressure, 20 mm Hg; N2 pressure, 800 mm Hg. O3/NZ
            ratio = 1/40. Flash energy, 2000 J. (McGrath and Norrish23)


222                        1967 R. G. W. NORRISH

                             The Photolysis of Ozone

The photolysis of ozone was first discerned as a chain reaction by Heidt and
Forbes 21 and confirmed for pure ozone by Norrish and Wayne29 who ob-
served quantum yields up to 16 in the ultraviolet. The nature of the excited
oxygen functioning as chain carrier would now appear to be identified as the
vibrating molecule with more than 17 quanta of vibration. For the propaga-
tion of the chain the endothermic reaction


requires 69 kcal, and this is supplied precisely by a molecule vibrating with
more than 17 quanta. All those vibrating with less are visible by flash photo-
lysis and decay by normal relaxation processes. Those with more react so
rapidly with ozone molecules that they are not seen, except that they may be
faintly discerned up to v = 30 as a consequence of competition between reac-
tion and collisional deactivation. This conclusion is based upon the deduction
that the oxygen atom is generated in the first electronically excited state, ID,
lying 45 kcal above the ground state and that the chain reaction is propagated
uniquely by ID oxygen atoms, because no chain reaction follows photolysis




Fig. 11. The flash photolysis of water/ozone mixtures. Production of excited hydroxyl
by reaction of O( ID) with water vapour. Pressure of ozone, 6 mm Hg; pressure of water
vapour, 4 mm Hg; pressure of nitrogen, 200 mm Hg. Flash energy, 1600 J. (Basco and
                                       Norrish 23)


        FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                               223
by "orange" light where the magnitude of the quantum is only sufficient for
the generation of 3P oxygen atoms.
   The chemical proof that the oxygen atoms generated by the photolysis of
ozone in ultraviolet light are in the ID state lies in the fact that when small
quantities of water vapour are added to the system the spectrum of vibra-
tionally excited O2 molecules is progressively suppressed and replaced by the
absorption spectrum of OH as seen in Fig. 12. This is to be correlated with the
observation-of Forbes and Heidt39 that in "damp" ozone the quantum yield
is increased to values as high as 130, as compared with their maximum value of
8 for dry ozone, and in the light of our observation it may be concluded that an
entirely new mechanism of chain propagation is substituted as a consequence
of the successful competition of water with ozone for the oxygen atom, i.e.:




This however can only take place if the 0 atom is excited to the ID state for
the reaction of O(3P) with water is endothermic; we have




In the presence of water, the chain reaction may be written




followed by chain ending by intercombination of radicals. This scheme satis-
fies the kinetic findings of Forbes and Heidt; it explains the appearance of the
OH radical and demands the formation of the excited O atom. The reaction
of O atoms with other hydrides referred to above is also equally dependent on
the photolytic generation of O( ID) in the ultraviolet. It is significant that water
has no effect on ozone photolysis in "orange" light where only 3P oxygen


224                          1967 R. G. W. NORRISH

atoms can be generated. The quantum yield remains unchanged at 2 in accord
with the simple scheme31




analogous to the photolysis of NO2 and ClO2.
   It was shown by McGrath and Norrish 22 that the rate of decomposition of
ozone by the secondary reactions subsequent to the flash is strongly affected by
the addition of inert gases. Starting with 2.94 mm of O3 and diluting with
added gas to give a mixture ratio of O 3/M=1:163, the rate of disappearance
of O2 was determined by photometering the O2 absorption in a series of
spectra such as those shown in Fig. 13. In Fig. 14 are seen three typical curves
showing ozone decay. From these curves could be measured the efficiences of
third bodies M in the back reaction



When M is O the ratio of O2 to O2 is 163:1 so it is hardly surprising that the
               2


above reaction predominates over the reaction




Fig. 13. Disappearance of ozone spectrum in time after flash. Flash energy, 1280 J. O 3/N2
                  mixture, ratio I : 163. Ozone pressure, 2.93 mm Hg.


        FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                                225




Fig. 14. Typical ozone decay curves for         0     and 0   mixtures. Mixture ratio
                                  in all cases 1:163.

to such an extent as to reverse all O2 decomposition. With other added gases
the relative efficiences of the molecules M for the three body recombination
were determined as He=1, A=1, SF 6=1.5, CO 2=14, N 2=16, N 2O = 1 7 .
   The gases divide into two groups : (1) the inert gases and SF6 and (2) N2,
CO2 and N2O. Group (1) exhibiting low efficiency are spherically symmetri-
cal and chemically inert. Group (2) are much more efficient. It is possible with
group (2) that some form of chemical affinity is operative in forming inter-
mediate transition species, and that a more facile energy transfer is possible
due to readily stimulated vibrational modes. Further work along these lines
may well prove rewarding.




The gaseous oxidation of hydrides, including hydrocarbons occurs by exo-
thermic processes which have the characteristics of chain reactions, that is to
say they proceed by initiation, propagation, multiplication and extinction of
reacting centres. The reactions are said to be autocatalytic and if the conditions
are such that multiplication of propagating centres exceeds extinction, the
process may develop to explosion. These conditions depend on the param-
eters of temperature, total pressure, relative concentrations of reactants,
catalytic activity of the surface in initiating or terminating reaction chains, the
geometry of the reaction vessel, and the activity of added catalysts and inhib-


216                       1967 R. G. W. NORRISH

itors. The variation of these parameters gives rise to sharp limits of explosion,
and by judicious kinetic experiment the separate effect of each can be isolated
and defined by keeping all but the one under examination constant.
   The development of the slow reaction and the incidence of ignition arc
subject to an induction or incubation period during which autocatalysis occurs
(initially exponentially) to a steady state or to explosive reaction. This auto-
catalysis is dependent on the magnitude of the "net branching factor", which
is the result of the interplay of the physical parameters leading to multiplica-
tion and extinction of reaction centres. If in the notation of Semenov, f repre-
sents the sum of the reactions leading to multiplication and g the sum of those
leading to extinction



the net branching factor, which may obviously be positive or negative and
the development of the reaction velocity (v) in time (t) is given by



where the pre-exponential term A varies only slowly and in a much less
dramatic way then        with changing kinetic conditions. When is negative
from the beginning a finite and small stationary reaction velocity is imposed.
When is positive, rapid and exponential development of velocity to explo-
sion may occur. This is the case with the reaction of hydrogen with oxygen
which shows sharp explosive limits dependent on the parameters listed above.
There exist cases, however, where starting positive, may give rise to expo-
nential development of the reaction in a big way, but owing to consumption
of reactants or varying catalytic factors may become negative during the
course of reaction which, as it were, starting hopefully towards explosive
build up is finally quenched to a stationary state and subsequent decline, by the
failure of the net branching factor to remain positive. Such reactions are
termed degenerate explosions by Semenov. They are distinguished by having
a small but positive initial value of and depend for branching on the reaction
of a "precariously stable" intermediate which builds up as the reaction pro-
ceeds and which can be detected by kinetic and analytical observation. The
recognition of degenerately branched-chain reactions represents the culmi-
nating triumph in Semenov’s interpretation of branching-chain reactions and
in particular provides a pattern for the understanding of hydrocarbon oxi-
dation 33.
   But while giving us the overall pattern of reaction, neither the experimental


        FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                            227

methods nor the mathematical conceptions were capable of exposing the
intimate nature of the precise reactions involved. These were deduced in some
instances from circumstantial evidence, with the gradual realisation that atoms
and free radicals are more often than not concerned in the chain processes.
   It has remained for flash photolysis and kinetic spectroscopy not only to
confirm and amplify the general conclusions of the classical studies of chain
reactions, but also to provide objective proof of the nature and reactions of the
transient participating species. For this purpose we use the adiabatic method
taking advantage of the free radicals produced by pyrolysis and photolysis for
initiation, and flash heating to generate temperatures suitable to sustain the
propagation and branching reactions upon which the autocatalytic chain
reaction depends. We take for example the case ofhydrides.
   Since oxygen does not absorb energy from the photolytic flash under the
condition imposed by the limitations of the transparency of quartz, it is for-
tunate therefore that many hydrides absorb sufficiently to provide the neces-
sary pyrolysis for initiation. This is true for hydrogen sulphide, hydrogen
telluride, ammonia, hydrazine, and phosphine, all of which photolyse iso-
thermally and pyrolyse adiabatically by eliminating a hydrogen atom:



The growth and decay of the free radical XHn-1 so generated can be followed
by kinetic spectroscopy. Under pyrolytic conditions however when the con-
centration of free radicals generated may be high, the above reactions may be
followed by further elimination of hydrogen from the free radical, e.g.



This is true for example for ammonia (Husain and Norrish34), which under
isothermal conditions gives only NH, but under adiabatic conditions yields
NH radicals as well. We observe the same result with PH3 (Norrish and Ol-
dershaw 35), H2S (Norrish and Zeelenburg36), and H2Te (Norrish and Os-
borne37), the last two yielding HS and S, and HTe and Te respectively even
under isothermal conditions as shown for example in Fig. 15.
  The pyrolytic reactions under our conditions are generally limited in ex-
tent, but on the addition of oxygen in sufficient quantity oxidation proceeds
to explosion, unless the system is partially cooled by the addition of an inert
diluent. Sufficient excess fuel or oxygen has the same effect. Under such con-
ditions the oxidation proceeds by a quenched-chain reaction, and is much
more limited in extent.


228                        1967 K. G. W .NORRISH




Fig. 15. Flash photolysis of tellerium hydride. Pressure of TeH2, 0.25 mm Hg; pressure
           of N2, 350 mm Hg. Flash energy, 2 500 J. (Norrish and Osborne37)


The development of reaction from initiation to explosion involves an in-
cubation period of less than a millisecond, and in oxygen rich mixtures the
onset of ignition is marked by a copious burst of hydroxyl radicals. It is clear
that in all cases studied the hydroxyl radical acts as a chain carrier.
  Hydrocarbons on the other hand do not in general absorb light transmitted
by quartz (with the exception of highly unsaturated compounds) and the fuel
oxygen mixture therefore does not respond to the flash. To initiate explosive
reaction it is necessary to add a small quantity of sensitizer such as chlorine,
nitrogen peroxide or alkyl nitrite. These, by absorbing strongly, raise the
temperature of the system, and simultaneously photolyse and pyrolyse to
give free atoms or radicals which act as initiators. Nitrogen peroxide for ex-
ample absorbs strongly throughout the spectrum and yields oxygen atoms
which give ready initiations*



In Fig. 16 is shown a sequence of absorption spectra illustrating the explosion
of a mixture of 2 H2 + O 2 sensitized by nitrogen peroxide39. The growth and
decay of the OH radical is seen in the (o,o) and (o, I) bands of the transition
          This and the earlier study of the reaction of oxygen atoms with
hydrogen by Norrish and Porter38 go far to confirming the scheme of oxida-
tion of hydrogen proposed by Lewis and Von Elbe 40 of which the following
are some constituent reactions


       FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                              229




The explosion of hydrocarbons sensitized by amyl nitrate was studied by
Erhardt and Norrish41 and is illustrated in Figs. 17 and 18 which show the
effect of adding tetraethyl lead to a mixture of hexane and oxygen. The first
shows the ignition in the absence of the addendum with the rapid disappear-
ance of the spectrum of the sensitizer on flashing, followed by an incubation
period of 875      to the onset of explosion as marked by the sudden growth
of the OH radical. The second shows the ignition under identical conditions
in the presence of the addendum. It is seen that the incubation. period is in-
creased some three-fold to                 while during the growth to explo-
sion the spectrum of gaseous lead oxide is strongly developed. At the point
of ignition the PbO spectrum disappears completely and is replaced by the




Fig. 16. (a) Photo-reaction of NO2 + H2 giving OH radical. Pressure of H2, 2 mm Hg;
pressure of NO2, 2 mm Hg. No delay. (Norrish and Porter38) (b) Flash photolysis of
NO, (2 mm) + H2 (20 mm) + O2 (10 mm) + N2 (15 mm) showing the formation and
             decay of OH during a typical explosion. Flash energy, 3 300 J.


230                        1967 R. G. W. NORRISH




Fig. 17. Spectra vs. time. Explosion of hexane and oxygen sensitized by amyl nitrite.
Pressure of C6H14, 2 mm Hg; pressure of C5H11ONO, 2 mm Hg; pressure of O2,
              32.5 mm Hg. Flash energy, 2000 J. (Erhard and Norrish41)

resonance spectrum of lead. Both the OH and the Pb spectra are very faintly
visible before ignition. These and other experiments in which ignition was
observed photoelectrically by the sudden growth of OH emission, throw
light upon the mechanism of antiknock in the internal combustion engine
which we conclude to be dependent on the moderating effect of Pb and PbO
on the development of the autocatalytic growth to explosion.
   Knock has been proved by Miller42 and Male43 to be due to the homo-
geneous detonation of the residual charge in the cylinder at the end of the
ignition stroke. It is believed to be due to the generation of centers of auto-
ignition (peroxides, aldehydes, etc.) due to adiabatic rise of temperature,
which replaces the smooth explosion wave generated by the spark ignition.
We have concluded that the tetraethyl lead clearly must operate in the gas
phase and suggest that (1) it may remove the centers of autoignition by reduc-
tion - e.g. peroxides may be removed by



and (2) moderate the liberation of energy as the reaction develops to explosion
by the following reactions


         FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                                         231




Fig .18. Spectra vs. time. Effect of tetraethyl lead on the hexane explosion. Pressure of
         C6H14, 2 mm Hg; pressure of C5HIIONO, 2 mm Hg; pressure of O2, 32.5 mm Hg;
        pressure of tetraethyl lead, 0.2 mm Hg. Flash energy, 2 000 J. (Erhard and Norrish 4 1 )




Thus by alternate oxidation and reduction from lead to lead oxide and back
again the atomic lead and lead oxide can intervene in chain propagation by
the removal of OH, and so by shortening the chains retard their development.
With the onset ofexplosion, the PbO is instantaneously decomposed to atom-
ic lead, which as the system cools is finally deposited on the surface of the
reaction vessel.
   The question as to whether moderation of the explosive process occurs in
the gas phase, or by chain ending on heterogeneous particles of lead or lead
oxide ("smoke") would appear to be answered by these results, since no
"smoke" is observed during the course of the reaction, which is seen to be
completely homogeneous. In contrast the addition of tetraethyl tin which has
no anti-knock action is accompanied by the copious formation of smoke.
There is no sign of the production of gaseous SnO during the incubation
period and no effect whatsoever on the said incubation period and the reac-
tions leading to ignition . This is due to the lower volatility of SnO.
                         4 4


232                        1967 R. G. W. NORRISH

  Many other studies of the affects ofaddenda on explosive reactions of hydro-
carbons have been made by Callear and Norrish44 with interesting results
which cannot be discussed here. Reactions of this kind provide a plentiful
source of free radicals and atoms derived from the addenda in high tempera-
ture reactions.
   The growth and decay of free radicals as we pass through ignition is shown
for the combustion of acetylene sensitized by NO, in Figs. 19 and 20 (Norrish,
Porter and Thrush45). The curves were obtained by plate photometry of the
various radical spectra seen in absorption at increasing intervals after initiation.


        FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                           233
They are also typical of curves obtained for ethylene and methane and indi-
                                                                   46


cate the growth and decay of the observed radicals with time, though they
cannot be compared in terms of absolute concentration since the extinction
coefficients of the radicals are at present unknown. The combustion of acety-
lene and ethylene were shown by Bone to depend on the stoichiometric
                                            47



equations




according to which there is an apparent preferential burning of carbon. With
oxygen in excess, water is formed, while in fuel-rich mixtures free carbon in
the form of smoke is produced. These two conditions are very sharply distin-
guished on either side of the fuel-oxygen ratio of 1:1. This classical result is
very clearly confirmed by the curves shown in Figs. 19 and 20. In the former
we have an oxygen-rich system and the formation of water is indicated by the
copious display of OH, in the latter - the fuel-richsystem - the OH is barely in
evidence and the precursors of free carbon arc observed in the CH, C2, and C3
radicals. The change from one type of display to the other takes place extreme-
ly sharply at the fuel : oxygen ratio of 1:1, nitrogen peroxide for this purpose
being counted as oxygen.
   The CN radical which is strongly in evidence in fuel-richsystems is derived
from the sensitizer. It has been shown48 that during the induction period of
about 0.5 msec the temperature rises exponentially, slowly at first and very
sharply at the end. With the sudden appearance of the free radicals the explo-
sive reaction is complete: we are witnessing in fact the afterburning of hydro-
gen in oxygen-rich mixtures, and the after-cracking of the fuel in fuel-rich
mixtures. The only radical which can be seen during the induction period
before ignition is the OH radical which grows in concentration as the reaction
develops.
   Further experiments with fuel-rich mixtures46 indicated the growth and
decay of a precursor of free carbon which followed closely the growth and
decay of the carbon radicals C2, C3 and CH. It was possible to deduce the
extinction coefficient of this carbon precursor at 3 700 Å and to show that its
high value is characteristic of aromatic polynuclear hydrocarbons. It may be
suggested49 that in the high temperature of the flame (> 3 000ºC) cracking of
some of the excess fuel occurs to yield free carbon atoms, which progressively
   "crystallise" through C 2 and C3 to the "aromatic" structure of graphite. The


234                      1967 R. G. W. NORRISH

confirmation or otherwise of this view must await further studies of the pro-
ducts of explosion by means of the vacuum spectrograph when we may hope
to see the resonance line of carbon in absorption.




As I have mentioned above we have noted that the hydroxyl radical is com-
mon to the ignition processes of all the hydrides so far examined. Where ini-
tiation occurs by the direct photolysis of the hydride yielding an H atom, it
may be generated by the reaction



When initiation is by the photolysis of a sensitizer yielding oxygen atoms as
with NO2, OH may be derived from the reaction.



During the incubation period the OH is observed gradually to increase, and
the instant of ignition is marked in oxygen-rich mixtures by a very sudden
and enormous increase in its concentration. By detailed comparison of the
oxidation reactions of H2S, NH3, PH3 and hydrocarbons it may be concluded
that the pattern of chain propagation is the same in all cases, and represented
by the general scheme




Branching is dependent on the intermediate and may take place variously by
any one of the following reactions




The first reaction takes place in the autocatalysis of H 2S oxidation, in which
SO (seen by kinetic spectroscopy) is the intermediate. The second occurs in
the oxidation of methane which yields formaldehyde (readily detectable dur-
ing the reaction by conventional methods of analysis). The third is exemplified
by the oxidation of ammonia in which HNO is concluded to be the origin of
chain branching.


        FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                           235




   Table 2 shows the uniradical and the associated intermediate derived from
a series of hydrides which take part in chain propagation and branching, in
accordance with our conclusions based on comparative study both by classical
kinetic methods and flash photolysis. In cases where the intermediate is mod-
erately stable, as with SO from H2S and H2CO from CH4 the overall oxida-
tion exhibits the slow autocatalysis associated with degenerate branching. In
other cases, with extremely unstable intermediates the branching factor may
be high, and is reflected in kinetics which show very short incubation periods
and sharp transition from very slow reaction to explosion.
   All the uniradicals and associated intermediates are seen to be isoelectronic
or electronically structurally similar. This and the uniform participation of
the OH radical in all the chain-propagation reactions would seem to provide
a generalizing hypothesis of value and one which invites further experimental
examination.
   In connexion with the continued study of the reactions of the OH radical,
Home and Norrish53 have recently been able to measure quantitatively the
kinetics of the reactions


236                      1967 R. G. W. NORRISH

   The OH radicals were generated by flashing water vapour in highly trans-
parent quartz and comparing their rates of decay in the presence of inert gases
and hydrocarbons. Further measurements of this kind with other hydrides
will be of value to the continued study of the combustion of hydrocarbons
along the lines indicated above. They are also of course of importance in con-
sideration of the reactions involved in the evolution of planetary atmospheres,
as are many other reactions studied by kinetic spectroscopy such as the photo-
chemistry of NO, and of ozone and the reactions of the oxygen atom described
above.
   The examples which I have cited give, I hope, some indication of the breadth
of application of methods based on flash photolysis in the study of gas reac-
tions. Other results of importance involve the discovery of new absorption
spectra of chlorine and bromine by Briggs and Norrish 54, and the detection of
population inversion such as is observed in the study by Donovan and Husain
(ref. 55) of spin orbit relaxation of the metastable iodine atom I         pro-
duced in the photolysis of CF3I



Population inversion in favour of high vibrational levels is as we have seen
also observed in NO and CN, and has also been studied effectively by Polanyi
and his co-workers56 for atomic reactions such as




All these reactions form the basis of potential gas laser action and are being
effectively studied in this connexion.
   The opportunity for the application of the methods of flash photolysis to
chemical kinetics, not only in the gas phase, but also to the study of photo-
chemical reactions in solution is very great, and is increasing steadily as im-
provement in technique gives greater time resolution, and ever increasing
accessibility to reactions of the "vacuum ultraviolet".

In conclusion I give thanks to those who have collaborated and contributed
to the work described in this lecture, many of whom are continuing to direct
and develop it with distinction.

Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your interest and atten-
tion.


        FLASH PHOTOLYSIS AND KINETIC SPECTROSCOPY                                  237
 1. J.Stark, Z.Physik, 9(1908)889,894.
 2. E.Warburg, Sitz.Ber.Preuss.Akad.Wiss., Physik.-Math. Kl., (1916)314,(1918)300.
 3. M.Bodenstein and W.Dux, Z.Physik.Chem (Leipzig), 85(1913)297.
 4. See R.G.W.Norrish, Bakerian Lecture, 1967; Proc.Roy.Soc. (London), Ser.A, 301
    (1967)I.
 5. R.Wood, Phil.Mag., VI,44(1922)538.
 6. K.F.Bonhoeffer, Z.Physik.Chem. (Leipzig), 113 (1924) 199.
 7. F. Paneth and W. Hofeditz, Chem.Ber., 62 (1929) 1335. Also F.Paneth and W.
    Lautsch, ibid., 64(1931)2702.
 8. J.Franck, Trans. Faraday Soc., 21(1926)536.
 9. V.Henri, Compt. Rend., 177(1923) 1037.
10. R.G.W.Norrish and G.Porter, Nature, 164(1949) 658.
11. G.Porter, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser. A, 200(1950) 284.
12. O.Oldenberg, J.Chem.Phys., 2(1934)713;3(1935)266.
13. R.G. W.Norrish, G.Porter and B.A.Thrush, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser. A, 216
    (1955)165.
14. G. Porter and F. J. Wright, Discussion Faraday Soc., 14 (1953) 23.
15. N.Basco and R.G. W. Norrish, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser.A, 268(1962)291.
16. W.G.Burns and H.J.Bernstein, J.Chem.Phys., 18(1950)1669.
17. R.W.B.Pearse and A.G.Gaydon, Identification of Molecular Spectra, Chapman and
    Hall, London, 1950.
18. (a) N.Basco, A.B.Callear and R. G. W.Norrish, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser. A,
    260 (1961)293;(b)269(1662)180.
19. R. G. W. Norrish, The study of energy transfer in atoms and molecules by photo-
    chemical methods, in The Transference of Energy in Gases, 12th Solvay Conference,
    Brussels, 1962, Interscience, New York, 1964, p. 99.
20. N. Basco, J.E.Nicholas, R.G.W.Norrish and W. H. J. Vickers. Proc. Roy. Soc. (Lon-
    don), Ser. A., 272(1963)147.
21. R.G.W.Norrish, J.Chem.Soc., (1929) 1158; J.W.T.Spinks and J.M.Porter, J.Am.
    Chem. Soc., 56 (1934) 264; G. Kistiakowsky, Z.Physik.Chem(Leipzig), 117 (1925)
    337; J.Heidt and G.S.Forbes, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 56(1934)2365.
22. F. J. Lipscomb, R. G. W. Norrish and B. A-Thrush, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser. A,
    233 (1956) 455.
23. W.D. McGrath and R.G. W. Norrish, Proc. Roy. Soc.(London), Ser..A, 142(1957)
    265; N.Basco and R.G.W.Norrish, ibid., 260(1960)293; iden, Discussions Faraday
     Soc, 33 (1962) 99.
24. W.D.McGrath and R.G.W.Norrish, Z.Physik.Chem.(Frankfurt), 15(1958)245;
    Proc. Roy. .Soc. (London), Ser. A, 254(1960)317.
25. N.Basco and R. G.W.Norrish, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser. A, 260(1961)293.
26. N.Basco and R. G. W. Norrish, see ref. 24.
27. J.D.McKinley, D.Garvin and M.J.Boudart, J.Chem.Phys., 23(1955)784.
28. J.K.Cashion and J.C.Polanyi, J.Chem.Phys., 29(1958)455; 30(1959)316, 1097;
    J.C.Polanyi, ibid., 25(1955)754; idem, Chemistry in Britain, 2(1966)151.
29. R. G. W. Norrish and R.P. Wayne. Proc. Roy. Soc.(London), Ser. A, 288(1965) 200,
     361.


338                        1967 R. G. W. NORRISH

30. G.S.Forbes and L.J.Heidt, J.Aml.Chem.Soc., 56(1934)1671.
31. G.Kistiakowski, Z.Physik.Chem.(Leipzig), 117(1925)337.
32. W.D.McGrath and R.G. W.Norrish, Proc.Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A 242 (1957)
     265.
33. N.N.Semenov, Chemical Kinetics and Chain Reactions, Oxford University Press,
     London, 1935.
34. D. Husain and R. G. W. Norrish, Proc. Roy. Ser. (London), Ser. A, 273 (1963)145.
35. R.G.W.Norrish and G.A.Oldershaw, Proc. Roy. Soc.(London), Ser.A 262(1961)1.
36. R.G.W.Norrish and A.P.Zeelenbur, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser.A, 240 (1957)
     293.
3 7. R.G.W.Norrish and M. Osborne, in preparation.
38. R.G.W.Norrish and G.Porter, Proc. Roy.Soc.(London), Ser.A, 210(1952)439.
39. J.F.Nicholas and R.G.W.Norrish, Proc. Roy. Soc (London), Ser. A, 309 (1969) 171.
40. B. Lewis and G.von Elbe, Combustion, Flames and Explosions of Gases, Academic
     Press, New York, 1951.
41. K.Erhard and R.G.W.Norrish, Proc. Roy. Soc.(London), Ser.A, 234(1956)178.
42. S. A. E. Miller, Quart. Trans., 1(1947)98.
43. T. Male, Third Symphosium on Flame and Combustion Phenomena, Williams and Wil-
     kins, Baltimore, 1949, p.271.
44. A.P.Callear and R.G. W.Norrish, Proc. Roy. Soc.(London), Ser.A, 259 (1960) 304.
45. R.G. W. Norrish, G.Porter and B.A. Thrush, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser.A, 216
     (1953)165.
46. R.G. W. Norrish, G.Porter and B.A. Thrush, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser.A, 227
     (1955)423.
47. W. A. Bone, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser.A, 137(1932)243.
48. R. G. W. Norrish, Plenary Conference, Section Melanges Gazeux, 16th Congress of
     Pure and Applied Chemistry, Experiementia, Suppl.7 (1958)87.
49. R. G. W. Norrish, see ref. 48, p. 97.
50. R. G. W. Norrish, Rev. Inst. Franc. Pétrole Am Combust Liquides, 7 (1949) 288.
51. A.Harding and R.G.W.Norrish, Proc.Roy.Soc.(L.ondon), Ser.A 212(1952)291.
52. M.D.Carabine and R. G. W.Norrish, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), Ser. A, 296 (1967)1.
53. D.Home and R.G.W.Norrish, Nature, 215(1967)1373.
54. A. G.Briggs and R. G. W. Norrish, Proc. Roy. Soc (London), Ser. A, 276 (1963) 57.
55. R. J.Donovan and D.Husain, Trans. Faraday Soc., 62(1962)11,1050.
