ELECTRON TRANSFER REACTIONS IN
CHEMISTRY: THEORY AND EXPERIMENT
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1992

by
R UDOLPH        A. M A R C U S
Noyes Laboratory of Chemical Physics, California Institute of Technology,
MS 127-72, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA




ELECTRON TRANSFER EXPERIMENTS SINCE THE LATE 1940s
Since the late 1940s, the field of electron transfer processes has grown
enormously, both in chemistry and biology. The development of the field,
experimentally and theoretically, as well as its relation to the study of other
kinds of chemical reactions, represents to us an intriguing history, one in
which many threads have been brought together. In this lecture, some
history, recent trends, and my own involvement in this research are de-
scribed.
   The early experiments in the electron transfer field were on “isotopic
exchange reactions” (self-exchange reactions) and, later, “cross reactions.”
These experiments reflected two principal influences. One of these was the
availability after the Second World War of many radioactive isotopes, which
permitted the study of a large number of isotopic exchange electron trans-
fer reactions, such as


and




   There is a two-fold simplicity in typical self-exchange electron transfer
reactions (so-called since other methods beside isotopic exchange were later
used to study some of them): (1) the reaction products are identical with the
reactants, thus eliminating one factor which usually influences the rate of a
chemical reaction in a major way, namely the relative thermodynamic
stability of the reactants and products: and (2) no chemical bonds are
broken or formed in simple electron transfer reactions. Indeed, these self-
exchange reactions represent, for these combined reasons, the simplest
class of reactions in chemistry. Observations stemming directly from this
simplicity were to have major consequences, not only for the electron


70                               Chemistry 1992


transfer field but also, to a lesser extent, for the study of other kinds of
chemical reactions as well (cf Shaik et al , ref. 2).
   A second factor in the growth of the electron transfer field was the
introduction of new instrumentation, which permitted the study of the rates
of rapid chemical reactions. Electron transfers are frequently rather fast,
compared with many reactions which undergo, instead, a breaking of
chemical bonds and a forming of new ones. Accordingly, the study of a large
body of fast electron transfer reactions became accessible with the introduc-
tion of this instrumentation. One example of the latter was the stopped-flow
apparatus, pioneered for inorganic electron transfer reactions by N. Sutin.
It permitted the study of bimolecular reactions in solution in the millisec-
ond time scale (a fast time scale at the time). Such studies led to the
investigation of what has been termed electron transfer “cross reactions,”
i.e., electron transfer reactions between two different redox systems, as in




   Again, in the field of electrochemistry, the new post-war instrumentation
in chemical laboratories led to methods which permitted the study of fast
electron transfer reactions at metal electrodes. Prior to the late 1940s only
relatively slow electrochemical reactions, such as the discharge of an H3O +
ion at an electrode to form H2 , had been investigated extensively. They
involved the breaking of chemical bonds and the forming of new ones.
   Numerous electron transfer studies have now also been made in other
areas, some depicted in Figure 1. Some of these investigations were made
possible by a newer technology, lasers particularly, and now include studies
in the picosecond and subpicosecond time regimes. Just recently, (non-
laser) nanometer-sized electrodes have been introduced to study electro-
chemical processes that are still faster than those hitherto investigated. Still
other recent investigations, important for testing aspects of the electron
transfer theory at electrodes, involve the new use of an intervening ordered
adsorbed monolayer of long chain organic compounds on the electrode to
facilitate the study of various effects, such as varying the metal-solution
potential difference on the electrochemical electron transfer rate.
   In some studies of electron transfer reactions in solution there has also
been a skillful blending of these measurements of chemical reaction rates
with various organic or inorganic synthetic methods, as well as with site-
directed mutagenesis, to obtain still further hitherto unavailable informa-
tion. The use of chemically modified proteins to study the distance depen-
dence of electron transfer, notably by Gray and coworkers, has opened a
whole new field of activity.
   The interaction of theory and experiment in these many electron transfer
fields has been particularly extensive and exciting, and each has stimulated


                                Rudolph A. Marcus                           71


       Developments in Electron Transfer Reactions



            ET at           ET at                ET at            ET at
        liquid-liquid   polymer-liquid      semiconductor       modified
          interfaces      interfaces          electrodes       electrodes




                                                             conversion
                                                        I




       ion pairs,
    recombination,
         escape


magnetic effects                                                 long range ET
     on ET
                                  ET across rigid
                                  organic bridges




  the other. The present lecture addresses the underlying theory and this
  interaction.


  THE EARLY EXPERIENCE
  My own involvement in the electron transfer field began in a rather circu-
  itous way. In an accompanying biographical note I have commented on my
  earlier background, which was in experimental measurements of reaction
  rates as a chemistry graduate student at McGill University (1943-46) and as
  a post-doctoral associate at the National Research Council of Canada
  (1946-49). A subsequent post-doctoral study at the University of North
  Carolina (1949-51) on the theory of reaction rates resulted in what is now
  known in the literature as RRKM theory (Rice, Ramsperger, Kassel, Mar-
  cus).
     This unimolecular reaction field reflects another long and extensive
  interaction between theory and experiment. RRKM theory enjoys wide-
  spread use and is now usually referred to in the literature only by its


72                                Chemistry 1992


acronym (or by the texts written about it, ref. 4), instead of by citation of the
original articles.
   After the theoretical post-doctoral, I joined the faculty of the Polytechnic
Institute of Brooklyn in 1951 and wondered what theoretical research to do
next after writing the RRKM papers (1951-52). I remember vividly how a
friend of mine, a colleague at Brooklyn Poly, Frank Collins, came down to
my office every day with a new idea on the liquid state transport theory
which he was developing, while I, for theoretical research, had none.
Perhaps this gap in not doing anything immediately in the field of theory
was, in retrospect, fortunate: In not continuing with the study of the theory
of unimolecular reactions, for which there were too few legitimate experi-
mental data at the time to make the subject one of continued interest, I was
open for investigating quite different problems in other areas. I did, how-
ever, begin a program of experimental studies in gas phase reactions,
prompted by my earlier studies at NRC and by the RRKM work.
   In the biographical note I have also recalled how a student in my statisti-
cal mechanics class in this period (Abe Kotliar) asked me about a particular
problem in polyelectrolytes. It led to my writing two papers on the subject
(1954-55), one of which required a considerable expansion in my back-
ground in electrostatics, so as to analyze different methods for calculating
the free energy of these systems: In polyelectrolyte molecules, it may be
recalled, the ionic charges along the organic or inorganic molecular back-
bone interact with each other and with the solvent. In the process, I read
the relevant parts of the texts that were readily available to me on electro-
statics (Caltech’s Mason and Weaver’s was later to be particularly helpful!).
When shortly thereafter I encountered some papers on electron transfer, a
field entirely new to me, I was reasonably well prepared for treating the
problems which lay ahead.


DEVELOPING AN ELECTRON TRANSFER THEORY
Introduction
My first contact with electron transfers came in 1955 as a result of chancing
upon a 1952 symposium issue on the subject in the Journal of Physical
Chemistry. An article by Bill Libby caught my eye - a use of the Franck-
Condon principle to explain some experimental results, namely, why some
isotopic exchange reactions which involve electron transfer between pairs
of small cations in aqueous solution, such as reaction (1), are relatively slow,
whereas electron transfers involving larger ions, such as Fe(CN) 6 3- -
F e ( C N )6 4- a n d M n O4 - - M n O4 2 - , are relatively fast.
   Libby explained this observation in terms of the Franck-Condon princi-
ple, as discussed below. The principle was used extensively in the field of
spectroscopy for interpreting spectra for the excitation of the molecular
electronic-vibrational quantum states. An application of that principle to
chemical reaction rates was novel and caught my attention. In that paper
Libby gave a “back-of-the-envelope” calculation of the resulting solvation


                                     Rudolph A. Marcus                                    73


energy barrier which slowed the reaction. However, I felt instinctively that
even though the idea - that somehow the F r a n c k - C o n d o n principle was
involved - seemed strikingly right, the calculation itself was incorrect. The
next month of study of the problem was, for me, an especially busy one. To
place the topic in some perspective I first digress and describe the type of
theory that was used for other types of chemical reaction rates at the time
and continues to be useful today.

Reaction rate theory
Chemical reactions are often described in terms of the motion of the atoms
of the reactants on a potential energy surface. This potential energy surface
is really the electronic energy of the entire system, plotted versus the
positions of all the atoms. A very common example is the transfer of an
atom or a group B from AB to form BC




Figure 2. Potential energy contours for reaction (4), AB + C   A + BC, in the collinear case.


 74                              Chemistry 1992


    A point representing this reacting system begins its trajectory in the lower
 right region of the figure in a valley in this plot of contours, the “valley of
 the reactants.” When the system has enough energy, appropriately dis-
 tributed between the various motions, it can cross the “mountain pass”
 (saddle-point region) separating the initial valley from the products’ valley
 in the upper left, and so form the reaction products. There is a line in the
 figure, XY, analogous to the “continental divide” in the Rocky Mountains
 in the U.S., which separates systems which could spontaneously flow into
 the reactants’ valley from those which could flow into the products’ one. In
 chemists’ terminology this line represents the “transition state” of the
 reaction.
    In transition state theory a quasi-equilibrium between the transition state
 and the reactants is frequently postulated, and the reaction rate is then
 calculated using equilibrium statistical mechanics. A fundamental dynami-
 cal basis, which replaces this apparently ad hoc but common assumption of
 transition state theory and which is perhaps not as well known in the
 chemical literature as it deserves to be, was given many years ago by the
 physicist and one-time chemical engineer, Eugene Wigner (1938). He used
 a classical mechanical description of the reacting system in the many-
 dimensional space (of coordinates and momenta). Wigner pointed out that
 the quasi-equilibrium would follow as a dynamical consequence if each
 trajectory of a moving point representing the reacting system in this many-
 dimensional space did not recross the transition state (and if the distribution
 of the reactants in the reactants’ region were a Boltzmann one). In recent
 times, the examination of this recrossing has been a common one in classical
 mechanical trajectory studies of chemical reactions. Usually, recrossings are
 relatively minor, except in nonadiabatic reactions, where they are readily
 treated (cf discussion, later).
    In practice, transition state theory is generalized so as to include as many
 coordinates as are needed to describe the reacting system. Further, when
 the system can “tunnel” quantum mechanically through the potential ener-
 gy barrier (the “pass”) separating the two valleys, as for example frequently
 happens at low energies in H-transfer reactions, the method of treating the
passage across the transition state region needs, and has received, refine-
 ment. (The principal problem encountered here has been the lack of
 “dynamical separability” of the various motions in the transition state
 region.)

Electron transfer theory. Formulation
In contrast to the above picture, we have already noted that in simple
electron transfer reactions no chemical bonds are broken or formed and so
a somewhat different picture of the reaction is needed for the electron
transfer reaction.
   In his 1952 symposium paper, Libby noted that when an electron is
transferred from one reacting ion or molecule to another, the two new
molecules or ions formed are in the wrong environment of the solvent


                                       Rudolph A. Marcus                                      75


molecules, since the nuclei do not have time to move during the rapid
electron jump: in reaction (1) a Fe2+ ion would be formed in some configu-
ration of the many nearby dipolar solvent molecules that was appropriate to
the original Fe3+     ion. Analogous remarks apply to the newly formed Fe3+
ion in the reaction. On the other hand, in reactions of “complex ions,” such
a s t h o s e i n t h e F e ( C N )6 - 3 - F e ( C N )6 - 4 a n d M n O4 - - M n O4 2 - s e l f -
exchange reactions, the two reactants are larger, and so the change of
electric field in the vicinity of each ion, upon electron transfer, would be
smaller. The original solvent environment would therefore be less foreign
to the newly formed charges, and so the energy barrier to reaction would be
less. In this way Libby explained the faster self-exchange electron transfer
rate for these complex ions. Further confirmation was noted in the ensuing
discussion in the symposium: the self-exchange Co(NH 3) 63+ - Co(NH 3) 62+
reaction is very slow, and it was pointed out that there was a large difference
in the equilibrium Co-N bond lengths in the 3+ and the 2+ ions, and so
each ion would be formed in a very “foreign” configuration of the vibra-
tional coordinates, even though the ions are “complex ions.”
   After studying Libby’s paper and the symposium discussion, I realized
that what troubled me in this picture for reactions occurring in the dark was
that energy was not conserved: the ions would be formed in the wrong high-
energy environment, but the only way such a non-energy conserving event
could happen would be by the absorption of light (a “vertical transition”),
and not in the dark. Libby had perceptively introduced the Franck-Condon
principle to chemical reactions, but something was missing.
   In the present discussion, as well as in Libby’s treatment, it was supposed
that the electronic interaction of the reactants which causes the electron
transfer is relatively weak. That view is still the one that seems appropriate
today for most of these reactions. In this case of weak-electronic interac-
tion, the question becomes: how does the reacting system behave in the dark
so as to satisfy both the Franck-Condon principle and energy conservation?
I realized that fluctuations had to occur in the various nuclear coordinates,
such as in the orientation coordinates of the individual solvent molecules
and indeed in any other coordinates whose most probable distribution for
the products differs from that of the reactants. With such fluctuations,
values of the coordinates could be reached which satisfy both the Franck-
Condon and energy conservation conditions and so permit the electron
transfer to occur in the dark.
   For a reaction such as reaction (1), an example of an initial and final
configuration of the solvent molecules is depicted in Figure 3. Fluctuations
from the original equilibrium ensemble of configurations were ultimately
needed, prior to the electron transfer, and were followed by a relaxation to
the equilibrium ensemble for the products, after electron transfer.
   The theory then proceeded as follows. The potential energy                           of the
entire system, reactants plus solvent, is a function of the many hundreds of
relevant coordinates of the system, coordinates which include, among oth-
ers, the position and orientation of the individual solvent molecules (and


76                                      Chemistry 1992


                     Electron Transfer in Solution




                          Reactants


Figure 3. Typical nuclear configurations for reactants, products, and surrounding solvent
molecules in reaction (1). The longer M-OH2, bond length in the + 2 state is indicated schemati-
cally by the larger ionic radius. (Sutin, ref. 2)


hence of their dipole moments, for example), and the vibrational coordi-
nates of the reactants, particularly those in any inner coordination shell of
the reacting ions. (E.g., the inner coordination shell of an ion such as Fe 2+
or Fe3+ in water is known from EXAFS experiments to contain six water
molecules.) No longer were there just the two or so important coordinates
that were dominant in reaction (4).
   Similarly, after the electron transfer, the reacting molecules have the
ionic charges appropriate to the reaction products, and so the relevant
potential energy function Up, is that for the products plus solvent. These two
potential energy surfaces will intersect if the electronic coupling which leads
to electron transfer is neglected. For a system with N coordinates this
intersection occurs on an (N-l) dimensional surface, which then constitutes
in our approximation the transition state of the reaction. The neglected
electronic coupling causes a well-known splitting of the two surfaces in the
vicinity of their intersection. A schematic profile of the two potential energy
surfaces in the N-dimensional space is given in Figure 4. (The splitting is not
shown.)
   Due to the effect of the previously neglected electronic coupling and the
coupling between the electronic motion and the nuclear motion near the
intersection surface S, an electron transfer can occur at S. In classical terms,
the transfer at S occurs at fixed positions and momenta of the atoms, and S O
the Franck-Condon principle is satisfied. Since U r equals UP at S, energy is
also conserved. The details of the electron transfer depend on the extent of
electronic coupling and how rapidly the point representing the system in
this N-dimensional space crosses S. (It has been treated, for example, using
as an approximation the well-known one-dimensional Landau-Zener ex-
pression for the transition probability at the near-intersection of two poten-
tial energy curves.)


                                        Rudolph A. Marcus                                        77


                      Potential Energy Surfaces, Profile




Figure 4. Profile of potential energy surfaces for reactants plus environment, R, and for
products plus environment, P. Solid curves: schematic. Dashed curves: schematic but slightly
more realistic. The typical splitting at the intersection of U , and U p, is not shown in the Figure
                                                              r


(Marcus and Siddarth, ref. 2).




   When the splitting caused by the electronic coupling between the elec-
tron donor and acceptor is large enough at the intersection, a system
crossing S from the lower surface on the reactants’ side of S continues onto
the lower surface on the products’ side, and so an electron transfer in the
dark has then occurred. When the coupling is, instead, very weak, (“non-
adiabatic reactions”) the probability of successfully reaching the lower
surface on the products’ side is small and can be calculated using quantum
mechanical perturbation theory, for example, using Fermi’s “Golden
Rule,” an improvement over the l-dimensional Landau-Zener treatment.
   Thus, there is some difference and some similarity with a more conven-
tional type of reaction such as reaction (4), whose potential energy contour
plots were depicted in Figure 2. In both cases, fluctuations of coordinates
are needed to reach the transition state, but since so many coordinates can
now play a significant role in the electron transfer reaction, because of the
major and relatively abrupt change in charge distribution on passing
through the transition state region, a rather different approach from the
conventional one was needed to formulate the details of the theory.


78                                  Chemistry 1992


Electron transfer theory. Treatment
In the initial paper (1956) I formulated the above picture of the mechanism
of electron transfer and, to make the calculation of the reaction rate
tractable, treated the solvent as a dielectric continuum. In the transition
state the position-dependent dielectric polarization Pu(r) of the solvent, due
to the orientation and vibrations of the solvent molecules, was not the one
in equilibrium with the reactants’ or the products’ ionic charges. It repre-
sented instead, some macroscopic fluctuation from them. The electronic
polarization for the solvent molecules, on the other hand, can rapidly
respond to any such fluctuations and so is that which is dictated by the
reactants’ charges and by the instantaneous Pu(r).
   With these ideas as a basis, what was then needed was a method of
calculating the electrostatic free energy G of this system with its still un-
known polarization function Pu(r). I obtained this free energy G by finding a
reversible path for reaching this state of the system. Upon then minimizing
G, subject to the constraint imposed by the Franck-Condon principle (re-
flected in the electron transfer occurring at the intersection of the two
potential energy surfaces), I was able to find the unknown Pu(r) and, hence,
to find the G for the transition state. That G was then introduced into
transition state theory and the reaction rate calculated.
   In this research I also read and was influenced by a lovely paper by
Platzmann and Franck (1952) on the optical absorption spectra of halide
ions in water and later by work of physicists such as Pekar and Frohlich
(1954) on the closely related topic of polaron theory. As best as I can recall
now, my first expressions for G during this month of intense activity seemed
rather clumsy, but then with some rearrangement a simple expression
emerged that had the right “feel” to it and that I was also able to obtain by a
somewhat independent argument. The expression also reduced reassuringly
to the usual one, when the constraint of arbitrary P,,(r) was removed.
Obtaining the result for the mechanism and rate of electron transfer was
indeed one of the most thrilling moments of my scientific life.
   The expression for the rate constant k of the reaction is given by

                                                                           (5a)

where        in turn, is given by

                                                                          (5b)
The A in Eq. (5a) is a term depending on the nature of the electron transfer
reaction (e.g., bimolecular or intramolecular),       is the standard free
energy of reaction (and equals zero for. a self-exchange reaction), λ is a
“reorganization term,” composed of solvational        and vibrational      )
components.


                                Rudolph A. Marcus                             79

In a two-sphere model of the reactants,      was expressed in terms of the two
ionic radii a1, and a2 (including in the radius any inner coordination shell),
the center-to-center separation distance R of the reactants, the optical
and static (Ds) dielectric constants of the solvent, and the charge transferred
    from one reactant to the other:




For a bimolecular reaction, work terms, principally electrostatic, are in-
volved in bringing the reactants together and in separating the reaction
products, but are omitted from Eq. (5) for notational brevity. The expres-
sion for the vibrational term is given by




where       and      are equilibrium values for the jth normal mode coordi-
nate      and k, is a reduced force constant 2k             + k ) k being the
force constant for the reactants and            being that for the products. (I
introduced a “symmetrization” approximation for the vibrational part of
the potential energy surface, to obtain this simple form of Eqs. (5) to (8),
and tested it numerically.)
   In 1957 I published the results of a calculation of the        arising from a
stretching vibration in the innermost coordination shell of each reactant,
(the equation used for       was given in the 1960 paper). An early paper on
the purely vibrational contribution using chemical bond length coordinates
and neglecting bond-bond correlation had already been published for self-
exchange reactions by George and Griffiths in 1956.
   I also extended the theory to treat electron transfers at electrodes, and
distributed it as an Office of Naval Research Report in 1957, the equations
being published later in a journal paper in 1959. I had little prior knowl-
edge of the subject, and my work on electrochemical electron transfers was
facilitated considerably by reading a beautiful and logically written survey
article of Roger Parsons on the equilibrium electrostatic properties of
electrified metal-solution interfaces.
   In the 1957 and 1965 work I showed that the electrochemical rate
constant was again given by Eqs. (5)-(8), but with A now having a value
appropriate to the different “geometry” of the encounter of the partici-
pants in the reaction. The 1/2a2 in Eq. (7) was now absent (there is only one
reacting ion) and R now denotes twice the distance from the center of the
reactant’s charge to the electrode (it equals the ion-image distance). A term
    replaced the        in Eq.(5b), where e is the charge transferred between
the ion and the electrode, and       is the activation overpotential, namely the
metal-solution potential difference, relative to the value it would have if the
rate constants for the forward and reverse reactions were equal. These rate
constants are equal when the minima of the two G curves in Figure 5 have
the same height.


80                                      Chemistry 1992


                               Free Energy Curves




                                REACTION COORDINATE q
Figure 5. Free energy of reactants plus environment vs. the reaction coordinate q (R curve), and
free energy of products plus environment vs. reaction coordinate q (P curve). The three vertical
lines on the abscissa denote, from left to right, the value for the reactants, for the transition
state, and for the products. (Marcus and Siddarth, ref. 2).



   When             most electrons go into or out of quantum states in the
metal that are near the Fermi level. However, because of the continuum of
states in the metal, the inverted effect (described below) was now predicted
to be absent for this process, i.e., the counterpart of Eq. (5b) is applicable
only in the region            In the case of an intrinsically highly exothermic
electron transfer reaction at an electrode, the electron can remove the
immediate “exothermicity” by (if entering) going into a high unoccupied
quantum state of the metal, or (if leaving) departing from a low occupied
quantum state, each far removed from the Fermi level. (The inverted region
effect should, however, occur for the electron transfer when the electrode
is a narrow band semiconductor.)
   After these initial electron transfer studies, which were based on a dielec-
tric continuum approximation for the solvent outside the first coordination
shell of each reactant, I introduced a purely molecular treatment of the
reacting system. Using statistical mechanics, the solvent was treated as a
collection of dipoles in the 1960 paper, and later in 1965 a general charge
distribution was used for the solvent molecules and for the reactants. At the
same time I found a way in this 1960 paper of introducing rigorously a


                                 Rudolph A. Marcus                               81


global reaction coordinate in this many-dimensional (N) coordinate space of
the reacting system. The globally defined coordinate so introduced was
equivalent to using U P - Ur, the potential energy difference between the
products plus solvent (UP ) and the reactants plus solvent (Ur) (cf A. Warshel,
1987). It was, thereby, a coordinate defined everywhere in this N-dimen-
sional space.
   The free energy Gr of a system containing the solvent and the reactants,
and that of the corresponding system for the products, GP , could now be
defined along this globally defined reaction coordinate. (In contrast, in
reactions such as that depicted by Figure 2, it is customary, instead, to
define a reaction coordinate locally, namely, in the vicinity of a path leading
from the valley of the reactants through the saddle point region and into the
valley of the products.)
   The potential energies U r and U P in the many-dimensional coordinate
space are simple functions of the vibrational coordinates but are complicat-
ed functions of the hundreds of relevant solvent coordinates: there are
many local minima corresponding to locally stable arrangements of the
solvent molecules. However, I introduced a “linear response approxima-
tion, ” in which any hypothetical change in charge of the reactants produces
a proportional change in the dielectric polarization of the solvent. (Recent-
ly, I utilized a central limit theorem to understand this approximation
better-beyond simple perturbation theory, and plan to submit the results
for publication shortly.) With this linear approximation the free energies Gr
and Gp became simple quadratic functions of the reaction coordinate.
   Such an approach had major consequences. This picture permitted a
depiction of the reaction in terms of parabolic free energy plots in simple
and readily visualized terms, as in Figure 5. With them the trends predicted
from the equations were readily understood. It was also important to use
the free energy curves, instead of oversimplified potential energy profiles,
because of the large entropy changes which occur in many electron transfer
cross-reactions, due to changes in strong ion-polar solvent interactions.
(The free energy plot is legitimately a one-coordinate plot while the poten-
tial energy plot is at most a profile of the complicated U and U in N -
                                                                   r       p

dimensional space.)
   With the new statistical mechanical treatment of 1960 and 1965 one
could also see how certain relations between rate constants initially deriv-
able from the dielectric continuum-based equations in the 1956 paper
could also be valid more generally. The relations were based, in part, on
Equations (5) and (initially via (7) and (8)) on the approximate relation




where λ 12 is the λ for the cross-reaction and the λ 11 , and λ 22 are those of the
self-exchange reactions.


82                                 Chemistry 1992



In the 1960 paper I had listed a number of theoretical predictions resulting
from these equations, in part to stimulate discussion with experimentalists
in the field at a Faraday Society meeting on oxidation-reduction reactions,
where this paper was to be presented. At the time I certainly did not
anticipate the subsequent involvement of the many experimentalists in
testing these predictions. Among the latter was one which became one of
the most widely tested aspects of the theory, namely, the “cross-relation.”
This expression, which follows from Eqs. (5) and (9), relates the rate
constant k 12 of a cross-reaction to the two self-exchange rate constants, k     11


and k , and to the equilibrium constant K of the reaction.
      22                                        12




                                                                              (10)
 where f 12 is a known function of k , k and K and is usually close to unity.
                                    11   22          12

    Another prediction in the 1960 paper concerned what I termed there the
 inverted region: In a series of related reactions, similar in λ but differing in
        a plot of the activation free energy       vs.     is seen from Eq. (5b) to
 first decrease as         is varied from 0 to some negative value, vanish at
       = −λ, and then increase when             is made still more negative. This
 initial decrease of         with increasingly negative        is the expected trend
 in chemical reactions and is similar to the usual trend in “Bronsted plots” of
 acid or base catalyzed reactions and in “Tafel plots” of electrochemical
 reactions. I termed that region of           the “normal” region. However, the
 prediction for the region where                   the “inverted region,” was the
 unexpected behavior, or at least unexpected until the present theory was
 introduced.
    This inverted region is also easily visualized using Figures 6 and 7:
 Successively making ∆ G0 more negative, by lowering the products’ ∆ G0 curve
 vertically relative to the reactant curve, decreases the free energy barrier
        (given by the intersection of the reactants’ and products’ curves): that
 barrier is seen in Figure 6 to vanish at some ∆ G0 and then to increase again.
    Other predictions dealt with the relation between the electrochemical
 and the corresponding self-exchange electron transfer rates, the numerical
estimate of the reaction rate constant k and, in the case of non-specific
 solvent effects, the dependence of the reaction rate on solvent dielectric
 properties. The testing of some of the predictions was delayed by an
 extended sabbatical in 1960-61, which I spent auditing courses and at-
 tending seminars at the nearby Courant Mathematical Institute.

Comparisons of Experiment and Theory
Around 1962, during one of my visits to Brookhaven National Laboratory, I
showed Norman Sutin the 1960 predictions. Norman had either measured
via his stopped-flow apparatus or otherwise knew rate constants and equi-
librium constants which permitted the cross-relation Eq. (10) to be tested.
There were about six such sets of data which he had available. I remember
vividly the growing sense of excitement we both felt as, one by one, the


       Rudolph A. Marcus     83


The Inverted Region Effect




   REACTION COORDINATE q


84                                         Chemistry 1992


observed             more or less agreed with the predictions of the relation. I
later collected the results of this and of various other tests of the 1960
predictions and published them in 1963. Perhaps by showing that the
previously published expressions were not mere abstract formulae, but
rather had concrete applications, this 1963 paper, and many tests by Sutin
and others, appear to have stimulated numerous subsequent tests of the
cross-relation and of the other predictions. A few examples of the cross-
relation test are given in Table 1.
     The encouraging success of the experimental tests given in the 1963
paper suggested that the theory itself was more general than the approxima-
tions (e.g., solvent dipoles, unchanged force constants) used in 1960 and
stimulated me to give a more general formulation (1965). The latter paper
also contains a unified treatment of electron transfers in solution and at
metal electrodes, and served, thereby, to generalize my earlier (1957)
treatment of the electrochemical electron transfers.
     The best experimental evidence for the inverted region was provided in
1984 by Miller, Calcaterra and Closs, almost 25 years after it was predicted.




Figure 8. Inverted region effect in chemical electron transfer reactions. (Miller, et al, ref. 3).


                                    Rudolph A. Marcus                                    85


This successful experimental test, which was later obtained for other elec-
tron transfer reactions in other laboratories, is reproduced in Figure 8.
Possible reasons for not observing it in the earlier tests are several-fold and
have been discussed elsewhere.
  Previously, indirect evidence for the inverted region had been obtained
by observing that electron transfer reactions with a very negative ∆ G* may
result in chemiluminescence: when the               and      curves intersect at a high
     because of the inverted region effect, there may be an electron transfer
to a more easily accessible           curve, one in which one of the products is
electronically excited and which intersects the             curve in the normal region
at a low          as in Figure 9. Indeed, experimentally in some reactions
100% formation of an electronically excited state of a reaction product has
been observed by Bard and coworkers, and results in chemiluminescence.
  Another consequence of Eq. (5) is the linear dependence of                        k on -
     with a slope of l/2, when                   is small, and a similar behavior at
electrodes, with          replaced by        the product of the charge transferred


        Formation of Electronically Excited Products




           R




                        R E A C T I O N      C O O R D I N A T E        q

Figure 9. A favored formation of an electronically excited state of the products (Marcus and
Siddarth, ref. 2).


86                                              Chemistry 1992


and the activation overpotential. Extensive verification of both these results
h a s b e e n o b t a i n e d . M o r e r e c e n t l y , t h e c u r v a t u r e o f p l o t s o f l n k vs.
expected from these equations, has been demonstrated in several experi-
ments. The very recent use of ordered organic molecular monolayers on
electrodes, either to slow down the electron transfer rate or to bind a redox-
active agent to the electrode, but in either case to avoid or minimize
diffusion control of the fast electron transfer processes, has considerably
facilitated this study of the curvature in the ln k vs.                            plot.
     Comparison of experiment and theory has also included that of the
absolute reaction rates of the self-exchange reactions, the effect on the rate
of varying the solvent, an effect sometimes complicated by ion pairing in the
low dielectric constant media involved, and studies of the related problem
of charge transfer spectra, such as

                                                                                                                (11)

Here, the frequency of the spectral absorption maximum                                          is given

                                                                                                                (12)

Comparisons with Eq: (12), using Eq. (7) for                             have included those of the
effects of separation distance and of the solvent dielectric constant.
     Comparisons have also been made of the self-exchange reaction rates in
solution with the rates of the corresponding electron transfer reactions at




orders of magnitude, with rates of corresponding electron transfers at metal electrodes.
(Cannon, ref. 2).


                                       Rudolph A. Marcus                                       87


electrodes. An example of the latter is the plot given in Figure 10, where the
self-exchange rates are seen to vary by some twenty orders of magnitude.
The discrepancy at high k’s is currently the subject of some reinvestigation
of the fast electrode reaction rates, using the new nanotechnology. Most
recently, a new type of interfacial electron transfer rate has also been
measured, electron transfer at liquid-liquid interfaces. In treating the latter,
I extended the “cross relation” to this two-phase system. It is clear that
much is to be learned from this new area of investigation. (The study of the
transfer of ions across such an interface, on the other hand, goes back to
the time of Nernst and of Planck, around the turn of the century.)

Other Applications and Extensions
As noted in Figure 1, one aspect of the electron transfer field has been its
continued and, indeed, ever-expanding growth in so many directions. One
of these is in the biological field, where there are now detailed experimental
and theoretical studies in photosynthetic and other protein systems. The
three-dimensional structure of a photosynthetic reaction center, the first
membrane protein to be so characterized, was obtained by Deisenhofer,
Michel and Huber, who received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1988 for
this work. A bacterial photosynthetic system is depicted in Figure 11, where
the protein framework holding fast the constituents in this reaction center is
not shown.


                           The Reaction Center




Figure 11. Redox-active species involved in the initial charge separation for a photosynthetic
bacterium (cf Deisenhofer et al, ref. 3, and Yeates et al, ref. 3), with labels added, to conform to
the present text; they include a missing QB.


 88                                 Chemistry 1992


    In the photosynthetic system there is a transfer of electronic excitation
 from “antenna” chlorophylls (not shown in Figure 11) to a special pair
 B C h l2. The latter then transfers an electron to a pheophytin BPh within a
 very short time (~ 3 picoseconds) and from it to a quinone               in 200 psec
 and thence to the other quinone QB . (Other chemical reactions then occur
 with these separated charges at each side of the membrane, bridged by this
 photosynthetic reaction center.)
    To avoid wasting the excitation energy of the BChl 2* unduly it is neces-
 sary that the          of this first electron transfer to BPh be small. (It is only
 about 0.25 eV out of an overall excitation energy of BCh1 2* of 1.38 eV.) In
 order that this electron transfer also be successful in competing with two
 wasteful processes, the fluorescence and the radiationless transition of
 B C h 12*, it is also necessary that         for that first electron transfer step be
 small and hence, by Eq. (5b), that the λ be small. The size of the reactants is
 large, and the immediate protein environment is largely nonpolar, so lead-
 ing to a small λ (cf Eq.(7)). Nature appears, indeed, to have constructed a
 system with this desirable property.
    Furthermore, to avoid another form of wasting the energy, it is also
 important that an unwanted back electron transfer reaction from the BPh-
 to the BCh12+ not compete successfully with a second forward electron
 transfer step from BPh- to          That is, it is necessary that the back transfer,
 a “hole-electron recombination” step, be slow, even though it is a very
 highly exothermic process ( ~l.leV). It has been suggested that the small λ
 (~ 0.25eV) and the resulting inverted region effect play a significant role in
 providing this essential condition for the effectiveness of the photosynthetic
 reaction center.
    There is now a widespread interest in synthesizing systems which can
 mimic the behavior of nature’s photosynthetic systems, and so offer other
 routes for the harnessing of solar energy. The current understanding of
 how nature works has served to provide some guidelines. In this context, as
 well as that of electron transfer in other proteins, there are also relevant
 experiments in long range electron transfer. Originally the studies were of
 electron transfer in rigid glasses and were due to Miller and coworkers.
More recently the studies have involved a donor and receptor held together
 by synthetically made rigid molecular bridges. The effect of varying the
 bridge length has been studied in the various systems. A theoretical estimate
 of the distance dependence of electron transfers in a photosynthetic system
 was first made by Hopfield, who used a square barrier model and an
 approximate molecular estimate of the barrier height.
    Recently, in their studies of long range electron transfer in chemically
 modified proteins, Gray and coworkers have studied systematically the
 distance or site dependence of the electronic factor, by attaching an appro-
 priate electron donor or acceptor to a desired site. For each such site the
 reactant chosen should be such that -∆G”                  i.e., which has a k at the
 maximum of the In k vs. -∆G” curve (cf Eq. (5)). The value of k then no
 longer depends on a ∆G Since ∆G* is distance-dependent (cf Eq.(7)), it is


                                    Rudolph A. Marcus                                 89


particularly desirable to make ∆ G*            0, so that the relative k’s at the various
sites now reflect only the electronic factor. Dutton and coworkers have
treated data similarly for a number of reactions by using, where possible,
the k at the maximum of each In k vs.                  curve. Of particular interest in
such studies is whether there is a simple exponential decrease of the
electronic factor on the separation distance between donor and acceptor,
or whether there are deviations from this monotonic behavior, due to local
structural factors.
   In a different development, the mechanism of various organic reactions
has been explored by several investigators, notably by Eberson (ref. 2), in
the light of current electron transfer theory. Other organic reactions have
been explored by Shaik and Pross, in their analysis of a possible electron
transfer mechanism vs. a conventional mechanism, and by Shaik et al (ref.2).
   Theoretical calculations of the donor-acceptor electronic interactions,
initially by McConnell and by Larsson, and later by others, our group
among them, have been used to treat long-range electron transfer. The
methods have recently been adapted to large protein systems. In our studies
with Siddarth we used an “artificial intelligence” searching technique to
limit the number of amino acids used in the latter type of study.
   Another area of much current activity in electron transfers is that of
solvent dynamics, following the pioneering treatment for general reactions
by Kramers (1940). Important later developments for electron transfer
were made by many contributors. Solvent dynamics affects the electron
transfer reaction rate when the solvent is sufficiently sluggish. As we showed
recently with Sumi and Nadler, the solvent dynamics effect can also be
modified significantly, when there are vibrational                contribution to λ.
   Computational studies, such as the insightful one of David Chandler and
c o w o r k e r s o n t h e F e2 + + F e3 + self-exchange reaction, have also been
employed recently. Using computer simulations they obtained a verification
of the parabolic G curves, even for surprisingly high values of the fluctu-
ation in G. They also extended their studies to dynamical and quantum
mechanical effects of the nuclear motion. Studies of the quantum mechani-
cal effects on the nuclear motion on electron transfer reactions were
irritated in 1959 by Levich and Dogonadze, who assumed a harmonic
oscillator model for the polar solvent medium and employed perturbation
theory. Their method was related to that used for other problems by Huang
and Rhys (1951) and Kubo and Toyozawa (1954).
   There were important subsequent developments by various authors on
these quantum effects, including the first discussion of quantum effects for
the vibrations of the reactants by Sutin in 1962 and the important work of
Jortner and coworkers in 1974-75, who combined a Levich and Dogon-
adze type approach to treat the high frequency vibrations of the reactants
with the classical expression which I described earlier for the polar medium.
These quantum effects have implications for the temperature dependence
of k, among other effects. Proceeding in a different (classical) direction
Saveant recently showed how to extend Eq. (5b) to reactions which involved


90                                Chemistry 1992


the rupture of a chemical bond by electron transfer and which he had
previously studied experimentally: M(e) + RX            M + R + X-, where R is
an alkyl group, X a halide and M a metal electrode.
   A particularly important early development was that by Taube in the
1950s; he received the Nobel Prize for his work in 1983. Taube introduced
the idea of different mechanisms for electron transfer-outer sphere and
inner sphere electron transfers, which he had investigated experimentally.
His experimental work on charge transfer spectra of strongly interacting
systems (“Creutz-Taube” ion, 1959, 1973) and of weakly interacting ones
has been similarly influential. Also notable has been Hush’s theoretical work
on charge transfer spectra, both of intensities and absorption maxima
(1967), which supplemented his earlier theoretical study of electron trans-
fer rates (1961).
   There has been a “spin-off’ of the original electron transfer theory to
other types of chemical reactions as well. In particular, the             vs ∆ G0
relation and the cross-relation have been extended to these other reactions,
such as the transfer of atoms, protons, or methyl groups. (Even an analog of
Eqs. (5b) and (9), but for binding energies instead of energy barriers has
been introduced to relate the stability of isolated protonbound dimers
A H B+ to those of AHA+ and BHB + ! )
   Since the transfer of these nuclei involves strong electronic interactions,
it is not well represented by intersecting parabolic free energy curves, and
so a different theoretical approach was needed. For this purpose I adapted
(1968) a “bond-energy-bond-order” model of H. Johnston, in order to treat
the problem for a reaction of the type given by Eq.(4). The resulting simple
expression for          is similar to Eq.(5), when           is not large (< 1/2),
but differs from it in not having any inverted region. It has the same λ
property as that given by Eq.(9), and has resulted in a cross-relation analo-
gous to Eq. (10). The cross-relation has been tested experimentally for the
transfer of methyl groups by E. Lewis, and the          vs ∆ G0 relation has been
used or tested for other transfers by Albery and by Kreevoy and their
coworkers, among others.
   It is naturally gratifying to see one’s theories used. A recent article, which
showed the considerable growth in the use of papers such as the 1956 and
1964 articles (ref. 5), points up the impressive and continued vitality of the
field itself. The remarks above on many areas of electron transfer and on
the spin-off of such work on the study of other types of reactions represent
a necessarily brief picture of these broad-based investigations.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My acknowledgments are to my many fellow researchers in the electron
transfer held, notably Norman Sutin, with whom I have discussed so many
of these matters for the past thirty or more years. I also thank my students
and post-doctorals, whose presence was a constant source of stimulation to
me, both in the electron transfer field and in the other fields of research


                                                                             91




             Reaction                 Observed         Calculated




which we have explored. In its earliest stage and for much of this period this
research was supported by the Office of Naval Research and also later by
the National Science Foundation. The support of both agencies continues
to this day and I am very pleased to acknowledge its value and timeliness
here.
   In my Nobel lecture, I concluded on a personal note with a slide of my
great uncle, Henrik Steen (né Markus), who came to Sweden in 1892. He
received his doctorate in theology from the University of Uppsala in 1915,
and was an educator and a prolific writer of pedagogic books. As I noted in
the biographical sketch in Les Prix Nobel, he was one of my childhood idols.
Coming here, visiting with my Swedish relatives - some thirty or so descen-
dants - has been an especially heartwarming experience for me and for my
family. In a sense I feel that I owed him a debt, and that it is most fitting to
acknowledge that debt here.


92                                      Chemistry 1992


REFERENCES
Some of my relevant articles, largely from the 1956-65 period, are listed in ref.1
below, and some general references which review the overall literature are listed in
ref. 2. Several additional references for the Table and for the Figures are given in
ref. 3. Classic texts on unimolecular reactions are given in ref. 4.
1. R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys. 24, 966 (1956); ibid., 24, 979 (1956); ibid., 26, 867
    ( 1 9 5 7 ) ; ibid, 26, 872 ( 1 9 5 7 ) ; Trans. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 19, 423 (1957); ONR
    Technical Report No. 12, Project NR 051-331 (1957), reproduced in Special
    Topics in Electrochemistry, P. A. Rock, ed., Elsevier, New York, 1977, p. 181; Can.
    J. Chem. 37, 155 (1959); Discussions Faraday Soc. 29, 21 (1960); J. Phys. Chem.
    67, 853, 2889 (1963); J. Chem. Phys. 38, 1858 (1963); ibid., 39, 1734 (1963);
    Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 15, 155 (1964); J. Chem. Phys. 43, 679 (1965); ibid., 43,
     1261 (1965); ibid., 43, 2654 (1965), c( orr.) 52, 2803 (1970); J. Phys. Chem. 72,
    891 (1968)
2. R. A. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 811, 265 (1985); J.R. Bolton, N.
    Mataga and G. McLendon (eds.) Adv. Chem. Ser., 228, (1991), assorted articles; M.D.
    Newton and N. Sutin, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem., 35, 437 (1984); N. Sutin, Prog. Inorg.
    Chem., 30, 441 (1983); M.D. Newton, Chem. Rev., 91, 767 (1991); J. Ulstrup, Charge
     Transfer Processes in Condensed Media, Springer, New York, 1979; R.D. Cannon, Electron
     Transfer Reactions, Butterworths, London, 1980; L. Eberson, Electron Transfer Reactions in
     Organic Chemistry, Springer, NewYork, 1987; M.A. Fox and M. Chanon (eds.), Photoinduced
    Electron Transfer, Elsevier, New York, 1988, 4 vols.; M.V. Twigg (ed.), Mechanisms of
    Inorganic and Organometallic Reactions, vol. 7,1991, Chaps. 1 and 2, and earlier volumes;
    R.A. Marcus and P. Siddarth, in Photoprocesses in Transition Metal Complexes , Biosystems and
     Other Molecules: Experiment and Theory, E. Kochanski, ed., KIuwer, Norwall, Massachusetts,
     1992, p. 49; S.S. Shaik, H.B. Schlegel and S. Wolfe, Theoretical Aspects of Physical Organic
     Chemistry, J. Wiley, New York, 1992; N. Sutin, Pure & Applied Chem. 60, 1817 (1988);
    Assorted articles in Chem. Revs. 92, No. 3 (1992); R.A. Marcus Commemorative Issue,
    J. Phys. Chem. 90, (1986).
3. L. E. Bennett, Prog. Inorg. Chem. 18, I (1973); J.R. Miller, L.T. Calcaterra and
    G.L. Gloss, J. Am. Chem. Soc.106, 3047 (1984); J. Deisenhofer, O. Epp, K. Miki,
     R. Huber and H. Michel, J.Mol.Biol. 180, 385 (1984); J. Deisenhofer and H.
     Michel, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 28, 829 (1989); T.G. Yeates, H. Komiya, D.C.
     Rees, J.P. Allen and G. Feher, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84, 6438 (1987).
4. P. J. Robinson and H.A. Holbrook, Unimolecular Reactions, J.Wiley, New York
     1972; W. Forst, Theory of Unimolecular Reactions, Academic Press, New York,
     1973; cf also the very recent text, R.G. Gilbert and S.C. Smith, Theory of Unimole-
    cular and Recombination Reactions, Blackwells, Oxford, 1990.
5. Science Watch, 3, No. 9, November, 1992, p. 8.
