SV A N T E A R R H E N I U S
Development of the theory of electrolytic
dissociation*
Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1903
At first sight nothing seems more obvious than that everything has a beginning and an end, and that everything can be subdivided into smaller
parts. Nevertheless, for entirely speculative reasons the philosophers of Antiquity, especially the Stoics, concluded this concept to be quite unnecessary.
The prodigious development of physics has now reached the same conclusion as those philosophers, Empedocles and Democritus in particular, who
lived around 500 B.C. and for whom even ancient man had a lively admiration.
Empedocles taught that matter cannot originate from nothing and that
matter cannot be destroyed. All happenings in the world are based on a
change in form or on the combination or division of substances. Fire, air,
water and earth are the four elements of which everything is composed. A
continuous cycle is Nature’s chief characteristic.
Democritus’ theories coincide even more closely with our modern views.
He maintained that substances are composed of infinitely small, inseparable
particles, which he called atoms. These vary in shape and size and yield different products according to the differing ways in which they are combined
together.
This theory of the atoms was resuscitated by Gassendi in about 1650 and
later adopted by Boyle and Newton. It attained its present great importance
owing to Dalton’s discovery of the law ofmultiple proportions. For example,
the various compounds of nitrogen and oxygen contain 0.57, 1.14, 1.72, 2.29
or 2.86 parts by weight of oxygen per part by weight of nitrogen. There are
no transitional forms between these compounds. To account for this phenomenon we assume, in common with Dalton, that the moleculus of the various
nitrogen and oxygen compounds contain two atoms of nitrogen and 1, 2, 3,
4 or 5 oxygen atoms. This is specific to chemistry in contrast with physics
where the simpler, continuous transition from one state to another usually
 *This paper has previously been published in English in the Proceedings of the Royal
Institution, 1904.
46 1903 S.A.ARRHENIUS
applies. This dissimilarity between the two sister-sciences has frequently led
to differences of opinion in physical chemistry. That discontinuous changes
and multiple proportions also occur in physics has been assumed in many
cases which, on closer examination, disproved this assumption.
The law of multiple proportions is one of the foundations on which
modern chemistry is built. Another such is Avogadro’s law which states that
equal volumes of different gases at the same temperature and pressure contain the same number of molecules. This theory, which dates from the beginning of the nineteenth century, first met with strong opposition and it
was its great value in explaining the new discoveries within the rapidly expanding field of organic chemistry that resulted in its universal adoption in
the middle of last century after Cannizzaro had acted vigorously in its favour.
Meanwhile there were certain problems to be overcome before Avogadro’s law could be accepted. It was found, for example, that the molecular
volume of ammonium chloride, NH4Cl, in the gaseous state is greater than
would be supposed on the basis of its chemical composition. This led to the
assumption that the molecules of NH4Cl in the gaseous form are partly
broken down into ammonia, NH2
, and hydrochloric acid, HCl. Von Pebal
and Von Than were able to prove that this does in fact occur. They used an
apparatus shown in Fig. 1. Two tubes were placed one inside the other by
means of a cork. The outer tube was sealed at its open end; the inner tube
was open and contained at C, on top of an asbestos partition, a piece of
NH4Cl. The top was heated in an air bath so that the piece of NH4Cl slowly
volatilized. At the same time a stream of hydrogen was admitted through
the two glass tubes D and E. Ammonia diffuses through porous walls at a
faster rate than the hydrochloric acid. If the NH4Cl gas partly breaks down in
this way to form ammonia and hydrochloric acid, it is reasonable to expect
that there should be an excess of the latter above the porous asbestos partition
and an excess of ammonia below it. Von Pebal showed this to be so. The
stream of hydrogen from D gave an acid reaction with litmus paper at A,
and the stream from E gave an alkaline reaction, likewise on litmus paper,
at B. It was then objected that the breakdown might be caused by the asbestos partition or by the hydrogen. Von Than therefore made a partition of
NH4Cl and replaced the hydrogen by nitrogen, but with the same result.
These experiments were performed in 1862 and 1864. They were based on
the theory of dissociation which had been worked out in 1857 by SainteClaire-Deville and elaborated by his pupils. From time immemorial use has
been made of the fact that at high temperature limestone gives off carbon
 T H E O R Y O F E L E C T R O L Y T I C D I S S O C I A T I O N 47
dioxide to form quicklime. This and similar processes were studied by SainteClaire-Deville. He found that the same law applies to the pressure of carbon
dioxide above limestone as to the pressure of water vapour above evaporating water at different temperatures. These fundamental studies are basic to
the theory of dissociation which has since played an increasingly important
part in chemistry and, in a manner of speaking, created a wide bridge between the physical and chemical sciences.
Fig.1.
At almost the same time we find in Clausius’ work on the electrical conductivity of salt solutions the first inklings of an idea that salts and other
electrolytes are capable of partial dissociation when dissolved in water. Buff
had found that even the least electrical force is sufficient to drive a current
through a salt solution. According to Grotthus’ conception, which at that
time was generally accepted, the electrical current passes through a solution
in such a way that the conducting molecules, e.g. of potassium chloride
(KCl), separate into their ions, which recombine in the following manner.
Firstly, when the current sets in, the pole A becomes positive and the pole B
negative. All the conducting KCl molecules arrange themselves with their
positive K ions turned towards the negative pole B and their negative Cl ions
48 1903 S.A.ARRHENIUS
towards the positive pole A. Next a chlorine ion is liberated at A and a potassium ion at B, and the other ions combine again, the K ion in the first
molecule capturing the Cl ion in the second molecule, and so on (Fig. 2).
The molecules then turn under the influence of the electrical force to give us
stage 3 and splitting can take place anew. That is Grotthus’ view; it presupposes continuous splitting and recombination of the salt molecules.
Since these exchanges of ions between the molecules take place under the
influence of the least electrical force, Clausius concluded that they must occur
also when there is no electrical force acting, in other words, irrespective of
Cl K Cl K Cl K Cl K
Fig.2. Fig.3.
whether current passes through the liquid. In support of this hypothesis he
pointed out that in fact as early as 1852 Williamson, in his epoch-making
theory of the formation of esters, assumed a similar exchange of constituents
between the molecules. Clausius held that during the exchange of ions it
would sometimes, although extremely rarely, occur that an ion remained
free in the solution for a short time. At least, such anassumption is quite consistent with the mechanical theory of heat as developed at that time by Krönig, Maxwell, Clausius and others.
Meanwhile Bouty and particularly Kohlrausch devised methods to determine the electrical conductivity of salt solutions. In 1884 I gave a paper dealing with this subject. I had found that if a solution of, say, zinc sulphate is
diluted, its conductivity per molecule, or what is termed its molal conductance, does not increase infinitely but only as far as a certain limit. We can
visualize an experiment carried out in the following manner (Fig. 3). In-
THEORY OF ELECTROLYTIC DISSOCIATION 49
to a parallel-walled vessel are inserted very close to two opposite sides two
amalgamated zinc plates, E and E’. A layer of zinc sulphate solution is introduced extending from the horizontal bottom of the vessel to the line 1.
The conductivity is assumed now to be kI
. After this has been measured,
sufficient water is added so that after the solution has been stirred the level
reaches 2 which is as far above 1 as 1 from the bottom. The conductivity is
then found to have increased and have a value k2
. When the volume is
Fig.4.
doubled in the same way by the addition of pure water, level 4 is reached and
the conductivity is greater than in the foregoing case, let us say k4
. We can
continue in this way and the conductivity increases but ultimately at a lower
rate than at the beginning A final value of . k ∞ is thus reached. This is best
illustrated by the following diagram which shows Kohlrausch’s more recent
determinations (Figs.4 and 5). Here the dilutions are the abscissa and are
given in gram-equivalents per litre. The molal conductance at 18o
C is the
ordinate and given in thousandths of units (ohm).
I explained these experimental results in the following manner. The conductance is governed by the rate at which the ions (Zn and SO4) of the
molecules (ZnSO4) are carried through the liquid by the electrical force, i.e.
the potential difference between E and E’. If this potential difference is as-
50 1903 S.A.ARRHENIUS
sumed constant, the rate is determined solely by the friction which the ions
during their passage through the liquid set up on the surrounding molecules.
Since at strong dilutions these are almost exclusively water molecules, there
is reason to suppose that the molal conductance will remain constant and independent of the dilution, assuming of course, that all ZnSO4 molecules
participate in the conduction of the electricity. As the experiment now shows
that the molal conductance increases with the dilution to a very high value -
Fig.5.
1,000 water molecules or more to each molecule of ZnSO4 - we arrive at the
hypothesis that not all but only some of the ZnSO4 molecules participate in
the conduction of the electricity. This participation grows with the dilution
in the same ratio as the molal conductance k. With continuously increasing
dilution, the molal conductance approximates more and more to the limit
value which is the point at which all molecules conduct electricity. The
conducting part of the molecules is termed the active part. It can clearly be
calculated as the quotient of k : k,.
If this concept had only been applicable to accounting for the phenomenon
of electrical conductivity, its value would not have been particularly great.
An examination of the numerical values adduced by Kohlrausch and others
for the electrical conductivity of acids and bases as compared with Berthelot’s
 T H E O R Y O F E L E C T R O L Y T I C D I S S O C I A T I O N 51
and Thomson’s measurements of their relative strengths in terms of their
chemical effect showed me that the acids and bases with the greatest conductivity are also the strongest. I was thus led to the assumption that the electrically active molecules are also chemically active, and that conversely the
electrically inactive molecules are also chemically inactive, relatively speaking
at least. In this connection I would like to mention Gore’s remarkable experiment which can readily be explained by the new concept. Concentrated
hydrochloric acid, which is free from water, has no effect on oxides or carbonates. It happens that hydrochloric acid in this form is very nearly incapable of conducting electrical current whereas its aqueous solutions have
very good conductivity. The pure hydrochloric acid thus contains no active
molecules, or extremely few, and this agrees very closely with Gore’s experiment. In the same way we can explain the fact that concentrated sulphuric acid can be stored in a sheet iron vessel without damage to the latter, although this is impossible with the dilute acid.
An unexpected conclusion may be drawn from this concept. Because all
electrolytes in an extremely dilute state are completely active, the weak acids
must increase in strength when diluted and approach that of the strongest
acids. Shortly afterwards this proved to be in agreement with the experiments carried out by Ostwald.
The Norwegian research scientists Guldberg and Waage had developed a
theory according to which the strength of different acids could be measured
by their capacity of displacing, in solutions, another acid as well as by their
capacity of increasing the speed of certain chemical reactions. In conformity
with this we can suppose that the speed of a reaction produced by an acid is
proportional to the number of active molecules in it. I had only a few experiments by Berthelot to demonstrate this law, but in 1884 Ostwald published a
large number of observations which proved that this conclusion was correct.
The most far-reaching conclusion from the conception of active molecules was the explanation of heat of neutralization. As it is much simpler to
understand this by means of the theory of electrolytic dissociation, I will
therefore anticipate it for this case. According to this theory strong acids and
bases, as well as salts, are in extreme dilution almost completely dissociated
into their ions, i.e. HCl into H+
and Cl
-, NaOH into Na+
and OH-, and
NaCl into Na+
and Cl
-. On the other hand, water is hardly dissociated at
all. The reaction of neutralization of a strong acid with a strong base, e.g.
HCl with NaOH, both greatly diluted, can therefore be expressed by the
following equation:
52 1903 S.A.ARRHENIUS
( H+
+ C l - ) + ( N a+
+ O H -
 ) = ( N a-
+ C l-
 ) + H O H
H+
+ OH- = HOH
This equation is equivalent to the formation of water from its two ions,
H+ and OH-
, and is evidently independent of the nature of the strong acid
and the strong base. The development of heat in any reaction of this kind
must therefore always be the same for equivalent quantities of any strong
acids and bases. Actually, it has been found that in every case this is 13,600
calories (at 18o
C). This constancy of neutralization heat is the most lawabiding phenomenon which has been discovered in thermochemistry.
The question now arose in what respect the active state of the electrolytes
differs from the inactive state. I gave an answer to this question in 1887. At
this time Van ‘t Hoff had formulated his far-reaching law that the molecules
in greatly diluted solutions obey the laws which apply to the gaseous state if
gas pressure in liquids is merely replaced by the osmotic pressure. As Van ‘t
Hoff demonstrated, the osmotic pressure of a solute can be far more easily
determined by measuring the freezing point of its solution than directly.
However, both the direct measurements carried out by De Vries and the
freezing points of electrolytic solutions showed a much higher osmotic pressure than would have been expected from the chemical formula. For instance, whilst the solution of one gram-molecule (mole) of ethyl alcohol,
C2H5OH = 46 grams, in one litre of water gives a freezing point of - 1.85o
C,
according to Van ‘t Hoff’s calculations a solution of one mole of sodium
chloride, NaCl = 58.5 grams in one litre of water gives a freezing point of
- 3.26o
C = -1.75 x 1.85o
C. This characteristic could be explained in the
same way as the "abnormal" density of gaseous ammonium chloride, i.e. by
supposing a partial dissociation - up to 75% - of the sodium chloride molecules. On this assumption, therefore, the solution contains 0.25 moles of
NaCl, 0.75 moles of Cl and 0.75 moles of Na, a total of 1.75 moles, and has
a corresponding effect regarding the depression of the freezing point. We
have seen in what way we can calculate from the electrical conductivity the
number of active molecules in the same solution of sodium chloride, and
from Kohlrausch’s measurements we find exactly the same number, i.e. 0.75.
This strengthens the conception that the active molecules in the salt NaCl
have split ‘up into the ions Na+ and Cl-
. These are absolutely free and they
appear in the solutions exactly like other molecules. In the same way I cal-
T H E O R Y O F E L E C T R O L Y T I C D I S S O C I A T I O N 53
culated by both methods the degree of dissociation in all the electrolytes
which had been determined at the time-there were about 80 of them-and
I found that there was a very good agreement between the two different
methods of determination. In some cases the agreement was not so good and
I therefore carried out new analyses of these bodies and some others. The new
analyses were all completely in agreement with the theoretical assumptions.
Fig. 6 shows the freezing points of some solutions of salts and non-conductors. The abscissa of the diagram shows the concentration of the bodies
in the solutions, while the ordinate shows the molecular depression of the
Fig. 6.
freezing point divided by 1.85. The figure shows us that all the curves of the
non-conductors - in this instance cane sugar, propyl alcohol and phenolconverge towards unity with decreasing concentration as one would expect,
since no dissociation takes place. With higher concentrations variations from
the simple law take place. As examples of electrolytes consisting of two ions,
LiOH, NaCl and LiCl have been selected; their curves all converge towards
value 2. As electrolytes consisting of three ions K2S04, Na2S04, MgCl2 and
SrCl 2 have been selected; all these curves converge on value 3 for great
dilution.
As I had accepted this explanation, which seemed to chemists to be most
adventurous, I had to investigate whether it would agree chemically and
physically with experience obtained. The most general and far-reaching
point of all this is that the properties of a highly diluted electrolytic solution
54 1903 S.A.ARRHENIUS
are composed of the different ions of which the electrolyte consists. It was
already known that this was the case in many instances, and Valson had for
this purpose drawn up tables of their so-called moduli. By comparing the
one modulus value-for the negative ion-with the other - for the positive
ion - we can calculate the properties of each of the electrolytes consisting of
the ions in the table. In this way we can deal with the specific weight (Valson), the molecular conductivity (Kohlrausch), the internal friction (Arrhenius), the capillary attraction (Valson), the compressibility (Röntgen and
Schneider), the refraction exponent (Gladstone), the natural polarization rotation (Oudemans), the magnetic polarization rotation (Perkin and Jahn),
the magnetism (Wiedemann) and all the other properties of the electrolytes
which have so far been adequately studied.
The most significant of these properties are those we use in chemical analysis. As is well-known, it is in general true that chlorides yield a white deposit (silver chloride) with silver salts. It used to be said, therefore, that silver
salts were reagents for chlorine. Now we say that silver ions are reagents for
chlorine ions. This expression is better than the older one, as indeed some
such silver salts, e.g. potassium silver cyanide and many other silver compounds which do not contain silver ions, on the one hand, and all chlorine
compounds, e.g. potassium chlorate and many organic chlorides which do
not contain chlorine ions, on the other hand, do not give this characteristic
reaction. The experiment succeeds only with such silver and chlorine compounds which are split to a noticeable degree into silver and chlorine ions.
Ostwald has dealt comprehensively with this question and in this way has
produced a rational presentation of the general phenomena of analytical
chemistry. To this sphere there also belongs the poisonous effect of certain
salts, which can be regarded as a separate physiological-chemical reaction of
the chemical compounds. In this connection there are the valuable investigations by Krönig and Paul, Clarke and others.
A property of a physical nature, but one which is very much used by the
analytical chemist, is the colour in solutions. This has been thoroughly investigated by Ostwald. First let us see how a chemical compound, e.g.
fluorescein, C20H12O5, behaves if its hydrogen atoms are replaced by other
atoms, e.g. by metals, iodine, bromine or by atom groups (NO,). The
curves in the next figure, Fig. 7, represent the absorption bands in the spectra for the respective compounds. If H2 is replaced in the fluorescein itself
by K2
, the absorption spectrum is very greatly changed.
This is due to the property of fluorescein to be dissociated to a very slight
 T H E O R Y O F E L E C T R O L Y T I C D I S S O C I A T I O N 55
degree. (Permanganic acid behaves quite differently, as we shall soon see.)
Instead of a single absorption band in the blue field of the fluorescein spectrum we find two absorption bands in the blue-green and the green regions
in the spectrum of its salts, which all behave like potassium salt in that they
are all dissociated into metal ions and fluorescein ions, among which only
the latter are optically active.
A similar observation can also be made in the case of tetraiodo-fluorescein
and its potassium salt. In general the figures show that the spectrum undergoes instantaneous change when even the slightest chemical change takes
place in the molecule.
Fig.7. Fluorescein derivatives.
Thus, on the basis of existing theories we should expect that exchange of
hydrogen with a metal in permanganic acid or of one acid residue with
another in salts of pararosaniline will change entirely the nature of the absorption spectrum. As Ostwald has shown, this is not the case. The spectrum
is quite unchanged, as will be seen from Figs. 8 and 9. The spectra are represented by the same substance, that is to say, in the one case by a permanganicacid ion and in the other by a pararosaniline ion. In the case of the pararosaniline ion, however, it will be seen that the absorption is clearly less
pronounced than in the case of the permanganic-acid ion. Its background
has weakened in so-called hydrolysis of the salts of weak acids, e.g. acetic and
benzoic acids. Ostwald’s investigations of the "coloured" ions give a particularly striking example of the applicability of the ideas underlying the
theory of electrolytic dissociation.
It has been noted in connexion with this theory that it should be possible
56 1903 S.A.ARRHENIUS
according to it to separate by diffusion both ions, for instance the chlorine
and sodium ions in sodium chloride solutions. In actual fact the chlorine
ion diffuses about 1.4 times as rapidly as the sodium ion. But ions take
their electrical charges with them. If therefore we pour a solution of sodium chloride into a vessel and carefully cover it with a layer of pure water, immediately a small surplus of chlorine will enter the water. Thus the
water becomes negatively charged and the solution beneath it positively charged, so that the positive sodium ions are driven out of the solution
under a greater force than are the negative chlorine ions. As soon as the former forces become 1.4 times as great as the latter forces the velocity of the
chlorine ions becomes the same as that of the sodium ions. It is not difficult
to work out that this occurs as soon as the chlorine-ion content in the water
exceeds the corresponding quantity of sodium ions by about one billionth
of a milligram. It would be useless to try to determine this extremely small
amount by chemical methods; on the other hand it can easily be determined
electrically, as Nernst has shown in experiments for his concentration elements. Thus this objection is valid only in the case of hypotheses concerning
a general dissociation of salts and not dissociation into ions, which are charged with electricity in accordance with Faraday’s law. This objection has prob-
 T H E O R Y O F E L E C T R O L Y T I C D I S S O C I A T I O N 57
ably been a stumbling block for an earlier assumption concerning the state
of dissociation of electrolytes, which numerous investigators, e.g. Valson
and Bartoli have been inclined to support.
The gas laws, which apply to dilute solutions, have in a large number of
cases made it possible to calculate degrees of dissociation. The first investigator to use this principle was Ostwald, who showed that dissociation equilibria between ions and the undissociated parts of a weak acid more or less obey
the laws that apply to gases. Bredig has since shown that the same relationship is found in the case of weak bases. But highly dissociated electrolytes, in
particular salts, display deviations from dilute solutions (above 0.05 normal)
which as yet have not been fully explained. Professor Jahn in Berlin is at
present studying this very interesting question.
The equilibrium between a large number of electrolytes has been studied
by me, and has been found to agree well with the values obtained on the
basis of the dissociation theory. This field of research covers problems concerning the weakening of acids through addition of one of their salts, and the
so-called avidity of acids, that is to say the ratio in which two competing
acids divide a base. The results of calculations largely confirm the experimental findings of Ostwald and Thomson in this field. Theories concerning the
heterogeneous equilibrium ratios between electrolytes have been put forward by Van‘t Hoff and Nernst, who in this way have thrown light on the
general method used to precipitate salts in analytical chemistry.
It is also possible with the aid of the gas laws to determine the heat evolution that takes place during the dissociation of a weak acid or base, and in
this way I have been able in general to calculate the heat evolution that takes
place when acids are neutralized by bases. In a similar way Fanjung calculated the volume changes that take place on the dissociation of a weak acid or
base and on neutralizing these substances. All these calculations have given
values that agree closely with those observed in reality.
Water, which can be regarded as a weak acid or base, plays an important
role. Through its electrolytic dissociation it brings about hydrolysis of the
salts of weak acids and bases. It has been possible, through observation of the
extent of the hydrolysis, to calculate the extent of the electrolytic dissociation of water, and when this was determined shortly afterwards by Kohlrausch and Heydweiller by means of electrical measurements, there was
found to be complete agreement with the earlier calculations. These questions are of the utmost importance for physiological chemistry, as has been
shown by the results obtained in the investigations of Sjöqvist and others. In
58 1903 S.A.ARRHENIUS
studying volcanic phenomena, too, the competition between water and
silicic acid at different temperatures has proved useful.
The phenomena of catalysis, in which acids or bases play a leading role,
have been studied by many investigators, and it has been found that catalytic action depends on the large number of free hydrogen or hydroxyl ions
present in solutions.
In this survey, which does not claim to be a comprehensive one, mention
should also be made of the exhaustive investigations of Van ‘t Hoff, Ostwald
and in particular Nernst into the electromotive force of ions. These investigations have shed new light on the old problem of the way in which electrical forces are produced in hydro-electric combinations.
I have now described how theories of electrical dissociation have developed from our old ideas about atoms and molecules. We sometimes hear the
objection raised, that this viewpoint is perhaps not correct, but only a useful,
substituting working hypothesis.
This objection is in fact not an objection at all, for we can never be certain
that we have found the ultimate truth. Theories of molecules and atoms are
sometimes attacked on philosophic grounds. Until a better and more satisfactory theory appears, chemists can continue to use the atomic theory
with complete confidence. The position is exactly the same as regards electrolytic dissociation.
This theory has also shown us that atoms or groups of atoms charged with
electricity play a highly significant part in the world of chemistry. The
general tendency in scientific research appears to be to attach more and more
importance to electricity, the most powerful factor in nature, and developments in this direction are now proceeding very rapidly. We have already
seen not only how J. J. Thomson’s electron theory, in which matter is reduced to a very insignificant part, developed, but also the successful efforts that
have been made to explain matter as being simply a manifestation of electrodynamic forces (J. J. Thomson, Kaufmann, and Abraham).