FROM THE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE
RIBOSOME TO NEW ANTIBIOTICS

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2009
by
THOMAS A. STEITZ
Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Department of
Chemistry, Yale University and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 266
Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06520-8114, USA.


My passion for pursuing structural studies of biological macromolecules in
order to understand how they carry out their functions was initiated by a
Dunham lecture that Max Perutz presented at Harvard Medical School in the
spring of 1963, a year after he shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry with John
Kendrew for determining the first protein structures. He showed a very large
audience the first stereo slide of an atomic structure of a protein, myoglobin,
that any of us had ever seen. When the myoglobin structure popped into
three dimensions over his head, a loud “oh” came from the audience. I knew
then how I wanted to understand the chemistry of biology.
   I began my thesis research at Harvard by working with a team in the
laboratory of William N. Lipscomb, a Nobel chemistry Laureate in 1976,
on the structure of carboxypeptidase A. I did postdoctoral studies with
David Blow at the MRC lab of Molecular Biology in Cambridge studying
chymotrypsin. My interactions with Jim Watson and with Wally Gilbert while
I was at Harvard and the numerous contacts that I had with Francis Crick
and Sydney Brenner while I was at Cambridge stimulated my three decade
long interest in obtaining the structural basis of Crick’s Central Dogma:
“DNA makes DNA makes RNA makes Protein”. This trail ultimately led to
our determining the atomic structure of the large ribosomal subunit, which
catalyzes peptide bond formation, as well as the structures of its complexes
with substrate analogs and antibiotics.
   In the early 1960s, when I was a graduate student, Watson published a fig-
ure that summarized what was known about the ribosome structure (Watson,
1963). It showed the A site for the positioning of the aminoacyl-tRNA,
though nothing was known about the tRNA structure. The P site located next
to the A site had the peptidyl-tRNA, but the pathway taken by the polypep-
tide product was unknown. Also, the existence of the E site, the exit site, was
unknown. In 1976, Jim Lake used electron microscopic studies of negative
large and small ribosome subunits as well as the 70S ribosome to obtain the
first views of the shapes of the ribosome and its subunits (Lake, 1976). By 1995
Joachim Frank was able to use the single particle cryo-EM methods that he
and coworkers had developed to obtain a 25 Å resolution reconstruction of
the 70S ribosome with 3 bound tRNA molecules (Frank et al., 1995).


                                                                            179


   By 1995, my lab had obtained structural insights into the mechanisms
of most of the steps of “The Central Dogma”, except the last one: protein
synthesis by the ribosome. The mid-90s seemed to be the right time to take
on this largest of structural biology challenges. Computational power and
x-ray crystallographic methodologies including synchrotron x-ray sources
and CCD detectors had reached a sufficiently high level to allow x-ray data
collection from crystals of such a large assembly. Importantly, Ada Yonath
and Wittmann had shown in 1985 that the 50S ribosomal subunit could be
crystallized (Shevack et al., 1985), and in 1991 crystals of the Haloarcula maris-
mortui (Hma) 50S subunit were obtained that diffracted to 3.0 Å resolution
(von Böhlen et al., 1991). The growth of these well-diffracting crystals meant
that obtaining the atomic structure of the ribosome was in principle possible.
However, while crystals are a necessary condition for determining a crystal
structure, they are not sufficient: a large challenge remained – the phasing
problem. The 7 Å resolution electron density a map of the Hma 50S subunit
that was published in 1995 (Schluenzen et al., 1995) suggested to me (and
some others) that the challenge had not yet been correctly met, since the
map did not look like RNA. Another approach was needed.
   In the fall of 1995 Nenad Ban joined my lab and was interested in pursuing
the structure of the ribosome or its component large subunit – the right
person at just the right time. I suggested that he tackle the Hma large sub-
unit structure, which he did. I also decided that we should collaborate with
a close friend and colleague, as well as one of the pillars of the ribosome
research community, Peter Moore. Peter is an avid fisherman who likes to
catch big fish, and the ribosome was indeed a big fish. Nenad embarked
on determining the structure of the Hma 50S ribosomal subunit with the
assistance of Peter’s technician, Betty Freeborn, for preparing the subunit.
A student in Peter’s lab concurrently pursued the objective of crystallization
of the 30S subunit or domains of it. By early 1997, Nenad had successfully
initiated very low resolution crystallographic studies of the large subunit
including the correct location of the heavy atoms in several heavy atom de-
rivatives, when he was then joined in his efforts by Poul Nissen. Through the
next three years these two spearheaded the structure determination of the
Hma 50S subunit.
   While the crystals obtained using the published procedures (von Böhlen
et al., 1991) diffracted to 3 Å resolution, they were extremely thin and often
multiple. Indeed, Yonath and Franceschi (1998) and Harms et al. (1999)
described these crystal defects, which included severe nonisomorphism, high
radiation sensitivity, nonuniform mosaic spread, uneven reflection shape
and high fragility, as well as unfavorable crystal habit. Nissen introduced a
back extraction procedure that resulted in isometric and uniform crystals
that occasionally diffracted to 2.4 Å resolution (Ban et al., 1999; 2000). Later,
Martin Schmeing found an approach that extended the resolution to 2.2 to
2.4 Å more reproducibly (Schmeing et al., 2005a,b). At this resolution the
structures, when obtained, can inform on the chemistry of the processes
involved in protein synthesis.

180


   What then was the major challenge that needed to be overcome? Why
was the determination of the atomic structure of the ribosome perceived
to be a very high mountain to climb? The major challenge in determining
any crystal structure (once crystals have been obtained) is what is called the
“phase problem”. Each diffraction spot has an intensity, which can be directly
measured, and a phase, which is not directly measurable. Max Perutz was
awarded the Nobel Prize in 1962, in part because he developed the method
of heavy atom isomorphous replacement to solve the phasing problem for
macromolecules. Heavy atoms are bound specifically to the crystal, and their
positions in the crystal need to be determined; information that can then be
used to obtain the phase angles, which when combined with the diffraction
amplitudes allow the calculation of an electron density map.
   The phasing challenge presented by the ribosome arises from its large
size. Consequently, a single heavy atom provides too weak a diffraction signal
to measure and 100 heavy atoms are difficult, if not impossible, to locate. I
compare the problem with the challenge of trying to measure the weight of a
ship captain by subtracting the weight of the boat from the weight of the boat
plus the ship captain. While this can be done with some accuracy for a small
sailboat, subtracting the weight of the Queen Mary from that of the Queen
Mary plus the captain would give a very small signal, and the ribosome is the
Queen Mary of macromolecular assemblies. It is about 100 times heavier
than lysozyme.
   In order to obtain a super heavy ship captain, Ban used several heavy atom
cluster compounds, most importantly one containing 18 tungsten atoms
(W18) which together with the other atoms in the compound has about 2,000
electrons. At very low resolution, 20 Å or lower, it scatters almost as one heavy
atom. Since the x-ray scatter is proportional to the square of the number of
electrons, the scattering signal from the W18 cluster compound is over 600
times larger than that from a single 78 electron Tungsten atom. Indeed, its
scatter at low resolution is very much larger than that from more than 100
bound Osmium hexamine complexes (Fig. 1).




                                                                             181


Figure 1. The calculated radial distribution of the scattering intensities produced by four
of the heavy atom compounds used for phasing as a function of resolution. At very low
resolution the scattering from the cluster compounds, including the W18 cluster which
contains 2,000 electrons, is extremely large compared with the scatter from more than 100
bound osmium hexamines.


Nenad Ban located the position of a W18 cluster compound that was bound
to a single site using a 20 Å resolution difference Patterson map (Ban et al.,
1998). He then confirmed its location by calculating a difference electron
density map, phased using molecular replacement phases derived from a
20 Å resolution cryo-EM map of the Hma 50S subunit provided by Joachim
Frank (Fig. 2a). Ban then solved several additional heavy atom cluster
compound derivatives using phases derived from the W18 derivative. By the
end of 2007 he had a very nice 9 Å resolution map of the 50S subunit (Fig.
2b), obtained using only x-ray data, that showed the expected RNA duplex
helices and had the same overall shape as seen in the cryo-EM map (Ban et
al., 1998).




182


Figure 2. The progressive increase in the resolution of the electron density maps of the
50S ribosomal subunit obtained, beginning with the 20 Å resolution cryo EM map from
Joachim Frank (1996) and progressing to our 9 Å resolution map (Ban et al., 1998), which
showed the first of the RNA helices, to the 5 Å resolution map (Ban et al., 1999), into which
known protein structures could be fitted, and ending with a 2.4 Å resolution map (Ban et
al., 2000), which allowed the building of a complete atomic model.


Our strategy during the first four years of our crystallographic studies of the
50S subunit was to work at lower resolutions than 4.5 Å, which could be done
using a bending magnet beam line X12C at Brookhaven National Laboratory
on Long Island, New York. It was not possible to use the laboratory rotating
anode x-ray source because it was too weak, but the X12C source worked fine
at low resolutions and was generally very accessible for our use. When finally
all of our heavy atom derivatives were made and the heavy atoms correctly
located, our first trip to the high intensity insertion device beam line X25 at
Brookhaven was made at the end of 1999. Within 4 days, data were collected
that allowed calculation of a 3.0 Å resolution map and the initiation of the
building of the atomic model.
   The resolution of our maps gradually increased from the initial 9 Å reso-
lution (Fig. 2). In 1999, we published a 5 Å resolution map of the 50S Hma
subunit in which known r-protein (ribsome protein) structures could be
positioned (Ban et al., 1999). In 2000, we published the atomic structure of

                                                                                        183


the 50S ribosomal subunit derived from a 2.4 Å resolution map calculated
using data collected at Argonne National Laboratory (Ban et al., 2000) (Fig.
2d) and that of its complex with a substrate analogue of the transition state
of the peptidyl transferase reaction (Nissen et al., 2000). At the same time in
1999 that we published our 5 Å resolution map, the Ramakrishnan group
published a 5.5 Å resolution map of the 30S subunit (Clemons et al., 1999)
and the Noller group published a 7 Å resolution map of the 70S ribosome
(Cate et al., 1999), using phasing approaches that were similar to the cluster
approach we published in 1998. Shortly after the appearance of our papers
on the 2.4 Å resolution structures of the 50S subunit, two models of the 30S
subunit were published (Wimberly et al., 2000; Schleunzen et al., 2000). A
year later Noller and colleagues obtained a model of the 70S ribosome with
three bound tRNA molecules using a 5.5 Å resolution map into which were
fitted the atomic models of the 30S subunit of Ramakrishnan et al. and the
Hma 50S subunit modified to reflect the eubacterial differences (Yusupov et
al., 2001).




Figure 3. A space filling model of the Hma 50S ribosomal subunit cut in half through its
polypeptide exit tunnel at the PTC (PT) and opened up like a book. The tightly packed
RNA in the interior is shown in white and the penetrating protein loops in green. A
hypothetical model of the exiting polypeptide in the tunnel is shown in white (Nissen et
al., 2000).

The 3,000 nucleotides of RNA observed in the Hma 50S subunit exhibited
a compact structure with the globular domains of the r-proteins imbedded
in its surface, except in the deep cleft where the substrate analogue binds.
Splitting the subunit down the middle like an apple and opening it out
reveals a 100 Å long polypeptide exit tunnel emanating from the peptidyl
transferase center (PTC). It is wide enough to accommodate an alpha-helix


184


(Nissen et al., 2000; Voss et al., 2006), but not large enough to accommodate
any formation of protein tertiary structure as had been proposed (Gilbert
et al., 2004). Not only is the packing of the 23S rRNA relatively tight, but
extended peptides from many r-proteins are seen to fill the crevices that lie
between the RNA helices (Fig. 3). Indeed, when the structures of many of
the r-proteins are examined in isolation, they are seen to consist of globular
domains and idiosyncratically-folded extended loops and strands that contain
many Lys and Arg residues. Two particularly striking examples of extended
chains that penetrate deeply into the RNA interior are from r-proteins L2
and L3, which approach the PTC as marked by the bound substrate analogue
(Fig. 4).




Figure 4. A ribbon representation of the 23S rRNA in white and proteins L2 and L3 in yel-
low showing the extended peptide chains penetrating into the ribosome interior towards
the PTC but not reaching a bound substrate analogue (orange).


Our subsequent analyses of the structural features of the rRNA of the large
subunit revealed a novel long-range RNA tertiary structure interaction, the
A-minor motif, and a previously unrecognized secondary structure motif,
the kink turn (Nissen et al., 2001; Klein et al., 2001). The A-minor motif
involves the insertion of the smooth, minor groove (C2-N3) edges of adenine
bases within single stranded regions into the minor grooves of neighboring
helices, primarily at C-G base pairs. There are 186 adenines in the large
subunit observed to make A-minor interactions that stabilize helix-helix,
helix-loop, and junction interactions. Ramakrishnan et al. subsequently

                                                                                    185


observed that A-minor interactions are important to decoding by stabilizing
correct codon-anticodon interactions (Ogle et al., 2001). The kink-turns
(K-turns) are asymmetric internal loops imbedded in RNA double helices.
The six K-turns in the Hma 50S subunit have a kink in the phosphodiester
backbone that causes a sharp turn in the RNA helix, and they superimpose
on each other with an rmsd of 1.7 Å.
   Francis Crick had wondered in 1968 whether the catalytic heart of the
ribosome was all RNA. Realizing that evolution had faced the “chicken or
the egg problem” (which came first?) because the first machine to make a
protein could not have been a protein, he wrote “it is tempting to wonder
if the first ribosome was made entirely of RNA” (Crick, 1968). Noller and
coworkers attempted to establish that indeed the ribosomal RNA is respon-
sible for its catalytic activity by using proteases to digest the r-proteins (Noller
et al., 1992). However, many peptides in the 10K molecular weight range, as
well as intact L2 and L3, remained. Consequently, this experiment did not
confirm the hypothesis that the catalysis is done by the RNA component of
the ribosome.
When we examined the positions of all of the proteins that have portions




Figure 5. Four proteins whose non-globular extensions into the ribosome interior come
the closest to the PTC shown as a red ball, with distances to the PTC given in angstroms
(Nissen et al., 2000).


186


that approach the heart of the PTC, we observed (Fig. 5) in 2000 that the
closest protein component lies 18 Å from the PTC (Nissen et al., 2000). Even
taking into account that a loop of protein L10e is disordered in this crystal
and located in the neighborhood of the PTC, it cannot even hypothetically
be extended into the PTC. Therefore, we were led to conclude in 2000 that
“The ribosome is a ribozyme”. This was the first experimental verification of
the hypothesis that had been advocated by many in previous years.


The mechanism of peptide bond formation
As with any enzyme the important question is how catalysis is achieved,
and in the case of the ribosome it is of particular interest how RNA can be
effective in this process. Of course, as it the case with all enzymes, a major
component, if not by far the largest contributor, is the enzyme’s capacity to
correctly orient the substrates in order that chemistry can occur (Page and
Jencks, 1971). This has been shown to be an important component also
in ribosome catalysis (e.g., Sievers et al., 2004) . But what other specific chem-
ical mechanisms are utilized?
   To address this question, many structures of the Hma large ribosomal
subunit complexed with substrate, intermediate and product analogues
were determined by Jeff Hansen (Nissen et al., 2000; Hansen et al., 2002)
initially and then subsequently by Martin Schmeing (Schmeing et al., 2005a;
Schmeing et al., 2005b). The reaction that is catalyzed is the attack of the
alpha-amino group of the aminoacyl-tRNA bound in the A site on the
carbonyl carbon of the peptidyl-tRNA bound in the P site. This leads to
the formation of a tetrahedral carbon that contains an oxyanion; this inter-
mediate then breaks down to form the product peptidyl-tRNA now in the A
site and a deacylated P-site tRNA. Since it was not possible to bind full length
tRNA substrates to existing crystals of the 50S subunit, we made complexes
with fragments of the 3’ end of tRNA containing either A, CA or CCA linked
to either the amino acid, peptide or analogue of the tetrahedral intermediate.
Biochemists had for many years used these kinds of substrate analogues to
carry out what is called a “fragment assay” to study the reaction.




                                                                              187


Figure 6. A model of the A-site and P-site substrates bound to the PTC constructed from
the structures of the CCA phe cap bio bound to the P site (with sparsomycin, not shown)
and C-puromycin bound to the A site, as well as models of the tRNA acceptor stems. The
CCA of the P- site substrate makes two base pairs with G2285 and G2284 of the P loop, and
C-puromycin makes one base pair with the A loop. The models of the acceptor stems of the
A-site and P-site tRNAs are taken from the Yusopov et al. (2001) model of the 70S ribosome
with tRNAs bound to the A and P sites. The acceptor stems of the two tRNAs are related by
a translation, while the 2 CCAs are related by a 180o rotation.


Initially, we determined the structures of substrate complexes with either
CC-puromycin bound in the A site or CCA-phe-caproic acid-biotin bound in
the P site, which was stabilized in the P site by the simultaneous binding of
sparsomycin (Hansen et al., 2002). To construct a model of the structure of a
complex with aminoacyl-tRNA bound to the A site and peptidyl-tRNA bound
to the P site, the structures of the complexes with the two substrate analogues
were built onto the same model of the large subunit. The A- and P-site tRNAs
from the Noller et al. model of the 70S complex with tRNAs (Yusupov et al.,
2001) were also superimposed and joined to the fragment structures (Fig. 6).
As had been noted earlier (Nissen et al., 2000), the two tRNA molecules from
residue 1 to residue 73 were related by a translation, while their CCA ends
were related to each other by a 180o rotation. In the A site, C75 is Watson-
Crick base paired to G2588 of the ribosomal A-loop, while in the P site both
C74 and C75 make Watson-Crick base pairs to G2285 and G2284 of the P
loop. It was suggested (Hansen et al., 2002) that the additional base pair
between the CCA and the P loop in the P site as well as base stacking would
increase the affinity of the CCA for the P site compared with the A site and

188


thereby might facilitate the movement of the CCA and of the peptide linked
A-site tRNA to the P site once the deacylated P-site tRNA had moved to the
E site. These changes in the positions of the CCA ends of the tRNA may be
responsible for formation of the hybrid state.
  Martin Schmeing then determined the structures of many complexes
of the large subunit with substrate analogues of A- and P-site substrates
bound simultaneously to the PTC. Together, these suggested the mecha-
nism of peptide bond formation and showed that the premature hydrolysis
of the peptidyl-tRNA in the absence of an A-site substrate is suppressed by
an induced fit mechanism (Schmeing et al., 2005b). To prepare a stable
pre-reaction state complex, the A site substrate used was CC-
hydroxypuromycin in which the alpha-amino group is replaced by a less re-
active hydroxyl group. In the absence of an A-site substrate, the ester linked
carbonyl carbon of peptide linked to the P-site tRNA is protected from a
nucleophilic attack by water on both sides by rRNA bases. Addition of the
CC-hydroxypuromycin, however, causes a series of conformational changes
in the rRNA that lead to the repositioning of the protective base and the
reorientation of the carbonyl group positioning it for attack by the alpha-
amino group. The structures of these complexes confirm that only the N3
of A2486 (2451 in E. coli) and the 2’ OH of A 76 of the P-site tRNA contact
the attacking alpha-amino group of aminoacyl-tRNA and could be possible
candidates for functioning as a general base to activate the nucleophilic at-
tack of the alpha-amino group (Fig. 7). Rachel Green and coworkers showed
most conclusively that mutation of A2486 (2451) to any of the three other
bases had no effect on the rate of peptide bond formation when full length
substrates are used, thereby establishing that A2486 (2451) is not involved in
catalyzing peptide bond formation (Youngman et al., 2004).




                                                                          189


Figure 7. The orientations of two fragment substrates bound to the PTC. The 2’OH of A76
of the P-site substrate in green is the H-bonded to the analogue of the alpha-amino group
of the aminoacyl CCA in red. Only the 2’OH of A76 and the N3 of A2486 (2451) interact
with the attacking alpha-amino group (Schmeing et al., 2005b).




In contrast, removal of the 2’OH of A76 of the P-site tRNA greatly re-
duces the rate of the peptidyl transferase reaction. Barta et al. found using
fragment substrates that remove the 2’ OH of A76 of the P-site substrate
reduced the rate of peptide bond formation by several hundred-fold (Dorner
et al., 2004). Based on this observation and on structures of the Hma 50S
subunit complexed with either a P-site substrate analogue or an A-site ana-
logue, Barta proposed that the mechanism of peptide bond formation could
be facilitated by a proton shuttle mechanism in which the 2’ OH of A76 acts
as a general base to receive a proton from the alpha-amino group of the
aminoacyl-tRNA to facilitate its nucleophilic attack while simultaneously
acting as a general acid to provide a proton to the leaving 3’ OH of the
P-site A76 upon its deacylation. Strobel and colleagues demonstrated that
if full tRNA substrates are used in these studies, then a 2’ deoxy-A76 in the
peptidyl-tRNA resulted in a rate reduction in peptide bond formation of
greater than 106 fold (Weinger et al., 2004). Thus, the 2’ OH of the P-site
tRNA A76 is critical to peptide bond formation.




190


To explore whether the rate of peptide bond formation is also enhanced
by stabilization of the tetrahedral transition state intermediate, Schmeing
obtained a 2.3 Å resolution structure of a complex between the Hma 50S
subunit and an analogue of the transition state that was synthesized by Kevin
Huang in Scott Strobel’s laboratory (Schmeing et al., 2005a,b). This analogue
had a phosphate mimic of the tetrahedral carbon with an amino acid side
chain mimic in place of one of the phosphate oxygens and a sulfur mimic of
the oxyanion replacing the second oxygen. Hydrogen bonded to the phos-
phate oxygen mimic of the oxyanion is a water molecule that is positioned
by two rRNA bases (Fig. 8). This water molecule could indeed be assisting in
catalysis by partially compensating for the negative charge on the oxyanion.




Figure 8. Difference electron density in an Fo-Fc map shows a presumed water molecule
H-bonded to the oxyanion mimic of the transition state analogue, as well as to the N6 of
A2637 (2502) and to the 2’OH of mU2619 (2585) (Schmeing et al., 2005a).


Consequently, there appear to be at least three contributors to the ribosome’s
ability to enhance the rate of peptide bond formation. First, it correctly
orients the two substrates. Second, it provides substrate assisted catalysis by the
2’ OH of A76 of the P-site tRNA that functions as a proton shuttle acting as
both a general base and a general acid. Finally, a bound water molecule inter-
acting with the oxyanion may be functioning to stabilize the transition state.

                                                                                   191


Antibiotic inhibition of the 50S ribosomal subunit
About 50% of pharmaceutically useful antibiotics target the ribosome and
the majority of these bind to the large ribosomal subunit. Our determination
of the structure of the Hma large ribosomal subunit has enabled us to obtain
the structures of its complexes with many families of antibiotics that bind
in or near to the PTC, as well as those that bind in the E site (Hansen et al.,
2002; Hansen et al., 2003; Ippolito et al., 2008). Since H. marismortui is an
archaeon, the antibiotic binding sites of its ribosomes are more similar
to those of eukaryotic ribosomes than those of eubacterial ribosomes.
Fortunately, at millimolar concentrations many antibiotics that target
eubacteria will bind to the Hma large subunit, and our crystal structures of
their complexes have enabled the structure-based design of more deriva-
tive compounds that are proving effective against resistant bacterial strains.
Furthermore, complexes with Hma subunits that have been mutated to
contain a eubacterial base bind these antibiotics at pharmacologically
relevant concentrations and bind at a position that is displaced by less than an
angstrom from that observed for the wild type Hma subunit. Consequently,
these observations plus the high resolution of the structural studies that is
possible with the Hma crystals have made the Hma large subunit structure
a very effective tool in providing structural insights for the design of new
antibiotics.
   The macrolide family contains many members that have been pharmaceu-
tically important over many years, e.g., erythromycin. The macrolides consist
of 14- to 16-membered lactone rings to which various sugar substituents are
attached. We were able to establish the structures of complexes with several
16 member macrolides and one 15-member macrolide bound to wild-type
50S subunit (Hansen et al., 2002). The macrolides bind just below the PTC in
the polypeptide exit tunnel with the hydrophobic side of the macrolide ring
stacking on two splayed-out bases that form a hydrophobic pocket. Although
the oligosaccaride substitution on some macrolides, e.g., carbomycin A,
overlap the substrate binding sites, most do not. They appear to be function-
ing by blocking the polypeptide exit tunnel thereby preventing the extension
of the elongating polypeptide (Fig. 9). I refer to this process as “molecular
constipation”. Most of the macrolides interact only with the 23S rRNA and
the positions of their macrolide rings superimpose on each other very well.
Although there are almost no conformational changes induced in the RNA
upon macrolide binding, the 16-member macrolides cause a rotation of the
base A 2103 (2100) and form a covalent bond with it.




192


Figure 9. (A) The structure of the macrolide carbomycin (red) bound to the 50S subunit,
which is split in half with the 23S rRNA shown in white and the penetrating protein loops
in blue (Hansen et al., 2002). The tRNA molecules are derived from combining the tRNA
fragment structures complexed with the 50S subunit and the model of the tRNAs bound
to the large subunit (Yusupov et al., 2001). (B) A view up the tunnel towards the PTC; the
bases whose mutation render the ribosome resistant to inhibition by macrolides are shown
in green. (C) The same view as in (B) with the macrolide shown in red in a position that
blocks the polypeptide exit.



Aligning the structure of the Hma subunit complexed with azithromycin with
that of the D. radiodurans subunit bound to erythromycin (Schleunzen et al.,
2001) by superimposing their homologous rRNAs shows that the macrolide
rings were positioned orthogonally in the two models which seemed surpris-
ing for two compounds that are chemically so similar (Hansen et al., 2002).
Two possible explanations were posited for this difference initially. One pos-
sible cause might be the species differences; the second might be that the
erythromycin was mis-positioned in the lower resolution map (3.5 Å) of the
Dra complex. Subsequent studies have established that the latter explanation
is correct (Tu et al., 2005).




                                                                                     193


Figure 10. A difference electron density map between the wild-type 50S subunit containing
G2099 soaked in 3 mM erythromycin and the apo 50S subunit (left) is compared to a
difference map between a G2099A mutant 50S subunit soaked in 0.003 mM erythromycin
and the apo-50S subunit (right) (Tu et al., 2005).


Since the major difference between the eubacterial and archaeal binding
sites for macrolides is residue A2058 in eubacteria, which is G2099 in archaea
and eucaryotes, mutation of A2058 to G in eubacteria reduces the affinity of
the ribosomes for erythromycin by about 104 fold. Therefore, to better mimic
the eubacterial ribosome, G2099 in the Hma 23S rRNA was mutated to an
A (Tu et al., 2005). While erythromycin does not bind to the Hma wild-type
subunit at 1 mM concentration, it saturates the site of the mutant subunit at
0.001 mM concentration (Fig. 10). Indeed, all antibiotics belonging to the
MLSBK category that do not bind to the wild-type Hma subunit or to a eubac-
terial 50S subunit having an A2058G mutation bind to the G2099A-mutated
Hma 50S subunit. Azithromycin likewise binds at a lower, more physiologi-
cally relevant concentration. Its orientation is the same as that observed in
the complex with the wild-type 50S subunit, but it is positioned about 1 Å
closer to the A2099 (2058) residue due to the lack of steric interference of
the N2 of a G residue in that position. Very recently, we have determined
the structure at 3.1 Å resolution of erythromycin bound to a 70S Thermus
thermophilus ribosome and find that it binds identically as erythromycin binds
to the mutated Hma 50S subunit (Bulkley, Innis, Blaha, Steitz, unpublished).
This further confirms the earlier conclusion that the erythromycin was mis-
oriented in the initial model of the Dra 50S subunit complex (Schluenzen et
al., 20001), due presumably to the lower resolution of the electron density
map into which the erythromycin was fit.

194


Figure 11. Seven different antibiotics are shown binding to adjacent but distinct binding
sites in the PTC. The A site substrate is in red; the P site substrate with an extended peptide
model is in orange.

The structures of numerous other complexes between the Hma 50S
subunit and different families of antibiotics that bind to the PTC have been
determined (Tu et al., 2005; Hansen et al., 2003). Many bind to nearby, but dis-
tinct binding sites (Fig. 11) and most inhibit protein synthesis by interfering
with the binding of either the P-site or the A-site tRNA. The adjacent
locations of these different antibiotic binding sites has provided the oppor-
tunity to create novel inhibitors by chemically tying a piece of one antibiotic
to a piece of an adjacently-bound one to create hybrid molecules that bind
more tightly and provide the starting point for the creation of new antibiotics
using computation and structure based design.

                                                                                          195


Development of new antibiotics by Rib-X Pharmaceuticals,
Inc.
At a tRNA meeting held in Cambridge, England, in April of 2000, I had a
fish and chips lunch with John Abelson at the Eagle Pub, where Francis Crick
is reported to have first announced his and Jim Watson’s discovery of the
structure of double-stranded DNA and its significance for replication. John
was a co-founder of Agouron Pharmaceuticals, which in the 1990s used a
structure-based drug design approach to create one of the first HIV protease
inhibitors; it became an approved pharmaceutical and has been used to
successfully treat AIDS as part of combination drug therapy. I asked John if
he thought we should start a biotech company to use our structural informa-
tion on antibiotic complexes with the 50S subunit to design new antibiotic
pharmaceuticals effective against resistant bacterial strains, and if so, would
he be willing to participate in the founding of such a company? John very
excitedly and enthusiastically said yes to both questions. We toasted the
future and finished our meal while discussing strategies to explore.
   In the following months we began to develop a plan. I asked Peter Moore
to join in, which he did, and we decided that we should ask Bill Jorgensen
to join the team because of his skills and accomplishments in computational
methods of drug design. Susan Froshauer agreed to take on the role of CEO,
which she has successfully done to the present time. After raising Angel fund-
ing mostly from friends, the company began in the summer of 2001 to use
our structures of complexes between the Hma 50S subunit and antibiotics
along with Bill Jorgensen’s computational methods to carry out
structure- and computation-based drug design. The company was named
Rib-X Pharmaceuticals, to reflect the ribosome target and the use of X-ray
crystallography to obtain structures. After eight years, their first drug
candidate, radezolid, has successfully completed Phase II clinical trials for
use against skin and soft tissue infections and to treat mild-to-moderate
community-acquired pneumonia. Other disease applications of radezolid are
in Phase II trials and a pipeline of additional compounds is nearing comple-
tion of preclinical trials.




196


                                                            O
                                                                    H
                                                                    N
                                                        HN                  O

                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                    H
                                                                                    N
                                                                                             bridge                                     O
                                                                            O                                                   N
                                                                                            element
                                                                H
                                                                N                                               F
                                                                                                                                        HN      O
                                                        O                               O
                                                                N                           H
                                                                H
                                                                        O               N                               O
                                                                                        H
                    Bridge 1                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                    N                   N

                                                                                                        F
                                                                                            T1A                                 HN          O



                               O
                                        H
                                        N
                                                                                                            N
                               HN               O

                                                                                                                                    H
                                                        H                                                                           N
                                                        N
                                                                                                                            O                             O
                    Bridge 2                    O                                           O
                                                                                                                                                              O
                                                                                                    O                                                     N
                                                                                            N                                           T2B
                                                                T2A
                                                                                                                                                      F
                                                                                F                                                                             HN       O
                                                                                                    HN          O



                                    O
                                            H
                                            N
                                                                                                                            N
                                HN                  O

                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                O                                               H
                                                            H                                                                                   N
                    Bridge 3                                N
                                                                                                        O                                   O                      N
                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                    O                                           N

                                                                                                                                                T3B       F
                                                                                    F                                                                                      HN   O
                                                                T3A                                     HN          O




Figure 12. The creation of new hybrid antibiotic compounds by combining (A) sparsomycin
on the left (green) with linezolid on the right (orange). The ribosomal RNA to which they
bind is shown in a surface representation (grey). (B) These compounds can be chemically
linked using various bridge elements to create hybrid compounds.


The design procedures used by Rib-X to ultimately obtain radezolid nicely
exemplify how the structures of antibiotic complexes with the 50S subunit
and computational methods can be effectively combined with pharmaceuti-
cal chemistry and microbiology to create new antibiotics that are effective
against antibiotic resistant bacterial strains (Franceschi and Duffy, 2006;
Skripkin et al., 2008). Linezolid, an antibiotic sold by Pfizer, binds to the
PTC (Ippolito et al., 2008) adjacent to the binding site of the antibiotic spar-
somycin (Hansen et al., 2003), which is not selective between eubacteria and
eucaryotes (Fig. 12a). In this example, portions of the two antibiotics are
chemically linked together to create five new compounds whose intrinsic af-
finity, kingdom selectivity and minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) are
measured (Fig. 12b; Table 1). Two of the five were selective for eubacteria,
showing that replacement of the key sparsomycin affinity element could alter

                                                                                                                                                                                    197


the selectivity without completely losing ribosomal binding. Furthermore,
the pair on the right (T3A and T3B) featuring the biaryl template showed
not only substantially improved intrinsic affinity, but also dramatic improve-
ment in antibacterial activity against representative community and nosoco-
mial drug-resistant strains. With this proof-of-concept established, completely
new molecules were designed. These took advantage of the ribosomal space
defined by the chimeras, and they were optimized within these boundar-
ies using computational methods to balance the molecular features so that
Gram-positive and Gram-negative membranes could be penetrated, solubility
and permeability could be maximized for oral bioavailability, and liabilities
that might relate to toxicity were avoided. After synthesis of fewer than 700
compounds within less than one year’s time, two drug candidates emerged:
these featured greater than 103 lower inhibitory concentration for eubac-
teria than eucaryotes, very low MICs (0.25 and 2) against drug-resistant S.
pneumoniae and H. influenzae, and oral efficacy in a variety of rodent models
of infection. The final selected compound, radezolid, was found to be signifi-
cantly more effective against many antibiotic resistant strains than the parent
linezolid compound.
                    Linezolid Sparsomycin        RX-     RX-      RX-     RX-     RX-
                      (Lin)      (Spa)           154     190      209     212     213

              Intrinsic Affinity (Cell-Free Translation Inhibition)
E. coli D10 IC50
                        4.6         <0.02       0.26     0.03     16      0.03    0.58
(µM)
Bacterial
                         Y            N           N       N        Y       N        Y
Selectivity
                     Antibacterial Activity (MICs in µg/mL)
S. pneumoniae
O2J1175                  2            2           4        1       8     <0.25     0.5
(MacR, efflux)
S. pyogenes
Msr610 (MacR,
                         1            2           4        1       4     <0.25     0.5
rRNA methyla-
tion)
E. faecalis
P5 (LinR,              >32          >128        >128      32     >128      16      16
G2576U)
Table 1. The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) against three bacterial strains ex-
hibited by five compounds created by chemically combining sparsomycin with linezolid.


An analogous approach has led to the creation of a family of enhanced mac-
rolides. This family features representatives of the 14-, 15- and 16-membered
macrolide families that have been augmented in novel ways to access adja-
cent, validated binding sites in the Hma 50S ribosome. By so doing, they not

198


only restore activity against bacterial strains that are macrolide-resistant (e.g.,
the streptococci and the staphylococci, including community- and hospital-
acquired MRSA), but also extend the spectrum to be effective against other
drug-resistant Gram-positive bacteria such as the vancomycin-resistant en-
terococci. These compounds are in the late-stages of preclinical testing.
   Building on the knowledge that was derived from those programs, the
Rib-X team undertook the de novo design of completely new antibiotics that
target the 50S ribosomal subunit. Not only do they represent new classes for
this important target, but also they have been optimized computationally
to show potency against strains of multidrug-resistant Gram-negative organ-
isms like Escherichia coli, Psuedomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii.
Additionally, because these compounds represent new chemical classes, they
should not be affected by known resistance mechanisms seen clinically for
other antibiotics. Thus, it appears that the structure of the Hma large ribo-
somal subunit and those of its complexes with antibiotics are enabling the
development of a pipeline of new potential antibiotics.


New antibiotics against tuberculosis?
Tuberculosis (TB) continues to be a major disease that causes over a million
deaths a year, primarily in the poorest regions of the world. Also troubling is
the recent emergence of strains, called XDR, that are resistant to all anti-TB
antibiotics regardless of their specific molecular target. The possible spread
of the XDR strains poses a potential medical problem for the rest of the
world as well.

Viomycin binds between subunits, interacting with B2A bridge &tRNA




Figure 13. The binding site for viomycin at the decoding center interacting with RNA from
both subunits (Stanley et al., 2010). Shown on the left is a surface rendition of the 70S
ribosome with the 50S subunit in blue, the 30S subunit in tan, the A-site tRNA in yellow
and viomycin in red. A close-up view of viomycin bound to the large subunit helix 69 and
small subunit helix 44 at the decoding center; stabilizing bases 1492 and 1493 are in their
“flipped out” conformation, making A minor interactions with the codon of the mRNA
(green) base-paired with the anticodon of the tRNA (yellow).


                                                                                      199


We have recently (Stanley et al., 2010) determined the structures of the 70S
Thermus thermophilus ribosome complexed with tRNA molecules bound to the
A, P and E sites as well as capreomycin and viomycin, two tuberactinomycin
cyclic peptide antibiotics effective against TB. They were known to bind only
to the 70S ribosome and we observe them between the two subunits near
the decoding center, interacting with tRNA and the beta 2A intersubunit
bridge, which is formed by the contact between large subunit helix 69 and
small subunit helix 44. The drugs interact with bases A1492 and A1493,
stabilizing them in the “flipped out” orientation that they assume when
assisting in mRNA decoding. It appears that the drugs stabilize the tRNA in the
pre-translocation state (Fig. 13).
   Importantly, the capreomycin/viomycin binding site lies adjacent to the
binding sites for two antibiotics that bind the small subunit, paromomycin
(Voorhees et al., 2009) and hygromycin B (Borovinsaya et al., 2008) (Fig. 14).
This provides the opportunity to apply the same approach that Rib-X has
been successfully employing to develop new anti-TB antibiotics by chemically
tying a portion of either hygromycin B or paromomycin to capreomycin.
Since the XDR strain may be the consequence of a mutation in an ionpump
a new, larger compound might prove effective.




Viomycin, hygromycin & paromomycin bind to adjacent sites




Figure 14. The adjacent binding sites of viomycin (purple), hygromycin B (green) and
paromomycin (yellow) at the decoding center open the possibility of combinational drug
design of new anti-TB antibiotics (Stanley et al., 2010).


200


CONCLUSION
We began our structural studies of the ribosomal large subunit in order to
learn how this largest of RNA machines is built and how it is able to catalyze
peptide bond formation. These basic science questions and answers have
led to a practical and applied outcome that uses the power of structural and
computational methods to design new potential antibiotics that are effective
against antibiotic resistant bacterial strains. Our work reinforces my view of
the importance of research funding agencies continuing to emphasize their
support of basic research rather than divert their efforts to “translational”
research, which I believe has a more limited horizon for novel discoveries.


Acknowledgments
I acknowledge the important contributions to the structural studies of the
ribosome of all of the members of my research group as well as Peter Moore’s
group, during the past 15 years in addition to the four who are specifically
mentioned in the text. I also wish to acknowledge the unique and enabling
research environment created by the seven Center for Structural Biology
(CSB) laboratories at Yale between 1995 to 2000 (Richards, Engelman,
Moore, my lab, Sigler, Brünger and Doudna). Importantly, the long term
and major support of my lab research and of the CSB by the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute has been vital to the success of our studies of the ribosome.
Support was also provided by a program project grant from the NIH. Finally,
Erin Duffy assisted in the writing of the summary of drug development by
Rib-X Pharmaceuticals, Inc.




                                                                           201


REFERENCES
 1.   Ban, N., Freeborn, B., Nissen, P., Penczek, P., Grassucci, R. A., Sweet, R., Frank, J.,
      Moore, P. B. and Steitz, T. A. (1998), “A 9 Å resolution X-ray crystallographic map of
      the large ribosomal subunit,” Cell 93, 1105–1115.
 2.   Ban, N., Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Capel, M., Moore, P.B. and Steitz, T.A. (1999),
      “Placement of protein and RNA structures into a 5 Å resolution map of the 50S
      ribosomal subunit,” Nature 400, 841–847.
 3.   Ban, N., Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Moore, P. B. and Steitz, T. A. (2000), “The complete
      atomic structure of the large ribosomal subunit at 2.4 Å resolution,” Science 289,
      905–920.
 4.   Borovinsaya, M.S., Shoji, S., Fredrick, K., and Cate, J.H. (2008), “Structural basis of a
      hygromycin B inhibition of protein biosynthesis,” RNA 14, 1590–1599.
 5.   Carter, A. P., Clemons, W. M., Brodersen, D. E., Morgan-Warren, R. J., Wimberly, B.
      T. and Ramakrishnan, V. (2000), “Functional insights from the structure of the 30S
      ribosomal subunit and its interactions with antibiotics,” Nature 407, 340–348.
 6.   Cate, J. H., Yusupov, M. M., Yusupova, G. Z., Earnest, T. N. and Noller, H. F. (1999),
      “X-ray crystal structures of 70S ribosome functional complexes,” Science 285,
      2095–2104.
 7.   Clemons, W.M., May, J.L.C., Wimberly, B.T., McCutcheon, J.P., Capel, M.S.,
      Ramakrishnan, V. (1999), “Structure of a bacterial 30S ribosomal subunit at 5.5 Å
      resolution,” Nature 400: 833–840.
 8.   Crick, F. H. C. (1968), “The origin of the genetic code,” J. Mol. Biol. 38, 367–379.
 9.   Dorner, S., Panuschka, F., Schmid, W. and Barta, A. (2003), “Mononucleotide
      derivatives as ribosomal P-site substrates reveal an important contribution of the 2’-
      OH activity,” Nucl. Acids Res. 31, 6536–6542.
10.   Franceschi, F., Duffy, E.M. (2006), “Structure-based drug design meets the ribosome,”
      Biochemical Pharmacology 71, 1016–1025.
11.   Frank, J., Zhu, J., Penczek, P., Li, Y., Srivastava, S., Verschoer, A., Radermacher, M.,
      Grassucci, R., Lata, R.K., Agrawal, R.K. (1995), “A model of protein synthesis based
      on cryo-electron microscopy of the E. coli ribosome,” Nature 376, 441–444.
12.   Hansen, J.L., Schmeing, T.M., Moore, P.B. and Steitz, T.A. (2002), “Structural insights
      into peptide bond formation,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 11670–11675.
13.   Hansen, J.L., Moore, P.B. and Steitz, T.A. (2003), “Structure of five antibiotics bound
      at the peptidyl transferase center of the large ribosomal subunit,” J. Mol. Biol. 330,
      1061–1075.
14.   Harms, J., Tocilj, A., Levin, I., Agmon, I., Stark, H., Kölln, I., van Heel, M., Cuff, M.,
      Schlünzen, F., Bashan, A., Franceschi, F. and Yonath, A. (1999), “Elucidating the
      medium-resolution structure of ribosomal particles: an interplay between electron
      cryo-microscopy and X-ray crystallography,” Structure 7, 931–941.
15.   Ippolito, J.A., Kanyo, Z.F., Wang, D., Franeschi, F.J., Moore, P.B., Steitz, T.A., and
      Duffy, E.M. (2008), “Crystal structure of the oxazolidinone antibiotic linezolid bound
      to the 50S ribosomal subunit,” J. Med. Chem. 51, 3353–3356.
16.   Klein, D.J., Schmeing, T.M., Moore, P.B. and Steitz, T.A. (2001), “The kink-turn: a
      new RNA secondary structure motif,” The EMBO J. 4214–4221.
17.   Lake, J.A. (1976), “Ribosome structure determined by electron microscopy of
      Escherichia coli small subunits, large subunits and monomeric ribosomes,” J. Mol. Biol.
      105, 131–159.
18.   Nissen, P., Ban, N., Hansen, J., Moore, P. B. and Steitz, T. A. (2000), “The structural
      basis of ribosome activity in peptide bond synthesis,” Science 289, 920–930.
19.   Nissen, P., Ippolito, J. A., Ban, N., Moore, P. B. and Steitz, T. A. (2001), “RNA tertiary
      interactions in the large ribosomal subunit: the A-minor motif,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      USA 98, 4899–4903.
20.   Noller, H.F., Hoffarth, V. and Zimniak, L. (1992), “Unusual resistance of peptidyl
      transferase to protein extraction procedures,” Science 256, 1416–1419.


202


21.   Ogle, J. M., Brodersen, D. E., Clemons, W. M., Tarry, M. J., Carter, A. P. and
      Ramakrishnan, V. (2001), “Recognition of cognate transfer RNA by the 30S ribos-
      omal subunit,” Science 292, 897–902.
22.   Page, M.I. and Jencks, W.P. (1971), “Entropic contributions to rate acceleration in
      enzymatic and intramolecular reactions and the chelate effect,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      USA 68, 1678–1683.
23.   Schlünzen, F., Hansen, H.A.S., Thygesen, J., Bennett, W.S., Volkmann, N., Levin, I.,
      Harms, J., Bartels, H., Zaytzev-Bashan, A., Berkovitch-Yellin, Z., Sai, I., Franceschi, F.,
      Krumbholz, S., Geva, M., Weinstein, S., Agmon, I., Böddeker, N., Morlang, S., Sharon,
      R., Dribin, A., Maltz, E., Peretz, M., Weinrich, V. and Yonath, A. (1995), “A milestone
      in ribosomal crystallography: the construction of preliminary electron density maps
      at intermediate resolution,” Biochem. Cell Biol. 73, 739–749.
24.   Schluenzen, F., Tocilj, A., Zarivach, R., Harms, J., Gluehmann, M., Janell, D., Bashan,
      A., Bartles, H., Agmon, I., Franceschi, F. et al. (2000), “Structure of functionally acti-
      vated small ribosomal subunit at 3.3 Å resolution,” Cell 102, 615–623.
25.   Schleunzen, F., Zarivach, R., Harms, J., Bashan, A., Tocilj, A., Albrecht, R., Yonath, A.
      and Franceschi, F. (2001), “Structural basis for the interaction of antibiotics with the
      peptidyl transferase centre in eubacteria,” Nature 413, 814–821.
26.   Schmeing, T.M., Kitchen, D., Scaringe, S.A., Strobel, S.A. and Steitz, T.A. (2005a),
      “Structural insights into the roles of water and the 2’ hydroxyl of the P-site tRNA in
      the peptidyl transferase reaction,” Molec. Cell 20, 437–448.
27.   Schmeing, T.M., Huang, K.S., Strobel, S.A., and Steitz, T.A. (2005b), “An induced-fit
      mechanism to promote peptide bond formation and exclude hydrolysis of peptidyl
      tRNA,” Nature 438, 520–524.
28.   Shevack, A., Gewitz, H.S., Hennemann, B., Yonath, A. and Wittmann, H.G. (1985),
      “Characterization and crystallization of ribosomal particles from Halobacterium maris-
      mortui,” FEBS 184, 68–71.
29.   Sievers, A., Beringer, M., Rodnina, M.V., Wolfenden, R. (2004), “The ribosome as an
      entropy trap,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 7897–7901.
30.   Skripkin, E., McConnell, T.S., Devito, J., Lawrence, L., Ippolito, J.A., Duffy, E.M.,
      Sutcliffe, J., Franceschi, F. (2008), “Rχ-01, a new family of oxazolidinones that
      overfcome ribosome-based linezolid resistance,” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy
      52, 3550–3557.
31.   Stanley, R.E., Blaha, G., Grodzicki, R.L., Strickler, M.D. and Steitz, T.A. (2010), “The
      structures of the anti-tuberculosis antibiotics viomycin and capreomycin bound to the
      70S ribosome,” Nature Struct. and Molec Biol. 17, 289−293.
32.   Tu, D., Blaha, G, Moore, P.B. and Steitz, T.A. (2005), “Structures of MLSbK anti-
      biotics boundto mutated large ribosomal subunits provide a structural explanation
      for resistance,” Cell 121, 257–270.
33.   von Böhlen, K., Makowski, L., Hansen, H.A.S., Bartels, H., Berkovitch-Yellin, Z.,
      Zaytzev-Bashan, A., Meyer, S., Paulke, C., Franceschi, F., and Yonath, A. (1991),
      “Characterization of preliminary attempts for derivatization of crystals of large ribos-
      omal subunits from Haloarcula marismortui, diffraction to 3 Å resolution,” J. Mol. Biol.
      222, 11–15.
34.   Voorhees, R.M., Weixlbaumer, A., Loakes, D., Kelley, A.C. and Ramakrishnan,
      V. (2009), “Insights into substrate stabilization from snapshots of the peptidyl
      transferase center of the intact 70S ribosome,” Nature Struc. Biol. 16, 528–533.
35.   Voss, N.R., Gerstein, M., Steitz, T.A., and Moore, P.B. (2006), “The geometry of the
      ribosomal polypeptide exit tunnel,” J. Mol. Biol. 360, 893–906.
36.   Watson, J. D. (1963), “Involvement of RNA in the synthesis of proteins,” Science 140,
      17–26.
37.   Weinger, J.S., Parnell, K.M., Dorner, S., Green, R. and Strobel, S.A. (2004), “Substrate-
      assisted catalysis of peptide bond formation by the ribosome,” Nature Struc. Biol. 11,
      1101–1106.


                                                                                            203


38.  Wimberly, B. T., Brodersen, D. E., Clemons, W. M., Morgan-Warren, R. J., Carter,
     A. P., Vonrhein, C., Hartsch, T. and Ramakrishnan, V. (2000), “Structure of the 30S
     ribosomal subunit,” Nature 407, 327–339.
39. Youngman, E.M., Brunelle, J.L., Kochaniak, A.B., and Green, R. (2004), “The active
     site of the ribosome is composed of two layers of conserved nucleotides with distinct
     roles in peptide bond formation and peptide release,” Cell 117, 589–599.
40. Yonath, A., Franceschi, F. (1998), “Functional universality and evolutionary diversity:
     insights from the structure of the ribosome,” Structure 6, 679–684.
41. Yusupov, M. M., Yusupova, G. Z., Baucom, A., Lieberman, K., Earnest, T. N., Cate, J.
     H. D. and Noller, H. F. (2001), “Crystal structure of the ribosome at 5.5 Å resolution,”
     Science 292, 883–896.
Portrait photo of Professor Steitz by photographer Ulla Montan.




204
