The Intrinsic Fragility of DNA
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2015

by Tomas Lindahl
Clare Hall Laboratories, Cancer Research UK, London, United Kingdom.




A     ll macromolecules are, to some extent, unstable. My own work has focussed
      on the inherent lability of DNA [1, 2].

In my early studies as a postdoc at Princeton University in the 1960s we investi-
gated heat-induced shape changes and unfolding of the macromolecular struc-
ture of purified transfer RNA, the small RNA molecules that are key components
in protein synthesis [3]. In these time-consuming experiments, I was surprised
to observe that my purified tRNA not only unfolded at elevated temperatures,
but also very slowly decomposed in an irreversible way [4]. I was advised by col-
leagues that human fingers often have substantial amounts of ribonuclease on
their surface, that is, the enzyme that degrades RNA, and that the problem might
disappear if I improved my laboratory technique. But that was not the problem;
I observed that different preparations of tRNA obtained by different methods
still retained their property of apparently unprovoked slow decomposition in the
same way. I extended this work to show that the decomposition of tRNA involved
destruction of individual base residues and also involved slow cleavage of the
phosphodiester bonds that link the RNA nucleotide building blocks together.
I even published a short report on the heat-induced decomposition of tRNA
that nobody found particularly interesting [4]. So, I moved on to other experi-
mental work on ligation and processing of strand-breaks in DNA by previously
unknown mammalian enzymes such as DNA ligases and exonucleases [5, 6]. But
I had not forgotten the puzzling spontaneous decomposition of tRNA. When I
moved back to Sweden and obtained my own research laboratory in Stockholm

                                                                              73


74                                                              The Nobel Prizes


a couple of years later, I wanted to investigate if DNA, like tRNA, was susceptible
to slow decomposition.
    This was a rather far-fetched idea, because DNA, as the carrier of genetic
information in our cells, was believed to be very stable in the intracellular envi-
ronment (Fig. 1). In order to support such non-conventional work, I did not
apply for a research grant, which may well not have been funded, but used some
Swedish funds I had already been awarded to study enzymatic processing of
DNA strand breaks in mammalian cells. The initial strategy was to perform some




FIGURE 1. The stability of DNA.


The Intrinsic Fragility of DNA75


pilot experiments on DNA instability, and if the results did not seem promising,
quietly bury the project. But it turned out that although DNA was considerably
more stable than RNA, it still underwent very slow, but relevant decomposition
in neutral aqueous buffers.
    Together with my meticulous laboratory assistant, Barbro Nyberg, I then
devised a series of time-consuming experiments to attempt to quantify and char-
acterise the very slow degradation of DNA solutions under physiological condi-
tions. This meant investigating the stability of DNA at different pH values not
too dramatically removed from neutral pH, at various elevated temperatures, and
at different ionic strengths and levels of charge neutralisation. In order to facili-
tate our analyses, most studies were performed with DNA radioactively labelled
in individual base residues; such DNA can be prepared from various bacterial
mutant strains with defects in synthesis of precursors of DNA, grown in the
presence of commercially obtained radioactive base residues. DNA from either
B.subtilis or E.coli was used to avoid possible complications due to the presence
of the modified bases 6-methyladenine and 5-methylcytosine. Moreover, DNA
labelled with 14C rather than 3H was employed to avoid any possible exchange of
3
 H with the aqueous solvent during the prolonged incubations.
    Aliquots of such DNA solutions were incubated for several days, and then
analysed by chromatography. The most conspicuous change was that small num-
bers of base residues were lost from the DNA, in particular the purine bases
guanine and adenine [7].
    Figure 2 shows a summary of the different changes that were detected: a
section of one of the two strands of DNA is illustrated with arrows indicating
the sites of change. Cleavage of a base-sugar bond results in the loss of genetic
information and formation of an abasic site in DNA. The abasic sites resulting
from the loss of the bases guanine or adenine are chemically identical and were
introduced at similar rates, so to know the identity of a missing base one has to
consult the information in the opposite strand of the DNA molecule.
    There are also some changes to the remaining DNA bases, the most impor-
tant of these is the deamination of cytosine residues to uracil. This changes the
coding specificity of DNA, that is, a mutation has occurred [8].
    When I quantified all these losses or changes of information in DNA, the
numbers were surprisingly high (Ref. 1, Fig. 3). In a single mammalian cell, there
are 10 to 20 thousand changes per day. This is for double-stranded DNA.
    There is some protection of bases by the double helical structure of DNA.
While double-stranded and single-stranded DNA are depurinated at simi-
lar rates with only a 3- to 4-fold difference, single-stranded DNA is 150 times
more susceptible than double-stranded DNA to deamination of cytosine and


76                                                      The Nobel Prizes




FIGURE 2. DNA lability.




FIGURE 3. Spontaneous DNA lesions in a mammalian cell.


The Intrinsic Fragility of DNA77


5-methylcytosine, and also formation of 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine
residues. This means that in a transcriptionally active, replicating cell, there are
about 300 potentially mutagenic cytosine and 5-methylcytosine deamination
events per day. This decay of the cellular DNA would lead to an unacceptable del-
eterious loss and alteration of genetic information. The answer to this dilemma
must be that there is a correction mechanism.
    In a search for such mechanisms, we established that abasic sites can be
removed and replaced by an excision mechanism [9]. The same general excision-
and-repair strategy is used for other types of DNA lesions, such as DNA damage
induced by ultraviolet light, described by Dr Sancar and others, or to correct
replication errors in the DNA, as discovered by Dr. Modrich.
    If the DNA contains an altered base, such as a uracil which may be a deami-
nated cytosine, a previously unknown class of repair enzymes is employed, DNA
glycosylases, that cleave base-sugar bonds in DNA [10]. In contrast, nucleases
cleave phosphodiester bonds. We reconstituted the base excision repair pathway
with purified enzymes, first with bacterial enzymes [11] and then with human
enzymes [12] (Fig. 4).
    A stretch of synthetic double-stranded DNA is made that contains a uracil
residue in the centre of one of the two DNA strands. It can then be visualised
by gel electrophoresis under conditions where the DNA strands have been sepa-
rated. If there is uracil in DNA, the DNA strand remains intact after removal of
this base, but an abasic site has been generated which is susceptible to cleavage
by the next enzyme in the pathway, the endonuclease for abasic sites. The sugar-
phosphate residue at the site of damage is then removed, DNA polymerase fills
in the small gap and finally the DNA is ligated. (Fig. 5) In mammalian cells, the
gap-filling enzyme DNA polymerase β (beta) has a separate domain that pro-
motes the release of the base-free sugar-phosphate.
    Models for aspects of the pathway have been proposed by several groups,
including us. It is not a simple task for the DNA glycosylase to find a single
uracil base that has replaced a chemically similar cytosine (or thymine) residue
in a large excess of DNA, so this enzyme scans the DNA and usually flips out the
altered base, and then initiates the repair process [13].
    So far, the repair enzymes that can restore damaged DNA have been dis-
cussed. But occasionally an organism can also use induced changes in the DNA
structure to generate helpful genetic diversity. A striking case is the efficient
diversion of antibodies.
    In order to improve the repertoire of antibodies, an antibody-producing cell
can have the ability to actively change the structure of genes encoding antibodies


78                                                              The Nobel Prizes




FIGURE 4. Repair of Abasic Sites in DNA.




by targeted deamination of cytosine in DNA. This idea, and understanding the
further processing, were due to the brilliant insight of the late Michael Neuberger
of the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, UK (Fig. 6). I had
the pleasure to collaborate briefly with the Neuberger group [14]. One specific
deaminase AID, discovered by T. Honjo, apparently causes targeted deamination
of antibody genes, and the uracil-DNA glycosylase then processes this DNA and


The Intrinsic Fragility of DNA79




FIGURE 5. Reconstruction of base excision repair with purified human proteins.




triggers local mutational changes, which are reflected in an expanded and more
efficient antibody response.
     So far, hydrolytic DNA damage has been discussed, but there are other types
of DNA damage, some of which are caused by the oxygen we breathe and metab-
olise. One particularly sinister form of DNA damage caused by reactive oxygen
species is the oxidation of guanine residues in DNA to 8-hydroxyguanine, which




FIGURE 6. When DNA damage is a good thing: Generation of antibody diversity by
somatic hypermutation.


80                                         The Nobel Prizes




FIGURE 7. DNA lability: Oxidative damage.




FIGURE 8. DNA lability: Alkylation.


The Intrinsic Fragility of DNA81




FIGURE 9. Three mechanisms for repair of methylated DNA bases.



is a miscoding base (Fig. 7). This lesion is excised by a specific DNA glycosylase
distinct from the enzyme that removes uracil [15].
     There are other endogenous agents in cells besides water and oxygen that can
cause DNA damage. We showed that one important example is the reactive coen-
zyme S-adenosylmethionine, SAM, which is an alkylating agent that can cause
methylation damage to DNA [16]. There are several susceptible sites in DNA,
and they are different from the targets of water or oxygen (Fig. 8). Furthermore,
there are intricate DNA repair mechanisms that deal with such damage employ-
ing different chemical mechanisms and strategies. There are three main different
approaches (Fig. 9) to deal with methylation damage [15].
     A base in DNA can be methylated in such a way that it blocks replication of
the DNA, this could be a lethal change, but a special repair enzyme excises the
methylated base to trigger a base excision-repair event (17,18). This is analogous
to the removal of uracil from DNA. In another approach, the very mutagenic
base O6-methylguanine is directly demethylated by a methyltransferase that
removes the offending methyl group by transferring it to itself, to generate a
methylated cysteine residue in the repair protein (19). The term suicide inactiva-
tion has been used for this event, because the whole repair protein is destroyed
by the methylation. Methylcysteine is a chemically very stable entity that could


82                                                              The Nobel Prizes




FIGURE 10. The Intrinsic Fragility of DNA: Group-specific Reagents Causing DNA
Damage in Cells.




not be easily cleaved to regenerate an unmethylated repair protein. So, this is an
energetically costly but effective form of DNA repair.
    More recently, we found another type of DNA repair enzyme that can remove
methyl groups from the toxic residues 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine
in DNA [20, 21]. It took us many years to find this enzyme because it has very
unusual cofactors, that is, iron and the small metabolite alpha-ketoglutarate (Fig.
9). It turns out that this unexpected demethylation reaction with DNA using
these cofactors also is employed for demethylation of histones, which is impor-
tant for regulation of cell growth [20].
    In conclusion, there are several common molecules in cells that can damage
DNA, and which are impossible to avoid (Fig. 10).
    Water is a weak reagent, but it is present in cells at a very high concentra-
tion. Several other commonly occurring small molecules may also damage DNA.
Probably not all of them have even been identified yet as DNA damaging agents,
which suggests that there are more DNA repair enzymes waiting to be discov-
ered. But the fact that water is a damaging agent for tissues has been known for
over 400 years, because William Shakespeare points this out in the graveyard
scene in Hamlet, (Fig. 11) This scene is immediately followed by the famous
monologue on life and death. Hamlet shows himself to be an excellent scientist
by asking a series of logical and penetrating questions. Note that Shakespeare
pinpointed the deleterious effect of water on the soft components of the human
body, including the DNA [22].


The Intrinsic Fragility of DNA83




FIGURE 11. From Shakespeare’s Hamlet.




REFERENCES
 1. T. Lindahl, “Instability and decay of the primary structure of DNA,” Nature 362,
    709–715 (1993).
 2. T. Lindahl, “The Croonian Lecture: Endogenous damage to DNA,” Phil. Trans. R.
    Soc. Lond. B 351, 1529–1538 (1996)
 3. Adams, T. Lindahl and J.R. Fresco, “Conformational differences between the biologi-
    cally active and inactive forms of a transfer ribonucleic acid,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
    USA 57, 1684–1691 (1967).
 4. T. Lindahl, “Irreversible heat inactivation of transfer ribonucleic acids,” J. Biol. Chem.
    242, 1970–1973 (1967).
 5. S. Soderhall and T. Lindahl, “Two DNA ligase activities from calf thymus,” Biochem.
    Biophys. Res. Commun. 53, 910–916 (1973).
 6. T. Lindahl, D.E. Barnes, Y.G Yang and P. Robins, “Biochemical properties of mam-
    malian TREX1 and its association with DNA replication and inherited inflammatory
    disease,” Biochem. Soc. Trans. 37, 535–538 (2009).
 7. T. Lindahl and B. Nyberg, “Rate of depurination of native DNA,” Biochemistry 11,
    3610–3618 (1972).
 8. T. Lindahl and B. Nyberg, “Heat-induced deamination of cytosine residues in deoxy-
    ribonucleic acid,” Biochemistry 13, 3405–3410 (1974).
 9. T. Lindahl, “DNA glycosylases, endonucleases for apurinic/apyrimidinic sites, and
    base excision repair,” Progr. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 22, 135–192 (1979).
10. T. Lindahl, “New class of enzymes acting on damaged DNA,” Nature 259,
    64–66 (1976).
11. G. Dianov, A. Price and T. Lindahl, “Generation of single nucleotide repair patches
    following excision of uracil residues from DNA,” Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 1605–1612 (1992).
12. Y. Kubota, R.A. Nash, A. Klungland, P. Schär, D.E. Barnes and T. Lindahl,
    “Reconstitution of DNA base excision-repair with purified human proteins: inter-
    action between DNA polymerase ß and the XRCC1 protein,” EMBO J. 15, 6662–
    6670 (1996).
13. G. Slupphaug, C.D Mol, B. Kavli, A.S Arval, H.E Krokan, J.A Tainer, “A nucleotide-
    flipping mechanism from the structure of human uracil-DNA glycosylase bound to
    DNA,” Nature 384, 87–92 (1996).


84                                                                    The Nobel Prizes


14. C. Rada, G.T. Williams, H. Nilsen, D.E. Barnes, T. Lindahl and M.S. Neuberger,
    “Immunoglobulin isotype switching is inhibited and somatic hypermutation per-
    turbed in UNG-deficient mice,” Curr. Biol. 12, 1748–1755 (2002).
15. T. Roldan-Arjona, Y.-F. Wei, K.C. Carter, A. Klungland, C. Anselmino, R.-P. Wang,
    M. Augustus and T. Lindahl, “Molecular cloning and functional expression of a
    human cDNA encoding the antimutator enzyme 8-hydroxyguanine-DNA glycosyl-
    ase,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 8016–8020 (1997).
16. B. Rydberg and T. Lindahl, “Nonenzymatic methylation of DNA by the intracellular
    methyl group donor S-adenosyl-L-methionine is a potentially mutagenic reaction,”
    EMBO J. 1, 211–216 (1982).
17. T. Lindahl, “Keynote: Past, present and future aspects of base excision repair,” Prog.
    Nucl. Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 68, xvii–xxx (2001).
18. S. Riazuddin and T. Lindahl, “Properties of 3-methyladenine-DNA glycosylase from
    E. coli,” Biochemistry 17, 2110–2118 (1978).
19. M. Olsson and T. Lindahl, “Repair of alkylated DNA in E. coli: Methyl group transfer
    from 06-methylguanine to a protein cysteine residue,” J. Biol. Chem. 255, 10569–
    10571 (1980).
20. S.C. Trewick, T.F. Henshaw, R.P. Hausinger, T. Lindahl and B. Sedgwick, “Oxidative
    demethylation by Escherichia coli AlkB directly reverts DNA base damage,” Nature
    419, 174–178 (2002).
21. P.O. Falnes, R.F. Johansen, E. Seeberg, “AlkB-mediated oxidative demethylation
    reverses DNA damage in Escherichia coli,” Nature 419, 178–182 (2002).
22. W. Shakespeare, Hamlet (1601).”
