                         V ICTOR G RIGNARD

      The use of organomagnesium compounds in
             preparative organic chemistry
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1912


It is not without some apprehension that I acknowledge the great honour
which has been done me by giving an account of a subject so specialized in
its essence, so vast in its applications, as that on which I have been engaged
for the past twelve years and more.
   If I had to speak to you only on my own research into organic magnesium
compounds my task would be fairly simple, but, since my original discovery,
so much other work has been done independently of and parallel with mine
that now I cannot very well leave out any one brick from the edifice if I am
to enable you to see it in its true perspective.
   But alas! I should have to survey the entire subject of organic chemistry,
with its complicated formulae and with its forbidding names - which are
liable to daunt even the initiated. To do this would certainly be to abuse the
kindness of the eminent audience around me and I shall do my best not to be
guilty of such discourtesy.
   My learned colleague, Professor Sabatier, has just shown you how certain
metals can serve momentarily as a carrier for an element such as hydrogen in
order to transform it into an organic compound. Now, there are other
metals which can serve as carriers for a complete organic radical and enable
it to be transferred to another molecule.
   Such compounds, which result from the union of a metal with one or
more organic radicals, are called organometallic compounds. These, with a
fairly large number of metals, have been known for a long time, though they
do not all lend themselves equally readily to the practical application that I
have just mentioned. Some of them, those of the alkaline metals sodium and
potassium, are very active but very unstable and difficult to prepare directly
- in short they are unsuitable for practical application. Others, such as those
of mercury, err in the other direction - they are too stable and will react in
only a small number of cases. In fact, throughout the second half of last
century chemists had at their disposal only a single group of organometallic
compounds, namely the organic zinc compounds.


                   ORGANOMAGNESIUM COMPOUNDS                               235
   Typical of these substances, which were discovered by Frankland in 1849,
is zincdimethyl, Zn(CH3)2. They make possible several excellent methods of
synthesizing hydrocarbons, secondary and tertiary alcohols, ketones and
hydroxy acids. However, they were still very far from satisfying all require-
ments of the chemist. There are, in fact, very few organic zinc compounds;
only the first members of the series, which correspond to the simplest organ-
ic radicals, can be prepared without too much difficulty, but they have the
 disadvantage of being spontaneously inflammable in air and are consequently
very dangerous to handle. Apart from this, the reactions which they give do
not lend themselves to wide use, as some of them take several weeks or even
months to complete, and then the yields are very often unsatisfactory.
    It was therefore natural that we should seek to replace the zinc compounds
by other more numerous ones, easier to prepare and handle and with greater
reactive capacities.
    The one metal to which our thoughts inevitably turned was magnesium,
 in view of its analogy with zinc and of its much greater reactivity due to its
 appreciably lower atomic weight. However, it could not be studied properly
 from the point of view with which we are concerned until it could be pre-
pared in a suitably pure state.
    It was then that the researches conducted by Lohr, Fleck and Waga at the
Lothar Meyer Laboratory during the years 1891 to 1894 showed that sym-
 metrical organic magnesium compounds were not liquid, like those of zinc,
but solid, almost insoluble in all neutral solvents and spontaneously inflam-
mable, not only in air but also in carbon-dioxide gas. Thus it was difficult to
show their reactive capacities, and the results obtained were rather discour-
aging.
   These compounds therefore seemed destined to fall back into oblivion,
when in 1898 my eminent chief, Professor Ph. Barbier of Lyons, hit upon
the idea of trying out on magnesium the method which Saytzeff had success-
fully adapted to zinc in a certain number of cases. With this method the or-
ganometallic compound no longer has to be prepared in advance; all that is
necessary is to bring the two reactants together in the presence of the metal.
Professor Barbier thus succeeded in causing a reaction between a ketone with
a -COCH3 group, the natural methylheptenone, and methyl iodide. Now
this reaction was completely impossible with zinc. It therefore revealed that
magnesium possesses special properties and a study of it was made at the La-
boratory although the results obtained were so erratic that Professor Barbier
confined himself to publishing the preceding reaction.


236                            1912 V.GRIGNARD

   Almost two years later my chief advised me to resume this study in order
to perfect his reaction, but I soon came up against the same difficulties, and
it was then that I abandoned this procedure, which lacked flexibility, and
went back to preparing the organic magnesium compounds in advance, but
this time not by Löhr’s method, which experience had shown to be unsatis-
factory, but by a method which had formerly been tried by Frankland and
by Wanklyn for organic zinc compounds. By heating the methyl iodide
with the zinc in the presence of anhydrous ether these scientists had obtained
compounds of the form Zn(CH3) 2· O(C 2H 5) 2 which displayed more or less
the same properties as the non-ethereal compound; unfortunately, the need
to heat in a sealed tube and then to distil the solid mass produced by the reac-
tion robbed these new compounds of any practical value.
   I thought that with magnesium, which is more electropositive than zinc
and has greater reactivity, the same reaction would be easier and more com-
plete. And this in fact was the case, for I found that magnesium in the pres-
ence of anhydrous ether attacks alkyl halides at ordinary temperature and
pressure and that this reaction, which is more or less total, gives a compound
which is completely soluble in ether. This was the fundamental discovery
which placed in the hands of the chemist quite an important series of new
 organometallic compounds, and it is these compounds, together with their
principal applications, which I am going to attempt to describe to you.
   As I have just said, the preparation of organic magnesium compounds is
very simple. There is only one essential precaution to take; the operation must
be carried out in a medium free from moisture and atmospheric oxygen.
   The apparatus consists of a spherical flask surmounted by a good reflux
condenser and a bulb with a tap. Let us assume that we are preparing the
first member of these compounds. One gram-atom of magnesium (24 g),
for instance, is placed in the flask, and one molecule of methyl iodide is
 dissolved in an equalvolume of anhydrous ether. By means of the tap 25-30
 cubic centimetres of this solution are allowed to drop from the bulb on to the
magnesium. Almost immediately there is a very intense reaction, which is
moderated by adding, all at once, 200-250 cubic centimetres of anhydrous
ether to the flask; it is then maintained by allowing the rest of the reaction
mixture to drip on to the magnesium. The operation is completed by heat-
ing for a few moments, if necessary. Under these conditions all the magne-
sium disappears and we finally get a perfectly fluid and colourless liquid, al-
though at first it shows a slate-coloured cloudiness due to extremely minute
particles of iron from a slight impurity in the magnesium used.


                     ORGANOMAGNESIUM COMPOUNDS                             237
    The compound prepared in this way presents all the characteristics of an
organometallic compound: water decomposes it with violence; it fixes oxy-
gen and carbon dioxide gas, and it reacts vigorously with almost all the
functional groups of organic chemistry. But it already possesses one advan-
tage over the organic zinc compounds, namely that it can be exposed to air
without igniting. It is therefore no more dangerous to handle than ether
itself.
    When prepared in this way we can use it without making any alteration
 to the apparatus; in fact it is usually sufficient to allow the substance which
has to be brought into reaction, or rather its ethereal solution, to drip from
 the bulb. Then, if necessary, the reaction is completed by allowing the ma-
 terials to stand in the cold or by heating them for some hours in a water-bath.
    However, before studying the results which we can obtain in this way we
 must take a look at the reagents - from the point of view of their form and
 their variety - which we shall be using.
    Whereas the zinc compounds are symmetrical, i.e. the metal, by its two
 valences, has fixed two identical radicals to give Zn(CH 3)2, Zn(C2H5)2, etc.,
 this apparently is not the case with the organic magnesium compounds. Ex-
 perience shows, in fact, that the halogen, which was originally joined to the
 organic radical, still accompanies this latter in all the compounds which the
 organic magnesium compound forms by addition; it therefore appears to
 be intimately linked with it.
    Moreover, when an organic zinc compound gives an addition compound
  with an aldehyde molecule, for example, only one of the two radicals be-
  comes always fixed to the organic molecule; the other remains attached to
  the metal and is lost to the reaction. With an organic magnesium compound,
  on the other hand, the whole of the organic radical can be transported to the
  other molecule. For these two reasons I thought it necessary to adopt for
  these reagents the general formula:

                                    RMgX

in which R is an organic radical and X is a halogen; and in view of this con-
stitution I have called these compounds mixed organic magnesium compounds.
    Experience then showed that these compounds did not simply dissolve in
ether but combined with one or even two ether molecules (Tschelinzeff),
this probably resulting from the fact that the oxygen of the ether can be-
come tetravalent; these are therefore oxonium compounds (A. Baeyer). This


238                               1912   V.GRIGNARD

 moreover agrees with the fact that the nitrogen atom of the tertiary amines
 may, by becoming pentavalent, also serve as a carrier for the organic mag-
 nesium compounds (Tschelinzeff).
    Let us see what freedom we have in our choice of R and X. We observe
 here that magnesium is greatly superior to zinc. Whereas, generally speaking,
 zinc reacts suitably only with the first members of the alkyl iodides, with
 magnesium it is possible to use bromides, iodides and in many cases chlor-
 ides. These latter halides may sometimes even be more suitable, especially
 where the alkyl halide tends to lose a molecule of halogenated acid to give
 an ethylenic hydrocarbon, for instance, for tertiary butyl chloride and for
 pinene hydrochloride.
    With regard to the choice of R one might almost say that the only limit
 is the number of monohalides themselves, at least in so far as saturated, ali-
 phatic, cycloalkane or phenolic monohalides are concerned. But the reaction
 is generally easier and more regular with the primary than with the second-
 ary and still more so than with the tertiary derivatives.
    Moreover, we can go still further, for in a certain number of cases the exist-
 ence of another functional group in the molecule does not prevent the reac-
 tion from being normal, which is usually the case with the ethers of alcohols
 or of phenols and in some other particular instances.
    The presence of a double bond is no obstacle either, except in the case
 where it is in the vicinity of the halogen, as in the derivatives of allyl alcohol.
 The difficulty here is that this double bond increases the reactive capacities of
 the organometallic compound ; this can be obviated by using the same proce-
 dure as for zinc, i.e. the Barbier method.
    But this is not all. Organic compounds exist in which a hydrogen atom,
joined to the carbon, acquires acid properties as a result of the proximity of
 certain functional groupings. The most sharply characterized of these sub-
 stances are the true acetylenic hydrocarbons, which react with the organic
 magnesium compounds by double decomposition; for instance:




We thus get, as Jotsitsch has shown, acetylenic magnesium compounds
which possess all the properties of ordinary organic magnesium compounds.
  I for my part have shown that two double bonds suitably situated can also
give to a hydrogen atom sufficient mobility to produce the above reaction;
this is what happens with cyclopentadiene and the derivatives of its ring


                   ORGANOMAGNESIUM COMPOUNDS                              239
system, indene and fluorene, which give organic magnesium compounds
(V. Grignard and Ch. Courtot).




Finally B. Oddo established that the same also applies to the compounds
possessing the pyrrole bond and that by the same mechanism these give
magnesium compounds of the following type:




                                   H

On the other hand, the primary or secondary amino compounds also react
through the hydrogen combined with the nitrogen and give compounds
of the general formula




which have similar properties to those of the preceding compounds. These
are the amino magnesium compounds of L. Meunier.
   This is already a considerable range of reagents; but there are still more.
   The question arose, whether it would not be possible to produce the or-
ganometallic functional group twice, starting from a dihalogenated deriva-
tive. I first tried (Tissier and Grignard) ethylene bromide and trimethylene
bromide, but in these two cases a single atom of magnesium removes the
two atoms of bromine by liberating the divalent hydrocarbon radical. It
could nevertheless be predicted that the normal reaction would become pos-
sible if the two halogen atoms were sufficiently far away. I was more success-
ful, in fact, with 1,5-dibromopentane (V. Grignard and G. Vignon), then
with dipentene dihydrochloride (Ph. Barbier and V. Grignard), which gave
me the expected dimagnesium compounds. Such compounds are-now known
from position 1-4 to position 1-11 (Blaise, Hamonet, Braun).


240                           1912 V.GRIGNARD

   Finally, acetylene itself usually gives a dimagnesium compound by Jot-
sitsch’s reaction.
   It should not be thought, however, that all these reactions give quantita-
tive yields. In reality, more or less important secondary reactions occur in a
number of cases. The most consistent of these is that which results from re-
moval of the halogen, simultaneously from two organic halide molecules,
by a magnesium atom, accompanied by joining of the two radicals; this is
the same reaction as that discovered by Wurtz, using sodium:




This reaction is insignificant with the first members, but it increases with the
molecular weight, at least in the aliphatic series.
   Another secondary reaction results from elimination of a molecule of
halogen acid with production of a double bond. This reaction sometimes
occurs with the secondary and especially the tertiary halides, but it can gener-
ally be attenuated, as I have already said, by using the chloride rather than
bromides or iodides.
   Let us now see how all these reactions can be applied. As I have just men-
tioned, they react with almost all the functional groups and if I mentioned
every case I should try your patience by presenting formula upon formula. I
shall therefore do no more than outline the principal results.
   The reactions of organic magnesium compounds are of two kinds - reac-
tions of substitution and reactions of addition.
   It is in this way that these compounds react with substances containing one
or more atoms of reactive hydrogen, irrespective of whether this hydrogen
is joined to the carbon, as we have already seen, or to the nitrogen, as in am-
monia, the primary and secondary amines, the amides, etc., or again to the
oxygen as in alcohols, phenols, acids and pseudoacids, etc. The organic radi-
cal is then released as hydrocarbon, the volume of which, if one is careful to
take one of the first members, can be used for making a very accurate deter-
mination of the reactive hydrogen (Tschugaeff, B. Oddo, Zerewitinoff).
   The action of water, in particular, can be used for preparing hydrocarbons
(Tissier and Grignard).
    The organic halogenated derivatives and, more specifically, the allyl hal-
ides (Tiffeneau), the chloromethyl esters (Hamonet), readily react, accom-
panied by joining of the organic radicals, to give hydrocarbons or ethers.
   The reactions of addition take place with a divalent element such as oxy-


                    ORGANOMAGNESIUM COMPOUNDS                                 241

gen, which gives alcohols or phenols, and sulphur which results in mercap-
tans, thiophenols, etc. ; but they are of more special importance with the func-
tional groups in which two atoms are united by a multiple bond. Such are:



In all these cases one of the bonds in the functional group is broken, whilst
the radical R becomes fixed to the element of maximum valence and MgX
becomes fixed to the other. However, the organic magnesium compounds
do not become fixed to an ethylenic or acetylenic bond. Finally, with cer-
tain more complex functional groups, such as the ester group




addition to the CO and substitution of the OC2H5 group, which is replaced
by R, may take place simultaneously. But owing to the exceptional activity
of the organic magnesium reagents it is somewhat difficult to separate these
two phases and to prevent the reaction from continuing until it is complete.
   What are the results of these two reaction processes?
   The aldehydes give secondary alcohols, except for formaldehyde which
gives primary alcohols. The ketones result in tertiary alcohols.
   Esters will usually give tertiary alcohols, except in the case of formic esters,
which give secondary alcohols.
   The position is the same, generally speaking, with acid chlorides and acid
anhydrides.
   The presence of double bonds in the aldehyde, ketone or ester molecule
does not normally disturb the reaction.
   Thus, for instance, with terpene aldehydes, such as citral and citronellal, it
has been possible to produce a series of alcohols used in perfumery.
   The reaction is still normal despite the presence of halogens; thus with
ethyl-magnesium bromide monochloracetone produces alcohol:




which is easily transformed into a tertiary amine:




 which is the parent substance of stovaine (Fourneau).


242                          1912 V.GRIGNARD

  Likewise, starting with dichloracetone, we arrive in a similar manner at
the diamino alcohol:




the parent substance of alypine (Farben Fabr. vorm. Fr. Bayer).
  These two artificial alkaloids are useful substitutes for cocaine, possessing
the same anaesthetic properties but with less toxicity.
   The many alcohols which can be prepared by the above methods can, in
turn, be used as raw materials for the preparations of ethylenic hydrocarbons.
   Some of these alcohols, especially the tertiary alcohols, lose a molecule of
water spontaneously during the reaction; but in other cases thiseffect can be
induced by means of an excess of organic magnesium compound or by
other methods (Klages).
   It should be mentioned that isoprene and hydrocarbons of the same type
which yield rubbers by polymerization have been prepared by the mag-
nesium methods.
   An important series of hydrocarbons is particularly interesting from the
theoretical point of view - these are hydrocarbons obtained from magnesium
compounds of cyclopentadiene, indene and fluorene. Owing to their consti-
tution, all these hydrocarbons are coloured, from pale yellow to dark red.
They have thus become much more easily accessible and in much larger
numbers than was the case with Thiele’s method (V. Grignard and Ch.
Courtot).
   A much more curious characteristic than spontaneous splitting-off of
water is the following:
   If we try to apply the formaldehyde method to benzyl magnesium chlor-
ide, C6 H 5 - C H2 - M g C l , a transposition phenomenon occurs and we get
the orthotoluenic alcohol

                               (Tiffeneau and Delange).


  I succeeded in getting round this dificulty by causing bromobenzene mag-
nesium to react with ethylene monocblorohydrin:



   I thus obtained primary phenylethyl alcohol, a fundamental constituent of
attar of roses, which had previously been nothing but a laboratory curiosity,


                   ORGANOMAGNESIUM COMPOUNDS                                243
and at the same time I established the first method whereby in aromatic
compounds a halogen, and consequently another functional group, can be
introduced at the end of a side-chain containing more than one carbon atom.
   The technique of organic chemistry laboratories has for some years been
enriched by many methods of aldehyde synthesis, to which the organic mag-
nesium compounds have made a large contribution. These compounds can
in fact be obtained:
   (I) By the action of formic esters at a temperature of -50 C, which
                                                                      o



limits the reaction to the first phase (Gattermann and Maffezzoli).
   (2) By means of orthoformic ester, which results in readily hydrolysable
acetals (Bodroux, Tschitschibabin).
   (3) By decomposition, with dry oxalic acid, of ethers of α -glycols which
themselves are prepared by the action of the organic magnesium com-
pounds on phenoxyacetic ester, C6H 5O· CH·2CO 2C 2H 5; ethoxyacetic ester,
C 2H 5O··C H 2C O2C 2H 5 ; and ethoxyacetones with the general formula
C 2 H 5 O C H2 - C O - R ( B e h a l a n d S o m m e l e t ) .
   (4) By the action of disubstituted formamides, for instance diethylform-
a m i d e ( C2H 5) 2N-COH(Bouveault).
   (5) By means of ethoxymethylene aniline C 2H 5OCH=N-C 6H 5 (M O -
nier-Williams).
   Likewise for the production of ketones we now have several methods :
   The action on nitriles (Blaise) and amides (Beis) as well as the gradual re-
action, at low temperature, with acid chlorides (Darzens) or with acid anhy-
drides (Fournier).
   The nitriles themselves can be obtained by means of cyanogen chloride
and cyanogen (Grignard). -This latter method is even the only regular one
for the cycloalkane series.
   Finally, acids are easily and very widely prepared by the action of carbon
dioxide (Grignard).
   When the oxygen is replaced by sulphur the character of the reaction re-
mains the same: carbon disulphide gives dithiocarboxylic acids R ⋅ CS ⋅ SH
(Houben), whilst carbonyl sulphide gives thiolic acids R·CO.SH (Weigert).
   The position is still the same when the carbon itself is replaced by sulphur;
sulphur dioxide, by the same mechanism, gives sulphinic acids R ⋅ SO ⋅ OH
(Rosenheim and Singer).
   The non-carbon functional groups can also give interesting results. Thus,
nitrogenous ethers and nitro derivatives give disubstituted hydroxylamines
(Moureu).


244                            1912 V.GRIGNARD

    But we can go still further by working on molecules of complex function.
    If a molecule has two identical functions the reaction will normally affect
the two functions simultaneously. For example, diketones give ditertiary
glycols, except in the case of β -diketones which react only through their
enolic hydroxyl function (Valeur, Zelinsky).
    Among the diketones the quinones must be mentioned separately. Benzo-
quinone does not react, but its higher homologues react through one CO
only (Bamberger and Blangey).
    The pseudoquinones can react through their two groups, and anthraquin-
one, in particular, has given important results (Haller, Guyot).
    The di-esters likewise lead to ditertiary glycols (Valeur).
    Cyanoacetic ester reacts only through its nitrile function and gives ke-
tonic acids (Blaise).
    But in other cases, where the two functions are different, I have shown
that by reversing the usual procedure, that is to say, by allowing the mag-
nesium compounds to fall little by little into the solution of the compound
with which it has to react, it is possible to induce the two functional groups to
react successively, starting, of course, with the more negative.
    Thus the ketonic esters gradually lead to acid alcohols, then to ditertiary
glycols. Here again the β -ketonic esters are a special case because they react
in the enol form.
     Likewise ethyloxalyl chloride gives α -hydroxy acids, then ditertiary gly-
cols.
     With regard to ketonic esters I must mention a new group of very in-
 teresting syntheses, namely asymmetrical syntheses. When we transform a
 ketonic group into a tertiary alcohol group it often happens that the carbon
 of the carbinol becomes asymmetrical, but it is very clear that under normal
 conditions there is no reason why one of the optical isomers should predomi-
 nate over the other; thus we get the racemic mixture. But if we create
 temporary asymmetry in the molecule the reaction of the magnesium com-
 pound can itself become asymmetrical and cause the two enantiomorphs to
 have different proportions. This is what MC Kenzie did. He esterified benzoyl-
 formic, pyruvic and laevulic acids by l-menthol, and he caused the organic
  magnesium compound to react with the CO of each of these active esters.
  Then by saponifying the products obtained in order to eliminate the men-
  thol he obtained slightly laevorotatary alcohol acids.
     Finally, the organic magnesium compounds can produce in certain cases a
  phenomenon of apparent fixing to an ethylene bond. This will happen when


                    ORGANOMAGNESIUM COMPOUNDS                              245
the double bond is near a functional group with a multiple bond, in position
α−β, called a "conjugated position".
   I observed this phenomenon for the first time in the case of ethylidene-
acetylacetic ester and it has since been met with by several chemists (Hailer
and Bauer, Blaise and M. Courtot, etc), but the main systematic study of it
was made by Kohler and his pupils. Kohler’s experiments clearly demon-
strated the mode of fixing which I had assumed in the case of ethylidene-
acetylacetic ester: the magnesium compound is never added to the ethylenic
double bond but to the two extreme atoms of the conjugated system, i.e. at
1-4. For instance, under suitable conditions, with benzylidene-acetone, we
get:




And the final result is the same as if the magnesium compound had be-
come fixed to the ethylene bond without involving the CO.
   At the same time, the normal reaction with the CO takes place. These
two reactions are independent and can occur in very variable proportions
depending on the working conditions, the nature of the unsaturated com-
pound and the nature of the magnesium compound.
   To complete this survey of the most important reactions I must also men-
tion the substitution reactions produced by the metallic or metalloidal deri-
vatives, and in particular the halogen derivatives. A large number of organo-
metalloidal and organometallic compounds have been prepared in this way.
   Of all this research I shall mention only, in the first group, that with the
halogen derivatives of silicon (Dilthey, Kipping) and with orthosilicic ester
(Khotinsky and Seregenkoff), which has made a substantial contribution to
organic silicon chemistry.
   In the second group, among the organometallic compounds, we must
mention in particular the mixed organic zinc compounds which Blaise ob-
tained by the action of anhydrous zinc chloride:


246                            1912 V.GRIGNARD

This is the only method at present known of producing organic zinc arom-
atics.
   Such, ladies and gentlemen, are the principal syntheses which we are able
to carry out by means of magnesium; there are in fact other less important
ones which I have had to pass over in silence.
   The organic magnesium compounds have indeed given rise, in organic
chemistry laboratories, to an enormous amount of work at present spread
among more than seven hundred papers. As a result, zinc has to a large ex-
tent been dispossessed of its preserves. It still has the Saytzeff and Reformatsky
reactions, although it also shares these with magnesium; following the re-
search conducted by Blaise, however, it appears to be the metal of choice for
the synthesis of ketones by Freund’s method, i.e. by means of acid chlorides.
   And now a question arises!
   With this extraordinary faculty of being able to adapt itself to the most
varied chemical molecules, might magnesium not be capable of playing a
very active part in the natural syntheses of organized matter?
   Willstatter in fact recognized that this metal accumulates, so to speak, in a
substance possessing considerable catalytic activity, namely chlorophyll. He
isolated from the most varied chlorophylls compounds containing up to
3.5% magnesia. And from his studies he concluded that compounds analo-
gous to the organic magnesium compounds must form and that the absorp-
tion of carbon dioxide gas by chlorophyll would in every way be comparable
to the Grignard reaction. He thus came to compare the chlorophylls of
leaves with the haemoglobin of animals; hence for living matter there would
apparently be two transformation cycles - life due to synthesis by means of
magnesium and life due to oxidation by means of iron.
   However, it remains to be discovered in what form magnesium can adapt
itself to these reactions in such an environment, an environment so different
from that in which we are accustomed to seeing it triumphant.
   This is the problem for tomorrow!
