                       V   INCENT DU    V   IGNEAUD



  A trail of sulfa research: from insulin to oxytocin
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1955



It is a pleasure to have the opportunity of discussing with this Academy
some of the researches that I have been interested in during the past thirty
years. I am deeply grateful to the Academy for the recognition, as expressed
in the terms of the citation, of our work on "biochemically important sulfur
compounds". You have also noted in the citation "the first synthesis of a
polypeptide hormone". This hormone, oxytocin, the principal uterine-con-
tracting and milk-ejecting hormone of the posterior pituitary gland, is a
sulfur-containing compound, and its synthesis was the culmination of many
experiences along a trail of research stemming from my original interest in
sulfur and in insulin.
   It would seem proper, therefore, with the citation in mind, that I should
discuss with you a "trail of sulfur research". I shall try to unravel some of
the stepwise evolvement of our researches from insulin to oxytocin. I shall
also try to bring out the background of the research findings and the think-
ing behind the researches.
   I have had the pleasure of following this trail of research in the company
of a group of graduate students and postdoctoral associates, without whose
loyal and effective collaboration this trail I am going to present could not
have been worked out.
    I have also been fortunate in the kind of support that I have received
 from various foundations, such as the Rockefeller Foundation; from indus-
trial firms, such as Parke, Davis and Company, Eli Lilly and Company, and
 the Lederle Laboratories Division of the American Cyanamid Company;
from a governmental agency, namely the National Institutes of Health; and
from the universities where I have had the pleasure of working. All of this
 support was unrestricted, allowing us to explore whatever trail we wished.
    This trail becomes apparent only in retrospect. Obviously, I did not start
 out to study sulfur as my life’s work. And yet, as I look back over the trail
 of many years, I encounter the fact that this thread of sulfur has been the
thread of continuity running through practically all of my research en-
deavors .


         SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                           447
   I find it intriguing to contemplate how one starts out on a trail of ex-
ploration in the laboratory, not knowing where one is eventually going,
starting out, to be sure, with some immediate objective in mind, but also
having a vague sense of something beyond the immediate objective towards
which one is striving. The thrill of this kind of research, albeit at a sublimated
level, is analogous, I am sure, to the thrill that explorers like the Vikings
of old experienced in breaking through the confines of the known world.
   As one looks back on a trail of research, the continuity is sometimes
greater than one may have imagined at the time. As I look back, it seems
almost inevitable that I should have proceeded from the pancreatic hormone,
insulin, to the posterior pituitary hormone, oxytocin, via sulfur. Again, in
looking back, I now realize that there were times when we stopped to work
out more fully the chemistry of other sulfur-containing compounds, such as
cystine, homocystine, and methionine, and to study their metabolic signif-
icance in transsulfuration and transmethylation. These researches diverted
us into interesting by-paths. However, strangely enough, as I shall try to
bring out, many of these experiences, particularly the cystine peptide work
and the knowledge of certain reactions involving sodium and liquid am-
monia which we gained along the route, were vital when we came to study
the posterior pituitary hormones.
   Now where did the sulfur trail start?
   I think it started at the University of Illinois, where my first teacher in
biochemistry was the late Professor H. B. Lewis, who was extremely enthu-
siastic about sulfur. It was his enthusiasm that undoubtedly aroused my
interest in the biochemistry of sulfur compounds.
   In my work in organic chemistry at that same university with Professor
C. S. Marvel, I developed a strong interest in the relationship of organic
chemical structure to biological activity. The continuing interest in this
relationship has also influenced greatly the direction of this trail of research.
The work I did with Professor Marvel was concerned with the synthesis of
compounds which we hoped would have a local anaesthetic effect accom-
panied by an epinephrine-like effect. As I look back over the trail, I find
this theme - the relation between biological activity and organic chemical
structure - recurring again and again.
   My interest in insulin was initiated through a lecture given by Professor
W. C. Rose, who succeeded Lewis as Professor of Biochemistry at Illinois.
On his return from a meeting in Toronto in 1923, he gave an account of the
exciting discovery of insulin by Banting and Best. I will recall the thrill of


448                            1955   V.DU VIGNEAUD

listening to Professor Rose and my curiosity as to the chemical nature of a
compound that could bring      , about the miracles he described. Little did I
know at that time that insulin would eventually turn out to be a sulfur
compound.
    Some two years later, I received an invitation from Professor J. R. Murlin
at the University of Rochester, Medical School, to come and work on the
chemistry of insulin in his department, a department devoted mainly to
endocrinology and metabolism. The chance to work on the chemistry of
insulin transcended all other interests for me, and I accepted Professor Mur-
lin’s invitation.
   While there, I became intrigued with the fact that all of our preparations
contained sulfur, and most of my efforts over the next two years were
devoted to studying the sulfur of these insulin preparations. From these stud-
ies I came to the conclusion that the sulfur was present in the form of the
 disulfide linkage and that insulin was most likely a derivative of the amino
 acid cystine, and the suggestion was made that the cystine in insulin was
linked to the rest of the molecule by peptide linkages1.
   The following year, while working in Professor Abel’s laboratory at
Johns Hopkins University, I took up the isolation of cystine from crystalline
insulin, because the conclusive proof of the presence of cystine in insulin had
to rest on the isolation of the cystine in pure form. This isolation was even-
 tually accomplished2. As I continued work at Hopkins on insulin in collabo-
ration with Jensen and Wintersteiner, we could find nothing but ordinary
amino acids and ammonia in acid hydrolysates of insulins3,4.
   The presence of cystine in insulin naturally brought many questions to
mind. One of the first questions that occurred to me was whether various
combinations of cystine with other amino acids in peptide linkage might
affect the lowering of blood sugar. It was then realized that as yet no peptide
 of cystine linked through the carboxyl group of cystine had been prepared.
No method was available at the time for the synthesis of this type of peptide.
 Therefore, while the researches on insulin were continued over the next
 several years, parallel studies were carried out with several graduate students
on the synthesis of peptides of cystine.
   Although the peptides we eventually made did not have hypoglycemic
activity, the work thereon gave us valuable experience in the synthesis of
cystine peptides and also led to a synthesis of the biologically important
compound, glutathione, a tripeptide of glutamic acid, cysteine, and glycine.
This work on cystine peptides led to the development by us of several reac-


         SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                          449
tions involving sodium and liquid ammonia, which, almost twenty years
later, played a vital role in our synthesis of oxytocin, which will be discussed
subsequently. One of these reactions was the removal of a carbobenzoxy
group by sodium in liquid ammonia, and another was the utilization of a
benzyl group to cover the sulfur of cysteine during certain synthetic steps
and its final removal by means of sodium in liquid ammonia.
    As is well known, Bergmann and Zervas introduced in 1932 the now
classical method of protecting an amino group during the course of peptide
synthesis with what they called a carbobenzoxy groups. Their procedure led
to the carbobenzoxy derivative of the peptide, and the carbobenzoxy group
was removed by catalytic reduction with hydrogen. However, their proce-
dure did not lend itself to the preparation of cysteine or cystine peptides.
    Two years after the appearance of the Bergmann-Zervas method, it oc-
curred to me that the carbobenzoxy group might possibly be cleaved from
the amino group of cystine by reduction with sodium in liquid ammonia.
If so, a very convenient method for the synthesis of cystine peptides might
result. In work with Audrieth and Loring6, we had already prepared cysteine
from cystine by this method of reduction.
    The reduction of dicarbobenzoxycystine was therefore attempted in work
with Sifferd7. The compound was dissolved in liquid ammonia and sodium
was added until a permanent blue color was obtained. After evaporation of
the ammonia and subsequent oxidation of the cysteine by aeration of the
slightly alkaline solution, cystine was obtained in almost quantitative yield.
    In our earlier work on the preparation of cysteine, it had occurred to us
 that it might be possible to benzylate the sulfhydryl group of cysteine by
 adding benzyl chloride to the liquid ammonia solution of the sodium salt of
 cysteine produced by the reduction of cystine with metallic sodium. An
 excellent yield of S-benzylcysteine was obtained. Although the latter reac-
 tion was carried out in 1930 with Loring and Audrieth, it was not until
 sometime later that the possibility of cleaving a benzyl thio ether by this
 same means occurred to us in our work with Sifferd. S-Benzylcysteine was
 cleaved to cysteine in liquid ammonia with metallic sodium, cystine being
 isolated after oxidation7.
    This same reductive procedure was also applied to the preparation of
 cystinylbisglycine from dicarbobenzoxycystinylbisglycine and of cysteinyl-
 glycine from S-benzylcysteinylglycine8.
    The effectiveness of these reactions impressed us with their potentialities
 as possible key reactions for a synthesis of glutathione, the structure of which


450                         1955   V.DU VIGNEAUD




                      Fig.1. A synthesis of glutathione.

was believed, through the work of Hopkins9 and of Kendall, Mason, and
McKenzie 10 to be γ-L-glutamyl-L-cysteinylglycine. If we could synthesize
N-carbobenzoxy-γ -glutamyl-S-benzylcysteinylglycine, we felt that its re-
duction with sodium in liquid ammonia should yield glutathione.
   This approach to glutathione would have a particular advantage in that
the sulfhydryl group would be covered by a benzyl radical up to the final
step, and thus, during the course of the various reactions that might be
employed up to this point, the likelihood of partial oxidation of the sulfhy-
dry1 group and its attendant difficulties would be eliminated.
   In work with Miller11, we were able to obtain this desired intermediate
by the coupling of suitable derivatives of the three amino acids involved.
As shown in Fig. 1, reduction of this intermediate with sodium in liquid
ammonia gave glutathione, which, upon isolation in crystalline form, was
shown to be identical with the natural product. Our synthesis followed
shortly after the first synthesis of glutathione by Harington and Mead by a
somewhat different approach12.
   While this synthetic work was going on, we continued our work on insu-
lin, along mainly two lines. One was concerned with whether the cystine
content accounted for all of the sulfur, and the second with the behavior of
insulin upon reduction of the disulfide groups. After some seven years of
work, we finally were able to account for the sulfur of insulin entirely on
the basis of cystine 1 3, and we could obtain no evidence for any sulfur com-
pound other than cystine in insulin14,15 .
   The study of the reduction of insulin led directly to our work on the


         SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                         451
posterior pituitary hormones. With such a gentle reducing agent as cysteine
or glutathione acting at room temperature and at a neutral pH, insulin be-
came inactivated, reduction of the disulfide linkages being undoubtedly the
cause of the inactivation16-18 . Reoxidation did not restore activity.
   This work on insulin aroused our interest in other protein or protein-like
hormones. We turned to the examination of oxytocin, the uterine-contract-
ing hormone, and vasopressin, the blood-pressure-raising hormone, of the
posterior pituitary gland. There were some indications in the literature that
these hormones might be polypeptide-like substances of lower molecular
weight than insulin. Furthermore, there was evidence that partially purified
preparations of these hormones contained sulfur, but the nature of the sulfur
was unknown. We thought it would be interesting to investigate these hor-
mones in comparison with insulin, and in 1932 we made some preliminary
explorations on these hormones. In this discussion I will confine my attention
mainly to oxytocin with only occasional reference to vasopressin.
   Kamm and Grote of Parke, Davis and Company kindly placed at our
disposal some of their partially purified oxytocin, and we were able to show
that, upon hydrolysis, the samples contained approximately 9 per cent cys-
tine19. Of course we couldn’t tell at that time whether the cystine was present
in the hormone or in the impurities. Nevertheless, in work with Sealock 20,
we decided to treat the partially purified oxytocin with cysteine and find
out whether this hormone lost its activity like insulin. Much to our surprise,
the oxytocic activity remained. Oxidation, by aeration of an aqueous solu-
tion until the sulfhydryl test was negative, did not cause loss of activity. The
 question then occurred, had we really reduced the hormone by the cysteine
treatment? It appeared possible to us that if the hormone were a disulfide
 and had been reduced, then treatment with benzyl chloride might cover the
 sulfhydryl group with a benzyl radical and inactivation might take place.
 When the reduced oxytocin preparation was treated with benzyl. chloride,
 inactivation did result. On the other hand, treatment of the non-reduced
 material with benzyl chloride did not cause inactivation. These results made
 us fairly certain that the oxytocic principle contained sulfur in the form of
 a disulfide linkage20.
   We also investigated the behavior of the vasopressin preparation upon
 cysteine treatment and found it quite parallel to that of the oxytocin prep-
 aration. This aroused in us the desire to see what the pure compounds
 themselves would be like. What manner of compounds were they? Were
 they, like insulin, also simply made up of amino acids and ammonia? Since


452                          1955 V.DU VIGNEAUD

we had reason to believe that they were smaller molecules than insulin, it
seemed to me that they might lend themselves to an organic chemical ap-
proach. If we could isolate them, we thought we might be able to work out
their structure and perhaps synthesize them.
   The purification was a slow process, as the amount of active principles in
the gland is extremely small, they are unstable, and the bioassays involved
are very time-consuming. Hundreds of thousands of hog and beef glands
were used during the course of the investigations. Up to the time of World
War II, we made considerable progress in collaboration with Sealock, Irving,
Dyer, and Cohn on the purification of the principles, mainly through elec-
trophoretic techniques, and learned much about the behavior of the hor-
m o n e s 21-26 .
   We laid aside the problem during the war period for certain assignments,
particularly on penicillin, but thereafter the isolation of oxytocin was under-
taken in collaboration with Livermore 2 7. Since the countercurrent distribu-
tion technique developed by Craig 2 8 for the purification of organic com-
pounds had played a helpful role in our isolation of synthetic penicillin, we
naturally thought of using countercurrent distribution on partially purified
oxytocin fractions, prepared by the method of Kamm and co-workers 29. The
source material for preparation of the oxytocin fractions was a commercial
extract provided by Dr. Kamm of Parke, Davis and Company. The counter-
current distribution between 0.05 per cent acetic acid and secondary butyl
alcohol proved to be highly effective. We obtained a fraction that appeared
to behave like a pure compound by this criterion, and through application
of the elegant starch-column chromatographic method of Moore and Stein 30
we were able, with Pierce31, to show that an acid hydrolysate of oxytocin
consisted of eight amino acids and ammonia.
   It was then of importance to determine whether, starting from the glands
themselves, material of the same potency and properties would be obtained.
Therefore the oxytocin was isolated from lyophilized posterior lobes of beef
pituitary glands 3 2. A preparation was obtained which had approximately the
same distribution curve and the same potency as the preparation obtained
from the concentrate. The two preparations likewise showed the same amino
acid composition. The chromatogram of the amino acids is shown in Fig. 2.
The amino acids were present in a molar ratio to each other of 1:1, and the
molar ratio of ammonia to any one amino acid was 3:1. Molecular weight
determinations indicated a molecular weight in the neighborhood of 1,000.
   The sulfur content of oxytocin could be entirely accounted for by cystine.


          SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                                453
 1.5




Fig. 2.Separation of amino acids from a hydrolysate of oxytocin (upper chromatogram)
and from an artificial mixture of amino acids simulating the composition of oxytocin
(lower chromatogram). Solvents, 1:2: 1 n- butyl alcohol - n- propyl alcohol - 0.1 N HCl
                   followed by 2:1 n- propyl alcohol - 0.5 N HCl.

Knowing the cystine content of the purified hormone, it becomes evident,
from the sulfur content of all of the pre-war preparations including those
of Kamm and co-workers and our preparations, that none of these prepara-
tions could have been more than 50 per cent pure, regardless of the unitage
ascribed to them on an arbitrary basis by reference to a standard powder. No
greater purity than 50 percent could be attributed to these early preparations,
even if the sulfur of the preparations were due entirely to the presence of
oxytocin, which is somewhat unlikely since sulfur-containing impurities
may well have been present.
   Further countercurrent distribution of the purified oxytocin involving
1,000 transfers resulted in no change in composition, and this work 33 cul-
minated in 1952 in the isolation of a crystalline flavianate of oxytocin


454                           1955 V.DU VIGNEAUD

with Pierce, the first crystalline derivative of this hormone to be isolated.
   It is of interest that an oxytocic fraction was also obtained from hog
posterior pituitary glands which had a distribution curve approximately the
same as that from the beef glands3 3. In addition, the oxytocin obtained from
the hog pituitary had the same amino acid composition and potency as that
obtained from beef.
   During the course of these studies on the oxytocic hormone, the pressor
hormone, vasopressin, was also isolated from beef glands and shown to con-
tain six of the same amino acids as oxytocin. In place of the leucine and
isoleucine in oxytocin, vasopressin contained phenylalanine and arginine.
   With the isolation of what appeared to be the pure hormones and the
establishment of their composition, we were for the first time in a position,
on a chemical basis, to be quite certain that the oxytocin was free of vaso-
pressin, and therefore it was possible to ascertain the biological effects of
oxytocin itself.
   Before going into this, it might be well to mention a few of the biological
activities that have been attributed to the posterior pituitary gland. I would
recall to you that it was just sixty years ago that the first biological effect of
the pituitary gland was discovered by Oliver and Schäfer34. They found that
extracts of the pituitary when injected into mammals raised their blood pres-
sure - the pressor effect. Howell showed a few years later that this activity
resided in the posterior lobe3 5. Since that time, other biological activities of
posterior pituitary extracts were noted, particularly the uterine-contracting,
or oxytocic, effect by Dale36 in 1906; the milk-ejecting effect by Ott and
Scott 37 in 1910; the blood-pressure-lowering effect in birds, the so-called
avian depressor effect, by Paton and Watson 38 in 1912; and the inhibition of
urine excretion in man, the antidiuretic effect, by Von den Velden 39 in 1913.
    As to the biological effects of the purified oxytocin, it was assayed for
avian depressor effect against a standard powder according to the method of
Coon as described in the U.S. Pharmacopoeia40 and found to possess this
activity33 to the extent of 450 to 500 units per mg. In addition to the avian
 depressor effect, the oxytocin was found to have the same potency, relative
to the standard powder, in bringing about contractions of the isolated rat
 uterus - the uterine-contracting activity.The oxytocin also showed the same
 potency (450 to 500 units per mg, relative to the standard powder) in bring-
 ing about the ejection of milk. This milk-ejecting activity of oxytocin was
 demonstrated by tests of our purified material in sows by Whittlestone41, in
rabbits by Cross and Van Dyke32, and in recently parturient women, the


         SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                              455
latter testing having been carried out in a collaborative study with Douglas,
Nickerson, and Bonsnes of our Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology43.
   We thought at first that oxytocin was devoid of pressor and antidiuretic
activity. However, we placed at Van Dyke’s disposal samples of our purified
oxytocin which he and his colleagues assayed by refined techniques. They
found 7 units of pressor and 3 units of antidiuretic activity per mg. These
activities have been confirmed qualitatively and quantitatively with our syn-
thetic oxytocin, so there is no longer any question that they are inherent
properties of the oxytocin molecule44. It might be mentioned that vaso-
pressin, in addition to its pressor and antidiuretic effects (500 to 600 units per
mg, relative to the standard powder), also possesses avian depressor, uterine-
contracting, and milk-ejecting activity, but the potency of vasopressin with
respect to the latter three activities is only a fraction of the potency of oxy-
 tocin.
   With the purified oxytocin at hand and its composition established, we
then turned to the problem of how the component amino acids were linked.
 Of course there were many structures that could be written involving the
 eight amino acids and ammonia. The greatest difficulty in the degradative
 work was the scarcity of material. To obtain enough purified hormones was
 truly a prodigious task, as has already been mentioned. The various degrada-
 tive steps were perforce carried out on milligrams of material, and in most
 instances, the methods had to be adapted to this scale.
    Since I am attempting in this presentation to focus attention on the syn-
 thesis of oxytocin in relation to this trail of sulfur research, I shall not present
 the studies involving a variety of procedures in our gradual elucidation of
 the structure of the hormone. These researches over the course of several
 years with Pierce, Mueller, Turner, Davoll, Taylor, and Kunkel45-50, and
 the final decisive experiments with Ressler and Trippett51,52 on the cleavage
 of performic acid-oxidized oxytocin with bromine water and on the partial
 hydrolysis and identification of peptide fragments, brought us to a clear-cut
 concept 52,53 of the structure of oxytocin, a new type of cyclic polypeptide
 amide shown in Fig. 3.
    Although this structure was the only one that we could arrive at through
 the rationalization of our data, we felt that synthetic proof of this structure
 was mandatory because of certain assumptions involved in postulating it.
    It is of Considerable interest that Tuppy, on the basis of data we had
 published along with some data of his own, arrived at the same structure
 independently 54. Tuppy’s prop osal was based on the data from our labora-


456                           1955 V.DU VIGNEAUD




                                Fig. 3. Oxytocin.

tory on composition, molecular weight, terminal groups, as worked out by
our use of the Sanger dinitrophenyl end group procedure55, and on the cyclic
structure involving the disulfide linkage which we had established, along
with his independent studies on the sequence of amino acids involving partial
hydrolysis with acid and with an enzyme. The interpretation of the data and
the assumptions made were quite parallel in both laboratories.
   As already mentioned, we felt that synthetic proof of the structure we had
arrived at had to be adduced; that is, of course, if the synthesis were within
the range of possibility. I might point out that the synthesis of this structure
meant the synthesis of an octapeptide of eight different amino acids, one of
them being cystine. In addition, this desired octapeptide contained three
amide groups and was a cyclic polypeptide for which no known synthetic
methods were available - a cyclic pentapeptide with a tripeptide side chain.
To add to the challenge was the fact that we knew the final product was
relatively unstable and easily inactivated. Gentle means would therefore
have to be employed.
   The clue to the synthetic approach to this compound rested on our work
with Sealock, carried out in the 1930’s, on the reduction of oxytocin and the
oxidation of the reduced oxytocin without appreciable inactivation at either
step, which has already been discussed 2 0. On the basis of our postulated struc-


        SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                         457




               Fig. 4. Benzylated derivative of reduced oxytocin.


ture for oxytocin (Fig.3), the reduction of oxytocin and subsequent oxida-
tion could be interpreted as involving the opening and closing of the 20-
membered ring. The reduced oxytocin would then have a linear structure
containing two sulfhydryl groupings in place of the disulfide linkage in oxy-
tocin. Furthermore, if the proposed structure for oxytocin were correct,
reduction of oxytocin with sodium in liquid ammonia followed by addition
of benzyl chloride should give rise to the S,S’-dibenzyl derivative of reduced
oxytocin, possessing the structure shown in Fig. 4.
   Since benzylation of reduced oxytocin had led to inactivation in the earlier
study, the expectation was that this benzylated derivative of reduced oxy-
tocin would be biologically inactive. With what we now knew of the struc-
tures involved, we could see no reason why treatment of the S,S’-dibenzyl
derivative of reduced oxytocin with sodium in liquid ammonia should not
lead to the biologically active, reduced oxytocin; oxidation of the sulfhydryl
form by aeration should then lead to the regeneration of oxytocin itself, if
our concepts and line of reasoning were valid.
   We therefore decided to investigate the benzylation and debenzylation
using highly purified oxytocin preparations in work with Gordon 56. Our
best sample of natural oxytocin was treated with sodium in liquid ammonia
followed by the addition of benzyl chloride to the liquid ammonia solution.


458                            1955 V.DU VIGNEAUD

From this reaction mixture, a product was obtained, which on amino acid
analysis had the expected composition, containing two moles of S- benzyl-
cysteine along with one mole of each of the other seven amino acids present
in oxytocin.
   This material was biologically inactive. The isolated dibenzyl derivative
was then dissolved in liquid ammonia and metallic sodium was added. After
removal of the ammonia, the product was dissolved in water and oxidized
by passing air through the solution at a pH close to neutral; a biologically
active product was obtained. From a comparison of the physical, chemical,
and biological properties of the starting and regenerated material, we were
convinced that oxytocin had been regenerated from its S,S’-dibenzyl deriva-
tive. With this result, I was confident that the door was opened to a synthetic
attack on oxytocin.
   If the linear dibenzyl nonapeptide shown in Fig. 5, which possesses a car-
bobenzoxy group on the ammo group of one of the cysteine residues, could
be synthesized, it should be possible to convert this protected nonapeptide
by reduction to the reduced form of oxytocin and by subsequent oxidation
to oxytocin (see Fig. 5).
   The parallelism between this approach to the synthesis of reduced oxytocin
and the approach to the synthesis of glutathione, which I have already dis-
cussed, is at once apparent. In both cases, the cysteine residue(s) present in
 the intermediates for the syntheses were protected by carbobenzoxy and
 benzyl groups, which were to be removed in the last synthetic step by so-
 dium in liquid ammonia.
    After a consideration of the many ways in which the synthesis of the inter-
 mediate for oxytocin might be approached, and after exploratory synthetic
 studies, it was decided to attempt to prepare the compound by combining
 the tetrapeptide amide, S-benzyl- L-cysteinyl- L-prolyl- L-leucylglycinamide,
 through appropriate means with L-isoleucyl- L-glutaminyl- L-asparagine to
 obtain the heptapeptide amide, L-isoleucyl- L-glutaminyl- L-asparaginyl-S-
 benzyl- L-cysteinyl- L-prolyl- L-leucylglycinamide, and to condense the latter
 with N- carbobenzoxy-S-benzyl- L-cysteinyl- L-tyrosine, thus forming the
 desired nonapeptide amide, and we concentrated on this line of approach.
 In this work I should like to acknowledge the splendid collaboration of
 Ressler, Swan, Roberts, and Katsoyannis53,57 .
    In addition to the classical methods for the formation of peptides, other
 recently developed procedures were employed. We were able to utilize to
 particular advantage the contributions of Vaughan and Osato 58 and of An-


          SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                           459




                                                       I




        Fig. 5. Proposed intermediate leading to the synthesis of oxytocin.

derson, Blodinger, and Welcher 5 9. In the former case, the mixed anhydride
of an N-substituted amino acid, with, for example, isovaleric acid, is used
for the preparation of the peptide in the latter method, tetraethyl pyrophos-
phite is the condensing agent.
   In addition to using the carbobenzoxy group as a protective grouping for
the amino group, we have also employed the tosyl group for this purpose.
Removal of the tosyl grouping was accomplished by the use of sodium in
liquid ammonia, as utilized in our work with Behrens60 on the synthesis of
α-amino-N-methyl-L-histidine. The tosyl group as a protective group in
peptide synthesis was first used by Schoenheimer61, who employed a hy-
driodic acid-phosphonium iodide cleavage.
   As to the specific steps in our attempted synthesis of the hormone, the
tetrapeptide amide was prepared with Ressler
                                               53,57,62
                                                        . Ethyl carbobenzoxy- L -
leucylglycinate was synthesized by the mixed anhydride procedure of
Vaughan and Osato . After catalytic removal of the carbobenzoxy group,
                     58


460                         1955 V.DU VIGNEAUD

according to the procedure of Bergmann and Zervas 5, the ethyl-L-leucyl-
glycinate was condensed with carbobenzoxy-L-proline, again by use of the
mixed anhydride procedure with isovaleryl chloride.
   After removal of the carbobenzoxy group by reduction with hydrogen in
the presence of palladium catalyst, the ethyl L-prolyl- L-leucylglycinate was
converted to the tetrapeptide, S-benzyl-L-cysteinyl- L-prolyl- L-leucylglycine
via the dicarbobenzoxy-L-cystinyl derivative. Ethyl dicarbobenzoxy-L-cysti-
nyl-bis( L-prolyl- L-leucylglycinate) was saponified in aqueous dioxane at
+5ºC in the presence of I equivalent of sodium hydroxide to yield the
corresponding acid. The latter was converted to S-benzyl-L-cysteinyl- L-pro-
lyl- L-leucylglycine according to our procedure for the removal of carbo-
benzoxy groups in cystine-containing compounds by the use of sodium in
liquid ammonia7 followed by benzylation6 of the sulfur of the reduced com-
pound in the same medium. The crude tetrapeptide was readily converted,
with the use of benzyl alcohol and dry hydrogen chloride, to the crystalline
benzyl ester hydrochloride, benzyl S-benzyl- L-cysteinyl- L-prolyl- L-leucyl-
glycinate hydrochloride. Amination was accomplished by allowing the free
base obtained from the benzyl ester hydrochloride to stand in solution in
methanolic ammonia for several days at room temperature. S-Benzyl- L-
cysteinyl- L-prolyl- L-leucylglycinamide was isolated from its benzyl ester
hydrochloride as a crystalline hydrate.
   A novel method was devised for the synthesis of glutaminyl-asparagine
with Swan 53,57,63 . Harington and Moggridge 64 had already shown that
heating of tosyl-L-glutamic acid under reflux with acetyl chloride gave the
mixed anhydride of I-tosylpyroglutamic acid and acetic acid, which on hy-
drolysis in aqueous dioxane gave I-tosylpyroglutamic acid, and that this
compound with phosphorus pentachloride gave I-tosylpyroglutamyl chlo-
ride. They had shown that the pyrrolidone ring in these compounds could
be opened with aqueous alkali but was stable to anhydrous ammonia. In our
work, tosyl-L-glutamic acid was treated directly with phosphorus pentachlo-
ride. The reaction product was then coupled with L-asparagine in the pres-
ence of aqueous magnesium oxide as the condensing agents to give I-tosyl-
pyroglutamyl- L-asparagine. The latter compound with concentrated aque-
ous ammonia yielded tosyl-L-glutaminyl- L-asparagine, the pyrrolidone ring
having been opened by addition of the elements of ammonia. Detosylation
of the tosyl dipeptide by treatment with sodium in liquid ammonia gave
L-glutaminyl- L-asparagine.
   For the preparation of tosyl-L-isoleucyl- L-glutaminyl- L-asparagine with


          SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                        461
Katsoyannis        , tosyl-L-isoleucine was converted to the corresponding
             53,57,65



acid chloride and the latter was then coupled with L-glutaminyl- L-asparagine
in the presence of magnesium oxide to give the tosyl tripeptide.
    Condensation of this tripeptide with the tetrapeptide was effected by the
use of tetraethyl pyrophosphite according to the general procedure of An-
derson, Blodinger, and Welcher59. Removal of the tosyl group from the
protected heptapeptide amide was effected with sodium in liquid ammonia,
by which the benzyl group was also removed. The resulting reduced com-
pound was then benzylated with benzyl chloride in the same medium to
yield the heptapeptide amide.
    Finally, the heptapeptide amide was condensed with S-benzyl-N-carbo-
benzoxy- L-cysteinyl- L-tyrosine66, a dipeptide which had originally been
prepared by Harington and Pitt Rivers6 7. The condensation was brought
about in the presence of tetraethyl pyrophosphite to yield N-carbobenzoxy-
S- benzyl-L-cysteinyl- L-tyrosyl-L-isoleucyl- L-glutaminyl- L-asparaginyl-S-
 benzyl- L-cysteinyl- L-prolyl- L-leucylglycinamide.
    This was the compound we had set about to prepare as our proposed
 intermediate for the synthesis of oxytocin. If our structure for oxytocin were
correct, we had every reason to believe that this compound, on reduction
with sodium in liquid ammonia, followed by appropriate oxidation, would
 give us oxytocin (see Fig. 5).
    This intermediate was therefore treated with sodium in liquid ammonia,
by which both the benzyl and carbobenzoxy groups were removed. The
 reduced material obtained after evaporation of the ammonia was oxidized
 by aeration in dilute aqueous solution at pH 6.5 and tested for biological
activity by the rat uterine strip method68,69 and by the chicken vasodepressor
 method of Coon70, which utilizes the property of oxytocin of lowering the
 blood pressure of the fowl and has been adopted by the United States
 Pharmacopoeia as the method of assay for oxytocin 40. Based on the assump-
 tion that the synthetic material has a potency equivalent to that of the puri-
fied natural material (500 units per mg), the yield of biologically active ma-
 terial, as determined by the two types of assay, ranged in several runs from
 20 to 30 per cent of the calculated amount from the protected nonapeptide
 intermediate. The yield approximated closely the yield of oxytocic activity
 obtainable under similar conditions from the S,S’ -dibenzyl derivative of re-
 duced natural oxytocin56.
    The purified synthetic product isolated by countercurrent distribution and
 our best sample of natural oxytocin were assayed against each other fol-


462                          1955 V.DU VIGNEAUD

 lowing rigorously the procedures outlined by the U. S. Pharmacopoeia.
 The results indicated that the activity of the synthetic material 53,57 was in-
 deed very close to that of the natural oxytocin33.
    This synthetic material and natural oxytocin were then compared by a
 battery of tests - physical and chemical53,57. They both had the same amino
 acid composition. They showed, within experimental error, the same optical
 activity, partition coefficient (in two different solvent systems), electro-
 phoretic mobility (at two different hydrogen ion concentrations), infrared
 pattern, ultraviolet spectrum, and effluent pattern from an IRC-50 resin71.
    The synthetic material formed an active flavianate which had the same
 crystalline form (fine, silky needles) and the same melting point as the fla-
 vianate obtained from natural oxytocin.
    On treatment with bromine water, the synthetic material underwent the
 cleavage into two fragments encountered with natural oxytocin, both giving
 rise to                                 and a sulfonic acid heptapeptide51.
    Sedimentation studies on the molecular weight of natural oxytocin and
 the synthetic material were kindly made by Schachman and Harrington of
 the University of California. The natural and synthetic materials behaved
 identically, and the values obtained were in the expected range.
    We were fortunate at this stage that we had the collaboration arranged
 with the Lying-In Hospital group of our Medical Center on the use of our
 highly purified natural oxytocin in induction of labor and in milk ejection,
 for the natural and synthetic material were then compared on human sub-
jects. The synthetic product was fully effective in stimulating labor in the
 human and in milk ejection and could not be distinguished from the natural
 oxytocin in its action. Approximately 1 microgram of either the natural oxy-
 tocin or the synthetic material given intravenously to recently parturient
 women induced milk ejection in 20 to 30 seconds43.
    These comparisons of the physical, chemical, and biological properties of
 the synthetic product with those of the purified natural oxytocin justified
 in our estimation the conclusion that the synthetic octapeptide amide is
  oxytocin and that the structure shown in Fig. 3 represents that of the hor-
 mone57.
    With the establishment of the structure of oxytocin, a new ring system,
 that is, a 20-membered ring involving a disulfide linkage, was for the first
 time recognized in nature. Our studies have indicated that this same sized
 ring is present in vasopressin, the blood-pressure-raising and antidiuretic
 hormone of the posterior pituitary . Recently it has been shown by Sanger
                                     7 2


        SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                               463
and co-workers73 that a ring of the same size involving a disulfide linkage
occurs in the insulin molecule, as part of a more involved structure.
  The establishment of the structure of oxytocin and vasopressin will un-
doubtedly open the door to a better understanding of these hormones by the
biochemist, the physiologist, the pharmacologist, and the clinician. More-
over, it should provide a suitable basis for the study of the relationship of
chemical structure to biological activity in these protein-like substances. The
synthesis of oxytocin will afford a means of obtaining the compounds nec-
essary to the study of this relationship and may, in addition, point the way
to the synthesis of more complex sulfur-containing polypeptides.




 1. V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 75 (1927) 393.
 2. V. du Vigneaud, H. Jensen, and O. Wintersteiner, J. Pharmacol. Exptl. Therap., 32
    (1928) 367.
 3. H. Jensen, O. Wintersteiner, and V. du Vigneaud,J. Pharmacol. Exptl. Therap., 32
    (1928) 387.
 4. O. Wintersteiner, V. du Vigneaud, and H. Jensen, J. Pharmacol. Exptl. Therap., 32
    (1928) 397.
 5. M. Bergmann and L. Zervas, Ber., 65 (1932) 1192.
 6. V. du Vigneaud, L. F. Audrieth, and H. S. Loring, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 52 (1930)
    4500.
 7. R. H. Sifferd and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 108 (1935) 753.
 8. H. S. Loring and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., III (1935) 385.
 9. F. G. Hopkins, J. Biol. Chem., 84 (1929) 269.
10. E. C. Kendall, H. L. Mason, and B. F. McKenzie, J. Biol. Chem., 88 (1930) 409.
11. V. du Vigneaud and G. L. Miller, J. Biol. Chem., 116 (1936) 469.
12. C. R. Harington and T. H. Mead, Biochem. J., 29 (1935) 1602.
13. G. L. Miller and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 118 (1937) 101.
14. V. du Vigneaud, G. L. Miller, and C. J. Rodden, J. Biol. Chem., 131 (1939) 631.
15. V. du Vigneaud, R. H. Sifferd, and G. L. Miller, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 33
    (1935) 371.
16. V. du Vigneaud, A. Fitch, E. Pekarek, and W. W. Lockwood, J. Biol. Chem., 94
    (1931) 233.
17. V. du Vigneaud, J. Wash. Acad. Sci., 27 (1937) 365.
18. V. du Vigneaud, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 6 (1938) 275.
19. V. du Vigneaud, R. R. Sealock, R. H. Sifferd, O. Kamm, and I. W. Grote, J. Biol.
    Chem., 100 (1933) xciv.
20. R. R. Sealock and V. du Vigneaud, J. Pharmacol. Exptl. Therap., 54 (1935) 433.
21. V. du Vigneaud, G. W. Irving, Jr., H. M. Dyer, and R. R. Sealock, J. Biol. Chem.,
     123 (1938) 45.
22. G. W. Irving, Jr. and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 123 (1938) 485.


464                           1955 V.DU VIGNEAUD

23. G. W. Irving, Jr. and V. du Vigneaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 62 (1940) 1080.
24. M. Cohn, G. W. Irving, Jr., and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 137 (1941) 635.
25. G. W. Irving, Jr., H. M. Dyer, and V. du Vigneaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 63 (1941)
     503.
26. V. du Vigneaud and G. W. Irving, Jr., Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 43 (1943) 273.
27. A. H. Livermore and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 180 (1949) 365.
28. L. C. Craig, J. Biol. Chem., 155 (1944) 519.
29. O. Kamm, T. B. Aldrich, I. W. Grote, L. W. Rowe, and E. P. Bugbee, J. Am.
     Chem. Soc., 50 (1928) 573.
30. S. Moore and W. H. Stein, J. Biol. Chem., 178 (1949) 53.
31. J. G. Pierce and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 182 (1950) 359.
32. J. G. Pierce and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 186 (1950) 77.
33. J. G. Pierce, S. Gordon, and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 199 (1952) 929.
34. G. Oliver and E. A. Schäfer, J. Physiol., (London), 18 (1895) 277.
35. W. H. Howell, J. Exptl. Med., 3 (1898) 215,245.
36. H. H. Dale, J. Physiol., (London), 34 (1906) 163.
37. I. Ott and J. C. Scott, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 8 (1910) 48.
38. D. N. Paton and A. Watson, J. Physiol., (London), 44 (1912) 413.
39. R. von den Velden, Klin. Wochschr., 50 (1913) 2083.
40. The Pharmacopoeia of the United States of America, 14th revision, Mack Printing C O.,
     Easton, Pa., p. 475.
41. W. G. Whittlestone, J. Endocrinol., 8 (1952) 89.
42. B. A. Cross and H. B. van Dyke, J. Endocrinol., 9 (1953) 232.
43. K. Nickerson, R. W. Bonsnes, R. G. Douglas, P. Condliffe, and V. du Vigneaud,
     Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol., 67 (1954) 1028.
 44. H. B. van Dyke, K. Adamsons, Jr., and S. L. Engel, Recent Progr. Hormone Res.
      11 (1955) I.
 45. J. M. Mueller, J. G. Pierce, H. Davoll, and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 191
     (1951) 309.
 46. R. A. Turner, J. G. Pierce, and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 193 (1951) 359.
 47. H. Davoll, R. A. Turner, J. G. Pierce, and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 193
     (1951) 363.
 48. J. M. Mueller, J. G. Pierce, and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 204 (1953) 857.
 49. H. G. Kunkel, S. P. Taylor, Jr., and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 200 (1953) 559.
 50. S. P. Taylor, Jr., V. du Vigneaud, and H. G. Kunkel, J. Biol. Chem., 205 (1953) 45.
 51. C. Ressler, S. Trippett, and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 204 (1953) 861.
 52. V. du Vigneaud, C. Ressler, and S. Trippett, J. Biol. Chem., 205 (1953) 949.
 53. V. du Vigneaud, C. Ressler, J. M. Swan, C. W. Roberts, P. G. Katsoyannis, and S.
      Gordon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 75 (1953) 4879.
 54. H. Tuppy, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, II (1953) 449.
 55. F. Sanger, Biochem. J., 39 (1945) 507.
 56. S. Gordon and V. du Vigneaud, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 84 (1953) 723.
 57. V. du Vigneaud, C. Ressler, J. M. Swan, C. W. Roberts, and P. G. Katsoyannis, J.
      Am. Chem. Soc., 76 (1954) 3115.
 58. J. R. Vaughan, Jr. and R. Osato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 73 (1951) 5553.


         SULFUR RESEARCH: FROM INSULIN TO OXYTOCIN                              445
59. G. W. Anderson, J. Blodinger, and A. D. Welcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 74 (1952)
     5309
60. V. du Vigneaud and O. K. Behrens, J. Biol. Chem., 117 (1937) 27.
61. R. Schoenheimer, Z. Physiol. Chem., 154 (1926) 203.
62. C. Ressler and V. du Vigneaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 76 (1954) 3107.
63. J. M. Swan and V. du Vigneaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 76 (1954) 3 110.
64. C. R. Harington and R. C. G. Moggridge, J. Chem. Soc., (1940) 706.
65. P. G. Katsoyannis and V. du Vigneaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 76 (1954) 3113.
66. C. W. Roberts and V. du Vigneaud, J. Biol. Chem., 204 (1953) 871.
67. C. R. Harington and R. V. Pitt Rivers, Biochem. J., 38 (1944) 417.
68. J. H. Bum, Quart. J. Pharm. Pharmacol., 4 (1931) 517.
69. J. H. Bum, D. J. Finney, and L. G. Goodwin, Biological Standardization, 2nd ed.,
     Oxford University Press, New York, 1950, p. 180.
70. J. M. Coon, Arch. Intern. Pharmacodyn., 62 (1939) 79.
71. S. P. Taylor, Jr., Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 85 (1954) 226.
72. V. du Vigneaud, H. C. Lawler, and E. A. Popenoe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 75 (1953)
     4880.
73. F. Sanger, L. F. Smith, and R. Kitai, Biochem. J., 58 (1954) vi.
