                                    V. Prelog


CHIRALITY IN CHEMISTRY
Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1975
by VLADIMIR PRELOG
ETH, Laboratory of Organic Chemistry, Zürich, Switzerland




An object is chiral if it cannot be brought into congruence with its mirror
image by translation and rotation. Such objects are devoid of symmetry ele-
ments which include reflexion: mirror planes, inversion centers or improper
rotational axes.
   The useful terms chiral and chirality were coined by W.H. Thompson
(Lord Kelvin) in 1884 and are derived from cheir, the Greek’ word for a
hand, indeed one of the most familiar chiral objects. The simplest chiral
object of the three-dimensional perceptual space is, however, the chiral
three-dimensional simplex, the irregular tetrahedron. As early as 1827 the fa-
mous German mathematician August Ferdinand Möbius (of the Möbius-
strip) pointed out that the volume of a tetrahedron, expressed as a determi-
nant involving the Cartesian coordinates of its labelled vertices, and of its
mirror image have different signs, which are not dependent on the position
of the tetrahedra but change by reflection.
   Many objects of our three-dimensional perceptual world are not only chiral
but appear in Nature in two versions, related at least ideally, as a chiral
object and its mirror image. Such objects are called enantiomorphous or
simply enantiomorphs. There are enantiomorphous quartz crystals (Fig. 1),
pine cones, snail shells, screws, shoes etc.

Fig. 1


204                               Chemistry 1975


   The genius who first suggested (on the basis of optical activity) that mol-
ecules can be chiral was around 1850 Louis Pasteur. He also showed by his
famous experiments with tartaric acids that there is a connection between
enantiomorphism of crystals and of molecules.
   The Swiss painter Hans Erni has drawn for me the paraphernalia necessary
for dealing with chirality (fig. 2): human intelligence, a left and a right
hand and two enantiomorphous tetrahedra.
   To grasp the essence of chirality, it is instructive to withdraw for a mo-
ment from the familiar three-dimensional world into a two-dimensional one,
into a plane, and enquire what chirality means there. In doing this, we are
following in the footsteps of E. A. Abbot, who published his well-known
science fiction book “Flatland” about 70 years ago. The simplest chiral fig-
ure in “Flatland” is an irregular triangle, a scalene. A scalene can be located
in a plane in two different ways so that it displays one or other of its two op-
posite faces. Two equal scalenes “oriented” differently in a plane cannot be
brought into congruence by translation or rotation in two-dimensional space
but only by reflection across a straight line, the mirror of “Flatland”. They
are two-dimensionally enantiomorphous. This holds for any triangle where
the vertices are distinctly identified.
   Let us now consider an intelligent chiral “Flatlander” who can distin-
guish right and left and who carries on his front side a device which allows
him to receive signals from the identifiable vertices ABC of the two trian-
gles, which are for him not transparent (fig. 3). He will perceive the signals
of the first (colorless) triangle in the sequence ACB, CBA, BAC and from the
second (black) one in the sequence ABC, BCA, CAB. Thus he will be able to
distinguish the two enantiomorphs. However, if one takes them into three-
dimensional space they will become indistinguishable. Their nonequiva-
lence gets lost in three-dimensional space.
   A planar geometrical figure with more than three vertices can be decom-
posed into a set of triangles and it can be reconstructed from a set of trian-
gles. Two two-dimensionally chiral triangles can be combined together in a




                                                          Fig. 2


                                                                                 205




                                                    cis                  trans




                                                   Fig. 4


plane in two different ways (fig. 4). If they display the same face the combi-
nation is chiral. If their faces are different the combination can be made - de-
pending on the symmetry of the combination operation - composite achiral.
The two combinations, the chiral and the achiral one, cannot be made con-
gruent, neither by translation and/or rotation nor by reflection; neither in
two- nor in three-dimensional space. We call them diastereomorphous or
diastereomorphs. Diastereomorphism is not lost in higher dimensions. Thus:
chirality is a geometrical property. Enantiomorphism is due to the “orienta-
bility” of an object in an “orientable” space. Diastereomorphism is the re-
sult of the “mutual orientation” of at least two chiral objects.
   These conclusions are valid not only for two-dimensional space but also for
spaces of higher dimensions, e.g. our three-dimensional perceptual space,
apart from the mathematically trivial limitation that we are not actually able
to leave our three-dimensional world - at least the great majority of us.
   Familiar planar objects in the two-dimensional information space are cap-
 ital block letters (fig. 5). Some of them such as A, B, C are two-dimension-
 ally achiral, the others e.g. F, G, J . . . are chiral; they cannot be brought in a


206                                 Chemistry 1975


plane into congruence with their mirror images. In the following discussion
these three types of capital block letters will be used to represent all kinds of
two- and three-dimensionally achiral and chiral objects and the enantiomorphs
of the latter. In the text the somewhat inconvenient mirror image letters will
be replaced by barred ones:             . . . e.g. the shorthand representation for
a scalene of for a chiral tetrahedron will be the letter F and for its enantio-
morph         The chiral combination of two triangles or tetrahedra will be
represented by F-F or           the achiral one by
   But let us now switch over to the second part of the title of my lecture - to
the chemistry. Chemistry takes a unique position among the natural sciences
for it deals not only with material from natural sources but creates the major
part of its objects by synthesis. In this respect as stated many years ago by
Marcelin Berthelot, chemistry resembles the arts, the potential of its crea-
tivity is terrifying.
   Although organic chemistry overlaps with inorganic chemistry and bio-
chemistry it concentrates on compounds of the element carbon. So far, about
2 million of organic compounds are registered with innumerable reactions
and interconversions, but the number of compounds obtainable by existing
methods is astronomic.
   Aldous Huxley writes in an essay: “Science is the reduction of the bewilder-
ing diversity of unique events to manageable uniformity within one of a
number of symbol systems, and technology is the art of using these symbol sys-
tems so as to control and organize unique events. Scientific observation is al-
ways viewing of things through the refracting medium of a symbol system
and technological praxis is always handling of things in ways that some sym-
bol system has dictated. Education in science and technology is essentially
education on the symbolic level”. If we agree with Huxley, one of the most
important aims of organic chemistry is to develop an efficient symbol or mod-
el system. Because biochemistry and biology use the same symbol system
when working at the molecular level, every progress in this direction is also a
progress of these sciences.
   In spite of the great number of known and possible facts, chemistry has suc-
ceeded in developing in less than 1010 s (i.e. 200 years), a system which allows
it to keep the “bewildering diversity of events” under control. Compared
with the total evolution time of 10 17 s (3 billion years) this is a remarkably
short time, almost a miracle. If the system sometimes does not work perfectly
the occasional flaws add to the appeal of organic chemistry for experimenta-
lists and theoreticians in challenging them to improve it.
   How does this symbol system work? Organic chemists are mainly interested
in pure compounds, i.e. substances which consist of only one molecular spe-
cies. In polymer chemistry, where this is sometimes not possible, we have to
be content to work with compounds built from the same building blocks in
a uniform manner. The first important information the organic chemist
searches for in a compound is the composition or molecular formula i.e. the
kind and number of atoms in the molecule. The second step is to determine
the constitution, i.e. which atoms are bound to which and by what types of


                                     V. Prelog                                207


bond. The result is expressed by a planar graph (or the corresponding connec-
tivity matrix), the constitutional formula introduced into chemistry by Cou-
per around 1858. In constitutional formulae, the atoms are represented by let-
ters and the bonds by lines. They describe the topology of the molecule. Com-
pounds which have the same molecular formulae but different constitution
are called isomers. In the late sixties of the last century it was clear that com-
pounds exist which have the same constitution but different properties. One
of my predecessors in Zürich, Johannes Wislicenus, expressed the implica-
tions of this in a prophetic sentence: “Die Thatsachen zwingen dazu, die
verschiedenen Moleciile von gleicher Structurformel durch verschiedene La-
gerung der Atome im Raume zu erklären”. The prophecy was fulfilled
a few years later when, almost simultaneously, a young Dutchman, Jaco-
bus Hendricus van’t Hoff (22), and a young Frenchman, Joseph Achilles Le
Bel (27) came out with some simple but novel ideas about the “position of
atoms in space”. These ideas comprised concepts such as asymmetric atom,
free rotation etc. Van’t Hoff also introduced regular tetrahedra as atomic
models from which molecular models could be constructed. This contributed
substantially to the rapid propagation of these ideas about chemistry in
space, called stereochemistry by Victor Meyer, another of my predecessors in
Zürich. The different compounds having the same constitution were called
by him stereoisomers, and he distinguished enantiomorphous stereoisomers,
enantiomers, and diastereomorphous ones which he named diastereoisomers.
   Let us illustrate this by using as example an antibiotic isolated in our lab-
oratories and named boromycin. This is a compound of medium complexity
and has the molecular formula C 45 H 74 O 15 BN (fig. 6). The van’t Hoff-Le
Bel model system allows an average student of chemistry to calculate that the
constitutional formula of boromycin corresponds to 262,144 (=2 18) stereo-
isomers. This is a rather large number, compared with the 2 million organic
compounds which have hitherto been isolated or synthesized by thousands of
hard-working chemists during almost two centuries. If a chemist were to set
off to synthesize boromycin, he would not get very far from a knowledge of its
constitutional formula alone. To approach his goal, he has to know what is
the invariant part of its spatial architecture. Moreover, he has to know pro-
cesses, stereospecific reactions, which produce specifically the desired ste-
reoisomers and not randomly all possible ones.
   One problem in dealing with the multiplicity of stereoisomers is that of
communication - how to transfer the information about their molecular ar-
chitecture in space. This can be done, of course, by three-dimensional models
 (or their projections) constructed on the basis of coordinates obtainable by
diffraction methods e.g. by X-ray crystal structure analysis. Such models that
describe the complete molecular topography are invaluable for any detailed
discussion of the molecules. However, they often include many structural de-
tails that are unnecessary for our purpose, i.e. specification of the particular
stereoisomer. Indeed, some of these details may be dependent on the state (so-
lid, liquid, vapour, solution) in which the molecule was observed. The very
abundance of this information often makes it difficult to recognize, register,


                                 Chemistry I975




and memorize that invariant aspect of the topography, the so-called primary
structure, which is essential for specification and synthesis of the compound.
   In 1954 I joined R. S. Calm and Sir Christopher Ingold in their efforts to
build up a system for specifying a particular stereoisomer by simple and
unambiguous descriptors which could be easily assigned and deciphered.
This system, which now carries our names, makes it possible to convey the es-
sential information with the aid of a few conventions, letter symbols or num-
bers. In the rather complex model of boromycin (fig. 7) which contains 136
atoms corresponding to 408 coordinates the primary structure is specified by
18 descriptors. They are:


Fig. 7

   The letter symbols used in our system always occur in pairs (R, S; M, P;
cis, trans) and hence they can be replaced by the numbers 0 and 1. If these
numbers are ordered by using the conventional constitutional sequence of the
atoms, we obtain a binary number, which can then be expressed in decimal
form e.g. for boromycin by (0)00100100000111000           18488. From this num-
ber the invariant part of the molecular architecture can easily be retrieved.
   In the course of building up and improving our system, many problems
emerged with regard to the basis of stereoisomerism and the fundamental
concepts of stereochemistry. It was soon evident that by specifying most of the
stereoisomers, especially those which were called optical isomers, one speci-
fies their total or partial three-dimensional invariant chiralities. Somewhat
later it was recognized that cis-trans isomerism (sometimes misleadingly
called “geometrical” isomerism) is a two-dimensional diastereomorphism. For
years, the important         of two-dimensional chirality had been hidden be-
hind a variety of concepts and words, such as pseudoasymmetry, stereohetero-
topy, prochirality, propseudoasymmetry, retention and inversion of configu-
ration, etc. All these partially mysterious concepts can be illuminated by re-
garding them as manifestations of two-dimensional chirality.
   The question “What about one-dimensional chirality, the chirality of
Lineland?” can be easily answered. The enantiomorphism of Lineland already
is lost in Flatland, and the diastereomorphs of Lineland must have different
constitutions in one-dimensional space and are therefore not stereoisomers by
definition.
   Summarizing and extrapolating, one can claim that the duality inherent
in the invisible, intangible two- and three-dimensional chiralities of stable
molecules or of their parts is the geometrical basis of all stereoisomerism.
Such an uniform point of view towards stereochemistry is not only grat-
ifying for theoretical reasons but has also a heuristic value.


210                               Chemistry 1975


   Ever since van’t Hoff introduced the regular tetrahedra as a model of the
carbon atom, chemists have been solving their daily stereochemical problems
by inspection of molecular models. The exhaustive exploration of the possi-
bilities of such models (which are essentially geometrical figures) allowed
them to answer practically all questions with regard to the number and sym-
metry of stereoisomers encountered in their work. A good example is Emil
Fischer’s classical elucidation of the enigmatic diversity of sugars and their
derivatives by applying van’t Hoff-Le Bel ideas. This is nicely illustrated by
the following paragraph from Fischer’s autobiography: “I remember espe-
cially a stereochemical problem. During the winter 1890-91 I was busy with
the elucidation of the configuration of sugars but I was not successful. Next
spring in Bordighera (where Fischer was accompanied by Adolf von Baeyer)
I had an idea that might solve the problem by establishing the relation of
pentoses to trihydroxyglutaric acids. However, I was not able to find out how
many of these acids are possible; so I asked Baeyer. He attacked such problems
with great zeal and immediately constructed carbon atom models from bread
crumbs and toothpicks. After many trials he gave up because the problem was
seemingly too hard for him. Only later in Würzburg by long and careful in-
spection of good models did I succeed in finding the final solution”.
   Because of the indubitable success of “playing” with models, stereochem-
istry developed mainly as a pragmatic science. Several attempts to give it a
more theoretical background, by F. M. Jaeger, G. Polya, J. K. Senior, E. Ruch,
to mention only a few pioneers, had little influence on the experimentalists
in the field.


                                     V. Prelog                                  211


   If one tries to develop a universal system for specification of stereoisomers,
as we did, it is somewhat embarrassing to find that one does not actually
know what types of steroisomers are possible. During the century which had
elapsed since the foundation of stereochemistry several types of stereoisomers
were discovered, always as a kind of surprise. To mention only a few: the
atropisomerism of polyphenyls and of ansa-compounds, due to the so-called
secondary structure, i.e. hindered rotation around single bonds, “geometrical
enantiomorphic” isomerism, etc. How many novel types still remained to be
discovered? This question is especially relevant when one considers more
complex classes of molecules that have not been so thoroughly investigated.
   Several years ago Hans Gerlach and I discovered one such novel type, cyclo-
stereoisomerism. Head-to-tail combination of equal numbers of enantiomeric
building blocks such as (ABF) and            ( represented in the following figs.
by black and white dots) can lead to cyclic molecules which are either achi-
ral or chiral, depending on the symmetry of the building pattern. Such pat-
terns for the total number of building blocks n ≠ 4, 6 and 8 are shown on fig.
8. For one pattern with n = 6, two enantiomers are possible with different
“sense” of the ring (Nos. 2 and 3). We call these cycloenantiomers. There are
two pairs of cycloenantiomers with n = 8 (Nos. 2, 3 and 7, 8). With n = 10
(fig. 9) there are already 6 pairs of cycloenantiomers, but in addition to pat-




Fig. 9


212                               Chemistry 1975




  H-Ala-ala-ala-Ala-Ala-ala-X
  H-ala-ala-Ala-Ala-ala-Ala-X


  terns which lead to cycloenantiomers others can be found that give diastereo-
  mers on changing the “sense” of the ring (Nos. 4, 6; 5, 7; 12, 14 and 13, 15);
  these are called cyclodiastereomers. Both types of cyclostereoisomers can be
  realized in the cyclopolypeptide series. For example, by cyclization of the cor-
  responding penta-alanyl-alanines, two enantiomeric cycle-hexa-alanyls can be
  obtained, as shown on fig. 10. With increasing number of building blocks,
  the number of possible stereoisomers increases considerably: with 15 pairs of
  enantiometric alanines 5,170,604 stereoisometric cycle-trikosa-alanyls are
  possible with the same constitutional formula.
     With this in mind, we thought that it might be useful to build up a cata-
  logue of models, based on chirality, which would enable us not only to classify
  the known stereoisomers but also explore the extent of our present knowledge
  of stereoisomerism in certain areas.


                                     V. Prelog                               213


   By showing how to construct one rather trivial page of such a catalogue I
may manage to illustrate the general principles. First, all possible different
combinations of achiral and chiral objects, including the enantiomorphs of the
latter, are selected with the help of partition diagrams, as shown on fig. 11 for
number four. In partition diagrams equal objects are in horizontal rows, un-
equal ones in vertical columns. If the objects in question are parts of molecules
we call them ligands. By occupying vertices of a polyhedron, in our case a reg-
ular tetrahedron, with all combinations of ligands, models are obtained
which, according to their symmetry, can be divided into two classes: achiral
and chiral. An additional classification into two subclasses is possible by in-
troducing the criterion of permutability. Some of the models do not change if
two ligands are permuted, the others are transformed by such a permutation
either into their enantiomorphs or diastereomorphs.
   Among the achiral models obtained by this procedure. Nos. 5 and 6 shown
on fig. 12 are noteworthy because they are models of so called prochiral and
propseudoasymmetric atoms; Nos. 7 and 8 are models of pseudoasymmetric
atoms.




   The enantiomorphs of chiral models on fig. 13 are shown only if they arise
by exchange of ligands, as in Nos. 24, 25 and 32, 33. Nos. 24 and 25 are mod-
els of the classical “asymmetric atom”, the most familiar member of the sub-
class of “atoms” which are not invariant to permutation (Nos. 24-39).
   If one considers that stereochemists have “played” with tetrahedra for more
than a century, it is hardly surprising that this catalogue page contains only
models of familiar stereoisomers. However, some generalizations are possible.
Tetrahedral asymmetric atoms are also called centers of asymmetry or chirali-
ty, but such centers are not necessarily occupied by an asymmetric atom (Fig.
14). They can be occupied by atoms with rotational symmetry or the asymmet-
ric atom can be replaced by a rigid atomic skeleton with tetrahedral symme-
try such as the adamantane skeleton. The centre of the achiral skeleton of ada-
mantane is a center of chirality which is not occupied by an atom.


214                 Chemistry 1975




      A   F   F F




      F   G   F




                                     Fig. 14


                                     V. Prelog                               215


   Van’t Hoff had already noticed that there are chiral molecules without cen-
ters of chirality and had postulated that allenes with the constitutional formula
(AB)C = C = C(AB) are chiral. Models for such cases can be constructed by
using as the basic geometrical figure tetrahedra of lower symmetry than that of
a regular tetrahedron. Eight point-group symmetries (shown on fig. 15) are
possible for a tetrahedron. Three of them (Da, C2 and C1) are intrinsically chi-
ral i.e. their chirality does not depend on how ligands occupy their vertices.
The regular tetrahedron (T d ) itself and four others are achiral (D2 d , C3v ,
C 2v amd C s). By occupying the vertices of such tetrahedra with all combi-
nations of four ligands new pages of the catalogue are obtained. These new
pages contain some types of stereoisomerism which had escaped the notice of
pragmatic stereochemists.


216                                 Chemistry 1975


   I have limited the discussion to three-dimensional basic figures with 4
ligands because they are typical for organic stereochemistry. The same proce-
dures can be applied to produce catalogues based on figures with five or more
vertices but the multiplicity of models so obtained is larger and therefore more
difficult to deal with in a lecture.
   The time at my disposition also does not permit me to deal with the mani-
fold biochemical and biological aspects of molecular chirality. Two of these
must be mentioned, however, briefly. The first is the fact that although most
compounds involved in fundamental life processes, such as sugars and amino
acids, are chiral and although the energy of both enantiomers and the proba-
bility of their formation in an achiral environment are equal, only one enantio-
mer occurs in Nature; the enantiomers involved in life processes are the same
in men, animals, plants and microorganisms, independent on their place and
time on Earth. Many hypotheses have been conceived about this subject, which
can be regarded as one of the first problems of molecular theology. One pos-
sible explanation is that the creation of living matter was an extremely improb-
able event, which occured only once.
   The second aspect I would like to touch, the maintenance of enantiomeric
purity, is less puzzling but nevertheless still challenging to chemists. Nature is
 the great master of stereospecificity thanks to the ad hoc tools, the special cata-
 lysts called enzymes, that she has developed. The stereospecificity of enzymic
reactions can be imitated by chemists only in rare cases. The mystery of enzy-
mic activity and specificity will not be elucidated without a knowledge of the
intricate stereochemical details of enzymic reactions. The protagonist in this
field is John Warcup Cornforth.
