                          WA L T H E R NE R N S T

            Studies in chemical thermodynamics
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1921


I should best fulfil my obligation to give a lecture relating to my prize-
winning publications, if I discussed my heat theorem, which supplements the
older thermodynamics, with special reference to its chemical applications,
and described the experimental tests which it has undergone in numerous in-
vestigations in my laboratory.
   But this has already been done, especially in recent years, by a number of
different authors in textbooks and monographs. On this important occasion,
a keen desire to avoid simply repeating what has been said earlier, prompts
me to discuss the subject from the viewpoint of electrochemistry.
    This of course really limits my task, but on the other hand it broadens it,
because in this way I shall be able to describe more clearly the development
of my work.
   Thus, my lecture will take on a highly personal note, and generally speak-
ing it is better, where possible in natural science, to study objects of re-
search independently of the accidents of their historical development. But the
fact that a prize is awarded to an individual who, as a child of his time and
equipped with the logical and experimental methods of his time, is really
only able, by climbing on the shoulders of his predecessors, perhaps to see a
little further in some direction than anybody else before him - does not this
fact lead to such strong individualization that his personality must obtrude
more than usual into his grateful reply?
   From the start of my scientific career the galvanic cell, the first form of
which, the Volta pile, popularized physics in a single stroke and at the same
time presented us with so many problems, appeared to me to merit especi-
ally further study.
   The picture looked fairly hopeless to begin with. A law according to
which the e.m.f. of a cell could be easily calculated on the basis of the equa-
tion:


                                                                           (1)


354                             1920 W.H.NERNST

(here U is the heat evolution in gramcalories of the current-generating
chemical process) had been originally created by no less a person than Helm-
holtz and was accepted as a generally reliable but sometimes quite misleading
rule. Many other theories of the mechanism of current generation came and
went, and when Helmholtz again, with a grasp of genius, developed the
theory of the electrical double layer and, here unconsciously following the
precedent of W. Gibbs, also replaced the above incorrect thermodynamic
equation by the equation


                                                                              (2)


 we were still without any sure and more fundamental understanding of the
galvanic cell. It was particularly disillusioning to find a man like Helmholtz
returning repeatedly throughout his scientific career to his first love, the
galvanic cell, which he had courted in his great youthful work "Erhaltung
der Kraft" (The conservation of energy), without however succeeding in
finding a satisfactory solution.
   As often in natural science the picture changed quite suddenly. New fruit-
ful concepts appeared, through the interplay and extension of which most
of the darkness has been to a large extent dispelled in a single stroke. Such
means were Van ’t Hoff’s theory of osmotic pressure, Arrhenius’ theory of
electrolytic dissociation, and finally many new approaches to the treatment
of chemical equilibria, which, brilliantly presented, are to be found scattered
throughout the first edition of Ostwald’s "Lehrbuch der Allgemeinen Chemie"
(Textbook of general chemistry). So there arose in 1889 the osmotic theory
of galvanic current generation, which has not been seriously challenged since
it was put forward more than thirty years ago and has undergone no ap-
preciable elaboration since its acceptance, surely a clear sign that it has so far
satisfied scientific needs.
   I must exclude from this discussion my theory of liquid chains, in the
mathematical and physical extension of which, as you will know, Professor
Planck was of great assistance, the theory of electrolytic chains by means of
which in at least some special cases I believe that I have solved in a visual
manner and above all quantitatively the problem of thermoelectricity, the
quantitative calculation of residual currents, and finally the study of the
theory of concentration chains using dilute solutions, as well as the quantita-
tive calculation of the absolute diffusion rate of electrolytes, which is closely


                       CHEMICAL THERMODYNAMICS                              355
bound up with this. I would like, however, to deal briefly with my equation
for the metal-electrolyte potential difference :


                                                                             (3)


(where R is the gas constant, n is the chemical valency of the ion concerned,
C is a constant specific to the electrode, and c is the ion concentration), an
equation which has been used successfully for a long time, and one might
say daily, by numerous investigators in their electrochemical work.
   I would like to discuss the field of application of Eq. (3) in electrochemical
and also purely chemical problems, on the basis of a few simple tests. If we
dip two silver electrodes into a U-tube filled with dilute potassium nitrate
solution, we find that the e.m.f. fluctuates and is indeterminate; if approxi-
mately equal quantities of silver nitrate are added to the two electrodes, the
e.m.f. of the cell becomes determinate, i.e. close to zero thus exactly as one
would expect from Eq. (3). But if the silver concentrations in the vicinity of
the two electrodes are noticeably different from each other, what is termed a
"concentration chain" arises, the force of which can be found directly from
the above equation. The equation shows, however, that these concentration
currents are usually produced by small e.m.f.‘s, and experience confirms
this. The picture changes when we add potassium chloride to one of the
silver electrodes, thus largely removing the silver ions from the solution;
then the e.m.f of the chain produced in this way, in accordance with our
equation, assumes truly substantial values, and since the extremely low con-
centrations of the silver ions can be calculated on the basis of the laws of the
mutual influence in the solubility of salts, which I evolved and tested ex-
perimentally, it is possible to calculate the e.m.f. of such chains when the
silver content at one electrode and the chlorine content at the other electrode
is known; thus a not uninteresting way was found of further checking Eq. (3).
   If we add to the potassium-chloride solution in succession potassium
iodide, potassium cyanide, and ammonium sulphide, then, on the basis of
well-known laws of chemical equilibrium the concentration of the silver
ions is, in the same succession, depressed far more strongly than was the
case when the silver was precipitated with potassium chloride, and the e.m.f.
rises accordingly. (Experiments.)
   If we build in a U-tube-which contains effectively some cotton-wool in
the bottom part to prevent convection currents - a Daniell cell, formed by


356                            1920 W.H.NERNST

the electrolyte, a zinc bar, and a copper bar, then Eq. (3) has of course to be
used in various ways with two different C-values, one of which relates to
zinc and the other to copper, and it is possible to predict the total behaviour
of the Daniell cell using dilute solutions. The situation is very interesting, as
Hittorf found but could not explain, when by the addition of potassium
cyanide in the neighbourhood of the copper electrode the copper ions are
largely eliminated, while a solution of zinc sulphate is present in the neigh-
bourhood of the zinc electrode, as in the ordinary Daniell cell. Then, accord-
ing to Eq. (3), the current in the cell does not flow from the zinc to the cop-
per, as in the ordinary Daniell cell, but in the reverse direction, and under
these conditions copper goes into solution and zinc is precipitated. (Experi-
ments.)
   We can nowadays conclude, from a purely chemical point of view, that
copper in potassium-cyanide solutions must be a hydrogen-evolving metal.
But, if we dip a copper bar into concentrated potassium cyanide solution, at
first no hydrogen is generated because here certain passive resistances that
can be measured with accuracy are set up, which I have termed "the over-
voltage phenomenon". These passive resistances must disappear when we
wrap platinum wire round the copper bar, because hydrogen is liberated on
platinum with almost no overvoltage. Indeed, a copper bar wrapped round
with platinum wire, when present in a potassium-cyanide solution of suffi-
ciently high concentration, immediately evolves hydrogen at a violent rate.
(Experiment.)
   In particular, it has also been possible to determine the behaviour of lead
accumulator, in quite a detailed manner, qualitatively and quantitatively by
means of Eq. (3). The high overvoltage occurring on the lead when hydro-
 gen is liberated proved particularly significant for understanding the lead
accumulator.
   The osmotic theory of current generation stipulates moreover that when
 a metal ion concentration is higher than consistent with the solution tension
 of the particular metal, on immersion of the metal, ions of the relevant metal
electrode must go into solution, while conversely they must settle on the
electrode when the reverse is the case. In both cases, since the metal ions are
positively charged, electric double layers occur, the charge of which in many
cases immediately inhibits the precipitation or dissolution of the metal in-
volved. By his fine and well-known experiments, Prof. Palmaer was able to
 demonstrate on dripping mercury that these deductions based on my theory
 are also correct.


                        CHEMICAL THERMODYNAMICS                                357
   The osmotic theory of the galvanic generation of current does not permit
calculation of the actual value of the solution tension, but of its relative value;
in individual cases such as with silver and mercury, the solution tensions are
found to be very small, in others such as with zinc or even sodium they are
tremendously large. From time to time criticism has been made with regard
to the enormous size of these solution tensions, though as can be readily
demonstrated, without justification. For, in the case of normal, i.e. non-
electrolyte, dissolution, pressures are attained which, too, are enormous under
certain circumstances. Let us for example consider the process when ice and
sulphur trioxide dissolve in dilute sulphuric acid. During this process 38,000
calories are generated which, if electromotively active, would yield a gal-
vanic cell with an e.m.f. of approximately




that means a galvanic cell with an e.m.f. not much less than that obtained
when, for example, a zinc rod and a chlorine-charged platinum plate are
immersed in a zinc chloride solution. The two processes are exactly analo-
gous; in the first case ice and sulphur trioxide dissolve to form sulphuric acid
in dilute aqueous solution, in the second case zinc and chlorine in solid solu-
tion dissolve to form zinc chloride in aqueous solution. Admittedly, power-
ful chemical processes occur during the dissolution of the sulphur trioxide in
water, but that can also be the case during the dissolution of metals since, in
order to form positive ions (quite apart from possible hydration), the metal
atoms necessarily give off negative electrons, and hence must alter chemically.
   It has long been known that the e.m.f. of a galvanic cell is a measure of the
affinity of the current-generating chemical process, and Helmholtz and others
have previously pointed out that, conversely, electromotive forces can be
calculated thermodynamically from a chemical equilibrium. To extend my
electrochemical research I therefore set out together with my pupils to de-
termine chemical equilibria in gaseous systems at high temperatures; we dealt
particularly with the dissociation of water vapour and of carbon dioxide.
Our first measurements for example enabled von Wartenberg and myself to
determine thermodynamically the e.m.f of the oxyhydrogen gas cell. Not
without surprise we found that in this case the value measured directly by
electrochemical means was much too low.
   In the course of these studies I established in the first place empirically dis-


358                            1920 W.H.NERNST

tinct relationships between the state of the chemical equilibrium and the evo-
lution of heat in the particular reaction but only when comparing reactions
in which the change in the number of molecules during the reaction was the
same. This change is, for example, the same for the two reactions




since in both cases the number of molecules remains unchanged during the
reaction. As it happens these reactions evolve practically the same heat and
hence the state of the equilibrium is, at least approximately, also the same.
These similarities disappear, however, when the above two reactions are
compared with chemical processes which proceed like, for example, the
reaction



with a change in the number of molecules, and occur again when the disso-
ciation of water vapour is compared with the that of carbon dioxide. I am
not aware that attention had previously been paid to this orderliness, now
fully clarified through consideration of the specific heats and especially by
the introduction of the chemical constants.
   In very lengthy, tedious calculations I then made a closer check on these
points which I believe to have clarified in principle soon afterwards by the
publication of my work Über die Berechnung chemischer Gleichgewicht aus ther-
mischen Messungen (The calculation of chemical equilibria from thermal
measurements) (1906). The simple principle at which I arrived at that time
may be stated as follows: that in all cases chemical affinity and evolution of
heat become identical at low temperatures. Not, and this is the essential
point, in the sense that they intersect at absolute zero, but rather in the sense
that they invariably become practically identical some distance before abso-
lute zero is reached; in other words the two curves become mutually tangen-
tial in the vicinity of absolute zero.
   If we frame this principle in quite general terms, i.e. if we apply it not only
to chemical but to all processes, then we have the new heat theorem which
gives rise to a series of very far-reaching consequences:
    I. The best working capacity attainable in the most favourable case during
a process can be computed from the heat evolution which must, however, be
known down to the lowest temperatures.
    2. This can also be expressed by stating that the evolution of heat at an


                       CHEMICAL THERMODYNAMICS                             359
arbitrary temperature, and the specific heats of the substances concerned
must be known to very low temperatures.
   3. The specific heats must be strictly additive at very low temperatures, or
in other words the evolution of heat at very low temperatures must always
be independent of the temperature.
    Of course, the above principles, although applicable to all processes oc-
curring in Nature, are particularly useful in connection with chemical ones.
In this very context Berthelot, as we know, imagined that the chemical
affinity could be equated with the evolution of heat, but this assumption,
although correct in many cases, could not be upheld. We now appreciate
clearly in which cases Berthelot’s principle is correct; when very large a-
mounts of heat are evolved, and restricting the scope to condensed systems,
the influence of the specific heat becomes relatively small, and Berthelot’s
principle applies mostly with adequate approximation, provided the temper-
atures are not too high. For processes in which little heat is evolved, e.g.
fusion, it often breaks down completely.
   Having drawn the above conclusions I had to devote myself to the task of
verifying the consequences of my heat theorem as rigorously as possible by
experimental means - a task which took me many years. And again I was
only able to do so by working out methods, constantly aided and actively
supported, of course, by my assistants and pupils, to determine the specific
heats down to the lowest possible temperatures. I can truly say that at my
Institute in more than 100 experimental studies an abundance of data were
collected which confirmed the new theorem as accurately as allowed by the
precision of what were at times very difficult experiments.
   In particular I should like to mention the following. Quite in keeping
with an assumption I made at an early stage it was found experimentally
that in all cases the specific heats of solids become very small at low temper-
atures. The quantum theory proved of assistance here. After Einstein’s at-
tempt to demonstrate the behaviour of specific heats more qualitatively in
terms of the quantum theory, Debye showed on the basis of my findings that
the specific heats of solids at very low temperatures must increase in propor-
tion to the third power of the absolute temperature. And this in itself very
convincing theoretical finding of Debye’s could then be fully confirmed ex-
perimentally, in the most exact way, in my laboratory on a multiplicity of
substances. I would like especially to emphasize the fact that this enabled my
heat theorem to be thoroughly tested in a large number of cases. When
specific-heat measurements can be continued down to such low temperatures


360                             1920 W.H.NERNST

as to come within the scope of the Debye law, the behaviour of the specific
heats can quite safely be extrapolated to absolute zero.
   These temperatures are, admittedly, sometimes very low, and with amor-
phous substances such as glass, etc., even at the temperature of hydrogen
boiling under greatly reduced pressure, this state is still far off. Here it will be
necessary to go down to helium temperatures and this will be made possible
by the work of Kamerlingh Onnes.
   It need only be mentioned in passing that the study of specific heats at very
low temperatures has at the same time stimulated research with regard to the
theory of the solid, particularly the crystalline, states. One such instance is
the interesting theory of the process of melting proposed by F. A. Linde-
mann, who was my colleague for many years.
   So far we have tacitly restricted ourselves to solids, either in the crystalline
or in the amorphous state; in the latter case one deals with liquids, super-
cooled according to Tammann’s well-known theory, which after sufficient
cooling change to a glass-like state. Experience does, it is true, show that
only relatively few liquids, such as molten quartz, for instance, can be trans-
formed without difficult into the vitreous state (e.g. quartz glass) by suffi-
ciently rapid cooling, but there can be no doubt that in principle every fluid
can be brought down to absolute zero by continuous cooling, i.e. without
abrupt changes. There are therefore no objections in principle to the applica-
tion of my heat theorem in the case of fluids, even if the specific heats of the
super-cooled liquids mostly elude direct determination owing to their great
tendency to crystallization. I have adopted this point of view from the be-
ginning and I still believe today that it is entirely incontestable.
   The case is essentially different, however, with regard to gases. Here I
pointed out in my first papers on the subject that my heat theorem, to begin
with, does not appear to be applicable to gases, because we cannot continu-
ously cool down to absolute zero a gas kept at a constant volume, or, more
correctly, because we do not know how a gas would behave if such cooling
were possible.
   Here too, however, we have made considerable progress, and even if it
has not been possible to reach a definite conclusion regarding the questions
at issue, we have, I think, already come fairly close to solving the problem.
   Here again it was the quantum theory which came to the rescue. First of
all I was able to show that the specific heats of polyatomic gases, since their
rotational movement must be lost when sufficiently cooled, must assume the
value applicable to monatomic gases at a sufficiently low temperature. In the


                        CHEMICAL THERMODYNAMICS                              361
case of hydrogen I was able to demonstrate the probability, from Regnault’s
measurements, that at room temperature hydrogen has already lost a part of
its rotational energy; when Eucken subsequently, at my instigation, carried
out measurements of the specific heat of hydrogen at very low temperatures
it was shown that here indeed the specific heat of hydrogen fell to the value
applicable to monatomic gases, which is certainly a remarkable result, but
one which is easily explainable, qualitatively at least, by the quantum theory.
   An important practical application of this now ensues immediately for the
behaviour of vapour pressure at very low temperatures. The specific heat of
the condensate is zero at this point. That of the vapour assumes the values
applicable to monatomic gases and its exact value is therefore known, and
Clausius-Clapeyron’s formula accordingly gives, for the vapour pressure,
the following formula:


                                                                             (4)

which is, as can be seen, a simple and quite certainly a completely strict va-
pour-pressure formula, which of course is applicable only in the neighbour-
hood of absolute zero. (λΟ is the heat of vaporization at absolute zero, R is the
gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, and i the integration constant.)
   I established this formula immediately after I had recognized that all gases
must behave like monatomic gases at very low temperatures so far as specific
heat is concerned.
   From my heat theorem it easily follows that the integration constant i is
dependent only upon the nature of the gas, i.e. that it must have the same
value, quite irrespective of whether the gas concerned is obtained by the evap-
oration of a crystal or a liquid or indeed from any chemical process what-
ever.
   It is now of considerable interest that the numerical value of i can be ob-
tained from the quantum theory if the validity of my heat theorem is accept-
ed. As I was now able to demonstrate several cases in which in fact that value
can be verified from the quantum theory with tolerable certainty by various
persons (Sackur, Stem, Tetrode), I could in this way arrive at a new and, I
believe, particularly striking confirmation of the accuracy of my heat theo-
rem.
   In all this work we have only dealt so far with a confirmation of my heat
theorem for solids or liquids; we have not, even in the case of formula (4,
hereby dealt with a direct application of my heat theorem to gases.


362                            1920 W.H.NERNST

   I should now like to conclude my remarks, however, with this reference -
that at present the point of view is held in many quarters, as also in several of
my papers, that at very low temperatures gases as well reach a state in which
their specific heat is zero and their pressure is therefore independent of tem-
perature (the so-called "degenerate state of gases"). This would mean that
my heat theorem is also directly applicable to gases as well. This result is not
of immediate practical importance, for owing to the introduction of the so-
called "chemical constants", the chemical equilibria have of course already
become calculable in gases as well; from the theoretical point of view, how-
ever, this affects very important questions, the certain and exhaustive answer
of which may be awaited with eager expectation. All those who have probed
deeply into these questions will probably accept the fact that it is highly
probable that my heat theorem is directly applicable to mixed crystals and
similar matter, even though there is understandably no experimental proof
as yet.
   Finally, I should perhaps point out that recently my heat theorem has been
successful in assisting Eggert, Saha and others in deciding astrophysical ques-
tions.
