DNA SEQUENCING AND GENE STRUCTURE
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1980
by
WALTER GILBERT
Harvard University, The Biological Laboratories, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02138, USA




When we work out the structure of DNA molecules, we examine the fundamen-
tal level that underlies all process in living cells. DNA is the information store
that ultimately dictates the structure of every gene product, delineates every
part of the organism. The order of the bases along DNA contains the complete
set of instructions that make up the genetic inheritance. We do not know how to
interprete those instructions; like a child, we can spell out the alphabet without
understanding more than a few words on a page.
   I came to the chemical DNA sequencing by accident. Since the middle sixties
my work had focussed on the control of genes in bacteria, studying a specific
gene product, a protein repressor made by the control gene for the lac operon
(the cluster of genes that metabolize the sugar lactose. Benno Müller-Hill and I
had isolated and characterized this molecule during the late sixties and demon-
strated that this protein bound to bacterial DNA immediately at the beginning
of the first gene of the three-gene cluster that this repressor controlled (1, 2). In
the years since then, my laboratory had shown that this protein acted by
preventing the RNA polymerase from copying the lac operon genes into RNA. I
had used the fact that the lac repressor bound to DNA at a specific region, the
operator, to isolate the DNA of this region by digesting all of the rest of the
DNA with DNase to leave only a small fragment bound to the repressor,
protected from the action of the enzyme. This isolated a twenty-five base-pair
fragment of DNA out of the 3 million base pairs in the bacterial chromosome.
In the early seventies, Allan Maxam and I worked out the sequence of this
small fragment (3) by copying this DNA into short fragments of RNA and
using on these RNA copies the sequencing methods that had been developed by
Sanger and his colleagues in the late sixties. This was a laborious process that
took several years. When a student, Nancy Maizels, then determined the
sequence of the first 63 bases of the messenger RNA for the lac operon genes, we
discovered that the lac repressor bound to DNA immediately after the start of
the messenger RNA (4), in a region that lies under the RNA polymerase when
it binds to DNA to initiate RNA synthesis. We continued to characterize the lac
operator by sequencing a number of mutations (operator constitutive muta-
tions) that damaged the ability of the repressor to bind to DNA. We wanted to
determine more DNA sequence in the region to define the polymerase binding


                                           W. Gilbert                                       409

site and other elements involved in lac gene control; however, that sequence
was worked out in another laboratory by Dickson, Abelson, Barnes and Rezni-
koff (5). Thus by the middle seventies I knew all the sequences that I had been
curious about, and my students (David Pribnow, and John Majors) and I were
trying to answer questions about the interaction of the RNA polymerase and
other control factors with DNA.
   At this point, another line of experiments was opened up by a new sugges-
tion. Andrei Mirzabekov came to visit me in early 1975. The purpose of his visit
was twofold: to describe experiments that he had been doing using dimethyl
sulfate to methylate the guanines and the adenines in DNA and to urge me to
do a similar experiment with the lac repressor. Dimethyl sulfate methylates the
guanines uniquely at the N7 position, which is exposed in major groove of the
DNA double helix, while it methylates the adenines at the N3 position which is
exposed in the minor groove (Fig. 1). Mirzabekov had used this property to
attempt to determine the disposition of histones and of certain antibiotics on
the DNA molecule by observing the blocking of the incorporation of radioactive
methyl groups onto the guanines and adenines of bulk DNA. He urged me to
use this groove specificity to learn something about the interaction of the lac
repressor with the lac operator. However, the amounts of lac operator available
were extremely small, and there was no obvious way of examining the protein
sitting on DNA to ask which bases in the sequence the protein would protect
against attack by the dimenthyl sulfate reagent.
    It was not until after a second visit by Mirzabekov that an idea finally
emerged. He and I and Allan Maxam and Jay Gralla had lunch together.




Figure 1. Methylated cytosine-guanine and thymine-adenine base pairs. The top of the figure
shows cytosine-guanine base pair methylated at the N7 position of guanine. The bottom of the
figure shows a thymine-adenine base pair methylated at the N3 position of adenine. The region
above each of the base pairs is exposed in the major groove of DNA. The region below each of the
base pairs lies between the sugar phosphate backbones in the minor groove of the DNA double
helix.


410                                       Chemistry 1980

During our conversation I had an idea for an experiment, which ultimately
underlies our sequencing method. We knew we could obtain a defined DNA
fragment, 55 base-pairs long, which carried near its center the region to which
the lac repressor bound. This fragment was made by cutting the DNA sequen-
tially with two different restriction engymes, each defining one end of the
fragment (See fig. 2). Secondly, I knew that at every base along the DNA at
which methylation occurred, that base could be removed by heat. Further-
more, once that had happened, only a sugar would be left holding the DNA
chain together, and that sugar could be hydrolysed, in principle, in alkali to
break the DNA chain. I put these ideas together by conjecturing that if we
labelled one end of one strand of the DNA fragment with radioactive phos-
phate, we might determine the point of methylation by measuring the distance
between the labelled end and the point of breakage. We could get such labelled
DNA by isolating a DNA fragment (by length by electrophoresis through
polyacrylamide gels) made by cutting with one restriction enzyme, labelling
both ends of that fragment and then cutting it again with a second restriction
enzyme to release two separable double-stranded fragments, each having a
label at one end but not the other. Using polynucleotide kinase this procedure
would introduce a radioactive label into the 5’ end of one of the DNA strands of
the fragment bearing the operator while leaving the other unlabelled (Fig. 2). If
we then modified that DNA with dimethyl sulfate so that only an occasional
adenine or guanine would be methylated, heated, and cleaved the DNA with
alkali at the point of depurination, we would release among other fragments a
labelled fragment extending from the unique point of labelling to the first point
of breakage. Fig. 3 shows this idea. Any fragments from the other strand would
be unlabelled, as would any fragments arising beyond the first point of break-
age. If we could separate these fragments by size, as we could in principle by
electrophoresis on a polyacrylamide gel, we might be able to associate the
labelled fragments back to the known sequence and thus identify each guanine
and adenine in the operator that had been modified by dimethyl sulfate. If we
could do the modification in the presence of the lac repressor protein bound to
the DNA fragment, then if the repressor lay close to the N7 of a guanine, we




Figure 2. Procedure for obtaining a double-stranded DNA fragment uniquely labeled at one end of
one strand. The figure shows the restriction cuts for the enzymes AluI (target AG/CT) and Hpa
(target C/CGG producing an uneven end) in the neighborhood of the lac operator. The lac
repressor is shown bound to the DNA. By cutting the DNA from this region first with the enzyme
Alu, then labeling with radioactive P32 the 5’ termini of both strands of the DNA with polynucleo-
tide kinase, and then cutting in turn with the enzyme Hpa, we can isolate a DNA fragment that
carries the binding site for the repessor uniquely labeled at one end of one strand.


                                              W. Gilbert                                          411




Figure 3. Outline of procedure to produce fragments of DNA by breaking the DNA at guanines.
Consider an end-labeled strand of DNA. We modify an occasional guanine by methylation with
dimethylsulfate. Heating the DNA will then displace that guanine from the DNA strand, leaving
behind the bare sugar; cleaving the DNA with alkali will break the DNA at the missing guanine;
the fragments are the separated by size, the actual size of the fragment (followed because it carries
the radioactive label) determines the position of the modified guanine.


would not modify the DNA at that base, and the corresponding fragment
would not appear in the analytical pattern.
   I set out to do this experiment. Allan Maxam made the labelled DNA
fragments, and I began to learn how to modify and to break the DNA. This
involved analysing the release of the bases from DNA and the breakage steps
separately. Finally the experiment was put together. Figure 4 shows the results:
an autoradiogram of the electrophoretic pattern displays a series of bands
extending downward in size from the full length fragment, each caused by the
cleavage of the DNA at an adenine or a guanine. The same treatment of the
DNA fragment with dimethyl sulfate, now carried out in the presence of the
repressor produced a similar pattern, except that some of the bands were
missing (lane one versus lane two in Figure 4). The experiment was clearly a
success in that the presence of the repressor blocked the attack by dimethyl
sulfate on some of the guanines and some of the adenines in the operator (6). I
hoped that the size discrimination would be accurate enough to permit the
assignment of each band in the pattern to a specific base in the sequence. This
proved true because the spacing in the pattern, and the presence of light and
dark bands, the dark bands corresponding to guanines and the light ones to
adenines, were sufficiently characteristic to correlate the two. The guanines
react about five times more rapdly with dimethyl sulfate while the methylated
adenines are relesed from DNA more rapidly than the guanines during heating;
the shift in intensities as a function of the time of heat treatment could by used
to establish unambiguously which base was which. Furthermore, the gel pat-
tern is so clear, that bands corresponding to fragments differing by one base
were resolved. At this point it was evident that this technique could determine
the adenines and guanines along DNA for distances of the order of 40 nucleo-


412                                       Chemistry 1980




Figure 4. Methylation protection experiment with the lac repressor. The columns show the pattern
of clevage along each strand of the 53-55 base long fragment bearing the lac operator. The second
column from the left represents the DNA (labeled at the 5’ end of the 53 base long strand) treated
by dimethylsulfate, cleaved by heat and alkali. The dark bands correspond to breaks at guanines;
the light bands are breaks at adenines. The second column of the figure reads from the bottom:
-G-GAAA--G--A---G---A-AA----A-A-AA-A-A-...
The first column shows this same double stranded piece of DNA treated with dimethylsulfate in the
presence of the lac repressor. The repressor prevents the interaction of dimethytsulfate with the
guanine a third of the way up the pattern and blocks the reaction with two adenines in the upper
third of the pattern. The bands correspond to these two adenines represent fragments that differ in
length by one base, 30 and 31 long. The right hand side of this pattern shows the same experiment
done with the label at the end of the other DNA strand. The sequence at the far right would be:
-G-G-GGAA--G-GAG-GGA-AA-AA---...


                                  W. Gilbert                                  413

tides. By determining the purines on one strand and the purines on the
complementary strand (as Fig 4 does) one has in principle a complete sequenc-
ing method.
   Having in hand a reaction that will determine and distinguish adenines and
guanines, could we find reactions that would distinguish cytosines and thy-
mines? Allan Maxam and I turned our attention to this end. (First we exam-
ined a second binding site for the lac repressor that lies a few hundred bases
further along the DNA, under the first gene of the operon. This binding site has
no physiological function. We could locate this binding site on a restriction
fragment by repeating the methylation-protection experiment and identifying
bases protected by the lac repressor. I used the methylation pattern to attempt
to predict the positions of the adenines and the guanines in the unknown DNA
sequence; Allan Maxam then used the wandering spot sequencing method of
Sanger and his coworkers to determine the DNA sequence of this region to
verify that we had made a successful prediction.) Allan Maxam then went on to
do the next part of the development. We knew that hydrazine would attack the
cytosines and thymines in DNA and damage them sufficiently, or eliminate
them to form a hydrazone, so that a further treatment of the DNA with
benzaldehyde followed by alkali, (or a treatment with an amine), would cleave
at the damaged base. This soon gave us a similar pattern, but broke the DNA
at the cytosines and thymines without discrimination. Allan Maxam then
discovered that salt, one molar salt in the 15 molar hydrazine, altered the
reaction to suppress the reactivity of the thymines. The two reactions together
then positioned and distinguished the thymines and the cytosines in a DNA
sequence. This last discrimination conceptually completed the method. To
improve the discrimination between the purines, and to provide redundant
information which would serve to make the sequencing more secure against
errors, we used the fact that the methylated adenosines depurinate more
rapidly, especially in acid, to release the adenosines preferentially and thus to
obtain four reactions: one for A’s, one preferential for G’s, one for C’s and T’s,
and one for C’s determining the T’s by difference. This stage of the work was
completed within a few months. As the range of resolution on the gels was
extended toward 100 bases, the cleavage at the pyrimidines was not satisfac-
tory, the result of the incomplete cleavage was that the longer fragments
contained a variety of internal damages and the pattern blurted out. After
many months of searching an answer was found. A primary amine, aniline, will
displace the hydrazine products and produce a beta elimination that releases
the phosphate from the 3’ position on the sugar, but it will not release the other
phosphate, and the mobility of a DNA fragment with a blocked 3’ phosphate
bearing a sugar-aniline residue is different from the free phosphate ended
chains from the other reactions. A secondary amine, piperidine, is far more
effective and triggers both beta eliminations as well as eliminating all the
breakdown products of the hydrazine reaction from the sugar. This reagent
completed the DNA sequencing techniques (7). Although the development of
 the techniques continued for another nine months, they were distributed freely
 to other groups that wanted to use them. Fig. 5 shows an actual sequencing


414   Chemistry 1980


                                            W. Gilbert                                             415

pattern from the 1978 period, used in the work described in (8). Fig. 6 shows
two examples of the chemistry (9).
   The logic behind the chemical method is to divide the attack into two steps.
In the first we use a reagent that carries the specificity, but we limit the extent
of that reaction - to only one base out of several hundred possible targets in
each DNA fragment. This permits the reaction to be used in the domain of
greatest specificity: only the very initial stages of a chemical reaction are
involved. The second step, the cleavage of the DNA strand, must be complete.
Since the target has already been distinguished from the other bases along the
DNA chain by the preliminary damage, we can use vigorous, quantitative
reaction conditions. The result is a clean break, releasing a fragment without
hidden damages, which is required if the mobilities of the fragments are to be
very closely correlated so that the bands will not blur. (The specificity need be
only about a factor of ten for the sequence to be read unambiguously.)
   Today, later developments of the technique (9) have modified the guanine
reaction and replaced the dimethyl sulfate adenosine reaction with a direct
depurination reaction that releases both the adenines and guanines equally.
These changes, and the introduction of the very thin gels by Sanger’s group
 (10), now make it possible to read sequences out between 200-400 bases from
 the point of labelling. The actual chemical workup, the analysis on gels, and
 the autoradiography is the short part of the process. The major time spent in
DNA sequencing is spent in the preparation of the DNA fragments and on the
elements of stratagy. The speed of the sequencing comes only in part from the
 ability to read off quickly several hundred bases of DNA - at a glance. The
 more important element is the linear presentation of the problem. Rather than
 sequence randomly, one can begin at one end of a restriction map and move
 rationally through a gene - or construct the restriction map as one goes.
    The first long sequence was done by a graduate student, Phillip Farabaugh,
 who used the new techniques to sequence the gene for the lac repressor (11).
 The protein sequence of this gene product had been worked out in the early
 seventies by Beyreuther and his coworkers (12). Since the amino-acid sequence
 was known, he could quickly (a few months) establish the DNA sequence.
 However the DNA sequence showed that there were errors in the protein
 sequence, two amino acids dropped at one place and eleven at another. Since

Figure 5. Actual sequencing pattern from the 1978 period. Products of four different chemical
reactions, applied to a DNA fragment about 150 bases long, are electrophoresed on a polyacryl-
amide gel; three loadings produce sets of patterns that have moved different distances down the gel.
The four columns correspond to reactions that break the DNA: I) primarily at the adenines, 2) only
at the guanines, 3) at the cytosines but not the thymines, and 4) at both the cytosines and thymines.
The very shortest fragments are at the bottom right hand side of the picture and the sequence is
read up the gel recognizing first the band in the left hand column corresponding to A, a band in the
two! right hand columns corresponding to a C, a band in the far right hand column corresponding
to T, a band in the left hand column corresponding to A and so forth. After reading up as far
aspossible, the sequence continues in the sets of bands at the left hand side of the gel and then still
further in the pattern in the center of the gel. From the original photograph the sequence of the
entire fragment can be read. The fragment is from the genomic DNA corresponding to the variable
region of the lambda light chain of mouse immunoglobulin (8).


416                                        Chemistry 1980




Figure 6. Examples of the detailed chemistry involved in breaking the DNA. Figure 6a. above,
shows the guanine breakage. The guanines are first methylated with dimethylsulfate. The imida-
zole ring is opened by treatment with alkali (during the piperidine treatment). Piperidine displaces
the base and then triggers two beta eliminations that release both phosphates from the sugar and
cleave the DNA strand leaving a 3’ and a 5’ phosphate. Figure 6b. below, shows the hydrazinc
attack on a thymine that breaks the DNA at the pyrimidines.


                                   W. Gilbert                                  417

 the protein sequence contains 360 amino acids, he had to work out a gene of
 1080 bases. DNA sequencing is faster and more accurate than protein sequenc-
 ing. The reason for this is that DNA is a linear information store. Because the
 chemistry of each restriction fragment is like any other, they differ only in
 length, there is no particular reason for loosing track of them, except for the
very smallest. By sequencing across the joins between the fragments, one
 established an unambiguous order. Proteins, on the other hand, are strings of
 amino acids used by Nature to create a wide variety of chemistries. When a
 protein is fragmented, the fragments can exhibit quite different properties,
 some of which may be unusually unfortunate in terms of solubility or loss.
 There is no simple way of keeping account of the total content of amino acids,
 or of the order of fragments, as there is for DNA, where the length of the
 restriction fragments can easily be measured.
    Jeffrey Miller and his coworkers had done an extensive analysis of the
 appearance of mutations in the lac repressor gene. Three sites in the gene are
 hotspots, at which the mutation rate is some 10 times higher than at other sites.
 DNA sequencing showed that at each of these sites there was a modified base, a
 5-methyl cytosine, in the sequence (13). (The chemical sequencing detects the
 presence of the 5-methyl cytosine directly, because the methyl group suppresses
 completely the reactivity of this base in the hydrazine reaction. A blank space
 appears in the sequence, but on the other strand is a guanine.) The high
 mutation rate is a transition to a thymine. 5-methyl cytosine occurs at a low
 frequency in DNA, this observation shows that it is a mutagen. What is the
 explaination? Deamination of cytosine to uracil occurs naturally. If this oc-
 curred in DNA it could lead to a transition; however it usually does not, since
 there is an enzyme that scans DNA examining it for deoxyuridine (14). When it
 finds this base in DNA, mismatched or not, it breaks the glycosidic bond and
 removes the uracil. This is then recognized as a defect in DNA, and another
 group of enzymes then repair the depyrimidinated spot. However, 5-methyl
 cytosine deaminates to thymine - a natural component of DNA. On repair or
 resynthesis a transition will ensue. This whole argument explains why thymine
 is used in DNA - the extra methyl group serves to suppress the effects of the
 natural rate of deamination.
     To find out how easy and how accurate DNA sequencing was, I asked a
  student, Gregor Sutcliffe, to sequence the ampicillin resistance gene, the beta-
 lactamase gene, of E. coli. This gene is carried on a variety of plasmids,
 including a small constructed plasmid, pBR322, in E. coli. All that he knew
  about the protein was an approximate molecular weight, and that a certain
 restriction cut on the plasmid inactivated that gene. He had no previous
 experience with DNA sequencing when he set out to work out the structure of
  DNA for this gene. After seven months he had worked out about 1000 bases of
 double-stranded DNA, sequencing one strand and then sequencing the other
 for confirmation. The unique long reading frame determined the sequence of
 the protein product of this gene, a protein of 286 residues ( 15). We thought that
  the DNA sequence was unambiguous. Luckily there was available, from
 Ambler’s laboratory, partial sequence information about the protein which had


418                                 Chemistry 1980

been obtained as a result of several years work attempting to develop a
sequence for the beta-lactamase (16). This information, while not sufficient to
determine the protein sequence directly, was adequate to confirm that the
prediction of the DNA sequencing was correct. Sutcliffe then became very
enthusiastic and sequenced the rest of the plasmid pBR322 during the next six
months, to finish his thesis. He sequenced both strands of this 4362 base-pair
long plasmid in order to confirm the sequence (17). The chemical sequencing is
unambiguous, except for an occasional characteristic feature in the DNA
fragment itself that causes it to move anomalously during the gel electrophore-
sis. As longer and longer strands are being analysed on the gel, a hairpin loop
can form at one end of the fragment if the sequence is sufficiently self-comple-
mentary. As the fragmentation passes through this portion of the molecule, the
mobilities on the gel do not decrease uniformly as a function of length, but some
of the molecules move abberantly, a feature called compression, because the
bands on an autoradiograph become close together, or can overlap to conceal
one or more bases. This rare feature occurs about once every thousand bases. It
is resolved by sequencing the opposite strand in the other direction along the
double stranded molecule (or the same strand in the opposite chemical direc-
tion) because the hairpin will form when a different region of the sequence is
exposed and the compression feature will occur in a different place in the
sequence. If both strands of the DNA helix are sequenced, the sequence can be
unambiguous.



THE STRUCTURE OF GENES
The first genes to be sequenced, those in bacteria, yielded an expected struc-
ture: a contiguous series of codons lying upon the DNA between an initiation
signal and one of the terminator signals. Before the position at which the RNA
copy will start, there lies a site for the RNA polymerase, interacting with the
Pribnow box, a region of sequence homology lying one turn of the helix before
the initial base of the messenger RNA, and also with another region of homol-
ogy, thirty-five bases before the start. Thus one could understand the bacterial
gene in terms of a binding site for the RNA polymerase, and further binding
sites for repressors and activator proteins around and under the polymerase.
Alternatively, the control on transcription could be exercised by a control of the
termination function: new proteins or an elegant translation control (18) could
determine whether or not the polymerase would read past a stop signal into a
new gene.
   When the first genes from vertebrates were transferred into bacteria by the
recombinant DNA techniques and sequenced an entirely different structure
emerged. The coding sequences for globin (19,20), for immunoglobulin (21),
and for ovalbumin (22) did not lie on the DNA as a continuous series of codons
but rather were interrupted by long stretches of non-coding DNA. The discov-
ery of RNA splicing in adenovirus by Sharp and his coworkers (23) and Broker
and Roberts and their coworkers (24) paved the way for this new structure.


                                           W. Gilbert                                           419




Figure 7. A transcription unit corresponding to alternating exons and introns. The whole gene, a
transcription unit, is copied into RNA terminating in a poly (A) tail. The regions corresponding to
introns are spliced out leaving a messenger RNA made up of the three exons, the regions that are
expressed in the mature message.



They had shown that after the original transcription of DNA into a long RNA,
regions of this RNA are spliced out: some stretches excised and the remaining
portions fused together by an as yet undefined enzymatic process. The exons
(25), regions of the DNA that will be expressed in mature message, are
separated from each other by introns, regions of DNA that lie within the
genetic element but whose transcripts will be spliced out of the message. Figure
7 shows this process: the original transcript of a gene (now thought of as a
transcription unit) will undergo a series of splices before being able to function
as a mature message in the cytoplasm. Figure 8 shows a few examples.
Vertebrate genes can have many, eight, fifteen, even 50 exons (29,30), and the
exons are for the most part short coding stretches separated by hundreds to
several thousands of base pairs of intron DNA. The rapid sequencing has
meant that we can work out the DNA sequence of any of these complex gene
structures. But can we understand them?
   The emerging generalization is that procaryotic genes have contiguous cod-
ing sequences while the genes for the highest eucaryotes are characterized by a
complex exon-intron structure. As we move up from procaryotes, the simplest
eucaryotes, such as yeasts, have few introns; further up the evolutionary ladder
the genes are more broken up. (Yeast mitochondria have introns, are they an
exception to this pattern?) Are we seeing the emergence of the intron-exon
structure rising to ever greater degress of complexity as we move up to the
vertebrates, or the loss of preexisting intron-exon structures as we move down
to the simplest invertebrates and the procaryotes? One view considers the


420                                         Chemistry 1980




Figure 8. Examples of the intron-exon structure of a few genes. (1) The gene for globin is broken up
by two introns into three exons (20). (2) The functional gene in a myeloma cell for the immunoglo-
bulin lambda light chain is broken up into a short exon corresponding to the hydrophobic leader
sequence, an exon corresponding to the V region, and then, after an intron of some thousand bases,
an exon corresponding to the 112 amino acids of the constant region (26). (3) A typical gene for a
gamma heavy chain of immunoglobulin (27, 28). The mature gene corresponds to a hydrophobic
leader sequence, an exon corresponding to the variable region, and then, after a long intron. a series
of exons; the first corresponding to the first domain of the constant region, the second correspond-
ing to a 15 amino acid hinge region, the third corresponding to the second domain of the constant
region, and the fourth exon corresponding to the third domain of the constant region.




 splicing as an adaptation that becomes ever more necessary in more highly
 structured organisms. The other view considers the splicing as lost if the
 organism makes a choice to simplify and to replicate its DNA more rapidly, to
 go through more generations in a short time, and thus to be under a significant
 pressure to restrict its DNA content (31).
    What role can this general intron-exon structure play in the genes of the
 higher organisms? Although most genes that have been studied have this
 structure, there are two notable exceptions: the genes for the histones and those
 for the interferons. This last demonstrates that there can be no absolutely
essential role that the introns must play, there can be no absolute need for
 splicing in order to express a protein in mammalian cells. Although there is a
 line of experiments that shows that some messengers must have at least a single
 splice made before they can be expressed, there is no evidence that the great
 multiplicity of splices are needed. There is a pair of genes for insulin the rat,
 that differ in the number of introns; both are expressed - which demonstrates
 that the intron that splits the coding region of one of them, has no essential role,
 in cis, in the expression of that gene (32). Although a common conjecture is
 that the splicing might have a regulatory role, so far there is no tissue depen-
 dent splicing pattern that could be interpreted as showing the existance of a
 gene (or tissue) specific splicing enzyme.
    The introns are much longer than the exons. Their DNA sequence drifts
 rapidly by point mutation and small additions and deletions (accumulating
 changes as rapidly as possible, at the same rate as the silent changes in codons).
 This suggests that it is not their sequence that is relevant, but their length.
 Their function is to move the exons apart along the chromosome.


                                            W. Gilbert                                             421

    A consequence of the separation of exons by long introns is that the recom-
 bination frequency, both illegitimate and legitimate, between exons will be
 higher (25). This will increase the rate, over evolutionary time, at which the
 exons, representing parts of the protein structures, will be shuffled and reas-
 sorted to make new combinations. Consider the process by which a structural
domain is duplicated to make the two domain structure of the light chain of the
 immunoglobulins (or duplicated again to make the four domain structure of the
 heavy chain, or combined to make the triple structure represented by ovomu-
 coid (29) ). Classically, this involved a precise unequal crossing over that fused
 the two copies of the original gene, in phase, to make a double length gene. As
 Figure 9 shows, this process involves an extremely rare, precise illegitimate
 event (a recombination event that leads to the fusing of two DNA sequences at
 a point where there is no matching of sequence) that has as its consequence the
 synthesis at a high level of the new, presumably more useful, double length
 gene product. Consider the same process against the background of a general
 splicing mechanism. Again, the process of forming the double gene must
 involve an illegitimate recombination event, but now that event can occur
 anywhere within a stretch of 1000 to 10,000 bases flanking the 3’ side of one
 copy and the 5’ side of the other to form an intron separating the genes for the
 two domains. From a long transcript across this region, even inefficient splicing
  may produce the new double-length gene product. This will happen some 106
  to l08 times more rapidly than the classical process because of the many




 Figure 9. A double-length gene product arises through unequal crossing over. On the left, figure 9a,
 is the classical process by which a gene corresponding to a single polypeptide chain might have its
 length doubled by a crossing over. The top two lines indicate two coding regions, brought into
 accidental apposition by some act of illegitimate recombination which fuses the carboxy terminal
 region (the 3’ end) of one copy of the gene to the amino terminal region (the 5’ end) of the other.
 This rare illegitimate event (involving no sequence matching) would, if it occurs in phase. produce
 a double-length gene which could code for a double-length RNA which in turn translates into a
 double-length protein containing the reiteration of a basic domain. Figure 9b on the right illustrates
 the same process occurring in the presence of the splicing function. Now the unequal crossing over
 can occur anywhere to the 3’ side of one copy of the gene and anywhere in front of the 5’ end of the
 other copy of the gene to produce a gene containing two exons separated by long intron. I
 conjecture that the long transcript of this region now will be spliced at some low frequency to
 produce a mature message encoding the reiterated protein.


422                                       Chemistry 1980

different combinations of sites at which the recombination can occur. If the
long transcript can be spliced, even at a low frequency, some of the double-
length product can be made. This is a faster way for evolution to form the final
gene: proceeding through a rapid step to a structure that can produce a small
amount of the useful gene product. Small mutational steps can be selected to
produce better splicing signals and thus more of the gene product. If the
splicing signals already exist, recombination within introns provides an imme-
diate way to build polymeric structures out of simpler units. One would predict
that polymeric structures, made up of simpler units, will be found to have genes
in which the intron-exon structure of the primitive unit is repeated, separated
again by introns. That is the case.
    The rate of legitimate recombination between the exons of a gene will be
increased by the introns. Consider two mutations to better functioning, arising
in different parts of a gene and spreading, by selection, through the population.
Classically, both mutations could end up in a single polypeptide chain, after
both genes find their way into a single diploid individual, by homologous
recombination within the gene. Figure 10 shows that this process also should be
speeded some 10 to 100 fold by spreading the exons apart. This effect will be
strongest if the exons can evolve separately - if they represent structures that
can accumulate successful changes independantly.
    Furthermore, one can change the pattern of exons by changing the initiation
 or termination of the RNA transcript, to add extra exons or to tie together
 exons from one region of the DNA to exons from another. This has been
 observed in adenovirus, and is found in notable examples in the immunoglobu-
 lins in which exons can be added or subtracted to the carboxy terminus of the
 heavy chain to modify the protein. Hood’s laboratory has shown that this
 process is used to switch between two different forms of an IgM heavy chain
 (33). A membrane bound form is synthesized by a longer transcript, which
 splices on two additional exons and splices out part of the last exon of the
 shorter transcript. The shorter transcript synthesises a secreted form of the




pattern by which two mutations, one occurring in one copy of the gene, at the left end, and the
other occurring in the other copy of the gene, at the right hand end, might get together by
recombination happening in the homologous stretch of DNA that separates the two mutations.
This recombination can create a single gene carrying both mutations. On the right, figure 10b, the
same process happening in a gene in which the mutations occur in separate exons separated by an
intron. Now the recombination can occur anywhere, either in the exon or within the intron, to
produce a new gene carrying both mutations. Since the rate of recombination will be directly
proportional to the distance along the DNA between the mutations, it will be faster.


                                          W. Gilbert                                           423

protein. In a similar way the switch of the V region from IgM to an IgD
constant region is probably the result of a different, still longer, transcript
which splices across to attach the V region exons to the new constant region
exons of the delta class. These combinations of genes have certainly been
created by recombination events within the DNA that ultimately becomes the
intron of the longer transcription unit.
   The most striking prediction of this evolutionary view is that separate
elements defined by the exons have some functional significance, that these
elements have been assorted and put together in new combinations to make up
the proteins that we know. Gene products are assembled out of prevously
achieved solutions of the structure-function problem. Clear examples of this are
still meager. The hydrophobic leader sequence which is involved in the transfer
of proteins through membranes, and which is trimmed off after the secretion, is
often on separate exons-most notably in the immunoglobulins (see Figure 8),
but also in ovomucoid (29). In the pair of genes for insulin in the rat, a product
of recent duplication (32), the two chains of insulin lie on separate in exons one
gene, on a single exon in the other. The ancestral gene (the common structure
in other species (34)) has the additional intron-suggesting that the gene was
put together originally from separate pieces. The gene for lysozyme is broken
up into four exons; the second one carries the critical amino acids of the active
site and most of the substrate contacts (35). In the gene for globin the central
exon encodes almost all of the heme contacts. Figure 11 shows a schematic
disection of the molecule. A recent experiment (36) has shown that the poly-
peptide that corresponds to the central exon in itself is a heme binding "minig-
lobin”; the side exons have provided polypeptide material to stablize the
protein.




Figure 11, A schematic dissection of globin into the product of the separate exons. At the left the
black arrows show the points at which the structure of a chain of globin is interrupted by the
introns. (The structures of the chains of globin and of myoglobin are very similar, the schematic
structure shown is myoglobin.) The introns interrupt the protein in the alpha-helical regions to
break the protein into three portions shown on the right. The product of the central exon surrounds
the heme; the products of the other two exons, I conjecture, wrap around and stablize the protein.


424                                Chemistry 1980

   At the same moment that the rapid sequencing methods and the molecular
cloning gave us the promise of being able to work out the structure of any gene,
the ability to achieve a complete understanding of the genetic material, Nature
revealed herself to be more complex than we had imagined. We can not read
the gene product directly from the chromosome by DNA sequencing alone. We
must appeal to the sequence of the actual protein, or at least the sequence of the
mature messenger RNA, to learn the intron-exon structure of the gene. Nonthe-
less the hope exists, that as we look down on the sequence of DNA in the
chromosome, we will not learn simply the primary structure of the gene
products, but we will learn aspects of the functional structure of the proteins -
put together over evolutionary time as exons linked through introns.
   My interest in biology has always centered on two problems: how is the
genetic information made manifest? and how is it controlled? We have learned
much about the way in which a gene is translated into protein. The control of
genes in prokaryotes is well understood, but for eukaryotes the critical mecha-
nisms of control are still not known. The purpose of research is to explore the
unknown. The desire for new knowledge calls forth the answers to new ques-
tions.
   I owe a great debt to my students and collaborators over the years; the
greatest to Jim Watson who stimulated my interest in molecular biology, to
Benno Müller-Hill with whom I worked on the lac repressor, and to Allan
Maxam with whom I developed the DNA sequencing.


                                         W. Gilbert                                            425

BIBLIOGRAPHY
 1 Gilbert, Walter and Müller-Hill, Benno “Isolation of the Lac Repressor” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
    USA.556, 1891-1898 (1966).
 2 Gilbert, Walter and Müller-Hill, Benno “The Lac Operator is DNA” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
    58, 2415-2421 (1967).
3 Gilbert, Walter and Maxam. Allan “The Nuclcotide Sequence of the Lac Operator” Proc. Natl.
   Acad. Sci. USA 70, 3581-3584 (1973).
 4 Gilbert, W.. Maizels. N. and Maxam. A. “Sequences of Controlling Regions of the Lactose
    Operon” Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology 38. 845-855 (1973).
 5 Dickson, R., Abelson, .J., Barnes, W. and Reznikoff, W. “Genetic Regulation: the Lac Control
   Region” Science 187, 27-35 (1975).
 6 Gilbert, Walter, Maxam, Allan and Mirzabekov, Andrei “Contacts Between the lac Repressor
   and DNA Revealed by Methylation” in Control of Ribosome Synthesis”, 139-148, Alfred
   Benzon Symposium IX, Munksgaard 1976.
 7 Maxam, Allan M. and Gilbert, Walter “A New Method for Sequencing DNA” Proc. Natl. Acad.
   Sci. USA 74, 560-564 (1977).
 8 Tonegawa, S., Maxam, A. M., Tizard, R., Bernard, O. and Gilbert, W. “Sequence of a Mouse
   Germ-line Gene for a Variable Region of an Immunoglobulin Light Chain” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
    USA 75, 1485-1489 (1978).
 9 Maxam, Allan, M., and Gilbert, Walter “Sequencing End-Labelled DNA with Base-Specific
   Chemical Cleavages” Methods In Enzmology 65, 499-560 (editors K. Moldave and L. Gross-
   man) (1980).
10 Sanger, F. and Coulson, A. R. “The Use of Thin Acrylamide Gels for DNA Sequencing” FEBS
   Letters 87, 107-110 (1978).
11 Farabaugh, Philip J. “Sequence of the lacI Gene” Nature 274, 765-769 (1978).
12 Beyreuther, K., Adler, K., Fanning, E., Murray, C., Klemm, A. and Geisler, N. “Amino-Acid
    Sequence of lac Repressor from Escherichia coli” Eur. J. Biochem. 59, 491-509 (1975).
13 Coulondre, Christine, Miller, Jeffrey H., Farabaugh, Philp J. and Gilbert, Walter “Molecular
    Basis of Base Substitution Hotspots in Escherichia coli” Nature 274, 775-780 (1978).
14 Lindahl, T., Ljungquist, S., Siegert, W., Nyberg, B. and Sperens, B. “DNA N- Glycosidases” J.
    Biol. Chem. 252, 3286-3294 (1977).
15 Sutcliffe, J. Gregor “Nucleotide Sequence of the Ampicillin Resistance Gene of Escherichia coli
    Plasmid pBR322” Proc                                                . Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75, 3737-3741 (1978).
16 Ambler, R. P. and Scott, G. K. “The Partial Amino Acid Sequence of the Penicillinase Coded
    by the Escherichia coli Plasmid R6K” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75, 3732-3736 (1978).
17 Sutcliffe, J. G. “Complete Nucleotide Sequence of the Escherichia coli Plasmid pBR322” Cold
    Spring Harbor Symposium 43, 77-90 (1978).
18 For a review, see: Yanofsky, C. “Attenuation in the Control of Expression of Bacterial Oper-
    ons” Nature 289, 751-758 (1981).
19 Tilghman, S. M., Tiemeister, D. C., Seidman, J. G., Peterlin, B. M., Sullivan, M., Maizel, J. V.
    and Leder, P. “Intervening Sequence of DNA Identified in the Structural Portion of a Mouse
    Beta-Globin Gene” Proc. Natl. Sci. USA 75, 725-729 (1978).
20 Konkel, D. A., Tilghman, S. M. and Leder, P. “The Sequence of the Chromosomal Mouse
    Beta-Globin Major Gene” Cell 15, 1125-1132.
21 Brack, C. and Tonegawa, S. “Variable and Constant Parts of the Immunoglobulin Light Chain
    of a Mouse Myeloma Cell are 1250 Nontranslated Bases Apart” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74,
    5652-5656 (1977).
22 Breathnach, R., Mandel, J. L. and Chambon, P. “Ovalbumin Gene is Split in Chicken DNA”
    Nature 270, 314-319 (1977).
23 Berget, Susan M., Moore, Claire and Sharp, Phillip A. “Spliced Segments at the 5’ Terminus of
    Adenovirus 2 Late mRNA” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 3171-3175 (1977).
24 Chow, L. T., Gelinas; R. E., Broker, T. R. and Roberts, R. J. “An Amazing Sequence
    Arrangement at the 5’ Ends of Adenovirus 2 Messenger RNA” Cell 12, l-8 (1977).
25 Gilbert, Walter “Why Genes in Pieces?” Nature 271, 501 (1978).


426                                     Chemistry 1980

26 Bernard, O., Hozumi, N. and Tonegawa, S. “Sequence of Mouse Immunoglobulin Light Chain
    Genes Before and After Somatic Changes” Cell 15, 1133-1144 (1978).
27 Sakano, H., Rogers, J. H., Hüppi, K., Brack, C., Traunecker, A., Maki, R., Wall, R. and
    Tonegawa, S. “Domains and the Hinge Region of an Immunoglobulin Heavy Chain Are
    Encoded in Separate DNA Segments” Nature 277, 627-633 (1979).
28 Honjo, T., Obata, M., Yanawaki-Kataoka, Y., Kataoka, T., Kawakami, T., Takahashi, N. and
    Mano, Y. “Cloning and Complete Nucleotide Sequences of Mouse Gamma 1 Chain Gene” Cell
    18, 559-568 (1979).
29 Stein, J. P., Catterall, J. F., Kristo, P., Means, A. R. and O’Malley, B. W. “Ovomucoid
    Intervening Sequences Specify Functional Domains and Generate Protein Polymorphisms” Cell
    21, 681-687 (1980).
30 Yamado, Y., Avvedimento, V. E., Mudryj, M., Ohkubo, H., Vogeli, G., Irani, M., Pastan, I.,
    and de Crombrugghe, B. “The Collagen Gene: Evidence for its Evolutionary Assembly by
    Amplification of a DNA segment Containing an Exon of 54 bp.” Cell 22, 887-892 (1980).
31 Doolittle, W. F. “Genes in Pieces: Were They Ever Together?” Nature 272, 581 (1978).
32 Lomedico, P., Rosenthal, N., Efstratiadis, A., Gilbert, W., Kolodner, R., and Tizard, R. “The
    Structure and Evolution of the Two Non-Allelic Rat Preproinsulin Genes” Cell 18, 545-558
    (1979).
33 Early, P., Rogers, F., Davis, M., Calami, K., Bond, M., Wall, R. and Hood, L. “Two mRNA’s
    Can be Produced from a Single Immunoglobulin Gene by Alternative RNA Processing Path-
    ways” Cell 20, 313-319 (1980).
34 Perler, F., Efstratiadis, A., Lomedico, P., Gilbert, W., Kolodner, R. and Dodgson, J. “The
    Evolution of Genes: The Chicken Preproinsulin Gene” Cell 20, 555-566 (1980).
35 Jung, Alexander, Sippel, Albrecht, E., Grez, Manuel and Schütz, Günther “Exons Encode
    Functional and Structural Units of Chicken Lysozyme Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77, 5759-5763
    (1980).
36 Craik, Charles, S., Buchman, Steven R. and Beychok, Sherman “Characterization of Globin
    Domains: Heme Binding to the Central Exon Product” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77, 1384-1388
    (1980).
