                         W   ENDELL   M . ST A N L E Y


        The isolation and properties of crystalline
                   tobacco mosaic virus
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1946


Although the idea that certain infectious diseases might be caused by in-
visible living agents was expressed by Varro and Columella about 100 B. C.,
there was no experimental proof and the idea was not accepted. The cause of
infectious disease remained a mystery for hundreds of years. Even the won-
derful work of Leeuwenhoek and his description of small animals and bacte-
ria during the years from 1676 to 1683 failed to result in proof of the relation-
ship between bacteria and infectious disease. There was, of course, much
speculation and during the latter half of the 19th century great controversies
arose over the germ theory of disease. Then, through the brilliant work of
Pasteur, Koch, Cohn, Davaine and others, it was proved experimentally, for
the first time, that microorganisms caused infectious diseases. The Golden
Era of bacteriology followed and the germ theory of infectious disease was
accepted so completely that it became heresy to hold that such diseases might
be caused in any other way. Thus, when, in 1892 Iwanowski discovered that
the juice of a plant diseased with tobacco mosaic remained infectious after
being passed through a filter which retained all known living organisms, he
was willing to conclude that the disease was bacterial in nature, despite the
fact that he could not find the causative bacteria. As a result, his observations
failed to attract attention. However, six years later, the filtration experiment
was repeated and extended, independently, by Beijerinck, who immediately
 recognized the significance of the results and referred to the infectious agent,
 not as being bacterial in nature, but as a contugium vivum fluidum. Obviously,
 Beijerinck was quite aware of the fact that he had discovered a new type of
infectious disease-producing agent. It is also obvious, from the terminology
 that he used, that he thought of this agent as a living entity.
    Since the original discovery of this infectious, disease-producing agent,
 known as tobacco mosaic virus, well over three hundred different viruses
 capable of causing disease in man, animals and plants have been discovered.
 Among the virus-induced diseases of man are smallpox, yellow fever, dengue
 fever, poliomyelitis, certain types of encephalitis, measles, mumps, influenza,


138                          1946 W.M.STANLEY

virus pneumonia and the common cold. Virus diseases of animals include
hog cholera, cattle plague, foot-and-mouth disease of cattle, swamp fever of
horses, equine encephalitis, rabies, fowl pox, Newcastle disease of chickens,
fowl paralysis, and certain benign as well as malignant tumors of rabbits and
mice. Plant virus diseases include tobacco mosaic, peach yellows, aster yel-
lows, potato yellow dwarf, alfalfa mosaic, curly top of sugar beets, tomato
spotted wilt, tomato bushy stunt, corn mosaic, cucumber mosaic, and sugar
cane yellow stripe. Bacteriophages, which are agents capable of causing the
lysis of bacteria, are now regarded as viruses.
   The viruses have been separated as a special group of infectious, disease-
producing agents by means of several general properties, no one of which is,
however, exclusively characteristic of viruses. Nevertheless, no great amount
of difficulty has been encountered in the segregation of the virus group. Vi-
ruses are characterized by their small size, by their ability to reproduce or
multiply when within the living cells of a given host, by their ability of
change or mutate during multiplication and by their inability to reproduce
or grow on artificial media or in the absence of specific living cells. The sole
means of recognizing the existence of a virus is provided by the multiplica-
tion of the virus which is, of course, usually accompanied by manifestations
of disease. Viruses spread from diseased to normal susceptible hosts by dif-
ferent methods. Some are transferred by direct contact, as when a diseased
leaf is caused to rub against a healthy leaf by a gust of wind, or when a nor-
mal person or animal comes into direct contact with a diseased person or
animal. Such viruses can usually be spread by indirect contact through the
medium of non-specific animate or inanimate objects. Some viruses cannot
be transferred by direct contact, but require an intermediate host such as a
mosquito, louse or leaf-hopper. In some cases a highly specific intermediate
host is necessary, and a more or less definite period of incubation within this
host may be required before it can pass on the virus.
   Reproduction, mutation and metabolic activity have long been regarded
as unique and special properties of living organisms. When viruses were
found to possess the ability to reproduce and to mutate, there was a definite
tendency to regard them as very small living organisms, despite the fact that
the question of metabolic activity remained unanswered. Because of their
small size they could not be seen by means of the ordinary light microscope.
Although. this fact puzzled some investigators, it was pushed aside and for
over thirty years interest in virus research was centered about the discovery
of new viruses and on studies of the pathological manifestations of viruses.


              CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                                  139

               Approximate sizes of viruses and reference materials.




Fig. I. A chart showing approximate sizes of several viruses and reference materials.
               (From W. M. Stanley, Chem. Eng. News, 25 (1947) 3786.)


140                            1946 W.M.STANLEY

Then, around 1930, Elford began his important work on the filtration of
viruses through graded collodion membranes. He demonstrated that dif-
ferent viruses possessed different and characteristic sizes, and that some vi-
ruses were as large as about 300       whereas others were as small as 10         It
was soon realized that the acceptance of a virus 10             in size as a living
organism presented certain inherent difficulties, especially with respect to
metabolic activity. Grave doubts were expressed that the complicated pro-
cesses of respiration and digestion and the general metabolic functions usually
associated with life could be contained within structures as small as 10
especially since protein molecules larger than 10          were known. It can be
seen from Fig. I, which is a chart illustrating the relative sizes of several virus-
es and certain reference materials, that the viruses overlap with respect to
size, not only with protein molecules, but also, at the other extreme, with
accepted living organisms. For example, several viruses are smaller than cer-
tain hemocyanin protein molecules, and several viruses are larger than the
pleuropneumonia organism, which is an accepted living organism capable of
growth on artificial media. The fact that, with respect to size, the viruses
overlapped with the organisms of the biologist at one extreme and with the
molecules of the chemist at the other extreme only served to heighten the
mystery regarding the nature of viruses. Then too, it became obvious that a
sharp line dividing living from non-living things could not be drawn and
this fact served to add fuel for discussion of the age-old question of "What
is life?".
    Attempts to learn something about the nature of viruses through studies
on their general properties began with Beijerinck’s work in 1898 and were
continued in different laboratories for over thirty years without too much
success. Although Beijerinck and Allard made important contributions, per-
haps the most significant work was that of Vinson and Petre during the
years from 1927 to 1931 when they showed that tobacco mosaic virus could
be subjected to several kinds of chemical manipulations without loss of virus
activity. Nevertheless, when the work on viruses, which is recognized by the
1946 Nobel Prize for Chemistry, was started in 1932, the true nature of virus-
es was a complete mystery. It was not known whether they were inorganic,
carbohydrate, hydrocarbon, lipid, protein or organismal in nature. It be-
came necessary, therefore, to conduct experiments which would yield in-
formation of a definite nature. Tobacco mosaic virus was selected for these
initial experiments because it appeared to provide several unusual advan-
tages. Large amounts of highly infectious starting material were readily


                   CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                                        141




Fig. 2. Graph showing the effect of different hydrogen-ion concentrations on the inac-
tivation of tobacco mosaic virus with pepsin at 37º C. The lines showing the average
results obtained at pH 5, 6, 7 and 8 fall very close to the line for the controls, thus indicat-
ing little or no inactivation of virus. The line showing the results obtained at pH 3 drops
sharply, thus indicating a rapid inactivation of virus. (From W. M. Stanley, Phytopa-
                                   thology, 24 (1934) 1269)

available and the virus was known to be unusually stable. Furthermore, it
was possible to titrate or measure the amount of this virus in a preparation
with ease and rapidity and with great accuracy. The experimental foundation
which resulted in the subsequent isolation of crystalline tobacco mosaic virus
was laid during the course of two and one-half years. The work was reported
in a series of five papers published in Phytopathology in 1934 and 1935 under
the general title "Chemical studies on the virus of tobacco mosaic". The sub-
titles serve to denote the character of the experimental work and are as
follows: I. Some effects of trypsin; II. The proteolytic action of pepsin; III.
Rates of inactivation at different hydrogen ion concentrations; IV. Some
effects of different chemical agents on infectivity; V. Determination of op-
timum hydrogen-ion concentrations for purification by precipitation with
lead acetate.
    The experimental results described in the first paper demonstrate that the


142                              1946 W.M.STANLEY




Fig. 3. Graph showing the effect of different pepsin concentrations and of a different
digestion temperature on the inactivation of tobacco mosaic virus with pepsin. The line
showing the average results obtained with the pepsin concentration (C x 1) used in
most of the experiments at 37º C, drops away from the line for the controls sharply,
thus indicating a rapid inactivation of virus. The line for the results obtained when the
pepsin concentration is reduced to 1/10 (C x1/10) falls off very gradually, whereas the
line for the results obtained when the pepsin concentration is increased 10 times (C x
10 ) falls off almost at right angles. When new or active virus was added to the latter
solutions (C x 10) there was but little immediate effect on the infectivity of the added
active virus. However on digestion the activity of the added virus decreased as indicated
by the extension of the line for the results obtained with pepsin concentration C x 10 .
The line for the results obtained with the usual pepsin concentration (C x 1 ) at - 15º C
falls very close to the line for the controls, thus indicating little or no inactivation of
               virus. (From W. M. Stanley, Phytopathology, 24 (1934) 1269.)

decrease in infectivity of tobacco mosaic virus on addition of trypsin is not
due to the proteolytic activity of trypsin because the loss in infectivity is
immediate and can take place over a wide range of hydrogen-ion concentra-
tions, including some at which trypsin is inactive proteolytically. The in-
fectivity of the virus was regained by treatment with heat, by dilution or by
digestion and removal of trypsin. It was also found that a similar loss of the
infectivity takes place on addition of trypsinogen or globin, proteins which


                CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                            I43
possess no proteolytic activity, but which, like trypsin, have isoelectric points
more alkaline than pH 7. Unfortunately the work with trypsin failed to
provide definite information regarding the nature of tobacco mosaic virus.
However, in studies with pepsin it was found that this enzyme inactivated
the virus only under conditions under which pepsin is active as a proteolytic
agent. Pepsin was found to have no appreciable immediate effect on the in-
fectivity of the virus and to have no effect on the infectivity of virus prepara-
tions held at pH 7 or pH 8. However, at pH 3 and 37º C the virus activity was
found to disappear slowly. Although the rate of inactivation was found to be
slower than the rate of peptic digestion of ordinary proteins, it was, never-
theless, proportional to the concentration and activity of pepsin and to the
time of digestion. The results of some typical experiments are presented in
Figs. 2 and 3. It was not found possible to regain the infectivity of virus in-
activated by pepsin. It was concluded in 1934 that "the virus of tobacco
mosaic is a protein, or very closely associated with a protein, which may be
hydrolyzed by pepsin". At last a definite clue had been obtained and this
served to eliminate several kinds of materials from consideration and permit-
ted concentration on proteinaceous materials.
   Studies on the rates of inactivation of tobacco mosaic virus at different
hydrogen-ion concentrations provided valuable information, for it was
found that the virus was extremely stable between pH 3 and pH 8, and fairly
stable between pH 1.5 and pH 2.5 and between pH 8 and pH 9. As a result of
studies on the effects of over one hundred different chemicals on tobacco
mosaic virus, it was found that the only chemicals which had a direct in-
activating action could be classified as oxidizing agents, protein-precipitating
agents and agents causing a hydrogen-ion concentration known to inac-
tivate the virus. It was concluded that "as a whole, the results are in harmony
with the conception that this virus is a protein". As a result of these studies
efforts were directed more definitely towards the development of procedures
useful in the concentration and purification of proteins. The optimum hy-
drogen-ion concentrations for carrying out the three principal steps in the
lead acetate process for the purification of tobacco mosaic virus proposed by
Vinson and Petre were determined. It was found that the optimum hy-
drogen-ion concentrations for the lead subacetate precipitation, for the neu-
tral lead acetate precipitation and for the elution of the virus from the neutral
lead acetate precipitate, were about pH 9, pH 5.5 and pH 7, respectively.
Utilization of this process yielded colorless, partially purified solutions
having a virus content equal to, or somewhat greater than that of the starting


I44                          1946 W. M. STANLEY

material. Subsequently, it was found that concentration and purification of
the virus could be effected readily by means of a combination of isoelectric
precipitation and salting out with ammonium sulfate. A description of this
procedure, which yielded a crystalline material as the end-product, is con-
tained in the following paragraph.
   Turkish tobacco plants grown in pots or flats in a greenhouse are inoculated
when about 3 or 4 inches high by rubbing one or two leaves with a bandage
gauze pad moistened with a virus preparation. About 2 or 3 weeks later, and
preferably not more than 4 weeks later, the plants are cut and frozen. The
frozen plants are put through a meat grinder, the pulp is allowed to thaw,
and the juice pressed out. This and all subsequent steps are carried out in a
room held at about 4º C, or if this is impossible, the juice and all containers
and materials with which it comes in contact are kept as close to 4º C as pos-
sible. The juice is adjusted to pH 7.2        0.2 by adding 0.1 to 1 N NaOH, re-
combined with the press cake, well mixed, and again pressed out. The juice
will now be at about pH 6.7 ± 0.2. However, if it be desired, sufficient con-
centrated disodium phosphate to cause the expressed juice to be at pH 6.7
0.2, may be added directly to the pulp. The extract is filtered through a layer
of "Standard" celite about ½ inch thick on a Büchner funnel. The celite filter
cake is scraped with the flattened end of a spatula from time to time in order
to speed the filtration. The filtrate will be found to contain from about 1 to
2 mg total nitrogen per ml, of which about 0.6 to 1.2 mg per ml is protein
nitrogen. The globulin fraction is precipitated by the addition of 30 per cent
by weight of ammonium sulfate and removed by filtration with filter paper
or more rapidly by means of a thin layer of celite on a Büchner funnel. The
precipitate is dissolved in 0.1 M phosphate buffer at pH 7 or in sufficient water
to give about a I per cent solution of protein, and then adjusted to pH 7, and
again precipitated with ammonium sulfate. It will be found that considerably
less ammonium sulfate will be required to precipitate all virus activity. The
amount varies somewhat but approaches II per cent by weight. The use of
smaller amounts of ammonium sulfate permits inactive protein and pigment
to be lost in the filtrate. If celite and a Büchner funnel are used, the celite may
be removed before precipitation of the protein by filtration at about pH 7 in
the presence of less than II per cent ammonium sulfate. After two or three
precipitations with ammonium sulfate, or when the filtrate from the ammo-
nium sulfate precipitation becomes practically colorless, the precipitate will
usually be found to be only slightly colored. If the precipitate has consid-
erable color after several precipitations with salt, much of the color can be


                 CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                                145
precipitated and removed by treatment of a solution of the precipitate with
minimal amounts of lead subacetate. Following an additional precipitation
with the salt, the precipitate is dissolved in water and the solution adjusted to
about pH 4. This causes precipitation of the protein, which is removed by
filtration through a thin layer of celite. The filtrate contains some pigment
and inactive, presumably normal, protein. The celite filter cake containing
the protein is suspended in water and adjusted to pH 7 and the celite removed
by filtration on a Büchner funnel. The filtrate will be opalescent, practically
colorless, and contain about 80 per cent of the virus in the starting material.




Fig. 4. Crystals of tobacco mosaic virus ( x 675). (From W. M. Stanley, Am. J. Botany,
                                    24 (1937) 59.)

The protein in the filtrate is crystallized by adding slowly, with stirring,
sufficient of a saturated solution of ammonium sulfate to cause a slight
cloudiness, followed by a solution of 10 per cent glacial acetic acid in one-
half saturated ammonium sulfate sufficient to increase the hydrogen-ion
concentration to about pH 5. The suspension of the crystals has a very
characteristic appearance. When stirred it has a satin-like sheen. The crystals,
which are shown in Fig. 4, are very small and may best be observed by means
of a microscope at a magnification of about 400 times. Within a few months
following the publication of a description of the isolation procedure, the
isolation of the crystalline material was confirmed in several laboratories in
different parts of the world.
   Following the isolation of the crystalline material the immediate and im-
portant tasks consisted of proving that virus activity either was, or was not,
a. specific property of the crystalline material and, in the event of a positive


146                          1946 W.M.STANLEY

correlation, of securing a complete chemical, biological and physical charac-
terization of the crystalline material. Much effort has been and continues to
be devoted to these two tasks. Needless to say, for a time there was great
skepticism that the crystalline material could be tobacco mosaic, due chiefly
to the old idea that viruses were living organisms. A wide variety of experi-
mental approaches has been used to test the proposal that the crystalline ma-
terial represented tobacco mosaic virus. It was found that essentially all of the
virus activity present in infectious juice could be isolated in the form of the
crystalline material. The virus activity of this material was about 500 times
that of the starting material. One ml of a solution containing but 10-9 grams
 of the material has usually proven infectious and occasionally, under favor-
able conditions, one ml containing only 10-14 grams has caused infection.
 The same crystalline material has been obtained repeatedly from different
 batches of diseased plants obtained at different times of the year and under
 different growing conditions. The same material has been obtained from dif-
 ferent kinds of plants, such as mosaic-diseased tomato, petunia, spinach and
 phlox plants. The material has been recrystallized with little or no change in
 its properties. Fractional crystallization yielded no evidence for inhomogene-
 ity. Fractionation by means of filtration through fine membranes, by means
 of centrifugation and by means of electrophoresis likewise yielded no evi-
 dence for the presence of extraneous material. The crystalline material and
 virus activity were always directly related on movement in a high-speed
 centrifuge or in the Tiselius electrophoresis apparatus under a wide variety of
 conditions. Antiserum to the material was found to give a specific precipi-
 tin test and to neutralize virus activity specifically. The virus material was
  found to bear no serological relationship to material present in extracts of
  normal tobacco, tomato or phlox plants. When solutions of the material
 were made more alkaline than about pH 11, or more acid than about pH 2, or
  were heated to about 75º C the protein was denatured and the virus activity
  was lost. In these cases, as when tobacco mosaic virus was subjected to strong
  solutions of urea or of detergents, the rate of denaturation of the protein and
 the loss of virus activity paralleled each other. The ultraviolet light absorp-
  tion spectrum of the material was found to coincide with the destruction
  spectrum of virus activity. Treatment of virus solutions with ultraviolet light,
  hydrogen peroxide or nitrous acid resulted in loss of activity without accom-
  panying gross chemical and physical changes. The high molecular weight
  and ability to crystallize were retained. Of special significance was the find-
  ing that by treatment with formaldehyde, it was possible to cause measurable


                  CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                                  I47
       Table I. Composition of tobacco mosaic virus* and some of its strains**




* Tobacco mosaic virus has been found to contain 1.5 per cent of amide nitrogen and 6
per cent of ribonucleic acid.
** The values given in the table represent percentages of the indicated amino acids. In
order to facilitate comparison, the values which are considered to differ significantly
from those of TMV are underlined.
* * * Mean deviation of the values of single determinations from the averages given.
Three to five preparations of each strain were analyzed for each amino acid, with the
exception of cysteine, and the results were averaged to give the figures presented. (From
C. A. Knight, J. Biol. Chem., 171 (1947) 297.


structural changes in the material and loss of virus activity, but by reversing
the structural changes the virus activity was regained. As a whole, the results
indicated that the crystalline material was, in fact, tobacco mosaic virus.
   Attention was therefore directed to the characterization of the crystalline
material. The material was originally reported to be a protein and to contain


148                          1946 W.M.STANLEY

about 52 per cent carbon, about 7 per cent hydrogen and about 16 per cent
nitrogen, and was later found to contain, in addition, about 0.6 per cent
phosphorus and 0.2 per cent sulfur. The fact that nucleic acid could be iso-
lated from the crystalline material was reported by Pirie and coworkers in
December, 1936, and by the writer a few days later. Although Pirie and co-
workers concluded in 1937 that the crystalline virus material was a nucleo-
protein, the presence of nucleic acid as a component of the virus was ques-
tioned at first by the writer. However, within a few months the writer be-
came convinced that the nucleic acid could not be removed without causing
loss of virus activity and there was general agreement that the virus was a
nucleoprotein. Later, Loring, working in the writer’s laboratory, dem-
onstrated that about 90 per cent of the phosphorus in tobacco mosaic virus
could be isolated in the form of pure pentosenucleic acid. This work, as well
as the earlier and also subsequent work, has provided ample justification for
regarding tobacco mosaic virus as a nucleoprotein. Elementary chemical
 analyses of the nucleoprotein are not very significant because most proteins
have a similar elementary composition. However, the amino acid composi-
 tion can be used to characterize a protein material somewhat more definitely.
 Considerable effort has been devoted to a study of the amino acid composi-
 tion of tobacco mosaic virus and all or most of the virus has been accounted
 for. The most recent results are given in the first column of Table 1. It can be
 noted that the virus does not contain histidine or methionine and that there
is no special concentration of basic amino acids.
    Early experiments involving osmotic pressure indicated that the purified
virus material possessed an unusually large particle size. Subsequently a sam-
ple of the purified nucleoprotein was sent to Professor Svedberg who, with
Eriksson-Quensel, found the nucleoprotein to have a molecular weight,
 based on a dissymmetry constant of 1.3, of about 17 millions. Later, Lauffer,
in the writer’s laboratory, conducted extensive studies on the physicochemical
 and optical properties of solutions of the virus nucleoprotein. Early deter-
 minations of viscosity and sedimentation yielded data which permitted the
 conclusion that the particles of tobacco mosaic virus consisted of rods, about
 12      in diameter and about 400        in length, with a molecular weight of
 about 40 millions. These results were received with some skepticism because
 they were based on physicochemical theory, certain aspects of which were
 relatively untested. However, when the electron microscope became avail-
 able, pictures of purified tobacco mosaic virus were made, first in Germany
 and later in the writer’s laboratory, and these provided direct evidence of the


                 CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                               149
existence of the rods 15 by 280         in size. A recent study by means of the
electron microscope of tobacco mosaic virus from three different parts of the
world showed that the most common length of the rods is 280                 8.6
Electron micrographs of these three samples are shown in Fig. 5. Recent stud-
ies on the physicochemical and optical properties of solutions of tobacco
mosaic virus have yielded data on the size and shape of the virus rods which
are in complete accord with the results obtained with the electron micro-
scope. Because of the high molecular weight of tobacco mosaic virus and
because adequate high-speed centrifuges have become available during the
past few years, a physical method involving differential centrifugation has
been developed for the concentration and purification of tobacco mosaic
virus and this method is now used extensively.
    An interesting and potentially very important property of the rods of to-
bacco mosaic virus is their ability to aggregate end-to-end. This aggregation
appears to be partly reversible and partly irreversible and the degree of re-
versibility appears to depend in part upon the conditions under which the
particles were originally aggregated. Although electron micrographs of the
contents of hair cells of tobacco mosaic diseased plants indicate that about
two-thirds of the rod-like particles present are about 280           in length, it is
possible to secure purified preparations of tobacco mosaic virus in different
stages of aggregation. The degree of aggregation depends largely upon the
 method of purification and preparations having the highest specific virus
activity always consist of monomers, that is, of rods about 280           in length.
 If these are aggregated, the specific activity or activity per mg of protein ni-
 trogen, is decreased. Likewise, preparations obtained from infectious juice by
 a process designed to yield a preponderance of rods shorter than 280              or
 preparations of short rods obtained by sonic treatment of rods 280                in
 length, always possess a low or negligible virus activity. Although it is im-
 possible to foretell what the future may bring, the experimental data avail-
 able at present indicate that the rods 15 by 280         in size represent tobacco
 mosaic virus, despite the fact that preparations of these rods in different
 stages of aggregation can exist. Studies on the interaction of the virus rods
 are proving a fruitful field and may yield significant information regarding
 important processes within living cells. Bernal and Fankuchen have called
 attention to the fact that, as the rod-like particles of tobacco mosaic virus are
 brought closer and closer together in solution, the virus rods begin to as-
 sume positions parallel to each other even at distances of several hundreds of
 A. This unusual phenomenon provides evidence for the existence of long


Fig. 5. Typical electron micrographs of the contents of hair cells from leaves of Turkish
tobacco plants diseased with the (a) Dahlem, (b) Rothamsted, and (c) Princeton samples
of tobacco mosaic virus. Mounts prepared with gold by the shadow-casting technique.
(X 34,800). (From G. Oster, C. A. Knight and W. M. Stanley, Arch. Biochem., 15
                                      (1947) 279.)


                 CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                              151
range forces. These workers have also reported that the needle-shaped crys-
tals of tobacco mosaic virus have no regularity in the direction of their length
and hence, that the virus crystals have a two-dimensional, rather than a
three-dimensional, type of regularity.
    The size and rod-like shape of the particles of tobacco mosaic virus endow
its solutions with some unusual properties. If a rather concentrated solution
of purified tobacco mosaic virus is allowed to stand it will separate into two
distinct layers. As can be seen from Figs. 6 and 7 the line of demarcation be-
tween the layers is quite sharp. The upper layer is not birefringent whereas
the lower layer is spontaneously birefringent. The lower layer appears to
consist of a three-dimensional mosaic of regions arranged at random to each
other but in each of which. all of the rod-shaped particles are orientated and
are parallel to each other. The concentration of virus is somewhat greater
in the lower layer than in the upper layer. Dilution of the lower layer yields
a solution having the properties of the upper layer. When solutions of to-
bacco mosaic virus are caused to flow the flowing stream becomes bire-
 fringent, as shown in Figs. 8 and 9. This is due to the fact that the flowing
stream causes the rod-like particles to line up parallel to each other and thus
 to assume a degree of orientation similar to that which obtains in a crystal.
 When an electric field is applied across a solution of tobacco mosaic virus
either positive or negative birefringence may be shown. The electrical
 double refraction appears to be due to the orientation of the virus rods par-
allel to the field for the case of positive birefringence and perpendicular to the
field for the case of negative birefringence. The double refraction of dilute
 solutions in an alternating field of 60 cycles appears to be positive for all
 values of field strength. The results indicate that the two ends of the virus
 rod differ. This difference may prove to be an important factor in the end-to-
 end aggregation of the rods of tobacco mosaic virus. When tobacco mosaic
 virus is dissolved in solvents having a refractive index approaching that of
 the virus, little or no stream double refraction is obtained. These and other
 studies indicate that the virus rods have little or no intrinsic double refraction.
 However, Bernal and Fankuchen have found, by means of X-ray studies,
 that the individual rods of tobacco mosaic virus have a regular inner struc-
 ture of such a nature that each rod could be considered to be a crystal. The
 significance of this detailed structure within the rods of tobacco mosaic virus
 has not been elucidated. However, as described earlier, the entire rod appears
 necessary for virus activity, for breakage of the rod into two halves is accom-
  panied by loss of virus activity. It may be of interest that heat treatment of


152   1946 W.M.STANLEY




         Figs. 6-9.


                  CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                                 153
solutions of purified tobacco mosaic virus has yielded nucleic acid prepara-
tions having very large and asymmetric particles. The size and shape of these
particles are such that it has been suggested that a virus rod has eight of these
nucleic acid particles running the length of the virus rod. Perhaps it is this
combination of amino acid and nucleic acid structure which yields the
amazing virus activity. Needless to say, one of the important problems for
the future is the elucidation of the nature of virus activity.
   Much of the foregoing is a description of the isolation and properties of
crystalline tobacco mosaic virus and includes the work on viruses which was
recognized by the 1946 Nobel Prize for Chemistry. The isolation of the crys-
talline tobacco mosaic virus has been followed by very important work and,
although there is not sufficient space to describe this subsequent work, it does
seem fitting that the more important aspects should be mentioned here. Most
viruses are known to exist in the form of different strains. Plants diseased
with eight distinctive strains of tobacco mosaic virus were subjected to the
same isolation procedure which yielded crystalline tobacco mosaic virus. The
eight nucleoprotein preparations which were obtained were found to pos-
sess similar, yet distinctive properties. As can be seen from Fig. IO, the par-
ticles of the different virus strains were similar in size and shape. Of great
importance was the fact that in a study of the amino acid composition of the
purified preparations of the eight strains, definite differences, presumably

Fig. 6. A tube of tobacco mosaic virus solution which, upon standing, has separated
into two layers. The photograph, taken with the aid of crossed Polaroid plates, shows
that the bottom layer material is spontaneously doubly refracting, whereas the top layer
material is not spontaneously doubly refracting. Double refraction of flow is shown by
the virus in both layers. (From M. A. Lauffer and W. M. Stanley, J. Biol. Chem., 123
                                       (1938) 507.)
Fig. 7. The same system as in Fig. 6 taken between parallel Polaroid plates. The inten-
sity of the light transmitted by the bottom layer is about the same as in the case re-
presented in Fig. 6. (From M. A. Lauffer and W. M. Stanley, J. Biol. Chem, 123 (1938)
                                          507.)
Fig. 8. Doubly refracting stream of tobacco mosaic virus solution flowing from the end
of a pipette, photographed between crossed Polaroid plates arranged so that each vibra-
tion direction of the Polaroid plates makes an angle of 45º with the direction of flow.
       (From M. A. Lauffer and W. M. Stanley, J. BioI. Chem., 123 (1938) 507.)
Fig. 9. Same system as in Fig. 8 photographed between parallel Polaroid plates. The
doubly refracting stream appears to be darker than the background in this case. (From
          M. A. Lauffer and W. M. Stanley, J. Biol. Chem., 123 (1938) 507.)


154                            1946 W.M.STANLEY




Fig.10. Electron micrographs of 8 strains of tobacco mosaic virus. TMV-ordinary
tobacco mosaic virus; M-Holmes’ masked; J14DI-derivative of strain obtained by
Jensen; GA-green aucuba; YA-yellow aucuba; HR-Holmes’ rib-grass; CV3 -cucum-
ber virus 3; CV4-cucumber virus 4. The micrographs are of contents of hair cells from
appropriately diseased Turkish tobacco plants except in the cases of CV3 and CV4,
which were obtained from hair cells of diseased cucumber plants. Mounts prepared
with gold by the shadow-casting technique. Line of the micrograph of TMV represents
       1   (From C. A. Knight and G. Oster, Arch. Biochem., 15 (1947) 289.)


correlated with mutation of the virus, were found. The results, which are
presented in Table 1, indicate that the mutation of a virus can be accom-
panied by the elimination of one or more amino acids from the virus struc-
ture, by the introduction of one or more amino acids to the virus structure
or by a change in the concentration of one or more amino acids present in
the virus structure. These results have great significance for biochemistry, for
genetics and for medicine.
  Chemical derivatives of tobacco mosaic virus possessing full virus activity


                   CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                                  155




Fig. 11. Electron micrographs of purified virus preparations. All are at the same mag-
nification and all except 1 and 5 were prepared by the gold shadow-casting technique.
(1) Vaccinia virus; (2) Influenza virus (Lee strain) ; (3) Tobacco mosaic virus prepared
from hair cells; (4) Potato X virus (latent mosaic of potato), hair cell preparation; (5)
T2 coli bacteriophage; (6) Shope rabbit papilloma virus; (7) Southern bean mosaic
virus; (8) Tomato bushy stunt virus. (From C. A. Knight, Symposia on Quantitative
Biology, Biological Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York, Vol. XII, 115-121, 1947.)


have been prepared. However, the virus produced by inoculation of the
chemical derivatives has always proved to be ordinary tobacco mosaic virus.
Work on the concentration and purification of different viruses has proceed-
ed in several laboratories. Over a dozen viruses have been obtained in highly
purified form, mainly by techniques involving high-speed centrifugation.
Electron micrographs of the individual particles of eight of these purified
virus preparations are shown in Fig. 11 at the same magnification. Because
of the wide array of particle size and shape which they afford, purified virus


 156                           1946 W.M.STANLEY




Fig. 12. Crystals of tomato bushy stunt virus ( x 224). (From W. M. Stanley, J. Biol.
                              Chem., 135 (1940) 437.)

preparations are proving exceedingly valuable in connection with studies on
particle interaction and other physicochemical phenomena. Some of these
purified viruses are crystallizable nucleoproteins (Fig. 12), either rod-like or
spherical in shape; others are nucleoproteins which have, as yet, not been
crystallized, and others are large particles consisting of nucleoprotein, lipid,
and carbohydrate, and possessing in some cases, a degree of morphological
differentiation characteristic of organisms. Still other viruses have, as yet,
defied isolation, possibly, in some cases, because of extreme instability. It
is obvious that the chemical and physical properties of only a relatively few
viruses have been determined. In view of the possibility that these represent
the more stable and more readily purified viruses, one cannot be certain that
a true picture of the chemical and physical properties of viruses as a whole
has been obtained as yet.
   The new field of virus research is really in its infancy and much remains to
be accomplished. Certain basic and fundamental problems relating to the
mode of virus reproduction and mutation have taken definite form. Solution
of these problems should yield information of great value to biology, chem-


                CRYSTALLINE TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS                          I57
istry, genetics and medicine. This new field of research has been laid upon a
very broad foundation, for the present status of virus research has been
achieved by contributions from almost every branch of science. It is likely
that a continuation and extension of the application of weapons from many
fields of science will be necessary for the proper and full development of the
new field of virus research.
