MOLECULAR BEAM STUDIES OF
ELEMENTARY CHEMICAL PROCESSES
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1986

by
YUAN TSEH LEE
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and Department of Chemistry, University of
California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA




Chemistry is the study of material transformations. Yet a knowledge of the rate,
or time dependence, of chemical change is of critical importance for the
successful synthesis of new materials and for the utilization of the energy
generated by a reaction. During the past century it has become clear that all
macroscopic chemical processes consist of many elementary chemical reactions
that are themselves simply a series of encounters between atomic or molecular
species. In order to understand the time dependence of chemical reactions,
chemical kineticists have traditionally focused on sorting out all of the elemen-
tary chemical reactions involved in a macroscopic chemical process and deter-
mining their respective rates.
   Our basic understanding of the relation between reactive molecular encoun-
ters and rates of reactions (formulated in terms of activation energies, E a, and
pre-exponential factors, A, as elucidated by Arrhenius in his rate constant
expression, k = Aexp(-E a /kT)), was deepened some fifty years ago following
the discovery of quantum mechanics. Since a chemical reaction is fundamental-
ly a mechanical event, involving the rearrangement of atoms and molecules
during a collision, detailed information on the dynamics of simple chemical
reactions could be obtained by first carrying our extensive quantum mechani-
cal calculations of the interaction potential as a function of interatomic dis-
tances and then computing classical trajectories based on this potential energy
surface [1]. Although these initial theoretical studies were only qualitative,
they heralded a new era in the field of chemical kinetics; the chemist could now,
in principle, predict the dynamical course of a chemical reaction.
   During the past three decades, with the development of many sophisticated
experimental techniques, it has become possible to study the dynamics of
elementary chemical reactions in the laboratory. For example, detailed infor-
mation on the nascent quantum state distributions of simple products for some
chemical reactions can be derived from the chemiluminescence spectra of
reaction products obtained under single collision conditions [2], the analysis of
the threshold operating conditions of a chemical laser [3] or the spectra
obtained using various linear or non-linear laser spectroscopic techniques [4,
5]. However, when one desires to (1) control the energies of the reagents, (2)


                                                Y. T. Lee                                            321


understand the dependence of chemical reactivity on molecular orientation, (3)
explore the nature of reaction intermediates and their subsequent decay dyna-
mics, and (4) identify complex reaction mechanisms involving polyatomic
radical products, the crossed molecular beams technique is most suitable [6, 7].
   Information derived from the measurements of angular and velocity distri-
butions of reaction products played a crucial role in the advancement of our
understanding of the dynamics of elementary chemical reactions. This and the
more general investigations of chemical reactions under single collision condi-
tions in crossed molecular beams will be the subject of this lecture.

Crossed Molecular Beams Experiments: Measurements of Angular and Velocity
Distributions of Products.
If the motion of individual atoms were observable during reactive collisions
between molecules, it would be possible to understand exactly how a chemical
reaction takes place by just following the motion of these atoms. Unfortunately,
despite recent advances in microscope technology that allow us to observe the
static arrangement of atoms in a solid, we are still far from being able to follow
the motion of atoms in the gas phase in real time. The idea of crossed molecular
beams experiments is in a sense to “visualize” the details of a chemical reaction
by tracing the trajectories of the reaction products. This is done by first
defining the velocities, approach angle, and other initial conditions of the
reactants, and then measuring the velocity and angular distribution of the
products. For example, in the investigation of the F +                                DF + D reaction
[8], if we let F atoms and D2 molecules collide at a relative energy of 1.82 kcal/
mol and then measure the angular and velocity distributions of DF products,
w e w i l l o b t ai n t h e r e s u l t s s h o w n i n F i g . 1 . Th is co n to u r map s h o w s th e
probability of DF products appearing at specific angles and velocities and
reveals a great deal about the dynamics of the reaction. 0° corresponds to the
initial direction of the F atom beam and the distance between any point and the
center is the center-of-mass velocity. The strong backward peaking of DF
products with respect to the initial direction of F atoms indicates that not all
the collisions between F atoms and D 2 molecules produce DF product. Only
those collisions in which the F atom and the two D atoms are nearly linear will
react and produce DF. Apparently, if an F atom collides with a D 2 m o l e c u l e
from a direction perpendicular to the molecular axis of the D 2, the F atom will
only bounce off elastically. The appearance of DF in several velocity bands is
due to the fact that DF molecules are produced in several vibrational states
with different recoil velocities as indicated in the figure. Since the total energy
released in every reactive encounter between F and D 2 i s t h e s a m e , t h e
maximum energy available for translational motion will depend on the vibra-
t i o n a l q u a n t u m s t a t e o f D F . B e c a u s e t h e rotational energy spread of DF
products is less than the spacings of the vibrational energy levels, the recoil
velocities of various vibrational states of DF products are well separated and
can be identified easily.
     If a crossed molecular beams study of the F +                                DF + D reaction is
carried out using the an experimental arrangement shown in Fig. 2, the rate of


322




Fig. 1. Center-of-mass velocity flux contour map for the F + D2   DF + D reaction. F atoms and
D 2 molecules move towards each other at a collision energy of 1.82 kcal/mol, with the F atoms
moving from right to left.




production of DF products, dN D F/dt, in the scattering volume defined by the
crossing of two beams can be estimated from the following equation:




where n f and n D2 are the number densities of F atoms and D 2 molecules in the
scattering region,        g, and AV are the reaction cross section, the relative
velocity between F and D 2 and the scattering volume, respectively. In a
experiment using a velocity selected effusive F atom source and a supersonic
beam of D 2, the values of       nD 2 , and AV are typically 10 10 molecules/cc, 10 12
molecules/cc, and 10 cc. If the relative velocity between F and D2 is 10 c m /
                         -2                                                     5



sec and the reactive cross section is 10 -15 c m , the dN H F/dt will have a value of
                                                 2


                                               Y. T. Lee                                           323




Fig.2. Experimental arrangement for F +                    DF + D and F + H 2      HF + H reactive
scattering. Pressures (in torr) for each region are indicated. Components shown by numbers are:
(1) effusive F atom beam source made of nickel, resistively heated; (2) velocity selector; (3) liquid
nitrogen cooled cold trap; (4) D2 or H2 beam source, supersonic expansion, (5) heater, (6) liquid
nitrogen feed line, (7) skimmer, (8) tuning fork chopper, (9) synchoronous motor, (10) cross
correlation chopper for time-of-flight velocity analysis, (11) ultrahigh vacuum, triply differentially
pumped, mass spectrometric detector chamber.



1 010 molecules/sec. These DF products with various recoil velocities will scatter
into a range of laboratory angles. If the DF is scattered fairly evenly within 1
steradian of solid angle in the laboratory and if the movable detector which
scans the angular distribution has an acceptance solid angle of 1/3000 stera-
dian (approximately an angular width of 1° in both directions from the detector
axis), the detector will receive ~3 X 1 06 DF molecules per second.
    This would certainly constitute a large product signal, assuming we were
able to count all of these molecules. Indeed, in a reactive scattering experiment
using a beam of alkali atoms, surface ionization could be used to detect the
alkali containing product with nearly 100 percent efficiency and with high
specificity. Therefore, even in the presence of a billion times more background
molecules very good signal to noise ratios can be obtained in a short time.
    To detect the DF products, however, first it is necessary to ionize DF to DF +
by electron bombardment. The product ion can then be mass filtered and
counted. The typical ionization efficiency for a molecule during the short
 transit time through the ionizer is about 10 - 4. 3 x 106 DF/sec reaching the


324                                 Chemistry 1986


detector will yield only 300 DF+ ions/sec. However, this is a large enough
number to allow reliable measurements of angular and velocity distributions in
a relatively short time if the background count rate is not much greater.
Indeed, the success of a crossed molecular beams study of such a chemical
reaction depends entirely on whether the background in the mass spectrometric
detector can be reduced sufficiently [9].
   There are two sources of background molecules in the detector that one has
to deal with in a crossed molecular beams experiment: the inherent background
in the detector chamber and the background caused by the effusion of mole-
cules from the collision chamber into the detector when the beams are on. The
former is mainly due to outgassing from the materials used for the construction
of the chamber and to limitations imposed by the performance of the ultrahigh
vacuum pumping equipment. Reduction of the latter requires many stages of
differential pumping using buffer chamber. 3 x 10 6 molecules/sec entering the
detector with a speed of 10 5 cm/sec through a 0.3 cm 2 aperture will establish a
steady state density of only 100 molecules/cc, which is equivalent to a DF
pressure of about 3 x 10 - 1 5 torr. This is four orders of magnitude lower than
the pressure attainable using conventional ultrahigh vacuum techniques. Since
none of the chemical compounds found in a vacuum system give ions with a
mass-to-charge ratio (m/e) of 21 (DF+ ) in the ionization process, inherent
background will not be a problem for the investigation of the F +           DF + D
reaction even if the ultimate pressure of the detector chamber is around 10 -11
torr.
   Suppose the partial pressure of DF background molecules in the collision
chamber after the introduction of beams of F atoms and D 2 molecules reaches
~ 1 0 -9 torr. Then three stages of differential pumping will be required to obtain
a partial pressure of ~ 1 0 in the ionizer chamber if the partial pressure of DF
                             -15



is reduced by a factor of 100 in each separately pumped buffer chamber. As
long as the inherent background in the detector does not contain the species to
be detected, extensive differential pumping appears to be the only thing needed
to make reactive scattering experiments feasible. This conclusion is unfortunate-
ly not quite correct. In order to detect the scattered products, the defining
apertures, which are located on the walls of the buffer chambers of the detector,
must be perfectly aligned. This limits the reduction of background that would
be possible through many stages of differential pumping since some of the DF
molecules in the main chamber moving along the axis of the detector will pass
straight through all the defining apertures and into the detector chamber. It is
important to understand that no matter how many stages of differential pump-
ing are arranged between the collision chamber and the detector chamber, the
number of these “straight through” molecules can not be reduced.
   If all the apertures on the walls of the buffer chambers and the detector
chamber have the same area, A, the steady state density of “straight through”
molecules in the detector chamber, n’, at a distance d from the entrance
aperture of the first buffer chamber can be calculated from the following
relation


                                      Y. T. Lee                                 325




where n is the number density of background molecules in the collision cham-
ber. If d is 20 cm and A is 0.3 cm 2




If the partial pressure of DF background molecules in the collision chamber is
1 0-9 torr, the “straight through” molecules will create a steady state density of
6 x 10-14 torr, which is 60 times larger than what one hopes to accomplish with
3 stages of differential pumping. Of course, reduction of the partial pressure of
DF molecules in the collision chamber will also reduce the “straight through”
background, but increasing the pumping speed in the collision chamber to
reduce the partial pressure of DF by several orders of magnitude is simply not a
practical solution.
   Fortunately there is a way to reduce this background without substantially
increasing the pumping speed in the collision chamber. Recognizing that at a
pressure of 10 - 7 torr the mean free path between molecular collisions in the
collision chamber is more than 100 meters, which is two orders of magnitude
larger than the size of a typical scattering apparatus, one realizes that almost
all of the “straight through” background will come from those molecules that
bounce off the surface which is in the line-of-sight of the detector, and not from
gas phase collisions that occur in the viewing window of the detector. Installing
a small liquid helium cooled surface opposite the detector and behind the
collision region, such that the detector line-of-sight always faces a cold surface,
will help to eliminate this background since the surface will trap essentially all
condensable molecules that impinge on it.
   Since the mid-1960’s, many “universal” crossed molecular beams apparati
have been constructed in various laboratories. Since ultrahigh vacuum equip-
ment available twenty years ago could attain an ultimate pressure of only
~ 1 0 -10 torr, and only two stages of differential pumping were needed to reduce
the pressure from 10 - 7 torr in the collision chamber to 10 - 1 0 t o r r i n t h e
detector chamber, almost all mass spectrometric detectors with electron impact
ionization were constructed with no more than two stages of differential pump-
ing, the principal exceptions being those built in our laboratory [10]. The
failure to recognize that for many chemical species the partial pressure in the
detector chamber could be reduced well below the ultimate total pressure
through additional differential pumping was part of the reason why many of
these apparatuses did not perform optimally.


Direct Experimental Probing of Potential Energy Surfaces
For gaseous rare gas systems, if the interaction potentials between the atoms
are accurately known, all bulk properties and transport phenomena can be
predicted theoretically. Similarly, for a simple atom-molecule reaction, the
potential energy surface, which describes the interaction potential as a function


326                                Chemistry 1986


of the coordinates of the atoms, will be the basis for the understanding of the
detailed dynamics of a chemical reaction.
   One of the systems which has attracted extensive attention in both experi-
mental and theoretical efforts during the last fifteen years is the reaction of
                     In the early 1970’s, using quasi-classical trajectory calcula-
tions, Muckerman derived a semiempirical potential energy surface, known as
the Muckerman V surface, which gave results in agreement with all experimen-
tal data available at that time [11]. These results included rate constants,
vibrational-rotational state distributions obtained from chemical laser and
chemiluminescence experiments, as well as product angular distributions ob-
tained from               DF+D experiments as shown in Fig. 1. The potential
energy surface obtained from the ab initio quantum mechanical calculations
[12] was still rather limited at that time, but it did show many important
features which were in good qualitative agreement with the Muckerman V
surface.
   If the Muckerman V surface were sufficiently accurate, it would be possible
to carry out scattering calculations using this surface under conditions which
could not be easily arranged in the laboratory. This would significantly expand
the scope of our understanding of the dynamics of this system. However, the
accuracy of the Muckerman V surface depends not only on the reliability of the
experimental input used in the derivation of the surface, but also on the
applicability of classical mechanics in treating the              HF+H reaction.
This is certainly a major concern for a H atom transfer reaction.
   One dimensional quantum calculations on the F+H 2 reaction, although not
necessarily realistic, had in fact shown the inadequacy of classical mechanics in
handling this reaction [13, 14] . Q uantum effects were, indeed, very important,
and in all these calculations strong “resonances” were found in the dependence
of reaction probability on collision energy [15]. These resonances were later
shown to be due to the formation of “quasi-bound” states in the F-H-H
reaction intermediate [16, 17] . The F+H 2 surface has a barrier in the entrance
channel, but there is no attractive well in the intimate region near the transition
state. The quasi-bound states in the F+H 2 reaction are entirely dynamical in
nature. Loosely speaking, the first dynamic resonance is due to the formation of
a bound state which is a superposition of F+H 2 (v = 0) and HF (v=3)+H in
the intimate region of chemical interaction.
   The discovery of dynamical resonances in the collinear quanta1 calculations
of the F+H 2 system provided new possibilities for probing the critical region of
the potential energy surface more directly. In contrast to most other microscop-
ic experiments, in which the influence of the potential energy surface on the
final distribution of products is assessed, the experimental observation of
resonances is almost equivalent to carrying out vibrational spectroscopy direct-
ly on the reaction intermediate. Thus it should offer a more stringent test of the
details of the calculated potential energy surface [16].
  In a three dimensional quantum scattering calculation of F + H 2 o n t h e
Muckerman V surface, Wyatt et al. [18] have shown that as the collision
energy is increased beyond the one dimensional resonance energy, the reso-


Fig 3. Laboratory angular distribution for F + para-H 2 , 1.84 kcal/mol, velocity diagram shown
below. Both the data and calculated laboratory distributions are shown            data, ----- total
                                                              ( f r o m H2 (J=2)).




nance does not just disappear but occurs at increasingly larger impact param-
eters. Consequently, resonances cannot be observed in an experiment in which
the reaction cross section is measured as a function of collision energy. On the
other hand, if the experiment is carried out at a fixed collision energy, and if the
reaction probability is measured as a function of impact parameter, the reso-
nance should be observable. Unfortunately, one has no hope of controlling or


328




330


                                        Y. T. Lee                                        331




Fig. 5. Center-of-mass velocity flux contour map for F + para-H2, 1.84 kcal/mol, shown in three
dimensional   perspective.


332                                 Chemistry 1986


measuring the impact parameter in a scattering experiment. But, for F + H 2
HF + H, in which the collinear configuration dominates the reactive scattering
at lower collision energies, the scattering angle of HF should depend on the
impact parameter. In particular, when a quasi-bound state is formed, if the
average lifetime of the F-H-H intermediate is an appreciable fraction of its
rotational period, HF produced from the decay of the F-H-H quasi-bound state
is expected to scatter in a more forward direction compared to the strongly
backward peaked HF produced by direct reaction. One of the unique and most
important aspects of the measurement of product angular distributions is that
one can use the rotational period of the reaction intermediate, typically 10 -12 --
1 0-13 sec to judge the lifetime of the reaction intermediate [6]. If the average
lifetime of the intermediate is much longer than the rotational period, the
angular distribution of products will show forward-backward symmetry. On
the other hand, if the lifetime is much shorter, the asymmetric angular distribu-
tion reveals the preferred molecular orientation for the chemical reaction to
occur.
    Experimental measurements of the laboratory angular distribution and time-
of-flight velocity distributions of HF products at a collision energy of 1.84 kcal/
mole, using the experimental arrangement shown in Fig. 2, are shown in Figs. 3
and 4. The velocity and angular distributions in the center-of-mass coordinate
system derived from these experimental results are shown in Fig. 5 [19]. The
enhanced forward peaking in the angular distribution of HF in v=3 is a strong
indication that quasi-bond states are indeed formed in the F + H 2         HF + H
reaction at this energy, and that they seem to decay exclusively into HF in the
v=3 state.
    For the reaction of F + HD       HF + D, quanta1 collinear calculations give a
very striking result. There is a sharp spike in the HF(v=2) reaction probability
near threshold and virtually no other product is formed at higher collision
energies up to 0.2 eV [15]. The collinear calculations therefore indicate that the
formation of HF in this reaction is dominated by resonant scattering while the
DF product is formed by direct scattering. As shown in Fig. 6, the product
angular distribution of HF measured at a collision energy of 1.98 kcal/mol
indeed shows that most of the signal is in the forward direction as expected, in
strong contrast to the DF signal which is formed through direct scattering and
is therefore mainly scattered in the backward direction. Again, the forward
peaked HF products are found to be in the v=3 state, rather than v=2, as was
observed in the quanta1 calculations on F + H 2       HF + F. This disagreement
is certainly due to the shortcoming in the M5 surface. These vibrationally state
specific angular distributions obtained at various collision energies for F + H 2,
H D a n d D2 reactions provide a very stringent test for the ever improving
potential energy surfaces obtained from ab initio quantum mechanical calcula-
tions.
    There is no doubt that through meaningful comparisons with experimental
results, more sophisticated and reliable ab initio quantum mechanical calcula-
 tion techniques will emerge. In the near future, ab initio calculations of
potential energy surfaces and exact scattering calculations on these systems will


Y. T. Lee   333


334                                   Chemistry 1986


likely provide more detailed and accurate information in simple reactive sys-
tems such as F + H 2 than one could possibly learn in the laboratory. The
fruitful interplay of theory and experiment will then extend to more complicat-
ed systems, making chemistry a more exact science.

Exploration of new chemistry under single collision conditions
There are many mysterious phenomena in nature which have thus far defied
explanation. The mystery is often due to the fact that a certain phenomenon
cannot be understood based on our established knowledge or common sense.
   T h e e a s e w i t h w h i c h F2 a n d I2 react to produce electronically excited IF
molecules which relax through photon emission was a mystery a dozen years
ago [20]. A molecule-molecule reaction is supposed to have a high energy
barrier and the four-center reaction producing two IF molecules, with either
both in the ground state or one of them in an excited state, is a symmetry
forbidden process. The text book mechanism has either I 2 or F2 molecules first
dissociating into atoms followed by the radical chain reactions F + I 2             IF I
and I + F2       IF + F. However, neither of these reactions is exothermic enough
to produce electronically excited IF.
   The clue that something new might be happening in this reaction was
actually discovered in a crossed molecular beams study of the F + CH 3I                IF
+ CH 3 reaction [21]. When we found that this reaction proceeded through the
formation of a long lived complex, we began to increase the collision energy to
see whether it was possible to shorten the lifetime enough to make it compara-
ble to the rotational period of the CH 3 IF complex. If we could estimate the
lifetime of the collision complex using the rotational period as a clock, it would
be possible to evaluate the stability of this reaction intermediate using statisti-
cal theories for the unimolecular decomposition rate constants. At higher
collision energies, the angular distribution of products monitored at m/e= 146
(IF+) showed a peculiar feature which could not possibly be due to IF pro-
duced from the F + CH 3 I reaction. This was later shown to be from stable
 CH 3 IF produced in the collision volume of the two beams which yielded
additional IF + signal after dissociative ionization.
   The stable CH 3 IF was in fact formed by the reaction of undissociated F2 i n
our F atom beam with CH 3I:


                                             Y. T. Lee




Fig. 7. The kinetic energy dependence of the production   of CH3IF in   the F2 +   CH3I   CH3IF +   F
reaction.



to proceed. But, what amazed us most was that this reaction had a threshold of
only 4 kcal/mol, and that at 7 kcal/mol the reaction



was observed [22]. The production of I and IF in this reaction is most likely
through the secondary decomposition of vibrationally excited I 2 F radicals.
Later, a careful investigation showed that the threshold energy for producing
electronically excited iodofluoride, IF* [23],



is identical to that for I2F + F formation. However, the formation of electroni-
cally excited IF* is only a minor channel compared to I 2 F + F formation.
Apparently, it is a secondary encounter between the departing F atom and the
terminal I atom in I2F which produces IF*. A relatively rare sequential process
during a binary collision between F 2 and I2 is responsible for the production of
electronically excited IF, not the symmetry forbidden four-center reaction
which breaks and forms two bonds simultaneously.


336                                     Chemistry 1986




Fig. 8. CH 3 IF angular distribution, obtained in the reaction of F 2 + C H3 IF+CH31F + F at a
collision energy of 25.1 kcal/mol.




Fig. 9. Energy diagram showing the relative energy CH3 IF intermediate in the reaction of F +
C H3 I   CH 3 + IF and as a product of the endothermic F2 + CH 3 I   CH 3 IF + F reaction.


                                             Y. T. Lee




Fig. 10. An acrobat bounced off the plank converts his kinetic energy into potential energy on his
way to forming a delicate three-man formation. Many delicate radicals which can not be synthe-
sized through exothermic channels were synthesized by this method.




   The fact that one can control kinetic energy precisely and carry out a
synthetic study of delicate new radicals through endothermic reactions is
certainly among the most dramatic features of crossed molecular beams experi-
ments. Successful studies of the stabilities of a series of I-F containing radicals
such as HIF, C1IF and I 2F were carried out by transferring the correct amount
of kinetic energy into potential energy, just like an acrobatic performance in a
circus in which an acrobat is bounced off of a plank and lands gently on the
shoulder of a second acrobat who is standing on top of a third to form a fragile
three acrobat formation (Fig. 10).
   The development of the seeded supersonic beam source has been largely
responsible for making crossed molecular beams experiments at higher colli-
sion energies possible [24]. If a g aseous mixture is expanded into a vacuum
chamber through a small nozzle with a sufficiently high stagnation pressure, all
molecules, regardless of their molecular weights, attain the same average
terminal speed. Consequently, the kinetic energies of molecules in the beam
will be proportional to their molecular weights, and for heavier atoms or


338                                        Chemistry 1986




Fig. 11. Cartesian contour map of Rb+ and I - angular and velocity distributions resulting from
dissociative Xe + RbI collisions at a most probable relative collision energy of 5.97 eV.




molecules a very high kinetic energy can be obtained by seeding a small
fraction of heavy particles in a very light carrier gas.
   Using this aerodynamic acceleration for heavier particles many interesting
experiments have been carried out in our laboratory. In the collision induced
dissociation of alkali halides by rare gas atoms [25], it was found from classical
trajectory simulations of velocity and angular distributions of the products that
for most dissociative collisions at energies near the dissociation threshold, the
most efficient means of transferring translational energy into internal energy is


                                     Y. T. Lee                                 339


through initial bond compression in near collinear collisions. The experimental
angular and velocity distributions of Rb + a n d I- from the reaction Xe + RbI
    Xe + Rb + + I- at a collision energy of 5.97 eV is shown in Fig. 11. The
amount of energy transferred as measured from the final translational energy
distributions of dissociated atoms agrees with the estimated initial momentum
transfer to one of the atoms in the diatomic molecule using the impulse
approximation.
   In a recent series of investigations of substantially endothermic reactions of
Br atoms eith ortho-, meta- and para-chlorotoluenes, a beam of energetic Br
atoms was used to study of reactivity and dynamics of C1 atom substitution by
Br atoms [26]. The intermediates of these reactions are expected to have
potential wells which are much shallower than the endothermicity of reaction.
From the measurements of the translational energy dependence of the reaction
cross sections and the product translational energy distributions, the extent of
energy randomization among various vibrational degrees of freedom was found
to be rather limited. Despite the fact that ortho- and para-chlorotoluenes react
easily, no substitution was observed for meta-chlorotoluene indicating that the
electron density distribution on the benzene ring strongly influences the reactiv-
ity, even though dynamic factors are expected to be more important in endot-
hermic substitution reactions.

Elucidation of Reaction Mechanisms from Product Angular and Velocity Distributions.
In elementary chemical reactions involving complicated polyatomic molecules,
the unravelling of the reaction mechanism is often the most important issue.
Without the positive identification of primary products, it is not possible to
discuss reaction dynamics in a meaningful way. In bulk experiments, the
identification of primary products has often been complicated by fast secondary
reactions of primary products. Recently, advances in sensitive detection meth-
ods and time resolved laser techniques have allowed single collision experi-
ments to become possible even in the bulk, and complications caused by
secondary collisions can be avoided. However, the positive identification of
internally excited polyatomic radicals produced under single collision condi-
tions is still a very difficult problem. Spectroscopic techniques which are so
powerful in providing state resolved detection of atoms or diatomic molecules
are often not very useful, either because of the lack of spectroscopic information
or simply because huge numbers of states are involved. The more general mass
spectrometric technique, which depends heavily on “fingerprints” of fragment
ions for positive identification, also suffers from the fact that fragmentation
patterns for vibrationally excited polyatomic radical products in electron bom-
bardment ionization are not known. This problem is especially serious because
many radicals do not yield parent ions. Even if stable molecules are formed as
products, the change in fragmentation patterns with increasing internal energy
can be so drastic that erroneous conclusions are often reached. For example, at
room temperature both ethanol (C 2H 5OH) and acetaldehyde (CH 3C H O ) w i l l
y i e l d C2 H 5 O H+ a n d C H3 C H O as major ions by electron bombardment
                                      +



ionization. However, since both these ions contain a very weak bond and most


340                                  Chemistry 1986


of the vibrational energy is retained in the ionization process, when highly
vibrationally excited C 2 H 5 OH and CH 3 CHO are ionized, even if parent ions
are initially produced, they will further dissociate into C 2 H 5 O + a n d C H3 C O+
by ejecting an H atom [27].
   The problem of product identification caused by the fragmentation of prima-
ry products during the ionization process can be overcome if product angular
and velocity distributions are measured carefully in high resolution crossed
molecular beams experiments. For example, the reaction between =O( 3P) and
C 2H 4, under single collision conditions using a mass spectrometer to detect the
products generates signal at m/e=43,42,29,27, and 15. The fact that m/e= 15
( C H+ 3 ) a n d 2 9 ( H C O+ ) are the most intense signals suggests that CH 3 +
HCO is the major reaction channel. This conclusion is in agreement with
previous studies of the reaction of O( 3P ) with C 2 H 4 carried out by Cvetanovic
[28], Pruss et al. [29], and Blumenberg et al. [20]. From the analysis of final
products in a bulk experiment using photoionization detection of products with
hydrogen Lyman-α (10.2 eV) radiation and electron bombardment ionization
mass spectrometry, it was concluded that formation of CH 3 and HCO, result-
ing from 1,2 migration of a hydrogen atom in the reaction intermediate and
subsequent C-C rupture, as shown below, provides 90 percent of the products.




The remaining 10 percent is ketene formed by a three center elimination of an
H 2 molecule from the reaction intermediate.




   The measurements of product angular distributions in a crossed molecular
beams experiment [31], as shown in Fig. 12, gave strong evidence that the
above conclusion was not quite correct. The fact that the intense m/e=42
signal and the weak m/e=43 signal (not shown) have the same angular
distributions indicates that the substitution reaction forming vinyloxy radical,
C H2 CHO + H, occurs. The m/e=42 signal (C 2 H 2 O + ) results from dissocia-


                                             Y. T. Lee                                       341




Fig. 12. Angular distributions from the reaction O + C2 H 4 at 10.7 kcal/mol collision energy. (A)
C H2 CHO product, (B) elastic scattering of C 2 H 4 monitored at m/e=27 (C 2 H 3 + ), (C) m/e=15
( C H3 + ), contributions from C 2 H 4 and CH 2 CHO are indicated by x and o respectively.


342                                           Chemistry 1986


tive ionization of CH 2CHO product rather than from the formation of CH 2C O
a n d H2 . The formation of CH 2 CO through the three center elimination of a
hydrogen molecule is expected to release a larger amount of recoil energy and
the fact that CH 2 CO is recoiling from H 2 rather than from an H atom will
cause the laboratory angular distribution of CH 2CO to be much broader than
that of CH 2CHO. The m/e= 15 (CH 3+ ) angular distribution clearly shows that
in addition to reaction products, elastically scattered C 2 H 4 molecules also
produce CH 3 + ions during ionization. The angular distribution of scattered
C 2 H 4 can be unambiguously measured at m/e=27 (C 2 H 3 + ). After substracting
the contribution from elastically scattered C 2 H 4 from the angular distribution
at m/e= 15, it is quite clear that the residual angular distribution of reactively
scattered CH 3 + has an identical angular distribution to that measured at m/e
43 and 42. Apparently, most of the CH 3 + from reactive scattering are also
daughter ions of vinyloxy radicals, CH 2 CHO. If the product channel CH 3 +
H C O w e r e d o m i n a n t t h e a n g u l a r d i s t r i b u t i o n o f C H3+ w o u l d b e m u c h
broader. Without the measurement of product angular or velocity distributions
which reveal the parent-daughter relations one would not have suspected that
the simple substitution reaction forming vinyloxy radical




is in fact the major channel.




    For the reaction of oxygen atoms with benzene the story is quite similar [37].
In earlier mass spectrometric studies of the reaction products under single
collision conditions, it was concluded that in addition to the formation of a
stable addition product, CO elimination from the reaction intermediate to form
C 5H 6 was another major pathway. The CO elimination mechanism was mostly
b a s e d o n t h e e x p e r i m e n t a l o b s e r v a t i o n t hat m/e = 66 and 65 (C 5 H 6 + a n d
C 5 H 5 + ) were the most intense signals. However, the angular distribution of
products monitored at m/e = 66 and 65 in the crossed molecular beams experi-
ments clearly show that they are different from each other but very similar to
those monitored at m/e = 94 and 93 [C 6 H 5 O H+ a n d C6 H 5 O + ], respectively.
Apparently, C 5H 5+ ions observed are not from neutral C 5 H 5 product, but are
actually daughter ions of the phenoxy radical C 6 H 5 O. The fact that the very
weak signals at m/e = 94 and 93 have different angular distributions, as also


                                                Y. T. Lee                                          343




Fig. 13. Angular distributions from the reaction O(3P) + C6H 6, at a collision energy of 6.5 kcal/mol.
The primary reaction products formed were C6H 5O and C6H 5OH, which subsequently fragmented
during electron bombardment ionization.




reflected in the angular distributions of m/e = 66 and 65 shown in Fig. 13, is
convincing evidence that the m/e = 93 signal (C 6H 5O +) is not entirely from the
dissociative ionization of the addition product, C 6 H 5 OH. It is the substitution
reaction, in which an oxygen atom replaces a hydrogen atom in the benzene
molecule, which causes the angular distribution of the phenoxy product,
C 6 H 5 O, to be broader than that of the adduct, C 6 H 5 O H . T h e b e n z e n e r i n g
does not seem to open up after the initial attack of an oxygen atom. The


344                                 Chemistry 1986

subsequent decomposition of phenoxy radicals appears to be the important
ring opening step. Crossed beams studies of substitution reactions of oxygen
atoms with a series of halogenated benzenes [38], indeed showed that very
highly vibrationally excited phenoxy radicals, produced by substituting bro-
mine and iodine atoms in bromo- and iodobenzene with oxygen atoms, under-
go decomposition to eliminate CO.
   The fact that each product in a crossed molecular beams experiment has a
unique angular and velocity distribution and the requirements that total mass
number in a chemical reaction be conserved and that a pair of products from a
given channel have the ratio of their center-of-mass recoil velocities inversely
proportional to their mass ratio in order to conserve linear momentum are
three of the main reasons why measurements of product angular and velocity
distributions are so useful in the positive identification of reaction products,
even in those cases where none of the products yield parent ions in mass
spectrometric detection [9]. In fact, there is no other general method more
useful in elucidating complex gas phase reaction mechanisms and providing
information on the energetics and dynamics.

Molecular beam studies of photochemical processes
In the investigation of reaction dynamics, lasers have become increasingly
important. Not only are they used extensively for the preparation of reagents
and quantum state specific detection of products, but they have also become
indispensable for the investigation of the dynamics and mechanisms of photo-
chemical processes.
   One of the more exciting application of lasers in crossed molecular beams
experiments is the control of the alignment and orientation of electronically
excited orbitals before a reactive encounter. For example, in the reaction of Na
with O 2 [39, 40], if lineary polarized dye lasers are used to sequentially excite
Na atoms from the 3S to 3P to 4D states, the electronically excited 4D orbital
can be aligned along the polarization direction of the electric field vector of the
lasers. Consequently, the effect of the alignment of the excited orbital on
chemical reactivity can be studied in detail by simply rotating the polarization
of the lasers with respect to the relative velocity vector.
   For many atom-molecule reactions that proceed directly without forming
long-lived complexes, for example, K + C H 3 I , F + H2 a n d D2 , a n d
Na(4D) + O 2, the dependence of chemical reactivity on the molecular orienta-
tion can be obtained from measurements of product angular distributions. For
symmetric top moleculars, control of molecular orientation in the laboratory
frame is possible, and careful investigations of the orientation dependence of
chemical reactivity have been carried out for many systems. The combination
of laser induced alignment of excited atomic orbitals and measurements of
product angular distributions provide the first opportunity for the detailed
experimental probing of the correlation between the alignment of the excited
atomic orbital and the orientation of the molecule in a reactive encounter
between an atom and a molecule.
   The experimental arrangement for the reactive scattering of electronically


                                              Y. T. Lee                                          345




Fig. 14. Cut-out view the experimental apparatus for the reactive scattering ofelectronically excited
sodium atoms with various molecules.




excited Na with simple molecules is schematically shown in Fig. 14. Because
the radiative lifetimes of electronically excited Na are short, excitation and
alignment have to be carried out in the intersection region of the two beams.
   The reaction of ground state Na atoms with O 2



is substantially endothermic. Even if Na is electronically excited to the 3P state,
it is still slightly endothermic, and excess translational energy in the reactants
was not found to promote NaO formation in our recent experiments. Further
excitation of Na from 3P to either the 4D or 5S state, which require comparable
excitation energies, makes NaO formation highly exothermic, but only Na(4D)
reacts with O 2 and then only at collision energies greater than 18 kcal/mol. The
NaO produced is sharply backward peaked with respect to the Na atom beam.
As in the low energy reactive scattering of F + D2       DF + D, the Na(4D) and
two O atoms must be lined up collinearly in order for chemical reaction to take
place. Such a strict entrance channel configuration with a high threshold
energy for Na(4D) + O 2        NaO + O and the lack of chemical reactivity for
Na(5S) are quite astonishing for a system in which electron transfer from Na to
O 2 is expected to take place at a relatively large separation.


346




Fig. 1.5. From the measurements of polarization dependence at various angles, the required
geometry for reaction was shown to have the Na-O-O intermediate collinear, so that with increas-
ing impact parameter, the Na-O-O axis must be tilted with respect to the relative velocity vector.
The Na(4d z2) orbital remains perpendicular to the Na-O-O axis as shown.




    The 4D state of Na prepared by sequential excitation using linearly polarized
 lasers has an electron density distribution similar to that of the dZ 2 orbital in a
 H atom, if we take the laser polarization axis to be the Z-axis. Rotation of this
 excited 4D orbital with respect to the relative velocity vector was found to cause
 a strong variation in reactivity. The reactively scattered signal reaches a
 m a x i m u m w h e n t h e dZ 2 orbital approaches O 2 perpendicularly to the relative
 velocity vector as shown in Fig. 15. The polarization dependence of products
 appearing at different scattering angles reflects the strong preference for the d Z2
 orbital to be aligned perpendicularly to the O 2 molecular axis as shown in the
 bottom frame of Fig. 15.
     These experimental observations are contrary to what one would expect
 from simple theoretical considerations. Because O 2 has a finite electron affinity,
 t h e N a ( 4 D ) - O2 potential energy surface is expected to cross the Na + - O2 -
 surface at at relatively large internuclear distance and the long range electron
 transfer from Na(4D) to O 2 , to form a Na+O 2 - intermediate, should play an


                                             Y. T. Lee                                        347


important role. If this chemically activated Na + O 2 - complex is indeed respon-
sible for the formation of an ionic NaO product, the reaction should proceed
with a large cross section at low collision energies. Also, because the most
s t a b l e s t r u c t u r e o f N a+ O 2 - is an isosceles triangle, the angular distribution of
NaO product should show either forward peaking or forward-backward sym-
metry.
    Apparently, this long range electron transfer, in spite of its importance, is not
the mechanism by which NaO product is formed, and may lead only to the
quenching of electronically excited Na(4D) through an inelastic scattering
process. It appears that only those collinear collisions that have the d z2 orbital
of Na(4D) aligned perpendicularly to the molecular axis can effectively avoid
the long range electron transfer. Then, with this configuration and sufficient
collision energy, Na and O 2 could follow a covalent surface to reach a very
short Na-O distance where the electron from Na(4D) is transferred to an
electronically excited orbital of O 2 after which the complex can separate as
N a+ O - a n d O .
     Na(4D) + NO 2                NaO + NO is a substantially more exothermic reaction,
but it has many features which are similar to those found in the
Na (4D) + O 2                 NaO + O reaction [41]. First of all, the high translational
 energy requirement, >18 kcal/mol, for NaO product formation again indicates
 that the entrance channel is very restricted and is likely to be along an O-N
 bond. If a Na(4D) atom must approach an NO 2 molecule along an O-N bond
 at a high translational energy in order for a chemical reaction to occur, the
 o r b i t a l a n g u l a r m o m e n t u m b e t w e e n N a ( 4 D ) and N O 2 will overwhelm the
 molecular angular momentum of NO 2, coplanar scattering will dominate, and
 NaO product will be scattered in the plane of the NO2, which also contains the
 relative velocity vector. In other words, when Na(4D) approaches NO 2 along
 the NO bond, all the forces between the interacting atoms will lie in the plane
 of the NO 2 , and the scattered NaO will be confined to that plane. Thus the
 detector, which rotates in a plane containing both the Na and NO 2 beams, can
 only detect those NaO products which are produced from NO 2 molecules lying
 in this plane at the instant when the reactions take place. In contrast to the
 collinear approach of Na and O 2 , there is no cylindrical symmetry about the
 O-N axis when Na approaches NO 2 along that axis. Because of this, the
 reaction will depend not only on the d Z 2 orbital alignment in the plane defined
 by the beams and the detector, but also on the alignment of the d Z 2 about the
 relative velocity vector. This is exactly what we have observed in the laborato-
 ry. The reactivity of Na(4D) + NO 2                         NaO + NO as a function of the d z2
 orbital alignment with respect to the NO 2 molecule is shown in Fig. 16. The
 most favorable approach has the d Z 2 orbital approaching the O-N axis per-
 pendicularly and lying in the plane of the NO 2. When the alignment of the dZ 2
 orbital is rotated in the plane of the NO 2 the reactivity is reduced as the d Z 2
 orbital comes closer to being collinear with the O-N axis. When the d Z 2 orbital
 is rotated out of the NO2 plane from this collinear configuration, the reactivity
 decreases further and reaches a minimum when the orbital perpendicular to
 the NO 2 plane.


           I -




Fig. 16. Polarization dependence of NaO signal from the Na(4D) + NO2 NaO + NO reaction.
As the        orbital of Na was rotated in the plane which contains both beams and the detector,
the signal was found to reach a maximum when the          orbital was perpendicular to the relative
velocity vector and reached a minimum when it was parallel.



   The reaction of ground state Na atoms with HCI is endothermic by 5.6 kcal/
mol. Figure 17 shows the product NaCl angular distributions for Na(3S, 3P,
4D) at an average collision energy of 5 kcal/mol. These angular distributions
were measured at m/e = 23 because most of the NaCl fragments yield Na + in
the electron bombardment ionizer. The rising signal at low angles is due to
elastically scattered Na atoms. The reactive cross section increases with in-


                                             Y. T. Lee




         0




Fig. 17. NaCl angular distributions for Na (3S, 3P, 4D, 5S) + HCl at a collision energy of 5.6 kcal/
mol.




creasing electronic energy. At the collision energy shown, the Na(3S) ground
state atoms react because the high velocity components of each beam just
barely overcome the endothermicity of the reaction. For the reaction of the
Na(3P) atoms, NaCl product is observed over the full laboratory angular range
possible allowing for the conservation of the momentum and total energy of the
system. This implies a broad range of product translational energies, a conclu-
sion which is supported by product velocity measurements. The same is not
true of the reaction of the Na(4D) and Na(5S) states, in which the NaCl is
scattered over a narrower angular range than that produced from the Na(3P)
state, indicating less translational energy despite an additional 2 eV of excess


                                           Chemistry 1986




    18. NaCl angular distributions for Na(3P,4D) + HCl at a collision energy of 5.6 kcal/mol from
Fig. 17. The peak intensity of the distribution arising from the reaction of Na(3P) is normalized to
that arising from Na(4D) allowing comparison of the angular widths of the two distributions.




energy. This is illustrated in Fig. 18 in which the Na(3P) and Na(4D) angular
distributions from Fig. 17 have both been normalized.
   These interesting results can be explained by invoking electron transfer
followed by repulsion the H atom and NaCl products. HCl is known to be
dissociated by slow electrons, and has a negative vertical electron affinity of
approximately 1 eV. For the reaction of the Na(3P) atoms this electron transfer
becomes energetically possible at 3.5 Å. This is, incidentally, the peak of the
Na(3P) orbital density. What the departing H atom feels is the repulsion from
the Cl atom of the fully developed closed shell NaCl molecule, and a significant


                                       Y. T. Lee                                   351


impulse is given to it, In the case of the Na(4D) atoms, the crossing of the
neutral and ionic potential curves (the initial point of electron transfer) moves
out to 7.7 Å. Thus, an electron transfers over, HCl - dissociates, the H atom
d e p a r t s a n d t h e N a+ a n d C l- are drawn together. The highly vibrationally
excited NaCl cannot get rid of any of its energy as the H atom is already gone.
The H atom has only felt the repulsion of the loosely bound or highly vibration-
ally excited NaCl. This interpretation is borne out by the polarization measure-
ments in which the favored alignment of the Na(4D) orbital for reactive signal
at any laboratory detector angle is along the relative velocity vector of the
system. This corresponds to pointing the 4d orbital towards the HCL, because
at long range the relative velocity vector in the laboratory is from the Na to the
HCl.
    Such a detailed study of the dependence of reactivity on the orbital align-
ment and the molecular orientation is possible only by combining the crossed
molecular beams method with laser excitation.

Concluding remarks
The experimental investigation of elementary chemical reactions is presently in
a very exciting period. The advancement in modern microscopic experimental
methods, especially crossed molecular beams and laser technology, had made it
possible to explore the dynamics and mechanisms of important elementary
chemical reactions in great detail. Through the continued accumulation of
detailed and reliable knowledge about elementary reactions, we will be in a
better position to understand, predict and control many time-dependent mac-
roscopic chemical processes which are important in nature or to human society.
   In addition, because of recent improvements in the accuracy of theoretical
predictions based on large scale ab initio quantum mechanical calculations,
meaningful comparisons between theoretical and experimental findings have
become possible. In the remaining years of the twentieth century, there is no
doubt that the experimental investigation of the dynamics and mechanisms of
elementary chemical reactions will play a very important role in bridging the
gap between the basic laws of mechanics and the real world of chemistry.
   The experimental investigations described in this article would not have
been possible without the dedicated efforts of my brilliant and enthusiastic
coworkers during the past twenty years. I enjoyed working with them im-
mensely and sharing the excitement of carrying out research together.
   I entered the field of reaction dynamics in 1965 as a post-doctoral fellow in
the late Bruce Mahan’s group at Berkeley, and learned a lot about the art of
designing and assembling a complex experimental apparatus from many scien-
tists and supporting staff at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory while studying
ion-molecule scattering. In February of 1967, I joined Dudley Herschbach’s
group at Harvard as a post-doctoral fellow. There, I was exposed to the
excitement of the crossed molecular beams research and participated in the
construction of an universal crossed molecular beams apparatus. Dudley’s
contagious enthusiasm and spectacular insight motivated not only me, but a
whole generation of chemical dynamicists.


352                                        Chemistry 1986




Fig. 19. Part of the new molecular beam laboratory at the University of California, Berkeley.




   Molecular collision dynamics has been a wonderful area of research for all
practitioners. This is especially true for those who were following the footsteps
of pioneers and leaders of the field twenty years ago. In my early years, I was
also inspired by the pioneering research work of Sheldon Datz and Ellison
Taylor, Richard Bernstein, John Ross, and Ned Green, as well as the “super-
sonic” John Fenn. They have been most generous and caring scientists and all
of us admire them. Their work is the main reason why the field of molecular
beam scattering has attracted many of the best minds in the world and made it
a most exciting and rewarding field.
   My associations with the University of Chicago (1968-74) and with the
University of California, Berkeley (1974-) h ave been very rewarding. I could
not ask for a better environment to pursue an academic career. The stimulating
colleagues and excellent facilities as shown in Fig. 19 are what made these
institutions so wonderful.
   Throughout all these years, my scientific research activities have been sup-
ported continuously by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the Department
of Energy and the Office of Naval Research. The stable and continuing support
and the confidence they have shown in my research have been most important
and are gratefully appreciated.


                                         Y. T. Lee                                    353


REFERENCES
 1. H. Eyring and M. Polanyi, Z. Phys. Chem. B12 (1931) 279.
 2. J.C. Polanyi and D.C. Tardy, J. Chem. Phys. 51 (1969) 5717.
 3. J.H. Parker and G.C. Pimentel, J. Chem. Phys. 51 (1969) 91.
 4. H.W. Cruse, P.J. Dagdigian, and R.N. Zare, Farady Discussion of the Chemical
    Society, 55 (1973) p. 277.
 5. D.P. Gerrity and J.J. Valentini, J. Chem. Phys. 82 (1985) 1323.
 6. D.R. Herschbach, in Les Prix Nobel 1986, Nobel Foundation, 1987.
 7. R.B. Bernstein, Chemical Dynamics via Molecular Beam and Laser Techniques, Oxford
    University Press, 1982.
 8. D.M. Neumark, A.M. Wodtke, G.N. Robinson, C.C. Hayden, K. Shobatake, R.K.
    Sparks, T.P. Schaefer, and Y.T. Lee, J. Chem. Phys. 82 (1985) 3067.
 9. Y.T. Lee, in Atomic and Molecular Beam Method, edited by G. Scoles and U. Buck,
    Oxford University Press, 1986.
10. Y.T. Lee, J.D. McDonald, P.R. LeBreton and D.R. Herschbach, Rev. Sci. Instr. 40
    (1969) 1402.
11. J.T. Muckerman, in Theoretical Chemistry-Advances and Perspectives, edited by H.
    Eyring and D. Henderson (Academic Press, New York, 1981), Vol. 6A, l-77.
12. C.F. Bender, P.K. Pearson, S.V. O’Neill, and H.F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 56
    (1972) 4626; Science, 176 (1972) 1412.
13. D.G. Truhlar and A. Kuppermann, J. Chem. Phys. 52 (1970) 384; 56 (1972) 2232.
14. S.F. Wu and R.D. Levine, Mol. Phys. 22 (1971) 991.
15. G.C. Schatz, J.M. Bowman, and A. Kuppermann, J. Chem. Phys. 63 (1975) 674.
16. A. Kuppermann, in Potential Energy, Surfaces and Dynamics Calculations, edited by D.G.
    Truhlar (Penum Publishing Corporation, New York, 1981).
17. J.M. Launay and M. LeDourneuf, J. Chem. Phys. B15 (1982) L455.
18. R.E. Wyatt, J.F. McNutt, and M.J. Redmon, Ber. Bunsenges. Chem. Phys. 86
    (1982) 437.
19. D.M. Neumark, A.M. Wodtke, G.N. Robinson, C.C. Hayden, and Y. T. Lee, J.
    Chem. Phys. 82 (1985) 3045.
20. J.W. Birks, S.D. Gabelnick, and H.S. Johnston, J. Mol. Spectr. 57 (1975) 23.
21. J.M. Farrar, and Y.T. Lee, J. Chem. Phys. 63 (1975) 3639.
22. M.J. Coggiola, J.J. Valentini, and Y.T. Lee, Int. J. Chem. Kin. 8 (1976) 605.
23. C.C. Kahler and Y.T. Lee, J. Chem. Phys. 73 (1980) 5122.
24. N. Abuaf, J.B. Anderson, R.P. Andres, J.B. Fenn, and D.R. Miller Rarefied Gas
    Dynamics, Fifth Symposium 1317-1336 ( 1967).
25. F.P. Tully, N.H. Cheung, H. Haberland, and Y.T. Lee, J. Chem. Phys. 73 (1980)
    4460.
26. G.N. Robinson, R.E. Continetti, and Y.T. Lee, to be published Faraday Disc.
    Chem. Soc. 84 (1987).
27. F. Huisken, Krajnovich, Z. Zhang, Y.R. Shen, and Y.T. Lee, J. Chem. Phys. 78
    3806 ( 1983).
28. R.J. Cvetanovic, Can. J. Chem. 33 (1955) 1684.
29. F.J. Pruss, J.R. Slagle, and D. Gutman, J. Phys. Chem. 78 (1974) 663.
30. B. Blumenberg, K. Hoyerman and R. Sievert, Proc. 16th Int. Symp. on Combution,
    The Combustion Institute, 1977, p. 841.
31. R.J. Buss, R.J. Baseman, G. He, and Y.T. Lee, J. Photochem. 17 (1981) 389.
32. G. Inoue and H. Akimoto, J. Chem. Phys. 74 (1981) 425.
33. H.E. Hunziker, H. Kneppe, and H.R. Wendt, J. Photochem. 17 (1981) 377.
34. F. Temps and H.G. Wagner, Max Planck Inst. Stromungsforsch. Ber. 18 (1982).
35. U.C. Sridharan and F. Kaufman, Chem. Phys. Lett. 102 (1983) 45.
36. Y. Endo, S. Tsuchiya, C. Yamada, and E. Hirota, J. Chem. Phys. 85, (1986) 4446.
37. S.J. Sibener, R.J. Buss, P. Casavecchia, T. Hirooka, and Y.T. Lee, J. Chem. Phys.
    72 (1980) 4341.


354                                Chemistry 1986


38. R.J. Brudzynski, A.M. Schmoltner, P. Chu, and Y.T. Lee, to be published in J.
    Chem. Phys. 1987.
39. H. Schmidt, P.S. Weiss, J.M. Mestdagh, M.H. Covinsky, and Y. T. Lee Chem.
    Phys. Lett. 118 (1985) 539.
40. P.S. Weiss PH.D. Thesis, University of California, 1986.
41. B.A. Balko, H. Schmidt, C.P. Schulz, M.H. Covinsky, J.M. Mestdagh, and Y.T.
    Lee, to be published Faraday Disc. Chem. Soc. 84 (1987).
