                       A   LBERT   S Z E N T- GY Ö R G Y I


         Oxidation, energy transfer, and vitamins
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1937



A living cell requires energy not only for all its functions, but also for the
maintenance of its structure. Without energy life would be extinguished in-
stantaneously, and the cellular fabric would collapse. The source of this
energy is the sun’s radiation. Energy from the sun’s rays is trapped by green
plants, and converted into a bound form, invested in a chemical reaction.
It can easily be observed that, when sunlight falls on green-plants, they
liberate oxygen from carbon dioxide, and store up carbon, bound to the
elements of water, as carbohydrate:


                                                                          (1)

The radiant energy is now locked up in this carbohydrate molecule. This
molecule is our food and the plant’s foodstuff. When energy is required, the
above reaction takes place in the reverse direction, i.e. the carbohydrate
is again combined with oxygen to form carbon dioxide, oxidized, and en-
ergy released thereby:


                                                                          (2)

According to our earlier views, carbon and carbon dioxide played the central
role in this process. Supposedly, radiant energy was used to break down
carbon dioxide. On oxidation carbohydrate was again combined with oxygen
to form carbon dioxide.
   Investigations during the last few decades have brought hydrogen instead
of carbon, and instead of CO2 water, the mother of all life, into the fore-
ground. It is becoming increasingly probable that radiant energy is used
primarily to break water down into its elements, while CO2, serves only to
fix the elusive hydrogen thus released:


                                                                          (3)
                                                                          (4)


              OXIDATION, ENERGY TRANSFER, VITAMINS                        441
   While this concept of energy fixation was still being developed, the im-
portance of hydrogen in the reversal of this process, whereby energy is liber-
ated by oxidation, had already been confirmed by H. Wieland’s experiments.
This could be represented as follows:


                                                                          (5)
                                                                          (6)

This way of representing it is meant to bring out the fact that our body
really only knowns one fuel, hydrogen. The foodstuff, carbohydrate, is essen-
tially a packet of hydrogen, a hydrogen supplier, a hydrogen donor, and the
main event during its combustion is the splitting off of hydrogen. So the
combustion of hydrogen is the real energy-supplyingreaction; To the eluci-
dation of reaction (6), which seems so simple, I have devoted all my energy
for the last fifteen years.
   When I first ventured into this territory, the foundations had already been
laid by the two pioneers H. Wieland and O. Warburg, and Wieland’s
teaching had been applied by Th. Thunberg to the realm of animal phys-
iology. Wieland and Thunberg showed, with regard to foodstuffs, how the
first step in oxidation is the "activation" of hydrogen, whereby the bonds
linking it to the food molecule are loosened, and hydrogen prepared for
splitting off. But at the same time oxygen is also, as Warburg showed,
activated for the reaction by an enzyme. The hydrogen-activating enzymes
are called dehydrases or dehydrogenases. Warburg called his oxygen-acti-
vating catalyst, "respiratory enzyme".
   These concepts of Wieland and Warburg were apparently contradictory,
and my first task was to show that the two processes are complementary to
one another, and that in muscle cells activated oxygen oxidizes activated hy-
drogen.
   This picture was enriched by the English worker D. Keilin. He showed
that activated oxygen does not oxidize activated hydrogen directly, but that
a dye, cytochrome, is interposed between them. In keeping with this func-
tion, the "respiratory enzyme" is now also called "cytochrome oxidase".
   About ten years ago, when I tried to construct this system of respiration
artificially and added together the respiratory enzyme with cytochrome and
some foodstuff together with its dehydrogenase, I could justifiably expect
that this system would use up oxygen and oxidize the food. But the system
remained inactive. So there had to be other links missing, and I set off in


442                         1937     A.SZENT-GYÖRGYI

search of them. To start with, I found that the dehydrogenation of certain
 donors is linked to the presence of a co-enzyme. Analysis of this co-enzyme
showed it to be a nucleotide, identical with v. Euler’s co-zymase, which
H. v. Euler and R. Nilsson had already shown to accelerate the process of
dehydration.
    As a result of Warburg’s investigations, this co-dehydrogenase has recent-
ly come very much into the foreground. Warburg showed that it contains
 a pyridine base, and that it accepts hydrogen directly from food when the
latter is dehydrogenated. It is therefore, the primary H-acceptor.
    While working on the isolation of the co-enzyme with Banga, I found
 a remarkable dye, which showed clearly by its reversible oxidation that it,
too, played a part in the respiration.
    We called this new dye cytoflav. Later Warburg showed that this sub-
 stance exercised its function in combination with a protein. He called this
 protein complex of the dye, "yellow enzyme". R. Kuhn, to whom we
 owe the structural analysis of the dye, called the dye lactoflavin and, with
 Györgyi and Wagner-Jauregg, showed it to be identical with vitamin B,.
    But the respiratory system stayed inactive even after the addition of both
 these new components, codehydrogenase and yellow enzyme.
   With the help of my loyal collaborators, especially Annau, Banga, Gözsy,
 Laki, and Straub, I succeeded over the last few years in showing that the C 4-
 dicarboxylic acids together with their activators, were involved as links in
 this chain of oxidation, and that with their addition the system was now
 complete, showing an oxygen uptake corresponding to normal respiration.
    My time is too short to permit me to go into the details of the demonstra-
 tion and the countless measurements which led to this conclusion. I will only
 describe the end result of this work in a few words. This is as follows: the
 C4-dicarboxylic acids and their activators which Thunberg discovered are
 interposed between cytochrome and the activation of hydrogen as inter-
 mediate hydrogen-carriers. In the case of carbohydrate, hydrogen from the
 food is first taken up by oxaloacetic acid, which is absorbed onto the proto-
 plasmic protein, the so-called malic dehydrogenase, and thereby activated.
 By taking up two hydrogen atoms, oxaloacetic acid is changed into malic
  acid. This malic acid now passes on the H-atoms, and thus reverts to oxalo-
  acetic acid, which can again take up new H-atoms.
    The H-atoms released by malic acid are taken up by fumaric acid, which
 is similarly activated by the plasma protein, the so-called succinic dehydro-
  genase. The uptake of two H-atoms converts the fumarate to succinate, to


             OXIDATION, ENERGY TRANSFER, VITAMINS                         443
succinic acid. The two H-atoms of succinic acid are then oxidized away by
the cytochrome. Finally the cytochrome is oxidized by the respiratory en-
zyme, and the respiratory enzyme by oxygen.




The function of the C4-dicarboxylic acids is not to be pictured as con-
sisting of a certain amount of C4-dicarboxylic acid in the cell which is
alternately oxidized and reduced. Fig. 2 corresponds more to the real sit-
uation. The protoplasmic surface, which is represented by the semi-circle,
has single molecules of oxaloacetate and fumarate attached to it as prosthetic
groups. These fured, activated dicar boxylic molecules then temporarily bind
the hydrogen from the food.
   The co-dehydrogenases and the yellow enzymes also take part in this
system. I have attempted in Fig. 2 to add them in at the right place.




                                    Fig. 2


444                       1937 A.SZENT-GYÖRGYI

   This diagram, which will probably still undergo many more modifica-
tions, states that the "foodstuff" - H-donor - starts by passing its hydrogen,
which has been activated by dehydrase, to the co-dehydrogenase. The co-
 enzyme passes it to the oxaloacetic acid*. The malic acid then passes it on
 again to a co-enzyme, which passes the hydrogen to the yellow enzyme.
The yellow enzyme passes the hydrogen to the fumarate. The succinate so
produced is then oxidized by cytochrome, the cytochrome by respiratory
enzyme, the respiratory enzyme by oxygen.
    So the reaction 2H + O → H2O, which seems such a simple one, breaks
 down into a long series of separate reactions. With each new step, with each
transfer between substances, the hydrogen loses some of its energy, finally
combining with oxygen in its lowest-energy compound. So each hydrogen
 atom is gradually oxidized in a long series of reactions, and its energy re-
leased in stages.
   This oxidation of hydrogen in stages seems to be one of the basic prin-
 ciples of biological oxidation. The reason for it is probably mainly that the
cell would not be able to harness and transfer to other processes the large
amount of energy which would be released by direct oxidation. The cell
needs small change if it is to be able to pay for its functions without losing
too much in the process. So it oxidizes the H-atom by stages, converting
the large banknote into small change.
   I myself was led into the territory of oxidation some 15 years ago by a
false supposition. I was interested in the function of the adrenal cortex.
When this organ ceases to function, life itself ceases (Addison’s disease). But
before life ceases, a brown pigmentation makes its appearance in the in-
dividual, as happens with certain fruits: apples, pears, bananas, etc., which,
as they decay, also turn brown. As a result of investigations by Palladin, the
great Russian botanist, it was known that this brown discolouration was
related to the damaged oxidation mechanism. I myself was (and still am)
convinced, that, with regard to basic functions, as oxidation may be regard-
ed representative of them, there are in principle no fundamental differences
between animals and plants. So I set out to study the oxidation system in
the potato, which, if damaged, causes the plant to turn brown. I did this in
the hope of discovering, through these studies, the key to the understanding
of adrenal function.
   It was already known that the plants which turn brown when damaged -
* One cannot exclude the possibility that the yellow enzyme may also mediate the
transfer of hydrogen between carbohydrate and oxaloacetic acid.


             OXIDATION, ENERGY TRANSFER, VITAMINS                         445
about half of all plants - contain a polyphenol, generally a pyrocatechol
derivative, together with an enzyme, polyphenoloxidase, which oxidizes
polyphenol with the help of oxygen. The current interpretation of the mode
of action of this oxidase was a confused one. I succeeded in showing that the
situation was simply this, that the oxidase oxidizes the polyphenol to qui-
none with oxygen. In the intact plant the quinone is reduced back again
with hydrogen made available from the foodstuff. Phenol therefore acts as
a hydrogen-carrier between oxygen and the H-donor, and we are here again
faced with a probably still imperfectly understood system for the stepwise
combustion of hydrogen. In the damaged plant, reduction of quinone can-
not keep pace with the mounting oxidation of the phenol, and quinones
remain unreduced and form pigments.




However, this system gave me no information about adrenal function. So
I turned to the plants which do not turn brown when they die, and therefore
had to contain an oxidation system with a different structure. All that was
known of these plants was that they contained a very active peroxidase. This
peroxidase is able to activate peroxide. In the presence of this enzyme,
peroxide can oxidize various aromatic substances to coloured pigments. This
reaction does not occur without peroxidase. For example, if benzidine is add-
ed to a peroxide in the presence of peroxidase, a deep-blue colour appears
immediately, which is caused by the oxidation of the benzidine. This reaction,
which also serves to indicate the enzyme’s presence, does not occur without
peroxidase.
   But if, for this reaction, I simply used some juice which had been squeezed
from these plants instead of a purified peroxidase, and added benzidine and
peroxide, the blue pigment appeared, but only after a small delay of about
a second. Analysis of this delay showed that it was due to the presence of a
powerful reducing substance, which reduced the oxidized benzidine again,
until it had itself been used up.
   There was great excitement in my little basement room in Groningen,
when I found that the adrenal cortex contained a similar reducing substance
in relatively large quantities.


446                      1937 A.SZENT-GYÖRGYI

    Both my means and my knowledge of chemistry were inadequate for
 investigating the substance more closely. But thanks to the invitation from
 F. G. Hopkins and the help of the Rockefeller Foundation, I was able ten
 years ago to transfer my workshop to Cambridge, where for the first time
 I was able to pay more serious attention to chemistry. Soon I succeeded in
 isolating the substance in question from adrenals and various plants, and in
 showing that it corresponded to the formula C6H8O6 and was related to the
 carbohydrates. This last circumstance induced me to apply to Prof. W.
 N. Haworth, who immediately recognized the chemical interest of the
 substance and asked me for a larger quantity to permit analysis of its struc-
 ture. Unfortunately it appeared that the only material suitable for prepara-
 tion on a large scale was adrenal gland. All my efforts to find a suitable
 plant raw material remained unsuccessful, and adrenals-were not available
 in large quantities in England.
    Prof. Krogh tried to help me, generously sending me adrenals from
 Copenhagen by plane. But unfortunately the substance perished in transit.
 Then the Mayo Foundation and Prof. Kendall came to my help on a
 large scale, and made it possible for me to work, regardless of expense, on
the material from large American slaughter-houses. The result of a year’s
 work-was 25 g of a crystalline substance, which was given the name "hexu-
 ronic acid". I shared this amount of the substance with Prof. Haworth.
 He undertook to investigate the exact structural formula of the substance.
  I used the other half of my preparation to gain a deeper understanding of
 the substance’s function. The substance could not replace the adrenals, but
  caused the disappearance of pigmentation in patients with Addison’s disease.
     Unfortunately it turned out that the amount of substance was inadequate
 for finding out its chemical constitution. Through lack of means the prepara-
 tion could not be repeated, and no cheaper material was found from which
  the acid could have been obtained in larger quantities.
     From the beginning I had suspected that the substance was identical with
 vitamin C. But my unsettled way of life was not suited for vitamin exper-
 iments, concerning which I had not had any experience either. In 1930 I
  gave up this way of life, and settled down in my own country at the Univer-
 sity of Szeged. Fate, too, soon sent me a first-rate young American collab-
 orator, J. L. Svirbely, who had experience in vitamin research, but besides
 this experience brought only the conviction that my hexuronic acid was
 not identical with vitamin C. In the autumn of 1931 our first experiments
 were completed, and showed unmistakably that hexuronic acid was power-


               OXIDATION, ENERGY TRANSFER, VITAMINS                            447
 fully anti-scorbutic, and that the anti-scorbutic acitvity of plant juices cor-
 responded to their hexuronic acid content. We did not publish our results
 till the following year after repeating our experiments. At this time Till-
 mans was already directing attention to the connection between the reducing
 strength and the vitamin activity of plant juices. At the same time King and
 Waugh also reported crystals obtained from lemon juice, which were active
 anti-scorbutically and resembled our hexuronic acid.
     Suddenly the long-ignored hexuronic acid moved into the limelight, and
 there was an urgent need for larger amounts of the substance, so that on
 the one hand its structural analysis could be continued and on the other its
 vitamin nature confirmed. However, in the course of our vitamin exper-
 iments we had used up the last remnants of our substance, and we had no
 chance of preparing the substance from adrenals, and, as already mentioned,
 every other material was unsuitable for large-scale work.
     My town, Szeged, is the centre of the Hungarian paprika industry. Since
 this fruit travels badly, I had not had the chance of trying it earlier. The sight
  of this healthy fruit inspired me one evening with a last hope, and that same
 night investigation revealed that this fruit represented an unbelievably rich
 source of hexuronic acid, which, with Haworth, I re-baptized ascorbic acid.
Supported on a large scale by the American Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation, it
 was still possible by making use of the paprika season, which was then
 drawing to a close, to produce more than half a kilogram, and the following
  year more than three kilogram of crystalline ascorbic acid. I shared out this
  substance among all the investigators who wanted to work on it. I also had
 the privilege of providing my two prize-winning colleagues P. Karrer and
  W. N. Haworth with abundant material, and making its structural anal-
  ysis possible for them. I myself produced with Varga the mono-acetone
  derivative of ascorbic acid, which forms magnificent crystals; from which,
  after repeated dissolving and recrystallization, ascorbic acid can be sep-
  arated again with undiminished activity. This was the first proof that as-
  corbic acid was identical with vitamin C, and that the substance’s activity




                                        Fig. 4


448                       1937 A.SZENT-GYÖRGYI

was not due to an impurity. I do not wish to linger any more over this
well-known story, which developed in such a dramatic fashion. Thanks to
international collaboration, in the unbelievably short space of two years the
mysterious vitamin C had become a cheap, synthetic product.
   Returning to the processes of oxidation, I now tried to analyse further
the system of respiration in plants, in which ascorbic acid and peroxidase
played an important part. I had already found in Rochester that the peroxi-
dase plants contain an enzyme which reversibly oxidizes ascorbic acid with
two valencies in the presence of oxygen. Further analysis showed that here
again a system of respiration was in question, in which hydrogen was
oxidized by stages. I would like, in the interests of brevity, to summarize
the end result of these experiments, which I carried out with St. Huszák.
   Ascorbic acid oxidase oxidizes the acid with oxygen to reversible dehydro-
ascorbic acid, whereby the oxygen unites with the two labile H-atoms from
the acid to form hydrogen peroxide. This peroxide reacts with peroxidase
and oxidizes a second molecule of ascorbic acid. Both these molecules of
 dehydro-ascorbic acid again take up hydrogen from the foodstuff, possibly
by means of SH-groups.
   But peroxidase does not oxidize ascorbic acid directly. I succeeded in
showing that another substance is interposed between the two, which be-
longs to the large group of yellow, water-soluble
 plant dyes (flavone, flavonol, flavanone). Here the peroxidase oxidizes the
 phenol group to the quinone, which then oxidizes the ascorbic acid directly,
 taking up both its H-atoms.
    At the time that I had just detected the rich vitamin content of the paprika,
 I was asked by a colleague of mine for pure vitamin C. This colleague him-
 self suffered from a serious haemorrhagic diathesis. Since I still did not have
 enough of this crystalline substance at my disposal then, I sent him paprikas.
 My colleague was cured. But later we tried in vain to obtain the same thera-
 peutic effect with pure vitamin C. Guided by my earlier studies into the
 peroxidase system, I investigated with my friend St. Rusznyák and his
 collaborators Armentano and Bentsáth the effect of the other link in the
 chain, the flavones. Certain members of this group of substances, the flava-
 none hesperidin (Fig. 5) and the formerly unknown eriodictyolglycoside,
 a mixture of which we had isolated from lemons and named citrin, now
 had the same therapeutic effect as paprika itself. It is still too early on in our
 experience for us to make any definitive statements. But it does seem that
 these substances possess great biological activity. They influence most ob-


             OXIDATION, ENERGY TRANSFER, VITAMINS                          449
viously the capillary blood vessels, whose permeability and resistance suffer
gravely in many disease states. These dyes are able to restore the state of
affairs to normal, and to judge by the first experiences, it seems that these
substances will enrich the doctor’s inventory with a really useful new weapon
for him to fight illnesses with. Our experiments made it probable that cer-
tain members of this group possess vitamin-like properties. For this reason
I called the substance vitamin P. Unfortunately these vitamin-like properties
have not yet been successfully demonstrated in a completely irreproachable
and reproducible fashion.




Ladies and Gentlemen, I have tried to sketch out for you a rapid picture
of my work. When I myself look back, I am always only aware of the
distressing puniness of my efforts, as compared with the magnitude of Na-
ture and of my problems. One circumstance, however, fills me always with
the greatest happiness and gratitude, when I look back on my own struggles.
From the moment I seized my staff, a novice in search of knowledge, and
left my devastated fatherland to tread the wanderer’s path - which has not
been without its privations - as an unknown and penniless novice, from that
moment to the present one, I always felt myself to belong to a great, inter-
national, spiritual family. Always and everywhere I found helping hands,
friendship, cooperation and international solidarity. I owe it solely to this
spirit of our science that I did not succumb, and that my endeavours are
now crowned with the highest human recognition, the award of the Nobel
Prize. This Nobel Prize, too, is but a fruit of this spirit, of this pan-human
solidarity. I can but hope, my heart filled with gratitude, that this spirit may
 be preserved and that it may spread its bounteous rays beyond the limits of
 our knowledge, over the whole of humanity.
