                              A N D R É F . CO U R N A N D
--

       Control of the pulmonary circulation in man with
                some remarks on methodology
                           Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1956


      At the outset it is my pleasant duty to express my profound gratitude to the
      Collegium of the Royal Karolinska Institute and to the members of its Nobel
      Committee for rewarding my studies with their most coveted prize. From
      the unique vantage point which they have so kindly allowed me to occupy
      for this one day, I wish to survey the development of our knowledge of the
      pulmonary circulation in normal man which has followed the introduction
      of the cardiac catheter.
         For us in 1943, the cardiac catheter was only the key in the lock - although
      this is in no way to minimize Dr. Forssmann’s brilliant and courageous
      experiment. To guide our hand in turning this key, we had all the know-
     ledge accumulated through the years by physiologists in their studies of an-
      imals; and to one, Dr. William F. Hamilton, I owe a more personal debt
      of gratitude for his constant advice and kind criticism. Basically our diffi-
      culties were then, as they are still, of measuring flow and pressure and
      volume. And, since the reliability of experimental data is no better than the
      reliability of the measuring techniques employed, I should like, before
 .     discussing our present understanding of the pulmonary circulation, to con-
      sider for a short while the limitations of our methods.
         As Dr. Richards remarked in the previous lecture, at first the measure-
      ment of pulmonary blood flow in man did not appear to pose an important
      problem, once catheterization of the pulmonary artery, cannulation of a
      peripheral artery and spirometry supplied the data necessary to apply the
      principle described by Fick in 1870. But the application of the Fick principle
      involves more than the simple substitution of analytical values into a ready-
       made equation, and the problem which had to be solved is an illustration of
       the caution necessary when physical principles are applied to biologic meas-
       u r e m e n t s1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 .
          The Fick principle can be used to measure flow in a physical system in
       which a stream. of constant velocity enters a chamber of constant volume,
      the volume being sufficiently small so that an indicator substance continually


530                           1956 A.F.COURNAND

added to the chamber is instantaneously mixed with the volume therein.
Then, if the rate at which the indicator enters the chamber is measured, and
if the difference in concentration of the indicator in the fluid entering and
leaving the chamber is determined, flow can be calculated by dividing the
volume of indicator added per unit of time by the volume of indicator gained
per unit of fluid flow. But these ideal conditions are not realized in the body,
since pulmonary blood flow is pulsatile and since the rate of transfer of




Fig. 1. Photographic reproduction of the first reported pressure pulses recorded in the
       right ventricle of a normal man and of a patient with severe traumatic
                           chest injury. (Chart 13 in Ref. 9.)
These tracings were obtained through a catheter attached to a Hamilton manometer;
        they are. undamped; the coarse vibrations are due to impacts upon the
                           catheter. (The scale is in mm Hg.)


               CONTROL OF PULMONARY CIRCULATION                                531
oxygen, the indicator substance, into the pulmonary capillaries is influenced
by the cyclic character of ventilation, and may only be measured at the
mouth rather than at the alveolocapillary membrane. Furthermore, blood
samples required for the determination of the oxygen content of the blood
entering and leaving the lungs are integrated in respect to time rather than
in respect to volume; in addition they must be collected for a finite period
rather than being available from instant to instant, as would be necessary in
order to make a continuous measurement of flow. However, as a result of
 extensive investigations in animal and in man, it would appear that these
 theoretical considerations do not introduce an error of large magnitude in
 the measurement of pulmonary blood flow, provided certain criteria re-
 garding the maintenance of a steady state of ventilation, circulation and gas
 exchange are met. Thus the problem of periodic variations in flow velocity
 and of arterio-venous oxygen difference, and the matter of time-integrated
 rather than volume-integrated samples, do not affect the measurement of
 flow except under the most extreme circumstances. It was pertinent to the
 solution of this question to demonstrate that the volume of flow measured
 by the dye-dilution technique which involves a somewhat different prin-
ciple, agrees rather closely, under a wide variety of conditions, with that
 obtained by application of the Fick principle6,7,8 .
    In the early days, pressures in the right atrium and in the right ventricle
 were recorded9,10,11 through a single-lumen catheter, connected to a Ham-
 ilton manometer, a coupling which raised important technical questions.
 Whereas in animals it had been possible to limit the distance between the
 heart and the manometer to the length of a short metal needle, the use of a
 catheter interposed a column of fluid at least 100 centimeters long between
 the pressure to be measured and the pressure-measuring device. Moreover,
 the fluid was contained inside a tube, the stiffness of which was considerably
 less than that of metal; an important consideration in view of the fact that
  the fidelity of a recording system is a function of the stiffness of its parts. It
  was necessary, therefore, to construct a catheter in which a compromise was
  made; it had to be sufficiently stiff to transmit pressures accurately, but not
  so stiff that its introduction into the heart would be dangerous. In addition,
  damping had to be considered because of the low natural frequency of the
  system, and in order to minimize the artifacts imposed by the mechanical
  impact of the beating heart. In general the proper degree of damping is best
  determined empirically, as it varies with heart rate, height of pressure and
  the location of the tip of the catheter. An important progress in technique


 532                           1956 A.F.COURNAND




 Fig. 2. Photographic reproduction of the first reported pressure pulses recorded in the
                          pulmonary artery of man. (Ref. 12.)
 The simultaneous tracings in the pulmonary artery and the right ventricle were
obtained through a double-lumen catheter attached to the Hamilton manometer in a
       patient with severe pulmonary hypertension. (The scale is in mm Hg.)


 was the development of a double-lumen catheter through which simulta-
 neous pressures in two contiguous heart chambers and large vessels could be
 recorded. The first two tracings of blood pressure pulses recorded simulta-
 neously within the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery are presented
 here. They served to illustrate a paper published in 1945, in collaboration
 with Henry Lauson and Richard Bloomfield12, on the use and advantages of
 this newly designed double-lumen catheter. For tie this tracing holds a
 unique place, since it is the first demonstration that the tip of a catheter was
 placed in the pulmonary artery of man in order to record pressure pulses.
 Subsequent progress in our knowledge of the dynamics of the pulmonary
 circulation in man13 owes much to the technique of catheterization of the
 pulmonary artery. The part played by Lewis Dexter and his associates in this
 latter technical development deserves special mention14.
    Apart from our efforts to evolve a satisfactory catheter, considerable atten-
 tion was also required for proper operation of the Hamilton manometer.
  Stanley Bradley, assigned by Professor Homer Smith to the team studying


             CONTROL OF PULMONARY CIRCULATION                             533
shock at Bellevue Hospital during the war years, was initially in charge of
this delicate and essential function. Although the Hamilton manometer was
subsequently replaced by a strain gauge in association with electronic re-
corders, it is well to recall that most of our early knowledge of pressure
pulses was obtained by using this device.
    During the past few years recording machines have become increasingly
 complex and useful. But no matter how sensitive may be the manometer
 employed, the catheter system itself still remains the limiting factor in re-
 producing faithfully human pulse pressures, under all circumstances.
    An estimation of the pressure drop across the entire pulmonary vascular
 system had been of particular concern to physiologists interested in the dy-
 namics of the pulmonary circulation. Catheterization of the pulmonary ar-
 tery supplied the necessary data, concerning pressure at the origin of the
 system; but the pressure at the end of the system, that is, in the left atrium,
 although predictable from the diastolic pressure in the pulmonary artery of
 the normal subject, could not be accurately determined. A first step in the
 proper direction was made when pressures were recorded from the left
 atrium and large pulmonary veins in human subjects under the abnormal
 conditions provided by interatrial septal defects’s; however, it was not until
 very recently that by means of needles direct measurement of the left atrial
 pressure in intact man have been secured. Prior to the latest development, an
 ingenious indirect method for this measurement had been developed sep-
 arately in 1949 by Hellems and Dexter16, and by Lagerlöf and Werkö17. It
 consists in advancing a cardiac catheter in a peripheral branch of the pul-
 monary artery until it is firmly wedged. At first it was assumed that the
 recorded pressure was that in the first freely anastomosing segment of the
 pulmonary vascular bed distal to the point of wedging, i.e. the capillary bed.
 Theoretical considerations suggest, and recent comparisons indicate, that the
 pulse contour and the mean pressures recorded after wedging correspond
 with those obtained from the left atrium, particularly in subjects with pul-
 monary venous congestion. This pressure, therefore, can be used with cau-
 tion to derive a fairly accurate figure for the pressure drop across the entire
 vascular bed, particularly in cases where vassular pressures throughout the
 pulmonary circuit are elevated.
    Since the pulmonary circulation constitutes a distensible reservoir inter-
 posed between the right and the left ventricle, measurements of pulmonary
 blood volume and of its variations under various physiologic conditions has
 attracted the interest of clinical investigators. The use of the dye-dilution


534                         1956 A.F.COURNAND

technique referred to above, provides an indirect means of measuring this
volume, according to a principle first correctly stated and then experimentally
established by Hamilton and his school. However, the "central blood vol-
ume" thus measured has somewhat vague limits, and includes the volume in
the left heart and a large part of the arterial tree. Furthermore, the error of
the technique is of the order of 15% of the volume measured; hence, varia-
tions of volume amounting to 150-200 ml may not be significant.
   Concluding this long preamble on methodology, I shall now turn to the
main theme of my lecture - the control of the pulmonary circulation in
normal man.
   From the large body of previous work in animals, particularly in dogs, it
was already evident at the inception of our investigation that the relationship
between pressure and flow in the pulmonary circulation was quite different
from that in the systemic circuit. Although the stroke output of each ven-
tricle is approximately the same, except for temporary differences, the mean
pressure in the aorta is six times that in the pulmonary artery. This is an
expression of a much higher viscous resistance to flow in the systemic
circulation - a resistance located mainly at the arterioles, the walls of which
are endowed with a thick and circular layer of smooth muscles. By contrast
the walls of the small branches of the pulmonary artery have only a very
thin muscular media.
    From these anatomic observations it might be expected that the influence
of the activity of this thin muscular coat on the viscous resistance to flow in
the small pulmonary arteries would be a relatively weak one. Moreover, if
the vasomotor tone is weak, the part played by purely mechanical factors,
 such as variations in blood flow and blood volume in controlling the pressure
in the pulmonary artery becomes proportionally more important.
    The effects of such mechanical factors are however, not simple. For in-
 stance, if the resistance to flow in the pulmonary vessels remained constant,
 then the pulmonary arterial pressure should be directly influenced by varia-
 tions in flow and by variations in left atria1 pressure. Since, however, the
 whole vascular system is distensible, the resistance in the circuit is itself
 dependent on variations in distending pressure. Thus an increased flow, or an
 increased left atria1 pressure, will by themselves increase the distending pres-
 sures in the various pulmonary vessels, change the geometry of the system
 by opening up new channels and thereby lower the pulmonary vascular
 resistance. From this it follows that the relationships between pressure and
 flow in the pulmonary circulation should not be expected to be rectilinear.


             CONTROL OF PULMONARY CIRCULATION                              535
   Indeed, it was soon apparent, from our studies, that there was not a linear
relationship. For example, measurements before and after pneumonectomy
showed that the pressure in the pulmonary artery rose very little when the
entire output of the right ventricle flowed through one single normal lung 18.
Hence, the vascular resistance is strikingly dependent on the rate of flow,
and the pulmonary vessels appears to be remarkably distensible within this
range. Further support of this observation is provided by the relatively small
rise in the pulmonary arterial pressure associated in normal subjects with a
large increase in pulmonary blood flow during exercise and in patients with
large left to right intracardiac shunts. Beyond a certain point, however, in-
creases in pulmonary blood flow cause greater increments in pulmonary
arterial pressure, and this is presumably an indication of the shape of the
curves which relate distending pressure to cross-sectional areas the pul-
monary vessels. In this respect it is interesting to recall that Lilienthal and
Riley have recently called attention to the relationship existing between the
critical level at which pressure in the pulmonary artery increases significantly
and the maximum oxygen diffusing capacity, a function closely related to
the size of the total alveolo-capillary interface19.
    Our experiments on the effects of the normal respiratory cycle, positive
 pressure breathing and the Valsalva maneuver20,21,22 showed also the me-
 chanical results of altering the effective, or net distending pressure in the
pulmonary vessels. In addition they revealed that the hemodynamic situation
 was further complicated by differential changes in the filling pressure and
 thereby in the stroke output of each ventricle. They directed our attention
 to the important notion of heterodynamism of both ventricles, particularly
 fruitful in the understanding of isolated ventricular failure.
   Since remarkably wide variations in vascular resistance can normally occur
 in a purely passive fashion, the task of demonstrating the active part that the
 smooth muscles in the wall of the small vessels may play in its alterations,
 becomes very difficult. Nevertheless, we have knowledge of two agents
 which appear to affect the resistance to flow in the pulmonary circulation by
 modifying the muscular tone of its vessels. These two agents are hypoxia
 and acetylcholine.
    Our interest in hypoxia was stimulated by the observations of von Euler
 and Liljestrand, who in 1946 demonstrated a rise in the pulmonary arterial
 pressure of cats breathing low concentrations of oxygen23. In man, we were
 able to confirm this phenomenon in collaboration first with Motley, Werko
 and Himmelstein24. More recently, we established with Fishman, McClem-


536                         1956 A.F.COURNAND

ent and Himmelstein that the rise of pressure in the pulmonary artery is
associated with some increase in the pulmonary blood flow and we suggest-
ed that this increase in flow is not by itself sufficient to account for the change
in pressures.
    Others have shown that the pulmonary wedge pressure in man, and the
left atria1 pressure in animals and in man are not altered by hypoxia. There
is, therefore, very strong evidence that hypoxia causes pulmonary vasocon-
striction.
   At what site has this vasoconstriction happened? We are not sure. How
is it caused? We do not know. We assume that it arises directly or indirectly
from the action of a low partial pressure of oxygen at some point in the body.
Is it a local reflex activated at the level of the alveoli or of the pulmonary
veins? - Does it involve the autonomic system as a result of the stimulation
of chemoreceptors in the carotid body or the aorta? - Is it due to a direct
action of excessively hypoxic mixed venous blood in the precapillary seg-
ment of the pulmonary vascular bed? Is there some other vasoconstricting
substance liberated in the body under the influence of hypoxemia and carried
by venous blood up to the lungs, or is such a substance activated in the
pulmonary tissue itself under the influence of local hypoxia and of other
factors! Does severe hypoxemia cause a shift of blood from the systemic to
the pulmonary circulation as a result of systemic vasoconstriction?
    Although we are in no way near to a final solution to this problem, there
are observations which give a partial answer to some of these questions as far
as man is concerned. In the first place, we have not been able to demonstrate
a significant increase in central blood volume under the influence of severe
arterial hypoxemia. In the second place, we have studied the effect of hy-
poxia in a patient before and after he underwent extensive bilateral sym-
pathectomy for Raynaud’s disease. The sympathectomy which included the
stellate ganglion, the upper three thoracic ganglia on each side, and the mid-
cervical ganglion on one side, had no influence on the rise in pulmonary
arterial pressure caused by hypoxia. Thus we reached timidly the tentative
conclusion that this effect is not mediated by the sympathetic system.
    Liljestrand25 and von Euler26 pointed out that, if the pulmonary vascular
 resistance were regulated on a regional basis, by a purely local action of the
 alveolar and blood oxygen partial pressures, this action could provide an
important mechanism for maintaining the most effective ventilation/perfu-
 sion ratio throughout the lungs. To examine this attractive hypothesis, sev-
 eral workers have studied the local effects upon blood flow of a hypoxic gas


              CONTROL OF PULMONARY CIRCULATION                                537

mixture given to one lung in animals, and we have in association with
Himmeistein, Fishman, and Fritts27,28 made similar observations in man.
The technique is difficult since it includes the simultaneous use of bron-
chospirometry, cardiac catheterization, and arterial cannulation. By means
of this technique the flow of blood through each lung can be separately
measured.
   It was found that concentrations of 8 to 10% oxygen in the inspired gas
given to one lung caused no modification in the partition of flow of blood
between the two lungs and no change in the pulmonary arterial pressure.
Yet, giving a somewhat higher concentration of oxygen (12%) to both
sides causes a considerable rise in pressure in the pulmonary artery. The role
of a local viscerovascular reflex arising from the low oxygen tension in the
alveolar gases has therefore been questioned. The capillary and pulmonary
venules, however, cannot be excluded as a site of origin for such a vaso-
constricting reflex, since the calculated oxygen saturation of the pulmonary
venous blood on the hypoxic side did not fall below the 80% level, which in
bilateral experiments is the critical level for pulmonary hypertension. We
have, however, four observations on the effect of giving concentrations of
oxygen as low as 6% to one lung. Here the calculated pulmonary venous
oxygen saturation fell below 80%. In three of these studies there was no
change in the partition of flow, as compared to the control period. In one of
them there was a diminution of flow to the hypoxic lung; suggestively
enough this is the only instance where mixed venous blood and pulmonary
venous blood had an identical oxygen saturation, and where, therefore, no
oxygen uptake in the hypoxic lung could be measured. Further work with
even lower O2, concentration is in progress and may well resolve the dis-
crepancy between some of our results in man and experiments on animals
in which the giving of pure nitrogen to one lung caused undisputably a
diminution in blood flow on this side.
    Here, then, the problem of the effect of hypoxia upon the pulmonary
vessels lies partly unsolved, and tantalizing. 1 turn now to the effects of acetyl-
choline on the pulmonary circulation. This drug has been known, since the
early experiments of Sir Henry Dale, to have a strong vasodilating influence
 throughout the systemic arterial tree. As far as the pulmonary circulation is
concerned, however, reports on the effects of this preparation in animals
have been contradictory. In normal man we have found in collaboration
 with Harris, Fritts, Clauss, and Odell29, that infusion of acetylcholine into
 the main pulmonary artery at a rate of 0.5 mg per minute caused a slight


538




Fig. 3 . Schematic representation of the effects of acetylcholine upon the pulmonary
                            arterial pressure in a normal man.
(Left): the subject is breathing 21% O2 in nitrogen. (Right): the subject is breathing
12% O2 in nitrogen. Acetylcholine was given in a continuous infusion of the main
            pulmonary artery at the rate of 0.5 mg per minute (shaded urea).


questionable fall in the pulmonary arterial pressure. When the pulmonary
arterial pressure had been previously increased by hypoxia, however, the fall
in pressure due to acetylcholine was very significant, although the hypoxic
stimulus was maintained. This fall in pressure in the pulmonary artery was
associated with no change in pulmonary wedge pressure. The cardiac output,
which had increased as the result of hypoxia, remained unchanged or rose
slightly further. When given in these small amounts, acetylcholine had no
effect on the systemic blood pressure or pulse rate, presumably because of its
rapid rate of destruction in the blood stream.
   It seems fairly certain, therefore, that the action of the drug had been
limited to the pulmonary circulation, that this action is one of vasodilatation,
and that the degree of vasodilatation is largely dependent, as one might
expect, on the pre-existing tone of the smooth muscles of the pulmonic


             CONTROL OF PULMONARY CIRCULATION                             539
vessels’ wall. As in hypoxia, we do not know whether the site of action is in
the pre-capillary or the capillary, or the post-capillary segments of the pul-
monary vascular bed. Again, as in hypoxia, we do not know through what
mechanisms the drug acts. Although they left these questions unsolved, the
experiments nonetheless have to their credit three important results. They
revealed that firstly, blood-borne substances can act directly on the wall of
some segment of the pulmonary vascular bed, secondly that the effects of
hypoxia in causing both an increase in blood flow and a vasoconstriction can
be neatly separated, and thirdly that the vasoconstriction associated with
hypoxia, whatever the site of its action, can be reversed.
    Although I am here mainly concerned with the relative importance of
mechanical and vasomotor factors in the pulmonary circulation of normal
man, it might be of interest to dwell for a few moments on the question of
how such factors are altered by disease. In certain diseases high pressure
develops in the pulmonary artery and this is associated with a high vascular
resistance, and thickening of the walls of the small branches of the pulmonary
artery. The hemodynamics of such a natural experiment provide an in-
teresting contrast to those which hold good under normal conditions. The
Eulmonary artery pressure of these patients is found to be considerably more
dependent on variation in flow and volume than it normally would be, and
one may well ascribe this to a diminished distensibility of the thickened pul-
monary arterial branches.
    The results of experiments with sympathetic blocking agents in this group
of diseases have led other workers to assign to the autonomic nervous system
an important role in the control of the pulmonary circulation. I am inclined
to believe that there are other alternative explanations for the striking drop
of pressure in the pulmonary artery following the use of these agents than to
claim that it is the result of blocking the nervous apply to the pulmonary
vessels. For instance, translocation of even small amounts of pulmonary
blood following systemic vasodilation, could have the same effect in a poorly
distensible pulmonary vascular bed.
    To summarize our present knowledge, it can be said that we have acquired
some understanding of the relations between pressure and flow in the pul-
monary vessels of normal man. We know also that these relations can be
influenced by mechanical factors and by at least two chemical stimuli - hy-
 poxia and acetylcholine. However, the mechanism of action of these stimuli
 is but poorly understood. And, when we come to fit them into an integrated
 concept of the control of the pulmonary circulation, we are troubled by sev-


540                           1956 A.F.COURNAND

era1 doubts. The first doubt is, how far such unphysiological concentrations
of inspired oxygen and doses of acetylcholine throw any light on what hap-
pens under normal circumstances. The second is how to extrapolate into
indefinite time the results from very short-term observations. The final doubt
is whether these notions may be justifiably extended to the solution of phys-
io-pathological problems, when the physical properties of pulmonary ves-
sels and of the surrounding pulmonary tissue have been greatly altered.
   Now, what of the future? Perhaps the only incontestable prophecy that
can be made is that advances in methodology and advances in understanding
will go hand in hand. Any attempt to define the limitations of our present
methods of measuring pressure, flow, and volume in the pulmonary circula-
tion points automatically to the directions in which improvements are at
the moment being made. For pressure, our hope is for a reliable, pressure-
sensitive head to the cardiac catheter. For flow, we look for a method of
instantaneous measurement. For volume, we need some much more distinc-
tive quantity than the central blood volume.
   As progress is made, more results will pour in. Let us, then, beware of the
danger of seeking security for our concepts in the accumulation of facts. As
the poet has said:

              "Knowledge is proud that it has learned so much,
               Wisdom is humble that it knows no more."




 1. A. Cournand, Measurement of the cardiac output in man using the right heart
    catherization, Federation Proc., 4 (1945) 207.
 2. A. Cournand, J. Lequime, and P. Regniers, L’Insuffisance Cardiaque Chronique.
    Études Physiopatkologiques, Masson & Cie, Paris, 1952, pp. 28-29
 3. A. P. Fishman, J. H. McClement, A. Himmelstein, and A. Coumand, Effects of
    acute anoxia on the circulation and respiration in patients with chronic pulmonary
    diseases studied during the "steady state", J. Clin. Invest., 31 (1952) 77.
 4. M. B. Visscher and J. A. Johnson, The Fick principle: Analysis of potential errors
    in its conventional application, J. Appl. Physiol., 5 (1953) 635.
 5. R. W. Stow, Systematic errors in flow determination by the Fick method, Min-
    nesota Med., 37 (1954) 30.
 6. W. F. Hamilton, R. L. Riley, A. M. Attyah, A. Coumand, D. M. Powell, A.
    Himmelstein, R. P. Noble, J. W. Remington, D. W. Richards Jr., N. C. Wheeler,
    and A. C. Witham, Comparison of the Fick and dye injection methods of meas-
    uring the cardiac output in man, Am. J. Physiol., 153 (1948) 309.


               CONTROL OF PULMONARY CIRCULATION                                        541
 7. A. Cournand, A. M. Mitchell, and A. P. Fishman, Applicability of the direct Fick
     method to measurement of pulmonary blood flow during induced acute hypoxia,
     Federation Proc., 13 (1954) 31.
 8. H. W. Fritts Jr., E. Braunwald, A. P. Fishman, and A. Cournand, Influence of
     induced hypoxia on central blood volume of normal man, Federation Proc., 15
     (1956) 68.
 9. Semi-annual Report of Work under Contract with Office Emergency Management, Com-
     mittee Medical Research (OEM cmr 107) for the period from September 1942 to March
     1943. Responsible investigator: D. W. Richards Jr., Research team: A. Cournand,
     R. L. Riley, E. S. Breed, H. D. Lauson, National Research Council, Washington,
     D.C., pp. 35, 58 and Chart 13.
10. A. Cournand, H. D. Lauson, R. A. Bloomfield, E. S. Breed, and E. de F. Baldwin,
     Recording of right heart pressures in man, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 55 ( 1944) 34.
11. R. A. Bloomfield, H. D. Lauson, A. Cournand, E. S. Breed, and D. W. Richards
     Jr., Recording of right heart pressures in normal subjects and in-patients with
     chronic pulmonary disease and various types of cardiocirculatory disease, J. Clin.
     Invest., 25 (1946) 639.
12. A. Cournand, R. A. Bloomfield, and H. D. Lauson, Double lumen catheter for
     intravenous and intracardiac blood sampling and pressure recording, Proc. Soc.
     Exptl. Biol. Med., 60 (1945) 73.
13. A. Cournand, Recent observations on the dynamics of the pulmonary circulation,
     Bull. N.Y. Acad. Med., 23 (1947) 27.
14. L. Dexter, F. W. Haynes, C. S. Burwell, E. C. Eppinger, R. P. Sagerson, and J.
      M. Evans, Studies of congenital heart disease. II. The pressure and oxygen content
      of blood in the right auricle, right ventricle and pulmonary artery in control
      patients with observations on the oxygen saturation and source of pulmonary
      "capillary" blood, J. Clin. Invest., 26 (1947) 554.
15. A. Cournand, H. L. Motley, A. Himmelstein, D. T. Dresdale, and J. Baldwin,
      Recording of blood pressure from the left auricle and the pulmonary veins in
      human subjects with interauricular septal defect, Am. J. Physiol., 150 (1947) 267.
16. H. K. Hellems, F. W. Haynes, and L. Dexter, Pulmonary "capillary" pressure in
  . man, J. Appl. Physiol., 2 (1949) 24.
17. H. Lagerlöf and L. Werkö, Studies on circulation of blood in man; pulmonary
      capillary venous pressure in man, Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Invest., 7 (1949) 147.
18. A. Cournand, R. L. Riley, A. Himmelstein, and R. Austrian, Pulmonary circula-
      tion and alveolar ventilation-perfusion relationships after pneumonectomy, J.
      Thoracic Surg., 19 (1950) 80.
19. J. L. Lilienthal, Jr. and R. L. Riley, Circulation through the lung and diffusion of
      gases, Ann. Rev. Med., 5 (1954) 237.
20. H. D. Lauson, R. A. Bloomfield, and A. Cournand, The influence of the respiration
      on the circulation in man, with special reference to pressures in the right auricle,
      right ventricle, femoral artery, and peripheral veins, Am. J. Med., 1(1946) 315.
21. D. W. Richards Jr., A. Cournand, and H. L. Motley, Effects on circulatory and
      respiratory functions of various forms of respirator, Trans. Assoc. Am. Physicians,
      59 (1946) 102.


542                           1956 A.F.COURNAND

2.2. A. Cournand, H. L. Motley, L. Werkö, and D. W. Richards Jr., Physiological
     studies of the effects of intermittent positive pressure breathing on cardiac output
     in man, Am. J. Physiol., 152 (1948) 162.
23. U. S. von Euler and G. Liljestrand, Observations on the pulmonary arterial blood
     pressure in the cat, Acta Physiol. Scand., 12 (1946) 301.
24. H. L. Motley, A. Cournand, L. Werkö, A. Himmelstein, and D. T. Dresdale, The
     influence of short periods of induced acute anoxia upon pulmonary artery pressure
     in man, Am. J. Physiol., 130 (1947) 315.
25. G. Liljestrand, Regulation of pulmonary arterial pressure, Arch. Internal Med., 81
     (1948) 162.
26. U. S. von Euler, Physiologie des Lungenkreislaufs, Verhandl. Deut. Ges. Kreislauf;
     17 (1951) 8.
27. A. P. Fishman, A. Himmelstein, H. W. Fritts Jr., and A. Cournand Blood flow
     through each lung in man during unilateral hypoxia, J. Clin. Invest., 34 (1955) 637.
28. A. Himmelstein, H. W. Fritts Jr., A. P. Fishman, and A. Cournand. (Unpublished
     data.)
29. P. Harris, H. W. Fritts Jr., R. H. Clauss, J. E. Odell, and A. Cournand, Influence
     of acetylcholine on human pulmonary circulation under normal and hypoxic
     conditions, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 93 (1956) 77:
