                          A   RTHUR   K   ORNBERG



    The biologic synthesis of deoxyribonucleic acid
                     Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1959



The knowledge drawn in recent years from studies of bacterial transforma-
tion1 and viral infection of bacterial cells2,3 combined with other evidences,
has just about convinced most of us that deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is
the genetic substance. We shall assume then that it is DNA which not only
directs the synthesis of the proteins and the development of the cell but that
it must also be the substance which is copied so as to provide for a similar
development of the progeny of that cell for many generations. DNA, like
a tape recording, carries a message in which there are specific instructions
for a job to be done. Also like a tape recording, exact copies can be made
from it so that this information can be used again and elsewhere in time
and space.
   Are these two functions, the expression of the code (protein synthesis) and
the copying of the code (preservation of the race) closely integrated or are
they separable? What we have learned from our studies over the past five
years and what I shall present is that the replication of DNA can be exam-
ined and at least partially understood at the enzymatic level even though the
secret of how DNA directs protein synthesis is still locked in the cell.




First I should like to review very briefly some aspects of DNA structure
which are essential for this discussion. Analysis of the composition of samples
of DNA from a great variety of sources and by many investigators4 revealed
the remarkable fact that the purine content always equals the pyrimidine
content. Among the purines, the adenine content may differ considerably
from the guanine, and among the pyrimidines, the thymine from the cyto-
sine. However, there is an equivalence of the bases with an amino group in
the 6-position of the ring, to the bases with a keto group in the 6-position.
These facts were interpreted by Watson and Cricks in their masterful hy-
pothesis on the structure of DNA. As shown in Fig. 1, they proposed in


666                       1959 A.KORNBERG




connection with their double-stranded model for DNA, to be discussed pres-
ently, that the 6-amino group of adenine is linked by hydrogen bonds to the
6-keto group of thymine and in a like manner guanine is hydrogen-bonded
to cytosine, thus accounting for the equivalence of the purines to the pyri-




       Fig. 2. Double-helical structure of DNA (Watson and Crick model).


    BIOLOGIC SYNTHESIS OF DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID                          667

midines. On the basis of these considerations and the results of X-ray crys-
tallographic measurements by Wilkins and associates6, Watson and Crick
proposed a structure for DNA in which two long strands are wound about
each other in a helical manner. Fig. 2 is diagrammatic representation of a
fragment of a DNA chain about ten nucleotide units long. According to
physical measurements, DNA chains are on the average 10,000 units long.
We see here the deoxypentose rings linked by phosphate residues to form the
backbone of the chain; the purine and pyrimidine rings are the planar struc-
tures emerging at right angles from the main axis of the chain. Fig. 3 is a
more detailed molecular model7 and gives a better idea of the packing of the
atoms in the structure. The purine and pyrimidine bases of one chain are
bonded to the pyrimidine and purine bases of the complementary chain by
the hydrogen bonds described in Fig. I. The X-ray measurements have in-
dicated that the space between the opposing chains in the model agrees with




        Fig. 3. Molecular model of DNA (After M. Feughelman, et al.7).


668                        1959 A.KORNBERG

the calculated value for the hydrogen-bond linkage of a purine to a pyrimi-
dine; it is too small for two purines and too large for two pyrimidines. Most
rewarding from the biological point of view, the structure provides a useful
model to explain how cellular replication of DNA may come about. For, if
you imagine that these two chains separate and that a new chain is formed
complementary to each of them, the result will be two pairs of strands, each
pair identical to the original parent duplex and identical to each other.




Although we have in the Watson and Crick proposal a mechanical model of
replication, we may at this point pose the question: "What is the chemical
mechanism by which this super molecule is built up in the cell?" Some sixty
years ago the alcoholic fermentation of sugar by a yeast cell was a "vital"
process inseparable from the living cell, but through the Buchner discovery
of fermentation in extracts and the march of enzymology during the first
half of this century, we understand fermentation by yeast as a, now familiar,
sequence of integrated chemical reactions. Five years ago the synthesis of
DNA was also regarded as a "vital" process. Some people considered it useful
for biochemists to examine the combustion chambers of the cell, but tam-
pering with the very genetic apparatus itself would surely produce nothing
but disorder. These gloomy predictions were not justified then, nor are sim-
ilar pessimistic attitudes justified now with regard to the problems of cellular
structure and specialized function which face us. High adventures in en-
zymology lie ahead and many of the explorers will come from the training
fields of carbohydrate, fat, amino acid and nucleic acid enzymology.
   I feel now, as we did then, that for an effective approach to the problem
of nucleic acid biosynthesis it was essential to understand the biosynthesis of
the simple nucleotides and the coenzymes and to have these concepts and
methodology well in hand. It was from these studies that we developed the
conviction that an activated nudeoside 5'-phosphate is the basic biosynthetic
building block of the nucleic acids*. You will recall that the main pathways
of purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis all lead to the nucleoside 5’-phos-
phate 8; they do not, except as salvage mechanisms, usually include the free
bases or nucleosides. While the 2’ and 3’ isomers of the nucleotides are
known, they probably arise mainly from certain types of enzymatic degrada-
tion of the nucleic acids. You will also recall from the biosynthesis of coen-


    BIOLOGIC SYNTHESIS OF DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID                             669




       Fig. 4. Nucleophilic attack of a nucleoside rnonophosphate on ATP.

zymes 9, the simplest of the nucleotide condensation products, that it is ATP
which condenses with nicotinamide mononucleotide to form diphosphopy-
ridine nucleotide, with riboflavin phosphate to form FAD, with pantetheine
phosphate to form the precursor of coenzyme A and so forth. This pattern
has been amplified by the discovery of identical mechanisms for the activa-
tion of fatty acids and amino acids and it has been demonstrated further that
uridine, cytidine and guanosine coenzymes are likewise formed from the
respective triphosphates of these nucleosides.
   This mechanism (Fig. 4), in which a nucleophilic attack 10 on the pyro-
phosphate-activated adenyl group by a nucleoside monophosphate leads to
the formation of a coenzyme, was adopted as a working hypothesis for
studying the synthesis of a DNA chain. As illustrated in Fig. 5, it was pos-
tulated that the basic building block is a deoxynucleoside 5’-triphosphate
which is attacked by the 3’-hydroxyl group at the growing end of a poly-
deoxynucleotide chain; inorganic pyrophosphate is eliminated and the chain
is lengthened by one unit. The results of our studies on DNA synthesis, as
will be mentioned presently, are in keeping with this type of reaction.




First let us consider the enzyme and comment on its discovery8,11,12 . Mixing
the triphosphates of the four deoxynucleosides which commonly occur in
DNA with an extract of thymus or bone-marrow or of Escherichin coli would
not be expected to lead to the net synthesis of DNA. Instead, as might be
expected, the destruction of DNA by the extracts of such cells and tissues
was by far the predominant process and one had to resort to the use of more
subtle devices for detection of such a biosynthetic reaction. We used a 14C-


670                          1959 A.KORNBERG




            Fig. 5. Postulated mechanism for extending a DNA chain.


labeled substrate of high specific radioactivity and incubated it with ATP
and extracts of Escherichia coli, an organism which reproduces itself every 20
minutes. The first positive results represented the conversion of only a very
small fraction of the acid-soluble substrate into an acid-insoluble fraction (50
or so counts out of a million added). While this represented only a few
           of reaction, it was something. Through this tiny crack we tried to
drive a wedge, and the hammer was enzyme purification13. This has been and
still is a major preoccupation. Our best preparations are several thousand-
fold enriched with respect to protein over the crude extracts, but there are still
contaminating quantities of one or more of the many varieties of nuclease
and diesterase present in the coli cell. The occurrence of what appears to be a
similar DNA-synthesizing system in animal cells as well as in other bacterial
species has been observed14. We must wait for purification of the enzymes
from these sources in order to make valid comparisons with the coli system.


    BIOLOGIC SYNTHESIS OF DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID                             671

  The requirements for net synthesis of DNA with the purified coli enzyme15
are shown in the equation in Fig. 6. All four of the deoxynucleotides which
form the adenine-thymine and guanine-cytosine couples must be present.
The substrates must be the tri- and not the diphosphates and only the deoxy
sugar compounds are active. DNA which must be present may be obtained




                Fig. 6. Equation for enzymatic synthesis of DNA.

from animal, plant, bacterial or viral sources and the best indications are
that all these DNA samples serve equally well in DNA synthesis provided
their molecular weight is high. The product, which we will discuss in fur-
ther detail, accumulates until one of the substrates is exhausted and may be
20 or more times greater in amount than the DNA added and thus is com-
posed to the extent of 95% or more of the substrates added to the reaction
mixture. Inorganic pyrophosphate is released in quantities equimolar to the
deoxynucleotides converted to DNA.
   Should one of these substrates be omitted, the extent of reaction is di-
minished by a factor of greater than 10 4 and special methods are now re-
quired for its detection. It turns out that when one of the deoxynucleotide
substrates is lacking, an extremely small but yet significant quantity of nu-
cleotide is linked to the DNA primer. We have described this so-called
"limited reaction" , and have shown that under these circumstances a few
                   16



deoxynucleotides are added to the nucleoside ends of some of the DNA
chains but that further synthesis is blocked for lack of the missing nucleotide.
Current studies suggest to us that this limited reaction represents the repair
of the shorter strand of a double helix in which the strands are of unequal
length, and that the reaction is governed by the hydrogen bonding of ade-
nine to thymine and of guanine to cytosine.
   When all four triphosphates are present, but when DNA is omitted, no
reaction at all takes place. What is the basis for this requirement? Does the
DNA function as a primer in the manner of glycogen or does it function as
a template in directing the synthesis of exact copies of itself? We have good
reason to believe that it is the latter and as the central and restricted theme of


672                         1959 A.KORNBERG

this lecture I would like to emphasize that it is the capacity for base-pairing
by hydrogen bonding between the preexisting DNA and the nucleotides
added as substrates that accounts for the requirement for DNA.
   The enzyme we are studying is thus unique in present experience in taking
directions from a template - it adds the particular purine or pyrimidine sub-




                Fig. 7. Mechanism for enzymatic DNA replication.


strate which will form a hydrogen-bonded pair with a base on the template
(Fig. 7). There are five major lines of evidence that I would like to present
to support this thesis.




The first line of evidence is derived from studies of the physical nature of the
DNA produced by the enzyme. It may be mentioned again that in these
descriptions as in those of the chemical nature of DNA, to be discussed
shortly, 90-95% of the DNA sample comes from the substrates used in the
reaction. From collaborative studies with Dr. Howard K. Schachman, to
whom we are greatly indebted, it can be said that the enzymatic product is


         BIOLOGIC SYNTHESIS OF DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID                         673

--   indistinguishable from high-molecular weight, double-stranded DNA iso-
     lated from nature17. It has sedimentation coefficients in the neighbourhood
     of 25, reduced viscosities of 40 deciliters per gram and, on the basis of these
     measurements, it is believed to be a long, stiff rod with a molecular weight
     of about 6 million. Upon heating the DNA, the rod collapses and the mol-
     ecule becomes a compact, randomly coiled structure; it may be inferred that
     the hydrogen bonds holding the strands together have melted and this is
     borne out by characteristic changes in the viscometric and optical properties
     of the molecule. Similar results are found upon cleavage of the molecule by
     pancreatic deoxyribonuclease. In all these respects the enzymatically syn-
     thesized DNA is indistinguishable from the material isolated from nature,
     and may thus be presumed to have a hydrogen-bonded structure similar to
     that possessed by natural DNA.
         Would one imagine that the collapsed jumbled strands of heated DNA
     would serve as a primer for DNA synthesis? Very likely one would think
     not. Guided by intuition derived from everyday experience with a jumbled
     strand of twine one might regard this as a hopeless template for replication.
     It turns out that the collapsed DNA is an excellent primer and the non-
     viscous, randomly coiled, single-stranded DNA leads to the synthesis of
     highly viscous, double-stranded DNA . Sinsheimer has isolated from the
                                               18



      tiny ØX 174 virus a DNA which appears to be single-stranded 19. Like
                                                           18
      heated DNA it has proved to be an excellent primer and a favorable mate-
      rial in current studies for demonstrating in density gradient sedimentations
                             20



      that it is progressively converted to a double-stranded condition during the
      course of enzymatic synthesis.
         While a detailed discussion of the physical aspects of replication is not
      feasible in this lecture, it should be mentioned that the DNA in the single-
      stranded condition is not only a suitable primer but is the only active form
     when the most purified enzyme preparations are used. With such coli prepa-
     rations, the native, double-stranded DNA is inert unless it is heated or pre-
     treated very slightly with deoxyribonuclease. Bollum has made similar ob-
      servations with the enzyme that he has purified from calf thymus21.




     The second line of evidence is derived from studies of the activity of the
     substrates when substitutions are made in the purine and pyrimidine bases


674                        1959 A.KORNBERG

From the many interesting reports on the incorporation of bromouracil22,
azaguanine 23 and other analogues into bacterial and viral DNA, it might be
surmised that some latitude in the structure of the bases can be tolerated pro-
vided there is no interference with their hydrogen bondings. When exper-
iments were carried out with deoxyuridine triphosphate or 5-bromodeoxy-
uridine triphosphate, it was found that they supported DNA synthesis when
used in place of thymidine triphosphate but not when substituted for the
triphosphates of deoxyadenosine, deoxyguanosine or deoxycytidine. As al-
ready described24, S-methyl- and 5-bromocytosine specifically replaced cy-
tosine; hypoxanthine substituted only for guanine; and, as just mentioned,
uracil and 5-bromouracil specifically replaced thymine. These findings are
best interpreted on the basis of hydrogen bonding of the adenine-thymine
and guanine-cytosine type.
   Along these lines it is relevant to mention the existence of a-naturally oc-
curring "analogue" of cytosine, hydroxymethyl cytosine (HMC), which is
found in place of cytosine in the DNA of the coli bacteriophages of the T-
even series25. In this case the DNA contains equivalent amounts of HMC
and guanine and, as usual, equivalent amounts of adenine and thymine. Of
additional interest is the fact that the DNA’s of T2, T4 and T6 contain glu-
cose linked to the hydroxymethyl groups of the HMC in characteristic ra-
tios 26,27,28 although it is clear that in T 2 and T6 some of the HMC groups
contain no glucose 2 7. These characteristics have posed two problems re-
garding the synthesis of these DNA’s which might appear to be incompat-
ible with the simple base-pairing hypothesis. First, what mechanism is there
for preventing the inclusion of cytosine in a cell which under normal condi-
tions has deoxycytidine triphosphate and incorporates it into its DNA? Sec-
ondly, how does one conceive of the origin of the constant ratios of glucose
to HMC in DNA if the incorporation were to occur via glucosylated and
non-glucosylated HMC nucleotides? Our recent experiments have shown
that the polymerase reaction in the virus-infected cell is governed by the
usual hydrogen-bonding restrictions but with the auxiliary action of several
new enzymes developed specifically in response to infection with a given
virus 29,30 . Among the new enzymes is one which splits deoxycytidine tri-
phosphate and thus removes it from the sites of polymerase action 30. An-
other is a type of glucosylating enzyme which transfers glucose from uridine
diphosphate glucose directly and specifically to certain HMC residues in the
D N A30 .


    BIOLOGIC SYNTHESIS OF DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID                          675

         Chemical composition of enzymatically synthesized DNA

The third line of evidence is supplied by an analysis of the purine and pyri-
midine base composition of the enzymatically synthesized DNA. We may
ask two questions. First, will the product have the equivalence of adenine to
thymine and of guanine to cytosine that characterize natural DNA? Sec-
ondly, will the composition of the natural DNA used as primer influence
and determine the composition of the product? In Fig. 8 are the results
which answer these two questions . The experiments are identical except
                                         3 1



that in each case a different DNA primer was used: Mycobacterium phlei,
Escherichia coli, calf thymus and phage T2 DNA. In answer to the first ques-
tion it is clear that in the enzymatically synthesized DNA, adenine equals
thymine and guanine equals cytosine so that the purine content is in every
case identical to the pyrimidine. In answer to the second question it is again
apparent that the characteristic ratio of adenine-thymine pairs to guanine-
cytosine pairs of a given DNA primer is imposed rather faithfully on the
product that is synthesized. Whether these measurements are made with
isotopic tracers when the net DNA increase is only 1% or if it is 1,000% the
results are the same. It can be said further that it has not been possible to
distort these base ratios by using widely differing molar concentrations of
substrates or by any other means. In the last line of Fig. 8 is a rather novel
"DNA" which is synthesized under conditions that I will not describe
here 18,32 . Suffice it to say that after very long lag periodes a copolymer of


676                           1959 A.KORNBERG

deoxyadenylate and thymidylate (A-T) develops which has the physical size
and properties of natural DNA and in which the adenine and thymine are
in a perfectly alternating sequence. When this rare form of DNA-like poly-
mer is used as a primer, new A-T polymer synthesis starts immediately and
even though all four triphosphates be present, no trace of guanine or cytosine
can be detected in the product. The conclusion from these several exper-
iments thus seems inescapable that the base composition is replicated in the
enzymatic synthesis and that hydrogen-bonding of adenine to thymine and
guanine to cytosine is the guiding mechanism.




The fourth line of evidence which I would like to cite is drawn from current
studies of base sequences in DNA and their replication. As I have suggested
already, we believe that DNA is the genetic code;. the four kinds of nucleo-
tides make up a four-letter alphabet and their sequence spells out the mes-
sage. At present we do not know the sequence; what Sanger has done for
peptide sequence in protein remains to be done for nucleic acids. The prob-
lem is more difficult, but not insoluble.
   Our present attempts at determining the nucleotide sequences33 will be
described in detail elsewhere and I will only summarize them here. DNA is
enzymatically synthesized using 32P as label in one of the deoxynucleoside
triphosphates; the other three substrates are unlabeled. This radioactive phos-
phate, attached to the 5-carbon of the deoxyribose, now becomes the bridge
between that substrate molecule and the nucleotide at the growing end of
the chain with which it has reacted (Fig. 9). At the end of the synthetic reac-
tion (after some 10 diester bonds have been formed), the DNA is isolated
                    1 6



and digested enzymatically to yield the 3’ deoxynucleotides quantitatively.
It is apparent (Fig. 9) that the P atom formerly attached to the S-carbon of
the deoxynucleoside triphosphate substrate is now attached to the 3-carbon
of the nucleotide with which it reacted during the course of synthesis of the
DNA chains. The 32P content of each of the 3’ deoxynucleotides, isolated by
paper electrophoresis, is a measure of the relative frequency with which a
particular substrate reacted with each of the four available nucleotides in the
course of synthesis of the DNA chains. This procedure carried out four
times, using in turn a different labeled substrate, yields the relative frequencies
of all the sixteen possible kinds of dinucleotide (nearest neighbor) sequences.


    BIOLOGIC SYNTHESIS OF DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID                        677

   Such studies have to date been carried out using DNA primer samples
from six different natural sources. The conclusions are:
1. All 16 possible dinucleotide sequences are found in each case.
2. The pattern of relative frequencies of the sequences is unique and repro-
ducible in each case and is not readily predicted from the base composition
of the DNA.
3. Enzymatic replication involves base-pairing of adenine to thymine and
guanine to cytosine and, most significantly:
4. The frequencies also indicate clearly that the enzymatic replication pro-
duces two strands of opposite direction, as predicted by the Watson and
Crick model.




   These studies and anticipated extensions of them should yield the dinu-
cleotide frequencies of any DNA sample which can serve as an effective
primer for enzymatic replication and thus provide some clues for deciphering
the DNA code. Unfortunately this method does not provide information
about trinucleotide frequencies but we are hopeful that with the improve-
ment of enzymatic tools for analysis and chromatographic techniques for
isolation some start can be made in this direction.


678                          1959 A.KORNBERG




Returning to the earlier-stated requirement for all four deoxynucleoside tri-
phosphates and DNA in order to obtain DNA synthesis, we can now regard
and understand these requirements as another and final line of evidence for
hydrogen bonding. Without added DNA there is no template for hydrogen
bonding and without all four triphosphates synthesis stops early and abruptly
for lack of a hydrogen bonding mate for one of the bases in the template.




The enzymatic approaches to the problem of DNA replication and the prop-
erties of the DNA-synthesizing enzyme purified from Escherichia coli have
been sketched. The unifying and basic generalization about the action of this
enzyme is that it catalyzes the synthesis of a new DNA chain in response to
directions from a DNA template; these directions are dictated by the hy-
drogen-bonding relationship of adenine to thymine and guanine to cytosine.
The experimental basis for this conclusion is derived from the observations
of: (1) The double-stranded character of the enzymatically synthesized
DNA and its origin from a single-stranded molecule, (2) the pattern of sub-
stitution of analogues for the naturally occurring bases, (3) the replication of
the chemical composition, (4) the replication of the nucleotide (nearest
neighbor) sequences and the antiparallel direction of the strands, and (5) the
requirement for all four deoxynucleoside triphosphates (adenine, thymine,
guanine, and cytosine) and DNA for DNA synthesis.
   In closing may I repeat what was said at the banquet last night: Any credit
for the work cited here is shared by my colleagues in New York, Bethesda,
Saint Louis and Stanford, and by the whole international community of
chemists, geneticists and physiologists, which is truly responsible for the pro-
gress in nucleic acid biochemistry.




 1. O. T. Avery, C. M. MacLeod, and M. McCarty, J. Exptl. Med., 79 (1944) 137;
    R. D. Hotchkiss, in The Chemical Basis of Heredity, W. D. McElroy and B. Glass
    (Eds.), Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1957, p. 321.
 2. A. D. Hershey, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 18 (1953) 135.


    BIOLOGIC SYNTHESIS OF DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID                                     679
 3. G. W. Beadle, in Chemical Basis of Heredity, W. D. McElroy and B. Glass (Eds.),
    Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1957, p. 3.
 4. E. Chargaff, in Nucleic Acids, E. Chargaff and J. N. Davidson (Eds.), Vol. I, Acad-
     emic Press, New York, 1955, pp. 307-71.
 5. J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick, Nature, 171(1953) 737; Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
     Quad. Biol., 18 (1953) 123.
 6. M. H. F. Wilkins, Biochem. Soc. Symp., Cambridge, Engl., 14 (1957) 13.
 7. M. Feughelman, R. Langridge, W. E. Seeds, A. R. Stokes, H. R. Wilson, C. W.
     Hooper, M. H. F. Wilkins, R. K. Barclay, and L. D. Hamilton, Nature, 175 (1955)
     834.
 8. A. Kornberg, in The Chemical Basis of Heredity, W. D. McElroy and B. Glass (Eds.),
     Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1957, p. 579. Rev. Mod. Phys., 31 (1959)200.
 9. A. Kornberg, in Phosphorus Metabolism, W. D. McElroy and B. Glass (Eds.), Johns
     Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1951, p. 392. Advan. Enzymol., 18 (1957) 191.
10. D. E. Koshland, Jr., in The Mechanism of Enzyme Action, W. D. McElroy and B.
     Glass (Eds.), Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1954, p. 608:
11. A. Kornberg, I. R. Lehman, and E. S. Simms, Federation Proc., 15 (1956) 291.
12. A. Kornberg, Harvey Lectures, 53 (1957-1958) 83.
13. I. R. Lehman, M. J. Bessman, E. S. Simms, and A. Kornberg, J. Biol. Chem., 233
     (1958) 163.
14. F. J. Bollum and V. R. Potter, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 79 (1957) 3603; C. G. Harford
     and A. Kornberg, Federation Proc., 17 (1958) 515; F. J. Bollum, Federation Proc.,
     17 (1958) 193; 18 (1959) 194.
15. M. J. Bessman, I. R. Lehman, E. S. Simms, and A. Kornberg, J. Biol. Chem., 233
     (1958) 171.
16. J. Adler, I. R. Lehman, M. J. Bessman, E. S. Simms, and A. Kornberg, Proc. Natl.
     Acad. Sci. U.S., 44 (1958) 641.
17. H. K. Schachman, I. R. Lehman, M. J. Bessman, J. Adler, E. S. Simms, and A.
     Kornberg, Federation Proc., 17 (1958) 304.
18. I. R. Lehman, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 81 (1959) 745.
19. R. L. Sinsheimer, J. Mol. Biol., 1(1959) 43.
26. I. R. Lehman, R. L. Sinsheimer, and A. Kornberg (unpublished observations).
21. F. J. Bollum, J. Biol. Chem., 234 (1959) 2733.
22. F. Weygand, A. Wacker, and Z. Dellweg, Z. Naturforsch., 7 b (1952) 19; D. B.
     Dunn and J. D. Smith, Nature, 174 (1954) 305; S. Zamenhof and G. Griboff,
     Nature, 174 (1954) 306.
23. M. R, Heinrich, V. C. Dewey, R. E. Parks, Jr., and G. W. Kidder, J. Biol. Chem.,
      197 (1952) 199.
24. M. J. Bessman, I. R. Lehman, J. Adler, S. B. Zimmerman, E. S. Simms, and A.
      Kornberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 44 (1958) 633.
25. G. R. Wyatt and S. S. Cohen, Biochem. J., 55 (1953) 774.
26. R. L. Sinsheimer, Science, 120 (1954) 551; E. Volkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 76 (1954)
      5892.
27. R. L. Sinsheimer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 42 (1956) 502; M. A. Jesaitis, J. Exptl.
     Med., 106 (1957) 233; Federation Proc., 17 (1958) 250.


680                           1959 A.KORNBERG

28. G. Streisinger and J. Weigle, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 42 (1956) 504.
29. J. G. Flaks and S. S. Cohen, J. Biol. Chem., 234 (1959) 1501; J. G. Flaks, J. Lich-
     tenstein, and S. S. Cohen, J. Biol. Chem., 234 (1959) 1507.
30. A. Kornberg, S. B. Zimmerman, S. R. Kornberg, and J. Josse, Proc. Natl. Acad.
     Sci. U.S., 45 (1959) 772.
31. I. R. Lehman, S. B. Zimmerman, J. Adler, M. J. Bessman, E. S. Simms, and A.
     Kornberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 44 (1958) 1191.
32. C. M. Radding, J. Adler, and H. K. Schachman, Federation Proc., 19 (1960) 307
33. J. Josse and A. Kornberg, Federation Proc., 19 (1960) 305.
