THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RESPONSES OF
THE GENOME TO CHALLENGE
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1983

by
BARBARA McCLINTOCK
Carnegie Institution of Washington
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Cold Spring Harbor, New York, U.S.A.




I. Introduction
An experiment conducted in the mid-nineteen forties prepared me to expect
unusual responses of a genome to challenges for which the genome is unpre-
pared to meet in an orderly, programmed manner. In most known instances of
this kind, the types of response were not predictable in advance of initial
observations of them. It was necessary to subject the genome repeatedly to the
same challenge in order to observe and appreciate the nature of the changes it
induces. Familiar examples of this are the production of mutation by X-rays
and by some mutagenic agents. In contrast to such “shocks” for which the
genome is unprepared, are those a genome must face repeatedly, and for which
it is prepared to respond in a programmed manner. Examples are the “heat
shock” responses in eukaryotic organisms, and the “SOS” responses in bacte-
ria. Each of these initiates a highly programmed sequence of events within the
cell that serves to cushion the effects of the shock. Some sensing mechanism
must be present in these instances to alert the cell to imminent danger, and to
set in motion the orderly sequence of events that will mitigate this danger. The
responses of genomes to unanticipated challenges are not so precisely pro-
grammed. Nevertheless, these are sensed, and the genome responds in a
descernible but initially unforeseen manner.
    It is the purpose of this discussion to consider some observations from my
early studies that revealed programmed responses to threats that are initiated
within the genome itself, as well as others similarly initiated, that lead to new
and irreversible genomic modifications. These latter responses, now known to
occur in many organisms, are significant for appreciating how a genome may
reorganize itself when faced with a difficulty for which it is unprepared.
Conditions known to provoke such responses are many. A few of these will be
considered, along with several examples from nature implying that rapid
reorganizations of genomes may underlie some species formations. Our present
knowledge would suggest that these reorganizations originated from some
“shock” that forced the genome to restructure itself in order to overcome a
threat to its survival.
    Because I became actively involved in the subject of genetics only twenty-one
years after the rediscovery, in 1900, of Mendel’s principles of heredity, and at a
180


stage when acceptance of these principles was not general among biologists, I
have had the pleasure ofwitnessing and experiencing the excitement created by
revolutionary changes in genetic concepts that have occurred over the past
sixty-odd years. I believe we are again experiencing such a revolution. It is
altering our concepts of the genome: its component parts, their organizations,
mobilities, and their modes of operation. Also, we are now better able to
integrate activities of nuclear genomes with those of other components of a cell.
Unquestionably, we will emerge from this revolutionary period with modified
views of components of cells and how they operate, but only, however, to await
the emergence of the next revolutionary phase that again will bring startling
changes in concepts.

II. An experiment with Zea mays conducted in the summer of 1944, and its consequences
The experiment that alerted me to the mobility of specific components of
genomes involved the entrance of a newly ruptured end of a chromosome into a
telophase nucleus. This experiment commenced with the growing of approxi-
mately 450 plants in the summer of 1944, each of which had started its
development with a zygote that had received from each parent a chromosome
with a newly ruptured end of one of its arms. The design of the experiment
required that each plant be self-pollinated. This was in order to isolate from the
self-pollinated progeny new mutants that were expected to appear, and to be
confined to locations within the arm of a chromosome whose end had been
ruptured. Each mutant was expected to reveal the phenotype produced by a
minute homozygous deficiency, and to segregate in a manner resembling that
of a recessive allele in an F 2 progeny. Their modes of origin could be projected
from the known behavior of broken ends of chromosomes in successive
mitoses. In order to observe those mutants that might express an altered
seedling character, forty kernels from each self-pollinated ear were sown in a
seedling bench in the greenhouse during the winter of 1944-45.
    Some seedling mutants of the type expected did segregate, but they were
overshadowed by totally unexpected segregants exhibiting bizarre phenotypes.
These segregants were variegated for type and degree of expression of a gene.
Those variegated expressions given by genes associated with chlorophyll devel-
opment were startingly conspicuous. Within any one progeny chlorophyll
intensities, and their pattern of distribution in the seedling leaves, were alike.
Between progenies, however, both the type and the pattern differed widely.
Variegated seedlings from the different progenies were transferred to pots in
order to observe the variegated phenomenon in the later developing, larger
leaves. It soon became apparent that modified patterns of gene expression were
being produced, and that these were confined to sharply defined sectors in a
leaf. Thus, the modified expression appeared to relate to an event that had
occurred in the ancestor cell that gave rise to the sector. It was this event that
was responsible for altering the pattern and/or type of gene expression in
descendant cells, often many cell generations removed from the event. It was
soon evident that the event was related to some cell component that had been
unequally segregated at a mitosis. Twin sectors appeared in which the patterns


of gene expression in the two side-by-side sectors were reciprocals of each other.
For example, one sector might have a reduced number ofuniformly distributed
fine green streaks in a white background in comparison with the number and
distribution of such streaks initially appearing in the seedling and showing
elsewhere on the same leaf. The twin, on the other hand, had a much increased
number of such streaks. Because these twin sectors were side-by-side they were
assumed to have arisen from daughter cells following a mitosis in which each
daughter had been modified in a manner that would differentially regulate the
pattern of gene expression in their progeny cells. After observing many such
twin sectors, I concluded that regulation of pattern of gene expression in these
instances was associated with an event occurring at a mitosis in which one
daughter cell had gained something that the other daughter cell had lost.
Believing that I was viewing a basic genetic phenomenon, all attention was
given, thereafter, to determine just what it was that one cell had gained that the
other cell had lost. These proved to be transposable elements that could
regulate gene expressions in precise ways. Because of this I called them
“controlling elements”. Their origins and their actions were a focus of my
research for many years thereafter. It is their origin that is important for this
discussion, and it is extraordinary. I doubt if this could have been anticipated
before the 1944 experiment. It had to be discovered accidently.

III. Early observations of the effect of X-rays on chromosomes
The 1944 experiment took place thirteen years after I had begun to examine
the behavior of broken ends of chromosomes. It was knowledge gained in these
years that led me to conceive of this experiment. Initial studies of broken ends
of chromosomes began in the summer of 1931. At that time our knowledge of
chromosomes and genes was limited. In retrospect we might call it primitive.
Genes were “beads” arranged in linear order on the chromosome “string.” By
1931, however, means of studying the “string” in some detail was provided by
newly developed methods of examining the ten chromosomes of the maize
complement in microsporocytes at the pachytene stage of meiosis. At this stage
the ten bivalent chromosomes are much elongated in comparison to their
metaphase lengths. Each chromosome is identifiable by its relative length, by
the location of its centromere, which is readily observed at the pachytene stage,
and by the individuality of the chromomeres strung along the length of each
chromosome. At that time maize provide the best material for locating known
genes along a chromosome arm, and also for precisely determining the break
points in chromosomes that had undergone various types of rearrangement,
such as translocations, inversions, etc. The usefulness of the salivary gland
chromosomes of Drosophila for such purposes had not yet been recognized. This
came several years later. In the interim, maize chromosomes were revealing,
for the first time, some distinctive aspects of chromosome organization and
behavior. One of these was the extraordinary effect of X-rays on chromosomes.
   The publications of H. J. Muller in 1927 and 1928 (1,2) and of Hanson in
1928 (3) reporting the use of X-rays for obtaining mutations in Drosophila, and
similarly that of Stadler in 1928 (4) with the barley plant, produced a profound


effect on geneticists. Here was a way of obtaining mutations at will. One did
not need to await their spontaneous appearances. Many persons over many
years continued to use X-rays for such purposes. But X-rays did not fulfill
initial expectations of their usefulness. For other purposes, however, they have
been most valuable, particularly for obtaining various types of structural
reorganizations of the genome, from minute deficiencies to multiple rearrange-
ments of chromosomes.
    It was to observe the effects of X-rays on chromosomes of maize that brought
me to the University of Missouri at Columbia in the summer of 1931. Prior to
1931 Dr. Stadler had been using X-rays to obtain mutations in maize. He had
developed techniques for isolating those mutations that occur at selected gene
loci. One method was to irradiate pollen grains. Pollen grains carry the haploid
male gametes. The irradiated male gametes in Stadler’s experiments carried
wild-type alleles of known recessive mutants. Irradiated pollen was placed on
the silks of ears of plants that were homozygous for one or more recessive alleles
located in known linkage groups. An X-ray-induced mutation altering the
expression of the wild-type allele of one of these recessives should be identifi-
able in an individual plant derived from such a cross. By the summer of 1931
Stadler had many plants in his field at Columbia, Missouri, from which one
could choose those that exhibited one or another of these recessive phenotypes.
Stadler had asked me if I would be willing to examine such plants at the
meiotic stages to determine what types of events might be responsible for these
recessive expressions. I was delighted to do so, as this would be a very new
experience. Following my arrival at Columbia in June, 1931, plants were
selected whose chromosomes were to be examined. The knowledge gained from
these observations was new and impressive. Descriptions and photographs
summarizing these observations appeared in a bulletin published by the Uni-
versity of Missouri Agricultural College and Experiment Station (5).
    None of the recessive phenotypes in the examined plants arose from “gene
mutation”. Each reflected loss of a segment of a chromosome that carried the
wild-type allele, and X-rays were responsible for inducing these deficiencies.
They also were responsible for producing other types of chromosome rear-
 rangements, some of them unexpectedly complex. A conclusion of basic signifi-
 cance could be drawn from these observations: broken ends of chromosomes
 will fuse, 2-by-2, and any broken end with any other broken end. This principle
 has been amply proved in a series of experiments conducted over the years. In
 all such instances the break must sever both strands of the DNA double helix.
This is a “double-strand break” in modern terminology. That two such broken
 ends entering a telophase nucleus will find each other and fuse, regardless of
 the initial distance that separates them, soon became apparent.
    After returning to Cornell University in the fall of 1931, I received a reprint
 from geneticists located at the University of California, Berkeley. The authors
 described a pattern of variegation in Nicotiana plants that was produced by loss
 of a fragment chromosome during plant development. The fragment carried
 the dominant allele of a known recessive present in the normal homologues.
 Loss of the dominant allele allowed the recessive phenotype to be expressed in


184



the descendants of those cells that had lost this fragment. It occurred to me that
the fragment could be a ring-chromosome, and that losses of the fragment were
caused by an exchange between sister chromatids following replication of the
ring. This would produce a double-size ring with two centromeres. In the
following anaphase, passage of the centromeres to opposite poles would pro-
duce two chromatid bridges. This, I thought, could prevent the chromosome
from being included in either telophase nucleus. I sent my suggestion to the
geneticists at Berkeley who then sent me an amused reply. My suggestion,
however, was not without logical support. During the summer of 1931 I had
seen plants in the maize field that showed variegation patterns resembling the
one described for Nicotiana. The chromosomes in these plants had not been
examined. I then wrote to Dr. Stadler asking if he would be willing to grow
more of the same material in the summer of 1932 that had been grown in the
summer of 1931. If so, I would like to select the variegated plants to determine
the presence of a ring chromosome in each. Thus, in the summer of 1932 with
Stadler’s generous cooperation, I had the opportunity to examine such plants.
Each plant did have a ring chromosome. It was the behavior of this ring that
proved to be significant. It revealed several basic phenomena. The following
was noted: (I) In the majority of mitoses replication of the ring chromosome
 produced two chromatids that were completely free from each other and thus
 could separate without difficulty in the following anaphase. (2) Sister strand
exchanges do occur between replicated or replicating chromatids, and the
frequency of such events increases with increase in the size of the ring. These
exchanges produce a double-size ring with two centromeres. (3) Mechanical
rupture occurs in each of the two chromatid bridges formed at anaphase by
passage of the two centromeres on the double-size ring to opposite poles of the
mitotic spindle. (4) The location of a break can be at any one position along any
one bridge. (5) The broken ends entering a telophase nucleus then fuse. (6) The
size and content of each newly constructed ring depend on the position of the
rupture that had occurred in each bridge (6, 7, 8).
   The conclusion seems inescapable that cells are able to sense the presence in
their nuclei of ruptured ends of chromosomes, and then to activate a mechan-
ism that will bring together and then unite these ends, one with another. And
this will occur regardless of the initial distance in a telophase nucleus that
separated the ruptured ends. The ability of a cell to sense these broken ends, to
direct them toward each other, and then to unite them so that the union of the
two DNA strands is correctly oriented, is a particularly revealing example of
the sensitivity of cells to all that is going on within them. They make wise
decisions and act upon them.
   Evidence from X-rays, ring chromosomes, and that obtained in later experi-
ments (9, 10, 11, 12), gives unequivocal support for the conclusion that broken
ends will find each other and fuse. The challenge is met by a programmed
response. This may be necessary, as both accidental breaks and programmed
breaks may be frequent. If not repaired, such breaks could lead to genomic
deficiencies having serious consequences.


IV. The entrance into a telophase nucleus of a single broken end of a chromosome
In the mid-nineteen-thirties another event inducing chromosome rupture was
discovered. It revealed why crossing-over should be suppressed between the
centromere and the nucleolus organizer in organisms in which chiasmata
terminalize, from the initial location of a crossover to the end of the arm of the
chromosome. In maize terminalization occurs at the diplotene stage of meiosis.
This is before the nucleolus breaks up, which it does at a later stage in the first
meiotic prophase. It is known that the force responsible for terminalization is
strong. It is enough to induce chromosome breakage should the terminalization
process be blocked before the terminalizing chiasma reaches the end of the arm
of a chromosome. In maize the centromere and the nucleolus organizer on the
nucleolus chromosome are relatively close together. No crossovers have been
noted to occur between them. However, if a plant is homozygous for a translo-
cation that places the centromere on the nucleolus chromosome some distance
from its nucleolus organizer, crossing over does occur in the interval between
them (10). A chiasma so located starts its terminalization process to reach the
end of the arm. It is stopped, however, at the nucleolus border. The terminaliz-
ing chromatid strands cannot pass through the nucleolus. Instead, the two
strands are ruptured at this border. Fusions then occur between the ruptured
ends establishing, thereby, a dicentric chromosome deficient for all of the
chromatin that runs through the nucleolus and continues beyond to the end of
the arm. At the meiotic anaphase, passage of the two centromeres of the
dicentric chromosome to opposite poles of the spindle produces a bridge. This
bridge is ruptured, and again, the rupture can occur at any one location along
the bridge. Now a single ruptured end of a chromosome enters the telophase
nucleus. How, then, does the cell deal with this novel situation?
   In order to determine how a cell responds to the presence of a single ruptured
end of a chromosome in its nucleus, tests were conducted with plants that were
heterozygous for a relatively long inversion in the long arm of chromosome 4 of
maize. It had been known for some time that a crossover within the inverted
segment in plants that are heterozygous for an inversion in one arm of a
chromosome would result in a dicentric chromosome, and also an acentric
fragment composed of all the chromatin from the distal breakpoint of the
inversion to the end of the arm. A chromatin bridge would form at the meiotic
anaphase by passage of the two centromeres on the dicentric chromosome to
opposite poles of the spindle. Mechanical rupture of this bridge as the spindle
elongated would introduce a single broken end into the telophase nucleus, as
illustrated in a to d, Fig. 1. The intent of this experiment was to observe this
chromosome in the following mitotic division in order to determine the fate of
its ruptured end. This could be accomplished readily by observing the first
mitotic division in the microspore. Meiosis on the male side gives rise to four
haploid spores, termed microspores. Each spore enlarges. Its nucleus and
nucleolus also enlarge. Approximately seven days after completion of meiosis
this very enlarged cell prepares for the first post-meiotic mitosis. This mitosis
produces two cells, a very large cell with a large, active nucleus and nucleolus,
and a small cell with compact chromatin in a small nucleus, surrounded by a


Figure 1. Photographs illustrating the behavior of a newly ruptured end of a chromosome at the
meiotic mitoses in microsporocytes and in the post-meiotic mitosis in the microspore. a. Chromatin
bridge at the first meiotic anaphase, with accompanying acentric fragment. Note the thin region in
the bridge where rupture probably would have occurred at a slightly later stage. b.Two sister cells at
a very late prophase of the second meiotic mitosis. The rupture of the chromatid bridge that
occurred at the previous anaphase severed the bridge at a non-median position. The larger segment
so produced appears in the upper cell and opposite to the shorter segment in the lower cell. Their
locations away from the other divalent chromatids relate to late entrances into the previous
telophase nuclei, caused by tension on the bridge before its rupture. Their placements show the


                        The Significance of Responses of the Genome to Challenge                 187



thin layer of cytoplasm. This is the generative cell. Sometime later it undergoes
a mitosis that will produce two condensed sperm cells. With completion of this
division the pollen grain is nearly ready to function. The first division in the
microspore may be observed readily merely by using a squash technique. The
division of the generative cell, on the other hand, is obscured by the densely
packed starch grains that have accumulated during the interval between the
two mitoses.
   Examination of the first mitotic division in the microspore revealed a strange
behavior of the single broken end that had entered a meiotic telophase nucleus.
The replicated chromosome again was dicentric. The two chromatids produced
by the replication process appeared to be fused at the location of the break that
had occurred at the previous meiotic anaphase. In the spore, passage to
opposite poles of the two centromeres of this newly created dicentric chromo-
some again produced a chromatid bridge that again was ruptured (Fig. 1, e, f).
Thus, a newly ruptured end of the chromosome again entered each telophase
nucleus. How would this newly broken end behave in subsequent mitoses? To
determine this requires that the pollen grain with nuclei having such a rup-
tured end of a chromosome be functional. This could not be in the described
instance because pollen grains whose nuclei had such a ruptured end would be
deficient for a large terminal segment of the long arm of chromosome 4. Pollen
grains whose nuclei have such a deficiency are unable to function.
   The problem was resolved by obtaining plants having one chromosome of
the maize complement with a duplication of all of its short arm in reverse
orientation; its homologue had either a normal organization of its short arm, or
better in the test to be performed, a short terminal deficiency of this arm that
will not allow pollen grains receiving this chromosome to function. A crossover
at the meiotic prophase, as shown in Fig. 2, produces a dicentric chromosome
 that simulates two normal chromosomes attached together at the ends of
their short arms, and a fragment chromosome with telomeres at both ends. The
dicentric chromosome, produced by the crossover, initiates the chromatid type




positions they occupied in these telophase nuclei. The acentric fragment is in the lower cell, close to
the cell membrane that was formed at the end of the first meiotic mitosis.         Anaphase of the second
meiotic mitosis. The chromatid with a ruptured end in each cell is placed closer to the newly
formed cell wall than are other chromatids, and for reasons given in b. Note dissimilar lengths of the
arms with ruptured ends. The acentric fragment is near the middle of the spindle in the upper cell.
d. Telophase of the second mitotic mitosis with extensions in two of the four nuclei pointing toward
each other, one in the upper left nucleus and one in the lower right nucleus. The shapes of these
nuclei reflect the off-positioning of chromatids having a newly ruptured end. Such off-positioning
starts with the first meiotic telophase, continues throughout the interphase and into the prophase,
metaphase, and anaphase of the second meiotic mitoses and then into the telophases, as shown
here. The acentric fragment is adjacent to but not within the nucleus to the upper right. Note
formation of the cell plate in each cell that anticipates the four spores that are products of meiosis.
e. Mitotic anaphase in the microspore showing a chromatid bridge produced by “fusion” of the
replicated broken end. f. Same as e but a slightly later stage showing rupture of the bridge.
(Photographs adapted from Missouri Agricultural Experiment Station Research Bulletin 290,
1938.)


188




Figure 2. Stylized representation of a crossover between a chromosome 9 with a normal short arm,
upper line, and one with a duplication of this arm in reverse orientation, line below. In the lower
two lines an exchange between two homologously associated arms is indicated by the cross. Such
an exchange would give rise to a dicentric chromosome that simulates two normal chromosomes 9
attached together at the ends of their short arms, plus a small acentric fragment composed of the
short arm of chromosome 9. The open circles represent centromeres. Telomeres are depicted as
small knobs at the ends of chromosomes.




of breakage-fusion-bridge cycle. This cycle, initially detected at the first mitosis
in a microspore, could now be followed in subsequent mitoses. This is because
the location of breaks in some of the anaphase bridges gave rise to chromo-
somes with at least a full complement of genes necessary for pollen functioning.
Such functional pollen grains falling on the silks of ears will deliver their two
sperm cells to the embryo sac inside a kernel-to-be. One sperm will contribute
to the development of the embryo and the other will contribute to the develop-
ment of the endosperm.
  On the female side only a single cell in the kernel-to-be undergoes meiosis,
and the embryo sac arises from only one of the four spores produced by the two
meiotic mitoses. The other three spores degenerate. This one haploid cell, the
megaspore, then undergoes three successive mitoses to form the embryo sac, or
female gametophyte. Of the cells in the embryo sac, only the egg cell and the
much enlarged central cell need be considered here. The very large central cell
has two haploid nuclei positioned close to each other and near the egg cell.
Following delivery of the two sperms to the embryo sac, one sperm nucleus
fuses with the egg cell nucleus to form the diploid zygote. The other sperm
nucleus and the two nuclei in the central cell fuse to form the primary endo-
sperm nucleus, which is triploid. (The term “double fertilization” is commonly
employed in referring to these events.) Thus, the embryo and endosperm are
formed separately, although both share the same genes, one set from each
parent for the embryo, and two sets from the female parent and one set from the
male parent for the endosperm. Although developing separately, the
two structures are placed side-by-side in the mature kernel, as illustrated
in Fig. 3.
   It was soon learned that the chromatid type of breakage-fusion-bridge cycle,
initiated at a meiotic anaphase, will continue during development of the pollen
grain and the embryo sac. Whenever a sperm nucleus contributes a chromo-


Figure 3. Longitudinal section through a mature maize kernel to show its parts. The cut surface was
treated with an iodine-potassium iodide solution to stain amylose in the starch granules of
individual cells. The narrow outer layer of the kernel is the pericarp, a maternal tissue. The embryo
and endosperm are side-by-side but clearly delimited from each other. The endosperm is above and
to the right of the embryo. In this photograph, four parts of the embryo may be noted. To the left
and adjacent to the endosperm is the scutellum with its canals. The shoot, to the upper left, and the
primary root below it, are connected to each other by the scutellar node. The different staining
intensities in the endosperm cells reflect different amounts of amylose in them. These differences
relate to the presence and action of a transposable A C element at the Wx locus (23). The Wx gene is
responsible for conversion of amylopectin to amylose, but only in the endosperm, not in the
embryo.


some with a newly broken end to the primary endosperm nucleus, this cycle
will continue throughout mitoses in the developing endosperm. Similarly, if the
two nuclei in the central cell each have such a ruptured end of a chromosome,
either the chromosome or chromatid type of breakage-fusion-bridge cycle will
occur throughout endosperm development. When, however, a single ruptured
end of a chromosome is delivered to the zygote nucleus by either the egg or the
sperm nucleus, the ruptured end will “heal” subsequently; the cycle ceases in
the developing embryo. Although not yet proven at the molecular level, it is
altogether likely that the healing process represents the formation of a new
telomere at the ruptured end. This assures that the special requirement for
DNA replication at free ends of chromosomes will be satisfied. This new
telomere functions normally thereafter. It is as stable in this regard as any other
telomere of the maize complement, and tests of this cover many cell and plant
generations.
   A cell capable of repairing a ruptured end of a chromosome must sense the
presence of this end in its nucleus. This sensing activates a mechanism that is
required for replacing the ruptured end with a functional telomere. That such a
mechanism must exist was revealed by a mutant that arose in my stocks. When
homozygous, this mutant would not allow the repair mechanism to operate in
the cells of the plant. Entrance of a newly ruptured end of a chromosome into
the zygote is followed by the chromatid type of breakage-fusion-bridge cycle
throughout mitoses in the developing plant. This suggests that the repair
mechanism in the maize strains I have been using is repressed in cells produc-
ing the male and female gametophytes and also in the endosperm, but is
activated in the embryo. Although all of this was known before the 1944
experiment was conducted, the extent of trauma perceived by cells whose
nuclei receive a single newly ruptured end of a chromosome that the cell cannot
repair, and the speed with which this trauma is registered, was not appreciated
until the winter of 1944-45.

V. Proof that entrance of a newly ruptured end of a chromosome into a telophase
nucleus can initiate activations of previously silent genomic elements
By 1947 it was learned that the bizarre variegated phenotypes that segregated in
many of the self-pollinated progenies grown on the seedling bench in the fall
and winter of 1944-45, were due to the action of transposable elements. It
seemed clear that these elements must have been present in the genome, and in
a silent state previous to an event that activated one or another of them. To my
knowledge, no progenies derived from self-pollination of plants of the same
strain, or related strains, had ever been reported to have produced so many
distinctly different variegated expressions of different genes as had appeared in
the progenies of these closely related plantsgrown in the summer of 1944. It was
concluded that some traumatic event was responsible for these activations. The
unique event in the history of these plants relates to their origin. Both parents of
the plants grown in the summer of 1944 had contributed a chromosome with a
newly ruptured end to the zygote that gave rise to each of these plants. The
rupture occurred, in the first instance, at a meiotic anaphase in each parent,


and the ruptured end then underwent the succession of mitotic anaphase
breaks associated with the chromatid type of breakage-fusion-bridge cycle
during development of the male and female gametophytes- the pollen grain
and the embryo sac. I suspected that an activating event could occur at some
time during this phase of the life history of the parent plants. I decided, then, to
test if this might be so.
   The newly activated elements, isolated from the initial experiment, were
observed to regulate gene expressions following insertion of an element, or one
of its derivatives, at a gene locus (13, 14, 15). In some instances the general
mode of regulation resembled that produced by the Dotted “gene” on the
standard recessive allele, a, of the A gene. This a allele represents the second
recognized gene among a number of others whose action is required for
production of anthocyanin pigment, either red or purple, in plant tissues and
also in several tissues of the kernel (16). In the mid-nineteen-thirties Marcus
Rhoades discovered this Dotted (Dt) element in a strain of Black Mexican sweet
corn (17, 18). It behaved as a dominant gene that caused the otherwise very
stable but non-functional a allele to mutate to new alleles that allowed antho-
cyanin pigment to be formed in both plant and kernel. The name Dotted, given
to it, refers to the pattern of mutations that is expressed in plants and kernels
homozygous for the a allele on chromosome 3 and having a Dt element located
elsewhere in the chromosome complement. Small streaks of red or purple
pigment appear in plants; the kernels have dots of this pigment distributed over
the aleurone layer. (The aleurone layer is the outermost layer of the endo-
sperm.)
   Suspecting that this Dt had originated from activation of a previously silent
element in the maize genome, and also suspecting that such silent elements
must be present in all maize genomes, it was decided to test whether the
breakage-fusion-bridge cycle would activate one such silent Dt element. My
stocks that were homozygous for the a allele had never given any indication of
Dt action. Therefore, these stocks were used to test if a presumed silent D t
element could be activated by the chromatid type of breakage-fusion-bridge
cycle. Plants homozygous for a, and having a chromosome 9 constitution
similar to that described for Fig. 2, were used as pollen parents in crosses to
plants that also were homozygous for a. These pollen parents had the duplica-
tion of the short arm as shown in Fig. 2, but its homologue was deficient for a
terminal segment of this arm that would not allow pollen grains having it to
function. It was determined that 70 to 95 percent of the functional pollen grains
produced by these plants carried sperms having a chromosome 9 with a newly
ruptured end of its short arm, the initial rupture having occurred at the
previous meiotic anaphase. Thus, most of the embryos and endosperms in the
kernels on ears produced by the described cross started development with a
newly ruptured end of the short arm of chromosome 9 in both embryo and
endosperm. These kernels were searched for dots of pigment in their aleurone
layer. A number of kernels had such dots. Many of these dots were confined to
a restricted area of the aleurone layer, suggesting that this area represented a
sector derived from a single cell in which a silent Dt element had been


192                          Physiology or Medicine 1983



activated. One kernel had dots distributed over all of the aleurone layer,
suggesting that the sperm nucleus contributing to the primary endosperm
nucleus already had an activated Dt element in it. Tests of the plant arising
from this kernel indicated that the sister sperm nucleus that had fused with the
egg nucleus did not have such an activated element. Apparently, the activating
event had occurred in the nucleus of only one of the two sperms. Significantly,
this is only two mitoses removed from initiation of the chromatid type of
breakage-fusion-bridge cycle. As mentioned earlier, this cycle continues during
successive mitoses in the development of the endosperm. This continuing cycle
could explain the presence in some kernels of sectors with pigmented dots, and
this, in turn, would imply that activations of silent elements could occur at any
time that this cycle remains in operation (19, 20, 21).
   A similar test was conducted some years later by Doerschug (22), using the
same constitution of the pollen parent as that just described. He obtained
similar results. In his tests, however, two kernels with spots of pigment distrib-
uted over the entire aleurone layer, proved to have an activated Dt element in
the plant grown from each of these kernels. The behavior of these two newly
activated Dt elements was extensively studied by Doerschug. The two elements
differed from each other not only in their location in the chromosome comple-
ment, but also in their mode of control of the time and place of change in a gene
action. We now know that such differences in performance of these elements
are expected.
   Doerschug’s two Dt isolates are most significant for appreciating the speed of
response of a genome to entrance of a newly ruptured end of a chromosome into
a telophase nucleus. Each Dt element must have been activated in the micro-
spore nucleus or not later than the generative nucleus produced by division of
the microspore nucleus. The unexpected event probably is sensed and acted
upon from the initial entrance of a single ruptured end of a chromosome into a
telophase nucleus, and in each subsequent nucleus that receives such a newly
ruptured end. It is recognized that Dt is only one among a number of silent, but
potentially transposable elements, that are present in maize genomes. Most
probably some of these other silent elements were activated during the de-
scribed test, but they were not able to be recognized as were activations of Dt
elements. A similar approach could be used to detect such activations if a
proper indicator stock were chosen for the test. Detection of silent elements is
now made possible with the aid of DNA cloning method. Silent A C (Activator)
elements, as well as modified derivatives of them, have already been detected in
several strains of maize (23). When other transposable elements are cloned it
will be possible to compare their structural and numerical differences among
various strains of maize. Present evidence suggests that wide differences may be
found in this regard, as they have been found for middle and highly repetitious
DNA sequences (24). In any one strain of maize the number of silent but
potentially transposable elements, as well as other repetitious DNAs, may be
observed to change, and most probably in response to challenges not yet
recognized.
   There are clear distinctions in comportment of ends of chromosomes on


                                                                              193



entering telophase nuclei. These relate to: (I) all chromosomes having normal
ends, (2) two chromosomes, each with a single ruptured end, or one chromo-
some with both ends ruptured, and (3) one chromosome with a single broken
end. Both ends of normal, unbroken chromosomes have a normal telomere. No
difficulties are experienced. Two ruptured ends, neither with a telomere, will
find each other and fuse. In these instances there is no immediate telomere
problem. A single broken end has no telomere, and no other broken end with
which to fuse. If the cell cannot make a new telomere, which is the case in the
maize gametophytes and the endosperm, trauma must be experienced as the
evidence indicates. Telomeres are especially adapted to replicate free ends of
chromosomes. When no telomere is present, attempts to replicate this un-
capped end may be responsible for the apparent “fusions” of the
replicated chromatids at the position of the previous break as well as for
perpetuating the chromatid type of breakage-fusion-bridge cycle in successive
mitoses. Activation of potentially transposable elements, as well as other struc-
tural modifications of the chromosomes not considered here, are recognizable
consequences of the cell’s response to the continuing trauma.

VI. Further examples of response of genomes to stress
Cells must be prepared to respond to many sources of stress. Mishaps that
affect the operation of a cell must be occurring continuously. Sensing these and
instigating repair systems are essential. We are aware of some of the mishaps
affecting DNA, and also of their repair mechanisms, but many others could be
difficult to recognize. Homeostatic adjustments to various accidents would be
required if these accidents occur frequently. Many such mishaps and their
adjustments would not be detected unless some event or observation directed
attention to them. Some, however, are so conspicuous that they cannot fail to
be noted. For example, in Drosophila, some sensing device recognizes when the
amount of rDNA is above or below the standard amount, and then sets in
motion the system that will make the proper adjustment. Similarly, amitotic
divisions of macronuclei in ciliates may result in unequal distributions of DNA
to daughter nuclei. These deviations are sensed in each daughter cell. To make
adjustments, one cell may respond by increasing its DNA content to reach the
standard amount. The other cell may discard the excess DNA. There must be
numerous homeostatic adjustments required of cells. The sensing devices and
the signals that initiate these adjustments are beyond our present ability to
fathom. A goal for the future would be to determine the extent ofknowledge the
cell has of itself, and how it utilizes this knowledge in a “thoughtful” manner
when challenged.
   One class of programmed responses to stress has received very little attention
by biologists. The stress signal induces the cells of a plant to make a wholly new
plant structure, and this to house and feed a developing insect, from egg to the
emerging adult. A single Vitus plant, for example, may have on its leaves three
or more distinctly different galls, each housing a different insect species. The
stimulus associated with placement of the insect egg into the leaf will initiate
reprogramming of the plant’s genome, forcing it to make a unique structure


194                           Physiology or Medicine 1983



adapted to the needs of the developing insect. The precise structural organiza-
tion of a gall that gives it individuality must start with an initial stimulus, and
each species provides its own specific stimulus. For each insect species the same
distinctive reprogramming of the plant genome is seen to occur year-after-year.
Some of the most interesting and elaborate plant galls house developing wasps.
Each wasp species selects its own responding oak species, and the gall structure
that is produced is special for each wasp to oak combination. All of these galls
are precisely structured, externally and internally, as a rapid examination of
them will show.
   The galls on roots of legumes that are associated with nitrogen fixing
bacteria are readily available for examination. They illustrate in their own way
an example of reprogramming of the plant genome by a stimulus received from
a foreign organism. Induction of such reprogrammings by insects, bacteria,
fungi, and other organisms, which are not a required response of the plant
genome at some stage in its life history, is quite astounding. But it is no more
astounding, it would seem, than the sharing of a single genome by two brilliant-
ly designed organisms, the caterpillar and the moth. It is becoming increasing-
ly apparent that we know little of the potentials of a genome. Nevertheless,
much evidence tells us that it must be vast.
   Many known and explored responses of genomes to stress are not so precisely
programmed. Activation of potentially transposable elements in maize is one of
these. We do not know when any particular element will be activated. Some
responses to stress are especially significant for illustrating how a genome may
modify itself when confronted with unfamiliar conditions. Changes induced in
genomes when cells are removed from their normal locations and placed in
tissue culture surroundings are outstanding examples of this.
   The establishment of a successful tissue culture from animal cells, such as
those of rat or mouse, is accompanied by readily observed genomic restructur-
ing. None of these animal tissue cultures has given rise to a new animal. Thus,
the significance of these changes for the organism as a whole is not yet directly
testable. The ability to determine this is a distinct advantage of plant tissue
cultures. Many plant tissue cultures have developed new plants and, in some
instances, many plants from a single initial cell or tissue isolate. A reason for
this difference in behavior of animal and plant tissue cultures is not difficult to
find. In many animals the germline is set aside early in cleavage, allowing the
soma-a dead-end structure-to develop by any means, including genome
restructuring and nonreversible programming. In higher plants, each fertile
flower has the equivalent of a “germline” in it. The flower makes the gametes
and initiates embryo formation. In this regard, consider the many flowers that
may be produced by a bush or a tree. Some system must operate to reprogram
 the genome in those cells of the flower that will produce the gametes and
 establish the zygote. This implies that the specific programming sequences,
earlier initiated and required for flower production, must be “erased” in order
 to return the genome to its very early state. If this occurs in so many places in a
 bush or a tree, then it is not surprising that it may occur in a plant cell or a
 cluster of cells not within a flower. Also in many plants such resettings are a


                    The Significance of Reponses of the Genome to Challenge   195



common means of initiating new individuals from somatic cells. In these
instances, however, the process of resetting is regulated, and the genome is not
permanently restructured. This is not true for plants arising from many tissue
cultures. The treatment, from isolation of the cell or cells of a plant, to callus
formation, and then to production of new plants from the cells of these calluses,
must inflict on the cells a succession of traumatic experiences. Resetting of the
genome, in these instances, may not follow the same orderly sequence that
occurs under natural conditions. Instead, the genome is abnormally repro-
grammed, or decidedly restructured. These restructurings can give rise to a
wide range of altered phenotypic expressions. Some of the altered phenotypes
are readily observed in the newly produced plants themselves. Others appear
in their progeny. Some initially displayed altered phenotypes do not reappear
in the progeny. Their association with genomic change remains problematic.
Other altered phenotypes clearly reflect genomic restructuring, and various
levels of this have been observed. It may be safe to state that no two of the
callus derived plants are exactly alike, and none is just like the plant that
donated the cell or cells for the tissue culture. The many levels of genomic
modification that already are known and expressed as changed genotypes and
phenotypes could be potent sources for selection by the plant breeder, and
incidentally, for theoretical ponderings by the biologist.
   Modifications in gene expression may be induced in plants when they are
infected with an RNA virus. Instances of this may be detected merely by
viewing infected plants in the field. For example, patterns of anthocyanin
pigment distribution, normally highly regulated and prominently displayed in
the flowers of a plant, may appear grossly distorted in those parts of a plant
that clearly reveal the virus infection. Recently, it was learned that infection of
maize plants with barley stripe mosaic virus, an RNA virus, may traumatize
cells to respond by activating potentially transposable elements. These, in turn,
may then enter a gene locus and modify its expression (25). Such changes in
expression of known genes may be exhibited in the self-pollinated progeny of
infected plants. More often they are detected in later generations. Yet, no virus
genome has been detected in the immediate progeny of infected plants or in
those plants shown to have a transposable element newly inserted at a known
gene locus.
   Species crosses are another potent source of genomic modification. Plants
have provided many excellent examples of this. The advantage of plants is the
ease of making crosses to obtain hybrids, the simplicity of growing them, the
ready availability of their chromosomes, and the ability to obtain progeny in
quantities, if necessary. The alterations produced when the genomes of two
species are combined reflect their basic incompatibilities. Evidence of this is the
appearance of the same types of genome change whenever the same two species
are crossed. Expressions of incompatibilities do differ, but their nature is
always in accordance with the particular two species whose genomes are
combined. The genus Nicotiana has a large number of species that differ from
each other in chromosome number, chromosome organization, and phenotypic
expressions. Genome incompatibilities have been observed in a large number of


196                           Physiology or Medicine 1983



2-by-2 combinations of species. An illustration is the behavior of chromosomes in
 the hybrid plant produced by the cross of N. tabacum by N. plumbaginifolia. The
chromosomes of plumbaginifolia are lost during development of this hybrid
plant. Although whole chromosome losses appear to be common, other irregu-
larities in chromosome behavior also occur. These are chromosome fragments,
chromosome bridges in somatic anaphases, and the appearance in an occasion-
al metaphase plate of a single, very much elongated chromosome, termed a
“megachromosome.” The presence of one or two such hugely elongated chro-
mosomes in some somatic metaphase plates characterizes the hybrid derived
from the cross of N. tabacum × N. otophora. In this instance it is known that a
heterochromatic segment in each of two chromosomes of the otophora set contri-
butes to these linear amplifications (26, 27). Hybrids produced by crosses of
distantly related Nicotiana species are known to give rise to tumors, some of
which resemble teratomas. In one instance it was shown that tumor production
relates to a single heritable modification which was initiated in the hybrid.
   Major restructuring of chromosome components may arise in a hybrid plant
and continue to arise in its progeny, sometimes over successive plant genera-
tions. The restructuring may range from apparently simple to obviously com-
plex. These are associated with translocations, inversions, deficiencies, duplica-
tions, etc., that are simple in some instances or variously intercalated in others.
New stable or relatively stable “species” or “genera” have been derived from
such initial hybrids. The commercially useful plant, Triticale, is an example.
Wheat (Triticum) and rye (Secale) were crossed and the combined set of chromo-
somes doubled to provide reproductive stability. Nevertheless, this genome was
not altogether stable. Selections continued in later generations for better perfor-
mances with considerable success, even though instabilities were not eliminat-
ed altogether. Some species of Triticum undoubtedly arose by a comparable
mechanism as that outlined for Triticale, and different related genera made their
contribution to some of these Triticum species. Evidence for this is exceptionally
clear (30).
   Undoubtedly, new species can arise quite suddenly as the aftermath of
accidental hybridizations between two species belonging to different genera.
All evidence suggests that genomic modifications of some type would accompa-
ny formation of such new species. Some modifications may be slight and
involve little more than reassortments of repetitious DNAs, about which we
know so little. (The adjective “slight” refers to the apparent simplicity of the
restructuring mechanism rather than the significance of its consequences).
Major genome restructuring most certainly accompanied formation of some
species. Studies of genomes of many different species and genera indicate this.
Appreciation of the various degrees of reassortment of components of a ge-
nome, that appear during and following various types of genome shock, allows
degrees of freedom in considering such origins. It is difficult to resist concluding
that some specific “shock” was responsible for the origins of new species in the
two instances to be described below.
  The organization of chromosomes in many closely related species may
resemble one another at the light microscope level. Only genetic and molecular


                    The Significance of Responses of the Genome to Challenge   197



analyses would detect those differences in their genomes that could distinguish
them as species. In some instances of this type, distinctions relate to the
assortment of repetitious DNAs over the genome, as if a response to shock had
initiated mobilities of these elements. In other instances, distinctions between
related species are readily observed at the light microscope level, such as
polyploidizations that are common in plants, or amplifications of DNA that do
not alter chromosome number or basic metaphase morphologies. Others relate
 to chromosome fusions or fragmentations, or readily observed differences in the
placement of specific DNA segments. The literature is full of descriptions of
differences in chromosome organization among the species of a genus. Two
 instances of these latter differences warrant special consideration here, because
 the observed differences in chromosome organization suggest origins from a
 response to a single event. One response gave rise to extensive fusions of
 chromosomes. The other placed heterochromatic segments at new locations
 within the chromosomes of the set.
    That such multiple chromosome changes may relate to some initial event
 occurring in a cell of the germline is proposed and defended in a review article
 by King (31). An example that would fit his proposal is the organization of
 chromosomes of the Indian muntjac deer (Muntiacus muntjak) (32) when com-
 pared with its closely related species, M. reevesi, the Chinese muntjac. The latter
 species has 46 chromosomes as the diploid number, whereas the Indian munt-
jac has 6 chromosomes in the female and seven chromosomes in the male, and
 these chromosomes are huge in comparison with those of the Chinese muntjac.
 Observations of the chromosomes in the hybrid between these two species
 strongly supports chromosome fusion as the mechanism of origin of the reduced
 number and huge size of the Indian muntjac chromosomes (33). In general,
 evidence of fusion of chromosomes is plentiful. When two or three chromo-
 somes of a set appear to have arisen by fusion, the question of simultaneous or
 sequential events responsible for these fusions cannot be determined with
 certainty. In the case of the Indian muntjac it is difficult to avoid the conclusion
 that the fusions of so many chromosomes resulted from some initial shocking
 event that activated a fusion mechanism already known to exist from the
 fusions of individual chromosomes in many other organisms. Whatever the
 cause, the changed chromosome organization is stunning.
    Another stunning example of differences in chromosome organization
 between species is reported by S. Beermann in an extraordinarily thorough and
 fascinating account (34). This report describes the chromosome organization in
 three species of the copepod genus Cyclops. The main differences among them to
 be considered here relate to distributions of conspicuous heterochromatic
 blocks in the chromosomes of each species. In one species, these blocks are
 confined to the ends of chromosomes. In another species, blocks of heterochro-
 matin are at the ends of chromosomes, but also positioned to each side of the
 centromere. In the third species, blocks of heterochromatin are distributed all
 along the chromosomes. An additional feature of this heterochromatin is its
 unchanged presence in cells of the germline, in contrast to its elimination at
 cleavages specific for each species and in cells destined to produce the soma.


198                          Physiology or Medicine 1983



The elimination process is associated with formation of rings of DNA cut out
from the heterochromatin (35). Ag ain it is difficult to avoid concluding that
these distinctive distributions of heterochromatin relate to unusual and dis-
turbing events, and that these events activate mechanisms that can redistribute
heterochromatin to specific sites.

VII. Concluding statement
The purpose of this discussion has been to outline several simple experiments
conducted in my laboratory that revealed how a genome may react to condi-
tions for which it is unprepared, but to which it responds in a totally unexpect-
ed manner. Among these is the extraordinary response of the maize genome to
entrance of a single ruptured end of a chromosome into a telophase nucleus. It
was this event that, basically, was responsible for activations of potentially
transposable elements that are carried in a silent state in the maize genome.
The mobility of these activated elements allows them to enter different gene loci
and to take over control of action of the gene wherever one may enter. Because
the broken end of a chromosome entering a telophase nucleus can initiate
activations of a number of different potentially transposable elements, the
modifications these elements induce in the genome may be explored readily. In
addition to modifying gene action, these elements can restructure the genome
at various levels, from small changes involving a few nucleotides, to gross
modifications involving large segments of chromosomes, such as duplications,
deficiencies, inversions, and other more complex reorganizations.
   It was these various effects of an initial traumatic event that alerted me to
anticipate unusual responses of a genome to various shocks it might receive,
either produced by accidents occurring within the cell itself, or imposed from
without, such as virus infections, species crosses, poisons of various sorts, or
even altered surroundings such as those imposed by tissue culture. Time does
not allow even a modest listing of known responses of genomes to stress that
could or should be included in a discussion aimed at the significance of
responses of genomes to challenge. The examples chosen illustrate the impor-
tance of stress in instigating genome modification by mobilizing available cell
mechanisms that can restructure genomes, and in quite different ways. A few
illustrations from nature are included because they support the conclusion that
stress, and the genome’s reactions to it, may underlie many species formations.
   In the future attention undoubtedly will be centered on the genome, and
with greater appreciation of its significance as a highly sensitive organ of the
cell, monitoring genomic activities and correcting common errors, sensing the
unusual and unexpected events, and responding to them, often by restructuring
the genome. We know about the components of genomes that could be made
available for such restructuring. We know nothing, however, about how the cell
senses danger and instigates responses to it that often are truly remarkable.


                         The Significance of Responses of the Genome to Challenge   199



REFERENCES
 1. Muller, H. J., Science 66, 84-87 (1927).
 2. Muller, H. J., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.A.) 14, 714-726 (1928).
 3. Hanson, F. B., Science 67, 562-563 (1928).
 4. Stadler, L. J., Science 68, 186-187 (1928).
 5. McClintock, B., Missouri Agr. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 163, l-30 (1931).
 6. McClintock, B., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci (U.S.A.) 18, 677-681 (1932).
 7. McClintock, B., Genetics 23, 315-376 (1938).
 8. McClintock, B., Genetics 26, 542-571 (1941).
 9. McClintock, B., Genetics 26, 234-282 (1941).
10. McClintock, B., Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 9, 72-80 (1941).
11. McClintock, B., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci (U.S.A.) 28, 458-463 (1942).
12. McClintock, B., Stadler Genetics Symp. 10, 25-48 (1978).
13. McClintock, B., Carnegie Inst. Wash. Year Book No. 47, 155-169 (1948).
14. McClintock, B., Carnegie Inst. Wash. Year Book No. 48, 142-154 (1949).
15. McClintock, B., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci (U.S.A.) 36, 344-355 (1950).
16. Emerson, R. A., Cornell University Agr. Exp. Sta. Memoir 16, 231-289 (1918).
17. Rhoades, M. M., Jour. Genetics 33, 347-354 (1936).
18. Rhoades, M. M., Genetics 23, 377-397 (1938).
19. McClintock, B., Carnegie Inst. Wash. Year Book No. 49, 157-167 (1950).
20. McClintock, B., Carnegie Inst. Wash. Year Book No. 50, 174-181 (1951).
21. McClintock, B., Brookhaven Symp. in Biol. 18, 162-184 (1965).
22. Doerschug, E. B., Theor. and Appl. Genetics 43, 182-189 (1973).
23. Fedoroff, N., Wessler S. and Shure, M. Cell 35, 235-242 (1983).
24. Hake, S. and V. Walbot, Chromosoma (Berl.) 79, 251-270 (1980).
25. Mottinger, J. P., Dellaporta, S. L. and Keller, P. In press.
26. Gerstel, D. U. and Burns, J.A. Chromosomes Today 1, 41-56 (1966).
27. Gerstel, D. U. and Burns, J. A. Genetica 46, 139-153 (1976).
28. Smith, H. H., Brookhaven Symp. in Biol. 6, 55-78 (1954).
29. Smith, H. H., Brookhaven Lecture Series 52, l-8 (1965).
30. Feldman, M., In “Evolution of Crop Plants” (N. W. Simmonds, ed.) pp. 120-128 Longman,
    London and New York, (1976).
31. King, M., Genetica 59, 53-60 (1982).
32. Wurster, D. H. and Benirschke, K. Science 168, 1364-1366             (1970).
33. Shi Liming, Yingying Ye and Xingsheng, Duan. Cytogen. Cell Genet. 26, 22-27 (1980).
34. Beermann, S., Chromosoma (Berl.) 60, 297-344 (1977).
35. Beermann, S., and Meyer G. F. Chromosoma (Berl.) 77, 277-283 (1980).
