                            C   AMILLO    G   O L G I



           The neuron doctrine - theory and facts
                       Nobel Lecture December 11, 1906



It may seem strange that, since I have always been opposed to the neuron
theory - although acknowledging that its starting-point is to be found in
my own work - I have chosen this question of the neuron as the subject of
my lecture, and that it comes at a time when this doctrine is generally re-
cognized to be going out of favour.
   The subject, however, is still a very important one in spite of these signs
of decline; but more than that, it is a very real one, for the majority of phys-
iologists, anatomists and pathologists still support the neuron theory, and no
clinician could think himself sufficiently up to date if he did not accept its
ideas like articles of faith. It is a subject which deserves to be re-examined
all the more because there is a growing tendency to attach to the word neuron
a meaning different from the proper one. Many authors, in fact, play on
words by substituting the word neuron for nerve cell, and this has now become
legalized through common usage and tradition. Admitting that eventual
substitution scarcely involves a question of principle and that after all it is
nothing new, for continuity between the cell and nerve fibres was already
well known, I ought to say that I am against giving a meaning to a word
which differs from that given it by the person who introduced the word into
science.
   At a point of time that the results of black staining had hardly started to
become generally known, while I had already for about ten years achieved
results much better in terms of clarity than those which had attracted atten-
tion elsewhere, the idea that cells and nerve cells formed an anatomical unit
became much more acceptable to the mind in a far more objective way than
that made possible by previous studies. The concept then developed that the
cell body and all its processes make up one independent elementary organism
which is not joined to others but merely contiguous with them. Waldeyer
perceived the existence of such a unit and called it the neuron. In an effort to
use the word neuron with the meaning given it by its creator, I must quote
in its entirety Waldeyer’s own description in a lecture which he gave in 1891
on the latest research into the anatomy of the nervous system. On page 52


190                               1906 C.GO.LGI

of this publication Waldeyer says: "The nervous system is made up of in-
numerable nerve units (neurons) which are anatomically and genetically in-
dependent of each other. Each nerve unit is composed of three parts: the
body, the fibre, and the terminal branches.
   Physiological conduction can take place just as well from the body to the
terminal branches as in the other direction.
   Motor impulses can only be transmitted from the body to the nerve ter-
minals, while sensory impulses can travel in either direction."
   In these words the unity, both anatomically and embryologically, of the
neuron is stated; but the physiological delimitation, which seems not to have
been comprised in this synopsis, is found better outlined by the author at the
end of the same work, where he says that the chief result of the research
which he has summarized is that it has made it possible to demarcate more
precisely the anatomical and functional parts of the nervous system.
   Still greater precision soon appeared, thanks to the work of several scholars,
so that the concept of the neuron finally appeared with the triple attribute
of being an independent anatomical, embryological and functional part.
   To define all this in a still better way, here are the ideas on which the
neuron theory is based:
   (1) The neuron is an embryological unit, that is to say, it derives from a single
embryonic cell.
   (2) The neuron, even in its adult form, is one cell. The whole system - ganglion
cell, protoplasmic and nerve processes - in the adult animal too, is only one
cell.
   (3) The neuron is a physiological unit. This fundamental idea which Wal-
deyer expressed with perfect precision has been enlarged upon both from
anatomical and functional sides with additional propositions, for example :
The communication between neurons is only established by casual contact.
There is scarcely any nervous tissue apart from the neurons; the neurons are
also trophic units.
   From the physiological point of view, the neuron theory finds its most
perfect expression in the so-called theory of dynamic polarization, which
van Gehuchten had already outlined, and which my distinguished colleague
Ramón y Cajal developed and supported in a most complete manner.
   The fundamental points of the doctrine may be summed up like this: the
transmission of nerve impulses is conducted from the protoplasmic extensions
and the cell body towards the nerve extension; consequently, each nerve
cell possesses a receiving apparatus constituted by the body and the proto-


               NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                              191
plasmic processes, a conducting apparatus - the nerve process - and a trans-
mitting or discharging organ. The protoplasmic processes should, therefore,
act as conductors towards the cell body, and the nerve process should act as
a conductor away from it. The author himself has successively, as one knows
successively modified his theory, either for adapting it to some particular
topographical arrangements of the point of origin of the nerve process, or to
harmonize it with data resulting from more intensive studies of the structure
of sensory organs and of the central nervous system of lower animals.
   More particularly, he modified his original scheme to meet some opposi-
tion concerning the nerve pathways in spinal ganglia: he accepted that the
pathway from the periphery goes directly into the central branch of the T-
shaped bifurcation, avoiding the cell.
   This theory, which I thought ought to be briefly summarized, should not
be considered as an essential part of the neuron theory. In fact it only expresses
one interpretation of nerve function and does not exclude the possibility of




                                      Fig.1


192                              1906 C.GOLGI

others. I do not think that I need prolong the discussion of the above any longer
to achieve the purpose I intended. I shall therefore confine myself to saying
that, while I admire the brilliancy of the doctrine which is a worthy product
of the high intellect of my illustrious Spanish colleague, I cannot agree with
him on some points of an anatomical nature which are, for the theory, of
fundamental importance, for example, that the peripheral branch of spinal
ganglion cells must be identified with a protoplasmic process, since one must
consider the myelin sheath as an absolutely secondary event, for it is only
necessitated by the length of the process. Similarly, I cannot accept as a good
argument in support of the theory the statement which, however, is its start-
ing-point, that says the processes of the cells of the molecular layer of the
cerebellum terminate by forming endings on the bodies of the cells of Pur-
kinje, for I have verified that the fibres coming from the nerve process of
the cells of the molecular layer only pass near the cells of Purkinje to proceed
into the rich and characteristic network existing in the granular layer.
   Fig. 1 illustrates this arrangement as regards the formation of the nerve
network; the bundles of fibrils coming from the nerve process of the small
cells of the molecular layer, and which ought to form the alleged ending on
the surface of the cells of Purkinje, can be seen to continue by an infinite
number of subdivisions into the nerve network.
   Fig. 2, which is an exact reproduction after life, shows in detail the way


                NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                                  193
this same nerve network is formed by the passage through it of fibres which
come from the molecular layer running across the surface of the cells of
Purkinje.
   As for the new form of the theory of dynamic polarization, I have not
been able to agree with my illustrious colleague about the direct pathway
of the nerve current from the peripheral branch to the central branch of the
T division in the spinal ganglia, for it is not difficult to show that, from here,
the fibres of the peripheral and central axis cylinder change their course and
sweep towards the cellular body, while no direct path from the peripheral
branch to the central branch can be seen.
   At this point, while I shall come back to this question later, I must declare
that when the neuron theory made, by almost unanimous approval, its tri-
umphant entrance on the scientific scene, I found myself unable to follow
the current of opinion, because I was confronted by one concrete anatomical
fact; this was the existence of the formation which I have called the diffuse
nerve network. I attached much more importance to this network, which I
did not hesitate to call a nerve organ, because the very manner in which it
is composed clearly indicated its significance to me. In fact, although in various
ways and to varying extent, every nerve element of the central nervous
system contributes towards its formation.
   At the same time I could not altogether lose interest in a statement dealing
with the behaviour of protoplasmic processes, something I shall return to
later. How could I consider these types of processes as being intended purely
for the reception of nerve impulses if I saw the processes of some sorts of cell
arborize at the surface of convolutions and penetrate beyond the molecular
layer and sometimes even into the meninges?

But returning to a methodical account of this subject, I come to the first
statement on which the neuron theory is based:

1. The neuron is an embryological unit, i.e. it is derivedfrom a single embryonic cell.
   The basis of this fundamental conception, as formulated by Waldeyer, is
essentially depicted by the well-known and classic works of His on the devel-
opment of nerve elements and, in particular, formation of neuroblast. As a
result of these studies we must consider nerve fibres as the direct emanations
of neuroblasts, which the author considers as independent units.
   It is not superfluous to recall that these results and, more particularly, the
essential fact of having proved the independence of neuroblasts are based


194                              1906 C.GOLGI

upon data established, mainly on the human embryo, with ordinary staining
methods. It is now easy to show, from the fourth day of incubation, surpris-
ingly detailed and complex structures in the chick embryo, using black stain-
ing, and one can follow the filament representing the nerve process from its
origin in the cell body across a background of the central nervous system
and, out of this, to the primitive muscle segment; if we take this into account,
we must be led to believe that really we suppose they are independent only
because we cannot prove that more intimate connections do exist.
    However that may be, I do not know whether an absolute value can be
attached to it or not. So far no one has been able to exclude the possibility
of there being a connection between nerve elements already from the be-
ginning of their development. Even if these elements were originally in-
dependent, one would not be able to show that this independence was going
to be maintained.
    Then the arguments surrounding other sorts of body tissue should be con-
sidered, for example, the epithelial cells of the Malpighian layer were thought,
only a short time ago, to be independent, whereas now with modern meth-
ods, any one can show that these cells are intimately connected by bundles
 of fibrils passing from one to the other.
    One may now ask if we are dealing with an original connection or with
 connections which are successively formed during development. The answer
would not be easy. From the embryological point of view two sets of data
 are directly or indirectly of importance for the question of the cellular unity
 of the neuron. On one hand there are the studies on the multicellular origin
 of the nerve cell (Capobianco, Fragnitto) and, on the other, those studies on
 the origin of nerve fibres from chains of cells (Balfour, Beard, Dohrn, Raf-
 faele, Bethe)... These studies would oppose the neuron theory; but the data
 put forward in support of the theory of the multicellular origin of ganglion
 cells are hardly conclusive. With regard to work done on the origin of nerve
 fibres from cell chains, I must take into account that done in my laboratory
 by Perroncito on nerve regeneration, although its argument is of only in-
 direct value. These studies show that the fibres of the new structure always
 come from pre-existing nerve fibres connected with the cell of origin, and
 that they do not come from so-called peripheral cell chains.
    Because I cannot consider results of a histogenetic nature, which I have
just mentioned concerning the multicellular origin of nerve fibres and gang-
 lionic structures as arguments against the neuron theory, I cannot consider
 the results of even the most recent work which showed the central origin


               NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                            195
of regenerated nerve fibres, contrary to the theory of independent regenera-
tion, as conclusive evidence in favour of the theory.
   I do not think that the latest studies can do more than prove the central
origin of nerve fibres; which is a long way from meaning that each fibre is
derived from a corresponding cell, as one should have to accept it for these
results to support any argument in favour of the neuron theory. It will be
enough, on this point, to bear in mind that nerve fibres in general, motor
fibres included, are connected in the central nervous organs by means of their
collateral fibres in a very complicated way - just as my studies have shown
and to which I will come back later.
   Finally, still on the subject of criteria which may be gathered from histo-
genetic studies, I do not think that this is the place to dwell on statements
like those of Joris, etc. who accept that fibres arise independently of the cell
and are subsequently incorporated in it; neither can I consider the incom-
prehensible results of Besta which do not bear any relation to the fundamental
knowledge we have of the detailed anatomy of the nervous system.
   I think that what I have said would justify the statement that, in the
present state of our knowledge of the histogenesis of the nervous system, it
is not possible to state with certainty that what we know of the origin of
nerve cells has a well-proved fundamental value, and can be used to support
the alleged embryological independence of the nerve cell.

2. The neuron is, in the adult state too, an independent cell unit.
   Referring to a time when the results of black staining started to become
known, it is not difficult to imagine how they provided a basis for the idea
that the whole elementary nerve structure ought to be considered as one in-
dependent anatomical unit.
   One recalls how strikingly these silver nitrate preparations differentiate
between the varieties of cell shapes and show how they are provided with
many processes which one can follow, just as one may their innumerable
subsequent branches, for a long way from their cell of origin without it being
possible to detect anastomoses; if one takes this and the fact that each cell in
these preparations shows the constant presence of a single functional process
- the nerve process (or axon) - into account, then I say one can easily under-
stand how the idea of cellular unity has imposed itself at that time.
   However, even then, our knowledge was not all that elementary or lim-
ited as one might have thought. I must point out here that, as regards the
behaviour of the nerve process, I had already distinguished two different types


196                              1906 C.GOLGI

of nerve cells which I simply called types one and two to reserve my opinion
on their possible physiological significance.
   I called a cell of the first type a cell whose nerve process, while maintaining
all the time its individuality, and having given off a more or less large number
of collateral fibres, seemed bound, at least in most cases, to change into the
axis cylinder of a myelinated nerve fibre. A cell of the second type was one
whose nerve process I had seen divide indefinitely to lose its individuality
and spread over an indefinite area, without demonstrable limits.
   The two types of cell which I have described are illustrated in Figs. 3 to 6.
Fig. 3 shows a cell from the antero-lateral portion of the anterior horn of the
spinal cord. Its nerve process enters an anterior root having given off a number
of collateral branches which are finely subdivided. Fig. 4 shows a Purkinje
cell from the cerebellum. Its nerve process crosses the granular layer giving
off a number of fine branches, and then goes to communicate with the nerve
fibres in the white matter of cerebral gyri. Fig. 5 is a reproduction of a nerve
cell of the second type from the spinal cord (pathway between the anterior
and posterior horns); its nerve process branches indefinitely. Finally, Fig. 6
shows a cell from the granular layer of the cerebellum. It is one of the most




                                      Fig.3


               NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                            197




                                     Fig.4

characteristic examples of the way in which the nerve process of the second
type of cells behave.
  As regards the distinction which, from the beginning of my work, I have
made between the two types of nerve cells, I have relied on a definite mor-
phological fact - that is on the different behaviour patterns of the nerve pro-
cesses. I must, therefore, stop for a moment to call attention to a remark which
has been attributed to me. This was that I had given the two types of cell a
motor and sensory function, respectively, without considering that these two
types of cells are found mixed in the same regions of the nervous system.
  This remark is not unimportant, even from the point of view of the neuron
theory. For two reasons, therefore - for history’s sake and for the subject I
am considering - I feel I must recall the facts as I described them.


198   1906 C.GOLGI




       Fig. 6


               NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                            199
   I have called attention to the necessity for finding a criterium capable of
giving a basis for such an opinion with an insistence which can be faulted
for its excess rather than the opposite. Several times I have pointed out that
it would be easy enough to say what functions both these types of cell had
if there were some parts of the central nervous system where cells of one
type were found exclusively and which were shown to be entirely sensory
or motor in function. The two types of cell are, however, scattered and in-
termingled everywhere in the central nervous system, even in the motor area
of the cerebral cortex, which is called the zone of Rolando, which is regarded
as being essentially motor with some sensory function. In the occipital lobes,
which have not been shown to be entirely sensory, the position is the same.
   The spinal cord would lend itself better to the solution of the problem if,
as we would like to have thought, one has been inclined to think the anterior
horns were entirely motor and the posterior horns entirely sensory. But it
is a distinction which no longer has any absolute value and will not stand up to
criticism, either from the anatomical or the physiological point of view.
   There are some fibres which go from the anterior roots to the posterior
roots and others which go from the posterior roots to the anterior; so that,
at the most, one can talk about predominance, not exclusiveness, of fraction.
   But if we look at the question from the other way, as it were, and try to
establish whether the fibres whose function is unquestionably proved, show
differences in their connection with the centres, and if for that purpose we
direct our studies towards the anterior and posterior root fibres, we notice
the following characteristic and important points :
   (1) that the axis cylinders from the anterior roots, after giving off a small
number of collateral fibres, continue in the nerve process of a cell;
   (2) that the axis cylinders from the posterior roots, obliquely entering the
grey matter, subdivide after a short course and become immeasurably slender
fibrils which by successive division become lost in the diffuse network of the
grey matter.
   Relying on these results it has been possible to prove that - in the spinal
cord - sensory and motor fibres behave in an opposite way to each other.
Without foregoing the strictest caution we may suppose that the sensory
and motor fibres of spinal nerve roots behave in accordance with a general
 rule, common to all types of fibres which behave in the same way: direct
and undetached contact of nerve fibres with ganglion cells would be partic-
 ular to motor fibres, and sensory fibres would be characterized by their in-
 direct contact through the intermediate diffuse network.


200                              1906 C.GOLGI

    From these data, I have decided to consider cells in direct contact with an-
terior roots as motor, and cells from other parts of the nervous system which
behave in an analogous way as probably motor or psychomotor.
    As for cells of the second type, it is much less decisively and in the form
of a simple hypothesis that I have been able to consider them as sensory, or
psychosensory. I have willingly kept their name of type two which, far from
suggesting their physiological role, restricts itself to expressing the idea of
the direct anatomic contact which these structures have with the diffuse net-
work in which their functional process passes, and loses its individuality.
    I may, from the foregoing, state an anatomical fact which, in my opinion,
is of major importance in judging the physiology of the nervous system:
that is, the existence of a diffuse network which I have spoken of several
times in my paper.
    I recognized the existence of this network several years before the neuron
theory made its triumphant appearance on the scientific scene. It is a true
nerve organ which is found, with differences in detail, in all layers of the grey
matter in the central nervous system.
    What immediately seemed to me of capital importance with regard to the
 role of the network in the function of the central nervous system, was its
 very structure, as it appeared to me. I shall confine myself here to the de-
 scription I gave then, repeating here that the following elements take part in
 its formation:
    (1) collateral fibrils which radiate from the nerve process of cells of the
 first type;




                                      Fig.7


               NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                             201




                                      Fig.8


   (2) the assemblage of nerve processes of the second type breaking up in a
highly complicated way;
    (3) collateral fibrils coming from nerve fibres of the first type to make
direct contact with ganglion cells of the first type;
   (4) a large number of other nerve fibres which, like the nerve process of
cells of the second type, gradually lose their individuality while dividing to
become extremely thin filaments.
    As regards the importance I attached to this network, may I repeat again
that I have always considered it as an organ playing a fundamental part in
the specific function of the nervous system and that I have, many times, said
that I considered it as an entirely distinct anatomical entity and not as a simple
hypothesis.
   I have demonstrated its existence in the chief areas of the nervous system,
in the spinal cord, in the cerebellum, and in the cerebral cortex, realizing that
it is a little modified from site to site.
   Figs. 7 and 8 are examples of this. Fig. 7 shows the nerve network as it is


202                               1906 C.GOLGI

seen in the granular layer of the cerebellum. Fig. 8 gives an idea of the net-
work existing in the dentate gyrus of the pes Hippocampus. I shall have to
return to this subject later.
   When I spoke of the diffuse nerve network of the spinal cord, remarking
that, in fact, one can also find connections from fibre to fibre which make a
real, closed lattice-work, I did not think it superfluous to point out that, in
view of the extreme complexity and intimacy of the connection between
the filaments of the network - such as could be seen in my preparations, it
was no longer necessary to invoke a material connection, a fusion of one
fibre to another, to be aware of the functional connections between the dif-
ferent groups of cells and between the different parts of the central nervous
system.
   In the presence of a reticular arrangement as fine as the one I have described,
an arrangement in which the fibres, having no insulating myelin sheath, run
side by side or very closely to each other and have frequent and extended
communications, I have stated that there was no reason to think that direct
contact between fibrils of different origin was an indispensable condition for
the transmission of the impulse from one to the other. On the contrary, I
thought that these contacts were more than sufficient for an impulse to be
transmitted in any direction. From then I had even adopted the idea which
Forel, after my work, put forward which stated to see less and less why a
mutual connection with really continuous contact of fine branching nerve
elements must always be considered as a postulate necessary to explain nerve
transmission. What I have just said of the network, on its structure and,
above all, on the fact that all the parts of the central nervous system make
up a part of it, proves the anatomical and functional continuity between
nerve cells. And that is the reason why I have not been able to accept the idea
of this independence of each nerve cell which is the essential basis of the
neuron theory.
   While speaking of the connections between cells and nerve fibres, I should
like to call attention to a particularity in the organization of the dentate gyrus
which illustrates these connections well and also demonstrates the group action
of nerve cells which I have defined as being opposite to their alleged individual
action.
   The small nerve cells which make up the elegant and characteristic layer
of the dentate gyrus, send their protoplasmic processes towards the surface of
this rudimentary gyrus while from the opposite pole they send a single and
very thin process. This process, at least in the majority of cases, subdivides a


                NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                             203
short way from the cellular body into extremely fine filaments which go to
make up a reticular zone. On the other side a well-differentiated bundle of
 fibres from the fimbria and from the medullary layer which clothes the ventricular
surface of the horn of Ammon turns towards the dentate gyrus.
   The fibres of this bundle, on approaching the reticular layer, which has
been mentioned above, subdivide in a most complicated way and interlace
with branches of nerve processes of cells to form with them the reticular zone.
(Incidentally I would point out that, with ordinary methods, this reticular
layer looks finely dotted in just the same way as the "Punktsubstanz" of older
authors.) One therefore gets the impression that the reticular layer is inter-
posed as a common region between the nerve processes of one side and the
nerve fibres of the other (Fig. 9).
    All one can gather of these connections speaks in favour of the whole dentate
gyrus acting as a group and against any individual action of these cells.




                                      Fig.9


204                                   1906 C.GOLGI

The diffuse network is exclusively formed by filaments which must be con-
sidered to be nervous because they are derived from nerve processes of the
first and second type, and from                certainly recognizable as nerve
by their classical properties. To assert that this network is the organ by which
both an anatomical and functional liaison is effected between the different
parts of the nervous system, I had to consider the doctrines concerning the
traditional idea that the nerve cells must be exclusively considered as the
primeral centres where the physiological activity of the nervous system takes
place.
   In this connection I recall that Nansen, for example, referring to his work
on lower animals, had already thought that the true organ of specific nervous
activity was the fibrillar network rather than the ganglion cells. This idea, as
one knows, has recently been confirmed by Bethe who had no hesitation in
writing "the doctrine attributing to cells the role of being the centre of specific nervous
activity is only a morphological speculation which is supported by no convincing
proof, while there are several facts which are decidedly against it".
   However, I do not think I ought to linger on this argument, about which
we possess only too little data.

The protoplasmic processes, or cellulipetal processes according to the theory
of dynamic polarization, have played just as important a part in the discus-
sions about the neuron.
   After I had shown that we must abandon the old view of Gerlach, which
said that these processes subdivide indefinitely, to make up the nerve net-
work, and after I had denied the constant presence of direct anastomoses, I set
about investigating, in a very determined way, how this sort of process be-
haves.
   Without committing myself on this question for the moment, I should like
to recall, in this connection, a fact which may easily be verified in several
types of cell; that is, that the majority of these processes, having more or less
subdivided, turn on the extreme border of the gyri where they terminate
either in a fairly large pyriform or spherical swelling or by an expansion
attached to a vessel wall.
   It is not difficult to see some of these terminal boutons going even beyond
the limit of the gyri to the meningeal vessels. This is a fact I have seen from
the beginning of my work and one I have been able to reproduce each time
I subsequently wished to see it. It is especially easy to verify this arrangement
in the cerebellum of young birds (Fig. IO). With this fact in mind is it not


               NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                            205
logical to think that these protoplasmic processes are also organs of nutrition
supplying the cell body?
   May I add here that the idea of the protoplasmic processes having a nu-
tritive function is, in my opinion, corroborated by the well-known facts
concerning the behaviour of blood vessels towards nerve cells deprived of
protoplasmic processes. In these cases the blood vessels establish an exception-
ally intimate contact.
   Most of the well-known giant cells of Lophius piscatorius do not have any
protoplasmic processes; surely enough we notice an actual invasion of blood
vessels which penetrate the cell body and get close to the nucleus.
   Deiters’ cells in the base of the corpus quadrigeminum, in the adult state,
do not have these processes either, and their cell body, too, is enclosed by an
actual network of capillaries.
   The function which I have suggested the protoplasmic processes carry out,
is confirmed by some anatomico-pathological studies and in the results of
experimental work which has been done on this point.




                                    Fig. IO


206                              1906 C.GOLGI

   In some work done on changes seen in the central nervous system of a
case of chorea, I drew attention to the fact that the calcific degeneration (in-
volving the cells of Purkinje in the cerebellum) was not evenly distributed
throughout the part, but was found much more frequently in the small peri-
pheral branches of the protoplasmic processes than in the larger branches,
the cell body or the nerve process. Then I recorded that such a fact should
bear a relation to the manner in which the degeneration progresses, that is
to say, it could mean that the change begins at the periphery in the smallest
branches of the protoplasmic processes and from there progresses centrally.
We have the work of Monti on cerebral embolism in the experimental field.
As a result of this work using black staining on the centres of softening pro-
duced by the embolic occlusion of small cerebral vessels one can see that the
cell changes (varicose atrophy) begin at the extremities of the protoplasmic
processes and only of those which are directed towards the occluded vessel.
It is also seen that the degenerative process only seems to involve the proto-
plasmic processes along which it advances some time after it has affected the
cell body.
   That said, I feel in a position to recall that whenever speaking of the func-
tion of protoplasmic processes, I always said that they may share in the partic-
ular function which we attribute to the nerve cell. Since protoplasmic pro-
cesses are a direct product of the body of the nerve cell whose structure they
reproduce, I have always said that naturally, one must also accept that they
may possibly share in the specific function of the cell substance.
   I am aware that strong objections have been raised with regard to this part
of my work. Above all there has been the question of the spines which the
protoplasmic processes are provided with. A major functional role has been
given to these spines and there are innumerable accounts in the literature
which aim to show what modifications they undergo in varying states of
activity, rest, sleep and of wakefulness. Now, if one considers that similar
structures are found not only on protoplasmic processes but also on cells of
the netiroglia and on the nerve process, it is not hard to imagine that, even
disregarding any estimation of the worth of the experiments, I have never
attached any final importance to this statement regarding protoplasmic pro-
cesses as cellulipetal conductors.
    In the discussion on the significance of protoplasmic processes I must men-
tion what has been called the pericellular and peridendritic network. This has
also been described as being a nerve organ and of great importance in the
mechanism of nerve actions. Even my name (Golgi-Netz) has been given to


               NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                             207
this network, thus confusing it with the real diffuse nerve network which I
described.
   While confirming the description, which I have already given, of a sheath
surrounding the body of the cells as well as their protoplasmic processes, this
sheath only sometimes appears to be reticular. I should also like to reaffirm the
interpretation I gave to it, as a sheath whose nature is not well understood,
probably a combination of nerve tissue and keratin and perhaps connected
with the cells of the neuroglia.
   As for the fibrillar structure which has been recorded in protoplasmic pro-
cesses as well as in cell bodies and which provides a new argument in favour
of the theory of cellulipetal conduction in these processes, I shall speak of it
later in connection with my work on the structure of nerve cells. I must say,
here, however, that the problem of the structure of nerve cells and more
especially that of the significance of the different formations these cells may
present, is still very far from its solution.
   The modern trend of research into the nervous system has been charac-
terized above all by a succession of investigations of cell structure and we
know well how each new structural detail has served as an argument either
for or against the neuron theory.
   On this subject I must first of all declare that it is absolutely impossible
for me to follow certain arguments which, in my opinion, leave the realms
of anatomy and which relate to statements avoiding any possibility of veri-
fication.
   The lucubrations of Nissl on the "Centralgrau" are such an example. When
I see that he denies the existence of a nerve network without at first putting
himself in a position to verify it, and that he can only define the "Centralgrau"
by saying that it denotes everything which is found between the end of the
myelinated           and the cells, when I hear him refuse to give any credit to
evidence established by black staining on collaterals of nerve processes and
of fibres, I must conclude from it that Nissl’s ideas are more in the province
of speculation than of anatomy.
   Neither can I follow any more the long disputes which have followed
each other with regard to what Bethe has called the "network of Golgi",
referring to a structure I described as sometimes assuming the appearance of
a network and which has nothing in common with the real diffuse nerve
network.
   Seeing this network associated with the endings of nerve fibrils of different
origins and with nerve processes on the surface of cells, I am naturally obliged


208                               1906 C.GOLGI

to ask myself on what proven anatomical facts these conclusions have been
based.
   These so-called results aside, I must hasten to say that in modern times new
technical methods have opened up new horizons in the study of detailed cell
structure, and in first place are those methods of Ramón y Cajal.
   Although these methods have produced some wonderfully good results
there is, however, no agreement among them, so that we think they represent
paths converging perhaps towards a common goal and that one day they
will lead to an unfolding of the mystery around the nerve cell, but we must
realize that at present these paths are still not united.
   Following such a statement it will be easily understood that, in my opinion,
we cannot draw any conclusion, one way or the other, from all that has been
said on the importance which different structures identified in ganglion cells
have, in being for or against the neuron theory.
   Besides the work of Nissl on chromatic and achromatic substances which,
in spite of their importance in the study of experimental or anatomico-path-
ological changes, have not shed any new light on cell structure, the work of
Apáthy must be placed in the fore-front of the field. This work is so well
known that I need not recall it in any detail. Apáthy’s results, which demon-
strate the passage of neurofibrils from one cell to another, as well as the ex-
istence of a simple diffuse network should, to tell the truth, imply the destruct-
ion of the neuron theory and be formal corroboration of the existence of a
diffuse nerve network and of the theory which has been built on this fact.
   I must, nevertheless, say that Apáthy’s work, which is illustrated so bril-
liantly by his preparations, is on invertebrates and particularly the worm,
and that we can find no support in them to allow us to apply these data to
vertebrates.
   This denial of any correspondence refers, too, to all the most recent studies
in which the fibrillar structure has been shown in the nerve cells of verte-
brates.
   We thus arrive with regard to my studies to what I have called the endo-
cellular reticular apparatus. This structure is illustrated by Figs. 11, 12 and 13,
which show nerve cells from the intervertebral ganglia of the horse, and by
Fig. 14 which shows a cell of the same type from the dog. In showing these
pictures here, I must repeat what I have persistently said before, that is, that
the significance of these structures still represents an unsolved problem.
   I must also recall those fibrils with the typical appearance of nerve tissue
which I best demonstrated on the surface of cells of the cerebral cortex and


              NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                             209




                                     Fig. I I

say that I do not feel able yet to make any statement about the associations
which they may have with the fibres which have been described in succession
by other authors.
   This system of superficial nerve       is illustrated by Fig. 15, and in order
to demonstrate the difference between them and the internal reticular ap-
paratus, Fig. 16 shows a group of nerve cells from the cerebral cortex in which
only the internal reticular apparatus has been differentiated.
   As regards reticular apparati, my honourable colleague Holmgren has ar-
rived at really remarkable results which he has illustrated under the title of
Trophosponges or Endocellular canaliculi. Here again, however, we are faced
with differing facts...; subsequent study will settle the question.




                                     Fig.12


210                            1906 C.GOLGI




                                   Fig.13




                                   Fig.14

After the work which I have just briefly quoted comes that of Bethe and of
Donaggio, who have demonstrated the exquisite fibrillar structure of nerve
cells. Using similar methods, based on the use of a mordant before applying
the stain, these two last authors have achieved results which are essentially
in agreement with each other.
   However, Bethe’s studies aim at emphasizing the independence of fibrils,


               NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                              211

i.e. of supposed paths of conduction, and state that the fibrils may pass directly
from one protoplasmic process to another without forming any sort of con-
nection with the interior of nerve cells, while Donaggio tries to prove that
fibrils penetrate to the inside of the cells and that the cell body has an ex-
tremely complicated and fine reticular arrangement around the nucleus.




                                      Fig.15




                                       Fig.16


212                                1906 C.GOLGI




                                       Fig.17




                                       Fig.18


   I do not think that the fibrillar or reticular structure which Bethe and Don-
aggio describe can be identified with the structure demonstrated by Apáthy
in the nerve cells of worms; nor do I think that we can at once accept that
all the fibrils and reticular structures, and, in particular, the internal structures
described by these two authors, represent neurofibrils and nerve networks
respectively.
   Fig. 17, taken from Bethe’s work, shows the structure of a nerve cell from
the spinal cord as it appears using the special technique of this author. Fig.
 18, taken from a paper by Donaggio, reproduces the fine network structure
described by him.
   On this subject, and particularly with respect to Donaggio’s work, I must
recall the words of Jäderholm who expressed his conclusions as follows:
   "In my opinion, reticular formations in cells must be considered as artefacts
produced by an agglutination phenomenon. These reticular structures can
also be simulated by the plasma which, coagulated in the form of a network,


              NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                            213
stains at the same time as the fibrils. This happens most often using Donag-
gio’s method, much less frequently with Cajal’s and very rarely with those
of Bethe and Bielschowsky."
   In this order of work done on the detailed structure of nerve cells, Cajal’s
classic results, obtained with his method of silver reduction, have an eminent
place. These results are the finest and most important on this subject, and
are to be noted, too, for the ease with which they may be demonstrated.
   With Cajal’s method one can demonstrate fibrillar structure with such
precision of detail that one can see how the fibrils behave in the cell bodies
as well as in the processes (Fig. 19). Among the advantages of this method




                                    Fig.19


214                              1906 C.GOLGI

we may note that, unlike any previous method, it makes it possible to dem-
onstrate the fibrillar structure of nerve elements even at the beginning of
their development in the first stages of embryonic life.
   It is true that one cannot state that the problem of nerve cell structure is
solved, even with the help of this method which gives such exceptionally
fine results.
   I have said that these results do not agree with other results which represent,
however, a great deal of certain and indisputable knowledge of the struc-
ture of the nerve cell. I would further add that the question of the fibrils,
be they nervous or not, of the internal parts of the cells and of the proto-
plasmic processes is no more answered than the question of the relations
between fibrils and the reticular apparatus which, as can be seen in my illustra-
tions, penetrates the protoplasmic processes and extends a long way along
them.
   Finally, we are no more completely decided on the ultimate destination
of the fibrils which travel in the protoplasmic processes.
   Even with these results I must repeat that we are perhaps dealing with
many roads converging towards the same end, but which, at the moment,
have not yet met.

3. The neuron is a physiologically independent unit.
   The doctrine of the physiological independence of the neuron, which has
been stated to have its origin in Waller’s law as well as in the data on the
systematic degenerations of nerve centres, has had its expression and its ap-
plication in the appealing doctrine of dynamic polarization. The proof which
people have wanted to find in Waller’s law is, in my opinion, completely
worthless. In fact, with what foundation could one assert that Waller’s law
is applicable to cellular unity?
   Can one deny that secondary degenerations are connected, just as I have
always upheld, with a general effect on more or less extensive territories, of
the nervous system ? Then again, I don’t think one can take Waller’s law
into account as an argument of any worth against the idea of the existence,
through the diffuse nerve network, of intimate connections between nerve
cells.
   The doctrine of dynamic polarization can be seen to escape any kind of
direct physiological analysis; it is only one of the expressions of the physio-
logical concept and, as I have already noted, does not exclude the possibility
of there being others.


               NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                              215
   If the idea of cerebral localization had kept its original form, i.e. that well-
defined and distinct sensory and motor functions can be ascribed to carefully
demarcated areas of the brain, then the theory of the functionally independ-
ent neuron could have found indirect support from studies performed on
cerebral localization.
   But, today, our ideas on localization have undergone profound modifica-
tions.
   Without considering experimental data which, by demonstrating the im-
precision of the boundaries of central excitatory zones has shown the possi-
bility of substitution and compensation, a prejudicial question arises, at the
start, which, from the anatomical point of view, I have asked from the be-
ginning of my work when I demonstrated the existence of the collateral
branches of nerve fibres and of functional nerve process of the ganglion cells.
   Here is what I wrote on the subject:
   <"With regard to physiological deductions, particular consideration should
be given to the nerve fibres and fibrils which come from the nerve processes,
which always behave in such a manner as to form the most complicated and
extensive connections between the nerve fibres, which enter or leave the
centres, and the nerve cells."
   If one halts, to consider these connections, one becomes convinced that
one single nerve fibre may have connections with an infinite number of nerve
cells, as well as with completely different parts of nerve centres which may
be a long way from each other.
   Referring more directly to the doctrine of cerebral localization, I shall not
embark here on any analysis, which I have already made in my previous
studies, and which is illustrated by a series of plates showing the lack of all
the reputed anatomical conditions necessary for giving a basis to the phys-
iological conception of localization, and I shall limit myself here to recalling
how I summed up my views on the subject on the basis of those data: "While
denying the existence of finely demarcated central zones depicting the ex-
clusive seat of the central distribution of nerve fibres, we feel that we can
accept, however, the existence of territories to which most of the fibres are
directly distributed."
   The nerve fibres coming from, or going to, the periphery would have a
more direct and intimate connection with these territories, rather than with
those around or at some distance from them, with which they are, however,
also associated.
   It goes without saying that in speaking of territories with a preponderant


216                               1906 C.GOLGI

distribution it is understood that these territories slowly merge with other
regions where other bundles of fibres prevail. These anatomical observations
relating to localization may be expressed almost entirely in a physiological
argument.
   As for the specific function of the central nervous system, I have, on several
occasions, contested that it was correlated with a specificity of organization
of the nerve centres, and I have come round to the idea that specific function
is not associated with the characteristics of the organization of centres, but
rather with the specificity of peripheral organs destined to receive and trans-
mit impulses, or again, with the particular organization of peripheral organs
which must receive the central stimuli.

The conclusion of this account of the neuron question, which has had to be
rather an assembly of facts, brings me back to my starting-point, namely that
no arguments, on which Waldeyer supported the theory of the individuality
and independence of the neuron, will stand examination.
    We have seen, in fact, how we lack embryological data and how anatom-
ical arguments, either individually or as a whole, do not offer any basis firm
enough to uphold this doctrine. In fact, all the characteristics of nerve process,
protoplasmic process and cell-body organization which we have examined
seem to point in another direction.
    We find the same situation regarding the so-called physiological independ-
ence of the neuron. Just as we have said regarding the functional mechanism,
far from being able to accept the idea of the individuality and independence
of each nerve element, I have never had reason, up to now, to give up the
concept which I have always stressed, that nerve cells, instead of working
individually, act together, so that we must think that several groups of ele-
ments exercise a cumulative effect on the peripheral organs through whole
bundles of fibres. It is understood that this concept implies another regarding
the opposite action of sensory functions. However opposed it may seem to
 the popular tendency to individualize the elements, I cannot abandon the
idea of a unitary action of the nervous system, without bothering if, by that,
 I approach old conceptions.
    The statement I made about the horn of Ammon corroborates, in a most
 objective way, I should almost say schematically, my interpretation of the
 action of cells from different regions of the central nervous system.

Thus, as briefly as I could, because of the time and because I do not wish to


              NEURON DOCTRINE: THEORY AND FACTS                            217
submit the kind attention of the assembly to too severe a test, I have covered
the field of work which is most closely connected with my subject.
   Before I finish, there remains for me to present my most lively and sincere
thanks to the illustrious Institute which has judged me worthy of this, the
highest distinction the world. I do not dare to attribute this supreme distinc-
tion to my personal worth, nor directly to my work, however patient and
constantly directed towards scientific research it has been, but I allow myself
to believe that it has been ascribed in the not undeserved recognition of the
work accomplished by all those who drew from my studies an impulse which
was rich in good results. When I think how the modern period of scientific
research, whose developments I have had the good fortune to witness, has
really enlarged, in a surprising way, our knowledge of the organization of
the nervous system, I feel irresistably bound to trust in the fine words of
Alfred Nobel, whose mind was so widely open to the highest idealism, who
said: "Each new discovery leaves in the brains of men seeds which make it
possible for an ever-increasing number of minds of new generations to em-
brace even greater scientific concepts. My wish is that these new anatomical
studies, on which this Institute, in such a high order of thought, has wished
to draw the attention of the world, may represent a new element of progress
for humanity.
