                   C ARL F. C ORI and G ERTY T. C ORI


                Polysaccharide phosphorylase
                     Nobel Lectures, December 11, 1947



                         Part I - by Carl F. Cori

Polysaccharide phosphorylase is characterized as an enzyme which can break
or make an                   bond at the termination (non-reducing end) of
a glycogen or starch chain. The process is illustrated below:




   The interaction of phosphate with the terminal glucosidic bond results in
the formation of glucose-1-phosphate and the loss of a chain unit; in the
reverse reaction the glucose part of glucose-1-phosphate is added as a new
chain unit and phosphate is set free. This reversible enzymatic polymeriza-
tion occurs with little change in free energy, as may be calculated from the
equilibrium constant. The reaction which involves expenditure of energy in
the conversion of glucose to glycogen is the hexokinase reaction, the forma-
tion of glucose-6-phosphate from glucose and adenosine triphosphate.


                  POLYSACCHARIDE PHOSPHORYLASE                              187
  For the discussion which follows it is important to note that the phosphoryl-
ated hexoses can enter into the following enzymatic equilibria (Table 1)

                  Table 1. Enzymatic equilibria at pH 7 at 30º.




   Resting mammalian muscle contains about 0.003 mole of hexose-6-phos-
phate     glucose-6- and fructosed-phosphate) per kilo. Assuming that
the mutase reaction is also close to equilibrium in a resting muscle, we can
calculate the concentration of glucose-1-phosphate to be expected as 0.0001
mole per kilo or less than 0.2 per cent of the total acid soluble phosphate
content of muscle. It seems clear that the detection and isolation of this inter-
mediate could not have been accomplished without a separation of phos-
phorylase activity from that of the other enzymes.
   Formation of hexose-6-phosphate - The discovery of polysaccharide phos-
phorylase and glucose-1-phosphate can be traced to systematic work on the
formation of hexosed-phosphate in muscle. Of particular importance was
the fact that the method used for the determination of hexosed-phosphate
consisted of two independent measurements, one based on the reducing
power of the compound and the other on its phosphate content and that
there was generally good agreement between these two measurements. In
this manner it was found that a number of procedures led to an increase in
the hexosed-phosphate content of muscle, among which may be listed,
anaerobiosis, injection of epinephrine in intact animals, incubation of isolated
frog muscle in Ringer’s solution containing epinephrine, and electric stim-
ulation of mammalian or frog muscle.
   Balance experiments during aerobic recovery ofpreviously stimulated and
isolated frog muscle indicated that the hexose-6-phosphate which disap-
 peared was in large part reconverted to glycogen; hence it was made prob-
able that the reaction, glycogen     glucose-6-phosphate, was reversible. The
next step was the finding that the increase in hexosed-phosphate in isolated
 frog muscle incubated anaerobically with epinephrine was accompanied by


188                   1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI

a corresponding decrease in inorganic phosphate (average of 6 experiments
per 100 g muscle, + 14 mg ester P, - 16 mg inorganic P). Phosphocreatine
and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) remained unchanged, suggesting that
they were not involved in the formation of hexose-6-phosphate, but since
their regeneration through lactic acid formation was not excluded, the ex-
periments were repeated with muscles poisoned with iodoacetate. The results
were the same as with unpoisoned muscle and it was therefore concluded
that hexosed-phosphate was formed from glycogen by ester&cation with
inorganic phosphate:




    These findings were presented in 1935 at the 15th International Physio-
 logical Congress and were discussed at that time with Professor Pamas
 who then stated that he had under consideration experiments with muscle
 extract. Prior to that time it has been assumed that glycogen reacted with
 ATP to form hexose diphosphate. Parnas and Baranowski found that a dis-
 appearance of inorganic phosphate could be demonstrated in a cell-free
 extract of muscle which did not contain phosphocreatine or ATP. This was
ofimportance because it established beyond doubt the participation of in-
 organic phosphate in the splitting of glycogen, a process which has been aptly
 called "phosphorolysis" by Parnas. However, the mechanism of phosphor-
  olysis remained unknown until glucose-r-phosphate had been isolated.
     Formation of glucose-1-phosphate - The following experiments led to the
  detection and isolation of glucose-1-phosphate. Minced frog muscle was ex-
  tracted three times with 20 volumes of cold distilled water, a procedure
  which removed most of the acid-soluble phosphates normally present in
  muscle, but did not remove glycogen. When the washed residue was in-
  cubated anaerobically at 20º in isotonic phosphate buffer at pH 7.2, some
  hexose monophosphate was formed. On addition of a catalytic amount of
  muscle adenylic acid, the formation of hexose monophosphate was very
  markedly increased. When phosphate was replaced by isotonic KCl, no ester
  formation occurred. The glucose part of the ester could have come only
  from glycogen, and the phosphate part only from the added inorganic phos-
  phate, thus confirming the reaction postulated for intact muscle.
     After short periods of incubation there was much more organic phosphate
  present in the hexose monophosphate fraction than corresponded to the
  reducing power of hexose-6-phosphate. Such a discrepancy had not been


                  POLYSACCHARIDE            PHOSPHORYLASE                       189
encountered before in analyses of the hexose monophosphate fraction, and
since the discrepancy became smaller or disappeared completely after longer
periods of incubation, the formation of a precursor of glucosed-phosphate
was suspected. Short hydrolysis in NH2SO4 at 100º (conditions under which
hexosed-phosphate is not hydrolyzed) revealed the presence of a compound
which yielded equivalent amounts of fermentable sugar and inorganic phos-
phate.
    A representative experiment is shown in Table 2. Comparison of the sec-
ond, third and the last columns shows that the additional organic phosphate
present before hydrolysis is accounted for by this new compound. Further-
more, the disappearance of this compound in the third hour of incubation
( - 0 . 7 4 m i l l i moles) is accounted for by a corresponding gain in reducing
power ("hexose") before hydrolysis (+0.67 millimoles).

Table 2. Formation of glucose-1-phosphate in minced and washed frog muscle in-
                  cubated in phosphate buffer plus adenylic acid.
The water-soluble, alcohol-insoluble barium salts (hexose monophosphate fraction)
were isolated and analyzed for phosphate and reducing power before and after hydrol-
                       ysis in N H2SO4 for 10 minutes at 100º.
                AU-values are given in milimoles per 100 g muscle.




* The sugar formed after hydrolysis was completely fermentable, while hexose-6
phosphate under the conditions chosen, was not fermented by the live yeast.


   The new phosphate ester was isolated as the crystalline brucine salt in a
large-scale experiment similar to that shown in Table 2 and identified as
glucose-1-phosphate.
   When glucose-1-phosphate was added to a cell-free frog or rabbit muscle
extract, it was converted rapidly to glucose-6-phosphate by an enzyme
which was named phosphoglucomutase. It was due to the leaking out of
the mutase that glucose-1-phosphate accumulated in washed and minced


190                    1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI

frog muscle. Mutase is greatly enhanced in its activity by magnesium ions.
In order to demonstrate the formation of glucose-I-phosphate from gly-
cogen and inorganic phosphate in muscle extract, it was necessary to remove
magnesium ions by dialysis.
  An experiment which shows the effect of magnesium ions as well as of
adenylic acid is given in Table 3. Addition of magnesium ions to the dialyzed
extract had no effect on the total amount of ester formed, but it prevented
the accumulation of glucose-I-phosphate.
  Experiments similar to those shown in Table 3 were performed with

Table 3. Formation of glucose-1-phosphate in dialyzed (17 hours) rabbit muscle
                                   extract.
Incubated for 60 minutes at 24º after addition of glycogen and inorganic phosphate.
              All values are given in micromoles per 10 cc. of extract:




dialyzed extracts of other mammalian tissues (brain, heart, liver, kidney) and
of yeast. In all of these the formation of glucose-I-phosphate could be dem-
onstrated, pointing to a wide distribution of the enzyme phosphorylase.
Hanes has described the occurrence of this enzyme in higher plants, partic-
ularly in tubers and seeds. In general, the enzyme is present in tissues and cells
which contain glycogen or starch.
   Properties and synthesis of glucose-l-phosphate - The ester, having no free
reducing group, does not react with alkaline copper solutions or with hypo-
iodite and is resistant to the action of strong alkali. Complete hydrolysis oc-
curs in 10 minutes at 100º in 0.1 N HCl or H2SO4 and equivalent amounts of
free glucose and inorganic phosphate are formed. The quantitative determi-
nation of the ester is based on this property. The neutral barium and potas-
sium salts of the ester are sparingly soluble in 66 per cent alcohol. A crys-
talline dipotassium salt, containing 2 H2O, has been described by Kiessling.
   The ester has been synthesized by a condensation of α−tetraacetyl glucose-


                   POLYSACCHARIDE PHOSPHORYLASE                                 191
I-bromide with trisilver phosphate. An intermediate product, tri- (tetraace-
tyl glucose-I)-phosphate, is formed which yields glucose-I-phosphate on
hydrolysis in 0.2 N HCl in methyl alcohol. The synthetic, like the natural
product, is the α-isomer. The               is obtained by substituting dibenzyl
phosphate or "monosilver" phosphate as the phosphorylating agent; it is not
acted upon by phosphorylase. Neither are the synthetically obtained
mers of mannose-I- or galactose-I-phosphate.
   Reversibility - The first clue for a possible reversibility of the reaction, gly-
cogen + phosphate         glucose-I-phosphate, came from the observation that
addition of glucose-I-phosphate to a reaction mixture containing enzyme,
glycogen and phosphate was strongly inhibitory, while glucosed-phosphate
had only a weak inhibitory effect on the formation of glucose-I-phosphate.
Further investigation showed that conditions for reversibility were unfavor-
able because the concentration of glucose-I-phosphate could not be main-
tained, owing to the activity of phosphoglucomutase even in electrodialyzed
extracts and at pH 6.5 (which is less favorable for its action than for the action
of phosphorylase). It became clear that a separation of the two enzymes was
necessary in order to investigate reversibility. A partial separation was first
achieved by adsorption of phosphorylase on aluminium hydroxide, fol-
   .
lowed by elution with disodium phosphate and dialysis to remove inorganic
phosphate. When glucose-I-phosphate was added to this enzyme prepara-
tion, inorganic phosphate was set free and a polysaccharide was formed in
equivalent amounts, showing the reversibility of the reaction. Independently
Kiessling had prepared a protein fraction from yeast juice by fractionation
with 0.3 saturated ammonium sulfate which also catalyzed the reaction in a
reversible manner, while some qualitative observations with yeast extract
based on iodine colors had been made earlier by Schäffner and Specht.
   An original experiment with a partially purified preparation of muscle
phosphorylase is reproduced here (Fig. 1) because it is instructive in relation
to later developments. The curve in Fig. 1 shows a definite lag period; the
polysaccharide which was formed gave a blue color with iodine and the reac-
tion did not attain a true equilibrium owing to incomplete separation of
phosphorylase from phosphoglucomutase. Reversibility could also be dem-
onstrated with phosphorylase preparations of heart and brain. The iodine
color of the newly formed polysaccharide was brown to reddish purple
rather than blue as with muscle phosphorylase. Preparations of liver phos-
phorylase formed a polysaccharide which could not be distinguished from
glycogen in iodine color and other properties.


192                     1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI




  . 1. Synthesis of polysaccharide with a partially purified phosphorylase preparation
Fig.
                    of muscle. (Experiment of March 11, 1939.)


  After these observations had been made, it became clear that further pro-
gress depended on the isolation of phosphorylase. This is described in Part
2 which is inserted here in order to avoid an interruption in the sequence of
exposition.




For a detailed study of the action of phosphorylase and for an understanding
of its mechanism, it appeared necessary to work with highly purified en-
zyme preparations. Muscle was chosen as starting material since in it the
concentration of the enzyme is much higher than that found in other tissues.
The rapid rate of glycogen breakdown connected with muscular contraction
may explain the relatively high concentration in skeletal muscle of phos-
phorylase as well as of the other enzymes which are concerned with lactic
acid formation.


                  POLYSACCHARIDE PHOSPHORYLASE                                   193
   The primer action of glycogen - The protein fraction of a muscle extract,
precipitated by less than 0.5 saturation with (NH4)2SO4, showed a marked
rise in phosphorylase activity per unit of protein over the unfractionated
starting material. This was however the case only when the enzyme was
catalyzing the reaction toward the right:


                                                                                 (1)

When enzyme activity was tested in the opposite direction a puzzling dif-
ficulty was encountered. Activity set in only after a lag period; refractiona-
tion of the enzyme increased this lag period from minutes to hours and in
some preparations completely abolished the activity toward polysaccharide
formation. A similar observation was made by Kiessling with yeast phos-
phorylase and led him to conclude that he had separated two enzymes, one
concerned with glycogen synthesis, one with its breakdown.
   Liver phosphorylase, upon salt fractionation, was found to retain activity
toward polysaccharide synthesis. Such preparations always contained traces
of glycogen, while the purified muscle enzyme was free of glycogen. This
observation offered a clue. Addition of glycogen to the reaction mixture in
as low a concentration as 10 mg per cent led to immediate activity of muscle
phosphorylase preparations, seemingly inactive when tested without gly-




Fig. 2. Rate of conversion of glucose-1-phosphate to polysaccharide in the presence of
        crystalline muscle phosphorylase and increasing amounts of glycogen.


194                    1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI

cogen addition. Fig. 2 illustrates these findings as well as the effect of in-
creasing concentrations of glycogen on the rate of the reaction.
   From these observations it followed that glycogen was needed for the
activity of the enzyme in both directions. Since the equilibrium of the reac-
tion is in favor of polysaccharide formation, it was of considerable advantage
that the enzyme could now be tested when acting in that direction.
   Enzyme test - Under certain conditions, Reaction (1) is of the unimolec-
ular type; toward the left, it can be followed conveniently by determination
of the amount of inorganic phosphate which is set free. Polysaccharide is
formed in equivalent amounts. Since the reverse reaction occurs simulta-
neously, an equation for a reversible first-order reaction is applicable: k =
I/t log                    represents the per cent of glucose-I-phosphate con-
verted to inorganic phosphate (and polysaccharide) at equilibrium, 79 per
cent at pH 6.7, while x represents the per cent converted at time t (in min-
utes). The position of the equilibrium changes with pH, hence a different
value for      must be used at other pH values. Hanes has shown, however,
that at equilibrium the ratio of the ionic forms of orthophosphoric and glu-
cose-I-phosphoric acid remains constant over the pH range investigated. The
mean ratio of the divalent ions of the two acids was found to be 2.2 for
potato and 2.0 for muscle phosphorylase between pH 5 and 7.5.
   In the standard test the enzyme is diluted with 0.03 M cysteine at pH 6.7.
Unless a reducing agent is present the enzyme has low activity and the reac-
tion is not of the first order. To a solution of glycogen, glucose-r-phosphate
and adenylic acid (5-phosphoriboside), adjusted to pH 6.7, an equal volume
of dilute enzyme solution is added to start the reaction. The order of addition
of the different components of the system makes an appreciable difference in
the initial rate of the reaction. When enzyme or glucose-1-phosphate is added
last, the initial rate is the same, but when glycogen is added last, the initial
rate is less and the shape of the rate curve is different.
   The final composition of the reaction mixture in micromoles per cc. is : 15
cysteine, 16 glucose-I-phosphate, 0.5 adenylic acid and glycogen (10 mg per
cc.). Inorganic phosphate is determined in an aliquot after 5 and 10 minutes
of incubation at 30º, and the data are used for a calculation of the first-order
velocity constant.
   The number of enzyme units present are expressed as k multiplied by
 1,000, for convenience. In order to compare different preparations, the activ-
ity of the enzyme is expressed as units per mg protein and is calculated for
the amount of protein which is present in 1 cc. of reaction mixture.


                 POLYSACCHARIDE PHOSPHORYLASE                              195
    The pH optimum of the reaction is between 6.5 and 6.8 and the temper-
ature optimum is close to 38º. The conversion of glucose-r-phosphate (pK2
6.1) to orthophosphate (pK2 6.8) results in a shift in pH. This change is small
and has a neglible effect on the rate during the early course of the reaction.
The pH can be kept constant by the addition of various buffers but they all
decrease the activity of the enzyme.
    Crystalline muscle phosphorylase has an activity of about 3,000 units per
mg protein at pH 6.7 and 30º. Calculated for the initial rate of the reaction,
 this corresponds to a turnover number of 40,000 molecules of glucose-I
phosphate per molecule of enzyme (mol. wt. 400,000) per minute.
    Phosphorylase a and b - It had been observed in experiments with dialyzed
and aged muscle extracts that the rate of phosphorylase activity was in-
 creased 10 times or more by the addition of adenylic acid in low concentra-
 tions. Later it was found that phosphorylase preparations obtained by precip-
itation of a fresh-water extract of rabbit muscle at 0.41 saturation with
 (NH 4)2S0 4, when freshly dissolved, had in the absence of added adenylic
 acid as high as 66 per cent of the full activity (i.e. activity in the presence
 of added adenylic acid). When the enzyme solution was kept for 1 hour at
25º its activity without adenylic acid dropped to zero; at this point addi-
 tion of adenylic acid to the reaction mixture brought back the original
 activity.
    These observations led to the conclusion that there exist two forms of
 phosphorylase, one active (phosphorylase a) and one inactive (phosphorylase
 b) without adenylic acid addition and that muscle tissue contains a factor,
 soon shown to be an enzyme, which converts the a into the b form. The
 assumption that this enzyme removes adenylic acid from the a form seemed
justified at this point and the enzyme was designated as PR (prosthetic group
 removing enzyme). Later work, however, failed to establish the presence of
 adenylic acid in phosphorylase a and the nature of the prosthetic group which
 is removed by the PR enzyme remains obscure. There is evidence that an
 organic phosphate which is dialyzable and difficult to hydrolyse in hot acid
 is split off from phosphorylase a by PR.
    In order to preserve the a form, it is necessary to prevent action of the PR
 enzyme. In vivo this is accomplished by avoiding as much as possible stim-
 ulation of the muscles before or during excision; in vitro, by the earliest
 separation of phosphorylase from the PR enzyme.
    Preparation of crystalline phosphorylase a - The procedure described below
 is based on experience gained in a large number of preparations. Information


196                   1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI

concerning the various steps is given which has not been included in the
original description of the method.
   A rabbit is killed by injection of amytal and the muscles of the hind legs
and back are rapidly excised and weighed. The following steps are carried
out in a cold room at 4º. The muscles are passed through an ordinary meat
grinder and extracted with one volume of water for about 10 minutes (ex-
traction in a blendor is to be avoided since it leads to conversion of the a to
the b form). After the residue is separated by straining it through gauze it is
re-extracted with another volume of water. The combined extracts are fil-
tered through cotton and coarse filter paper; this should be accomplished in
1-2 hours. It is unnecessary to obtain a completely clear extract. The pH of
the extract is measured with a glass electrode and if it is above 6.2, it is
adjusted to that pH by adding 0.05 N HCl with stirring. The extract is then
dialyzed in cellophane tubes (diameter 2.3 cm) against running tap water of
4-10º for 3-4 hours. The turbid extract is collected in a beaker and 0.05 N
HCl is added to bring the pH to 5.7. A flocculent precipitate forms which
contains most of the PR enzyme and only a small amount of phosphorylase.
This is the case only in rabbit muscle. In other species this separation is less
complete and so far the enzyme has only been crystallized from rabbit muscle.
The isoelectric precipitate is removed by centrifugation followed by filtra-
tion. Table 4 shows that no purification is achieved in this step, which never-
theless, because of the separation from the PR enzyme, is essential for the
success of the preparation.
   To the filtrate which is red and must be perfectly clear, sodium glycero-
phosphate or KHCO3 is added in substance until the pH is 6.8. Then the
extract is precipitated by bringing it to 0.41 saturation with a (NH4) 2S0 4

            Table 4. Preparation of crystalline muscle phosphorylase.

                                                         Total


                  POLYSACCHARIDE PHOSPHORYLASE                                  197

solution saturated at room temperature and neutralized to pH 6.8. Overnight
the flocculent precipitate settles to the bottom and most of the supernatant
fluid can be decanted. Finally the precipitate, which contains the enzyme is
separated by centrifugation, preferably at high speed (10,000 r.p.m.). The
well-drained precipitate is dissolved in water, about 3 to 4 ml per 100 g
muscle used originally. Table 4 shows that with a small loss the enzyme has
now been purified about 20 times and in this particular experiment was 39
per cent pure.
   The solution, which is slightly turbid, is transferred to a cellophane tube
(diameter 1.3 cm) and after a short dialysis (1/2 to 1 hour) against cold
running tap water, the tube is transferred to a cysteine solution (0.005 M)
brought to pH 6.6 to 6.8 with 0.03 M sodium glycerophosphate. Buffers
 other than glycerophosphate have been used successfully, while no crystals
 were obtained when glutathione was substituted for cysteine or when cys-
 teine was omitted. Dialysis is continued at 0º, against several changes of the
 same cysteine-buffer solution, until most of the sulfate has been eliminated
 from the enzyme solution. Precipitation of the enzyme sets in before this is
 the case; the precipitate is sometimes, but not always, crystalline. It is sepa-
rated by centrifugation, the supernatant fluid is carefully drained off and




      Fig. 3. Crystalline phosphorylase prepared from rabbit muscle ( x 130).


                       1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI

  the precipitate is stirred into a 0.01 to 0.03 M cysteine-glycerophosphate
  solution of pH 6.6 to 6.8 at 30 to 35º. The volume should be about the same
  as in the first crystallization. Solution of most of the protein should be
 rapidly achieved by vigorous stirring with a glass rod, however foaming
 should be avoided: the material is then centrifuged at room temperature
 (25º) at 10,000 r.p.m. for about 5 minutes. If a considerable amount of pro-
 tein remains undissolved, it can be re-extracted. The small insoluble residue
 consists mostly of cystine crystals. The supernatant fluid should be perfectly
 clear and almost colorless. It is immediately transferred to an ice bath.
 Crystals appear rapidly, the rate depending, among other factors, on the
 concentration of enzyme in the solution. In order to obtain the large crystals
 shown in Fig. 3 it is necessary to use a dilute solution and slow cooling.
    Table 4 shows that only 2 per cent of the protein in the crude extract was
 phosphorylase; 60 per cent of the enzyme was recoveredin the first crystals.
 Recrystallization causes a slight rise in specific activity. Eventually the moth-
  er liquor has almost the same specific acitivity as the crystals.
     During summer, when the temperature in St. Louis is well over 30º on
  many days, the phosphorylase content of the muscles drops to such a low
  level that crystallization becomes impossible. When the rabbits are kept for
about 1 week at 13º the level rises sufficiently to obtain crystals.

            Table 5. Comparison of properties of phosphorylase a and b.


                  POLYSACCHARIDE            PHOSPHORYLASE                      199
   Phosphorylase b was prepared by letting purified PR enzyme act on twice
crystallized phosphorylase a. The solution was then brought slowly to 0.28
saturation with (NH4) 2S0 4. The enzyme crystallized in the form of rhom-
boid plates. Table 5 gives a comparison of the properties of the two forms of
the enzyme.
   Determination of phosphorylase a and b in mixtures is based on two par-
allel activity determinations, one without and one with the addition of aden-
ylic acid in 10-3 M concentration. In the former case the a form has 66
per cent of its full activity, while the b form is inactive; in the latter case both
forms are fully active.
   Conversion of phosphorylase a to b, in vitro - The PR enzyme originally ob-
tained by isoelectric precipitation of dialyzed muscle extract, was consid-
erably purified by fractionation with (NH4)2SO4. It was shown that its activ-
ity was greatly increased in the presence of cysteine and that Mn++ ions had
an activating effect. The conversion of the a to the b form follows the first-
order reaction rate equation. PR enzyme units could thus be expressed in
terms of the first-order velocity constant.
   A conversion of phosphorylase a to b could also be effected by crystalline
trypsin at pH 6 to 6.2, at which pH the proteolytic acitivity of trypsin is kept
 at aminimum. This conversion is not a first-order reaction and is not ac-
celerated by Mn++ ions. Work by E. Krebs (unpublished) indicates that phos-
phorylases b obtained by PR and trypsin may not be identical.
   Conversion of phosphoryluse a to b, in vivo - Extracts of resting muscles
contain predominantly phosphorylase a. During strong muscular contraction
produced by strychnine or electric stimulation a large part of the enzyme is
converted to the b form, presumably through the action of the PR enzyme
in vivo. The sum of phosphorylase a and b does not differ significantly in
 resting and stimulated muscles. Determinations were carried out in crude,
 and crude dialyzed extracts and in the precipitate obtained with (NH 4)2SO4
 at 0.41 saturation (Table 6). No crystals of phosphorylase a were obtained
 when its concentration fell below 25 per cent of the total phosphorylase.
    Experiments on frogs gave results very similar to those obtained on rab-
 bits. When electric stimulation was followed by a rest period of 10-15 min-
 utes before the muscles were excised, the extract contained again prepon-
 derantly phosphorylase a. Conversion of the b to the a form has so far only
 been observed in vivo and nothing is known about its mechanism.
    The progressive conversion of phosphorylase a to b in muscle as contrac-
 tion continues might represent a regulatory mechanism, preventing exhaus-


200                     1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI

 Table 6. Effect of stimulation and recovery on phosphorylase-a content of muscle.




tion of the glycogen stores. The limiting reaction in the conversion of gly-
cogen to lactic acid is the phosphorylation of fructosed-phosphate to fruc-
tose-I, 6-diphosphate. Consequently the equilibrium ester (glucose-6- and
fructose-6-phosphate) accumulates during muscular contraction. The piling
up of even more of this intermediate substance is avoided by a temporary
inactivation of phosphorylase. The adenylic acid content of muscle is too
low to permit full activation of phosphorylase b.
   Liver phosphorylase and blood sugar formation - Until recently it was as-
sumed that a-amylase plus maltase convert glycogen to glucose in the liver;
the absence of dextrins and maltose from liver tissue and blood could not be
easily reconciled with this assumption.
   Glycogen added to dialyzed extracts of perfused liver tissue disappeared
very slowly, indicating weak amylase activity. When inorganic phosphate
and traces of adenylic acid were added to such extracts, glycogen disappeared
rapidly and its disappearance was balanced by the sum of hexose phosphate
 and glucose which accumulated.
   Fractionation of the liver extracts led to separation of the enzymes in-


                 POLYSACCHARIDE PHOSPHORYLASE                               201

The phosphatase seems to be specific for glucose-6-phosphate; its pH opti-
mum is within the physiological range. The glucose formed diffuses into the
blood stream and the phosphate can react again with glycogen.
   It is the absence of phosphatase from skeletal muscle tissue which explains
the fact that muscle does not contribute glucose to the blood. In the kidney,
both the glycogen and phosphorylase content are very low and its contribu-
tion of glucose to the blood through the above system seems to be insignif-
icant.




Plant phosphorylases - When Hanes first described the occurrence of phos-
phorylase in higher plants, he pointed out that there existed a close par-
allelism between the action of an enzyme system prepared from peas and
potatoes and what was then known about the action of the corresponding
enzyme system from animal tissues and from yeast. Hanes fractionated pota-
to extract with ammonium sulfate and noted an initial lag period in the
formation of starch from glucose-I-phosphate. In conformity with the results
obtained with the animal enzyme he found that this lag period was abol-
ished by the addition of a small amount of starch. Green and Stumpf found
their purified potato phosphorylase preparations completely inactive in the
direction of synthesis, unless a small amount of starch was added. Weibull
and Tiselius showed that under certain conditions the reaction catalyzed by

Table 7. Concentration of substrates at which phosphoryiases show half maximal
                                     activity.




* Calculated per mole end-group, assuming that glycogen contains 10 per cent and
starch 4.5 per cent end-groups.


202                    1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI

potato phosphorylase was first order in either direction. The Michaelis-
Menten constants of potato and muscle phosphorylase for substrates are very
similar (Table 7).


      Table 8. Differences in the action of muscle and potato phosphorylase.




  In spite of these and other similarities (nature of polysaccharide formed,
effect of pH on equilibrium), there are certain important differences in the
action of potato and muscle phosphorylase; these are summarized in Table 8.
  Nature of polysaccharide formed - A summary of the properties of synthetic
polysaccharides is given in Table 9. It is based on the work of Hanes, Hassid,


           Table 9. Properties of natural and synthetic polysaccharides.


                  POLYSACCHARIDE PHOSPHORYLASE                                  203
Bear, Cori and others. It seems clear that muscle and potato phosphorylase
form a linear polysaccharide which closely resembles the amylose compo-
nent of natural starch in all its properties.
   In order to form a branched polysaccharide of the type of amylopectin or
glycogen, a second enzyme is needed which forms a-1-6 glucosidic linkages
at the points of branching. Such an enzyme has been found in both animal
and plant tissues, but the mechanism of its action is not clearly understood.
When crystalline muscle phosphorylase plus a second enzyme (called the
branching factor and obtained from liver or heart) were allowed to act on
glucose-1-phosphate, an autocatalytic type of curve was obtained (Fig.4).
Traces of glycogen, introduced by the liver preparation, were present, but
not enough to prime muscle phosphorylase when acting alone.




Fig. 4. Enzymatic synthesis of a branched polysaccharide from glucose-I-phosphate. In
Curve B crystalline muscle phosphorylase was acting simultaneously with a supplemen-
tary enzyme prepared from liver. In Curve A the liver enzyme preparation was in-
          activated by heating before being added to muscle phosphorylase.


   As shown in the last column of Table 9, branched and linear polysaccha-
rides differ markedly in their activating effect on muscle phosphorylase. The
autocatalytic type of curve would result from the increasing number of
activating end-groups formed during the synthesis of a branched polysac-
charide. It was suggested that a combined action of both enzymes was nec-
essary for the formation of glycogen or amylopectin. Haworth and collab-
orators have, however, reported the conversion of amylose to amylopectin


204                     1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI

by the action of an enzyme prepared from potato, a sort of cross-linking en-
zyme which would break the long amylose chains into smaller fragments
and rearrange them in a laminated pattern.
   Connected with the problem of formation of              linkages is that of their
disruption. Neither       nor             can split this linkage. Recently an en-
zyme present in muscle has been investigated in this laboratory which in
combination with phosphorylase is able to cause an almost complete deg-
radation of glycogen. Phosphorylase alone cannot degrade branched poly-
saccharides beyond the branch points. In fact, the limit dextrin formed from
amylopectin or glycogen by either potato or muscle phosphorylase is larger
than that formed by                 The question whether the same enzyme is
involved in the formation and disruption of the 1-6 linkage has not been
settled.
   Theory of the action of phosphorylase - In the phosphorolysis of giycogen or
starch the reactants are (1) inorganic phosphate, and (2) the terminal glucose
unit of the polysaccharide chains. The chain molecule is thereby shortened,
one glucose unit at a time, but the concentration of terminal glucose units
remains the same until the limit of degradation is reached.
   The theory of the action of phosphorylase is based on the assumption that
the terminal glucose unit is also a reactant in the reverse direction; in this case
the polysaccharide chains would be lengthened by successive additions of
new glucose units from glucose-1-phosphate, again without any change in
the concentration of the terminal glucose units. The reaction catalyzed by
phosphorylase in the direction of increasing chain length might therefore be
expressed as follows.
   Terminal glucose (of n chain units) + glucose-r-phosphate + terminal
glucose (of n + 11chain units) + phosphate, etc.
   The following observations are in accord with this formulation. (1) Muscle
as well as potato phosphorylase remain inactive- when glucose-1-phos-
phate alone is added; they require the further addition of polysaccharide as
an essential reactant before new polysaccharide can be formed. (2) When in-
creasing amounts of glycogen or starch are added, the rate of polysaccharide
formation from glucose-1-phosphate increases in a manner which is char-
acteristic for a reacting molecule (see Fig. 2.) (3) Branched polysaccharides
are more strongly activating than linear polysaccharides, the effect being
roughly proportional to the number of end-groups present. (4) The equilib-
rium of the reaction is independent of the concentration of polysaccharide.
This would follow from the fact that the concentration of one of the two


                 POLYSACCHARIDE            PHOSPHORYLASE                  205
reactants in either direction, the terminal glucose units, remains constant.
Hence this term cancels out when the usual mass-law expression is written
and the equilibrium constant, K = (phosphate)/(glucose-I-phosphate). (5)
For the same reason, the reaction in either direction, although involving
two reactants, has been found to be kinetically of the first order.
   Several experiments have been devised to test this theory. The reaction,
glucose-r-phosphate       polysaccharide + phosphate, in the presence of 32P,
should lead to an incorporation of 32P in glucose-I-phosphate. Such an ex-
change occurred in the presence but not in the absence of polysaccharide
primer, showing that the latter was an essential reactant for polysaccharide
synthesis from glucose-1-phosphate.
   A further consequence of the theory presented above is that the length of
the newly formed polysaccharide chains should depend on the ratio of molar
concentrations, glucose-I-phosphate which reacted/terminal glucose units of
added primer. When this ratio is large, long chains, when it is small, short
chains should be formed. This has been shown to be the case by a number
of investigators, who used iodine color as a measure of chain length. A com-
parison has also been made of the chain length calculated from the above
ratio and that actually found by end-group assay, with fair agreement.
   A special case arises when the limit dextrin of glycogen (formed by ex-
haustive treatment with phosphorylase) is used as primer and an amount of
glucose-1-phosphate is added which would allow no more than one chain
unit to be added for each primer end-group. At the start the reaction can
proceed only in the direction of synthesis, since there are no end-groups
present in the limit dextrin which can be removed by phosphorolysis. As the
reaction proceeds, cleavable end-groups are added, but the rate of phosphorol-
ysis close to the limit of degradation is very slow. If polysaccharide syn-
thesis consists in the addition of glucose units to primer end-groups, one
would expect under these special conditions a shift in the equilibrium to the
side of polysaccharide formation and a dependence of the equilibrium on the
concentration of added primer. Hestrin who carried out this experiment
(unpublished) found both these predictions fulfilled.
   There is thus experimental support for the idea that polysaccharides act as
primers in the direction of synthesis because they enter stoichiometrically
into the reaction catalyzed by phosphorylase.


206                    1947 C.F.CORI AND G.T.CORI

References to the literature quoted will be found in the following articles:
1. C. F. Cori and G. T. Cori, J. Biol. Chem., 116 (1936) 169; Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol.
   Med., 34 (1936) 702; 39 (1938) 327.
2. C. F. Cori, S. P. Colowick, and G. T. Cori, J. Biol. Chem., 121 (1937) 465; 123
   (1938) 375; 124 (1938) 543.
3. C. F. Cori, G. Schmidt, and G. T. Cori, Science, 89 (1939) 464.
4. A. A. Green, C. F. Cori, and G. T. Cori, J. Biol. Chem., 151 (1943) 21; 158 (1945)

5. M. A. Swanson and C. F. Cori, J. Biol. Chem., 172 (1948) 797.
6. M. Cohn and G. T. Cori, J. Biol. Chem., 175 (1948) 89.
