                           C   HARLES   H   UGGINS



         Endocrine-induced regression of cancers
                      Nobel Lecture, December 13, 1966



 The natural course can be utterly different in various sorts of malignant dis-
 ease. Some tumors grow without any apparent restraint whatever. When
 man harbors a neoplasm of this kind, an increase in the size of the cancer is
 readily evident from day to day and death ensues in, say, six weeks. Con-
 versely, some malignant growths disappear spontaneously. Both of these an-
 tipodal effects are rare. Mostly, man with cancer lives 1 year or a little longer
 after the neoplasm becomes manifest, and it would appear that some inhibi-
 tion of growth of the tumor takes place to produce this protracted course.
    The net increment of mass of a cancer is a function of the interaction of the
tumor and its soil. Self-control of cancers results from a highly advantageous
competition of host with his tumor. There are multiple factors which restrain
cancer - enzymatic, nutritional, immunologic, the genotype and others.
Prominent among them is the endocrine status, both of tumor and host - the
subjects of this discourse.
   In hormone-responsive cancers, appropriate endocrine modification           re-
sults in catastrophic effects on cancers of several kinds (Tabl e 1) in man and
animals, even in those in the terminal stages of the disease. Of course, there
ensues pari passu improvement in the host’s condition. The results are often spe-


236                      1966 CHARLES HUGGIN S

tion. The improvement can persist throughout the remainder of the life of the
organism; in man regressions lasting more than a decade are not uncommon.
There can be complete disappearance of the lesions. But worthwhile benefit
ensues only when all or much of the cancer is hormone-responsive and only a
small proportion of cancers possess this functional characteristic in a pro-
nounced degree.
   The therapeutic system of endocrine-restraint of cancer came from the
efforts of many workers. I was never alone in my studies in which one or two
students always participated as colleagues. It is a privilege to thank the scores
of young men and women who sustained our work.
   Lacassagne 1 was the first to indicate that a correlation probably exists be-
tween hormones and the development of cancer since injections of estrone
evoked mammary cancer in each of three males of a special strain of mice;
carcinoma of the breast had never been observed previously in animals in this
category. The proof that hormones can influence the growth of cancer was
derived from tumors of the prostate of the dog and, later, of man.
   The second quarter of our century found the biological sciences much pre-
occupied with two noble topics : (i) chemistry and physiology of steroids and
(ii) biochemistry of organo-phosphorus compounds. The key to the puzzle
of the steroid hormones in cancer was the isolation of crystalline estrone by
Doisy et al.2 from extracts of urine of pregnant women. In the phosphorus
field there were magnificent findings of hexose phosphates, nucleotides,
coenzymes and high-energy phosphate intermediates. These wonderful dis-
coveries provided the Zeitgeist for our work.
    Through the portal of phosphorus metabolism we entered on a series of
interconnected observations in steroid endocrinology. A program was not
prepared in advance for this basic physiologic study. The work was fascinat-
ing and informative so that it provided its own momentum and served as an
end in itself. There were blind alleys but eventually the labyrinth of the ex-
perimental series was traversed and we were somewhat amazed to find our-
selves studying the effects of hormonal status on advanced cancers of people.




The fluid of spermatocele contains spermatozoa which become motile upon
 exposure to air. It was observed 3 that, remarkably, spermatocele fluid is de-
 void of acid-soluble phosphorus and free hexoses, whereas human semen


        ENDOCRINE-INDUCED REGRESSION OF CANCER S                               237
contains very large amounts of inorganic phosphorus and a monosaccharide
identified as fructose by Mann 4. At the time of ejaculation in the human male,
the environment of spermatozoa is altered by a sharp rise in its content of
fructose and acid-soluble phosphorus. We found that the seminal vesicle in
man is the chief source of these components in semen.
   It was somewhat difficult to obtain unmixed secretions from the various
accessory sex glands of man, so a simple technique       was devised to collect the
                                                       5


prostatic secretion (Fig. 1) of dogs quantitatively at frequent intervals for
years. Often the prostatic fluid of normal adult dogs is secreted for many
months with little variation in its quantity or chemical characteristics. This
steady state is noteworthy since secretion of the prostate is the end product of
a chain of antecedent events involving synthesis of steroids and protein hor-
mones.




                     Fig. I. The prostatic isolation operation.


238                      1966 CHARLES KUGGINS

   Following orchiectomy, the prostate shrinks, the oxidative phase of carbo-
hydrate metabolism declines 6, and secretion stops. Testosterone corrects these
defects. The cycle of growth and atrophy created by alternately providing and
then withholding testosterone was induced repeatedly in the course of the life
of the castrate dog. The prostatic cell does not die in the absence of testoster-
one, it merely shrivels. But the hormone-dependent cancer cell is entirely
different. It grows in the presence of supporting hormones but it dies in their
absence and for this reason it cannot participate in growth cycles.
   A remarkable effect of testosterone is the promotion of growth of its target
cells during complete deprival of food. Androstane derivatives conferred on
the prostate of puppies a selective nutritional advantage     7
                                                                during starvation of
3 weeks whereby abundant growth of this gland-occurred while there was
serious cell breakdown in most of the tissues of the body. It is useless growth
since it does not mitigate the ordeal of starvation. It is reminiscent of a nutri-
tional advantage for growth which some malignant tumors possess in under-
nourished hosts.




 It was good fortune that some of our metabolic experiments had been carried
 out on dogs since this is the only species of laboratory animal in which tumors
 of the prostate occur. As in man, it is very common to find spontaneous neo-
 plasms of prostate in aged dogs. Among the signs of great age in this species
 are cataracts and worn teeth. When testes are present in dogs with these stig-
 mata a prostatic tumor is likely; if, in addition, the dog had an interstitial cell
 tumor of the testis (this was common) a pros       tatic-neoplasm was always found.
 Most of the canine prostatic tumors are benign growths with much hyper-
 plasia of epithelium and many cysts; carcinoma is usually detected only by
 histological examination.
    At first it was vexatious to encounter a dog with a prostatic tumor during a
 metabolic study but before long such dogs were sought. It was soon observed
                                                                                   8


 that orchiectomy or the administration of restricted amounts of phenolic
 estrogens caused a rapid shrinkage of canine prostatic tumors.
    The experiments on canine neoplasia proved relevant to human prostate
 cancer; there had been no earlier reports indicating any relationship of hor-
 mones to this malignant growth.
    Measurement of phosphatases in blood serum furnished the proof that can-


         ENDOCRINE-INDUCED REGRESSION OF CANCER S                                   239
 cer of the prostate in man is hormone-responsive. The methodology is simple
 and the results are unequivocal. Kutscher and Wolbergs           9
                                                                    discovered that acid
 phosphatase is rich in concentration in the prostate of adult human males.
 Gutman and Gutman 10 found that many patients with metastatic prostate
 cancer have significant increases of acid phosphatase in their blood serum.
 Cancer of the prostate frequently metastasizes to bone where it flourishes and
 usually evokes proliferation of osteoblasts. In the school of Robert Robison,
 Kay found that brisk osteoblastic activity gives rise to increased alkaline
       11



 phosphatase levels in serum.
    Human prostate cancer which had metastasized to bone was studied at first.
The activities of acid and alkaline phosphatases in the blood were measured
concurrently at frequent intervals. The methods are reproducible and not
costly in time or materials; both enzymes were measured in duplicate in a
small quantity (0.5 ml) of serum. The level of acid phosphatase indicated ac-
tivity of the disseminated cancer cells in all metastatic loci. The titer of alkaline
phosphatase revealed the function of the osteoblasts as influenced by the pres-
ence of the prostatic cancer cells that were their near neighbors. By periodic
measurement of the two enzymes one obtains a view of overall activity of the
cancer and the reaction of non-malignant cells of the host to the presence of
that cancer. Thereby the great but opposing influences of, respectively, the
administration or deprival of androgenic hormones upon prostate cancer cells
were revealed with precision and simplicity. Orchiectomy or the administra-
tion of phenolic estrogens resulted in regression of cancer of the human pros-
tate 12 whereas, in untreated cases, testosterone enhanced the rate of growth
of the neoplasm.
    Results consistent with the foregoing were obtained by studying another
 enzyme of the prostate, fibrinolysin, in blood of patients with disseminated
 prostate cancer. In our metabolic studies it had been found that human pros-
 tatic fluid contained large amounts of many proteolytic enzymes 13 and espe-
 cially one which was highly active against fibrin as a substrate. Prostatic
 fibrinolysin differs from plasmin and trypsin.
    Subsequently Tagnon et al. 14 observed that the blood of some patients who
 have metastases of cancer of the prostate becomes incoagulable because of its
 concentration of prostatic fibrinolysin. The content of this proteolytic en-
 zyme in serum is reduced or eliminated by the administration of estrogenic
 substances or by gonadectomy; orchiectomy is hazardous when the blood is in-
 coagulable but, fortunately, the pills of diethylstilbestrol are effective therapy.
 Testosterone causes fibrinolysin to reappear in such patients. The entry of pros-


240                     1966 CHARLES HUGGIN S

tatic fibrinolysin into the blood is similar to that of acid phosphatase; each en-
zyme enters the plasma, but only from metastasis and not from the primary neo-
plasm. The antiandrogenic measures restore the coagulability of the blood.
   The control of activity of cancer by excision of endocrine glands is physio-
logic surgery wherein removal of a normal structure can cause healing of dis-
tant disease. Stilbestrol, which had been discovered in 1938 by E. C. Dodds
et al. 15, was the first synthetic substance to control cancer; hence the study of
the prostate cancers was the start of chemotherapy of malignant disease.
    The first series of patients with prostatic cancer treated by orchiectomy 16
 comprised 21 patients with far advanced metastases; only 4 of them survived
 for more than 12 years. Despite regressions of great magnitude, it is obvious
 that there were many failures of endocrine therapy to control the disease but;
 on the whole, the life span had been extended by the novel treatments and
 there had been a decrease of man-pain hours.




 The first indication that advanced cancer can be induced to regress was the
 beneficial effect of oöphorectomy on cancer of the breast of two women. This
 empirical observation 17 of Beatson in 1896 was remarkable since it was made
 before the concept of hormones had been developed. The beneficial action of
 removal of ovaries was not understood until steroid hormones had been iso-
 lated 4 decades later.
    But why does breast cancer thrive in folks who do not possess ovarian
 function - in men, old women, and females who have had oöphorectomy?
 Farrow and Adair18 observed that benefits of great magnitude frequently fol-
 low orchiectomy in mammary cancer in the human male. Thereby, they es-
 tablished that testis function can sustain mammary cancer.
    A half century after the classic invention of Beatson it was found out that
 adrenal function can maintain and promote growth of human mammary
 cancer. The adrenal factor supporting growth of cancer was identified     19
                                                                              when
 it was shown that bilateral adrenalectomy (with glucocorticoids as substitu-
 tion therapy) can result in profound and prolonged regression of mammary
 carcinoma in men and women who do not possess gonadal function. In devel-
 oping the idea of adrenalectomy for treatment of advanced cancer in man we
 were considerably influenced by the discovery of Woolley et al. 20 that adre-
 nals can evoke cancer of the breast in the mouse. Regression of great magni-


         ENDOCRINE-INDUCED REGRESSION OF CANCER S                                   241
tude of human mammary cancer also can be brought about by hypophysec-
tomy 21 as well as by adrenalectomy.
   Haddow et al. 22 found that phenolic estrogens can have an ameliorative
effect in human mammary cancer. A paradox seemed to be involved since, in
some circumstances, estrogenic compounds are activating agents for cancer of
the breast. In one room the surgeons were removing sources of estrogenic
hormones, while nearby the physicians were prescribing estrogens for mam-
mary cancer; both groups were achieving therapeutic triumphs in some cases.
Emerson said, "The ambitious soul sits down before each refractory fact.     "
The vexatious paradox was resolved by experimental studies.



                     Experimental mammary cancer

 Many of the early investigations in this area were carried out on mice and ad-
 mirable discoveries had been made; chiefly, these concerned the etiology of
 mammary cancer. But there was a serious disadvantage in use of the mouse -
 mammary cancers in this species are seldom hormone-responsive. True, in
 some strains breast cancer diminished somewhat during lactationas and in-
 creased in size during pregnancy. But Mühlbock 24 found that in most strains
 of mice mammary cancers are hormone-independent when the tumors have
 reached palpable size. Yet the thing about cancers is to cure them.
    Studies of the rat altered the course of research on breast cancer because this
 species has a remarkable propensity to develop mammary carcinoma after
 exposure to aromatics or, to a lesser extent, irradiation. Further, many of the
 cancers of rat evoked by these methods are completely hormone-dependent
 and so can be extinguished by endocrine methods.
    Compared with mouse and other rodents, rat is extremely vulnerable 25 to
 polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons. In the rat, small amounts of carcinogenic
 aromatics exert the following effects: (i) profound depression of incorpora-
 tion 25 of thymidine in DNA ; (ii) augmented p roduction of messenger
 RNA26 (iii) induction of synthesis of a soluble enzyme, menadione reduc-
 tase 27 and of microsome-bound enzymes and other protein                28
                                                                            ; (iv) cause
 cancer or kill the recipient . 29



   Maisin and Coolen 30 repeatedly painted mice with 3 -methylcholanthrene
(3-MC) andobserved that, in addition to cancer of the skin, mammary can-
cer developed in a small but significant percentage of the animals after seven
months. Shay31 fed rats a small dose of 3-MC each day for many months and


242                      1966 CHARLES HUGGIN S

observed a high incidence of mammary cancer; the tumors were first detected
after 4 months. We found that, under conditions which are highly restricted
but easily satisfied, a single massive but tolerable dose of any of a large num-
ber32 of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons or aromatic amines rapidly and
selectively induced breast cancers which were palpable within one month. It
is a method of extreme simplicity. Two carcinogenic aromatics, 7,8,12-tri-
methyl- and 7,12-dimethyl-benz(a)anthracene (7,12-DMBA), are more
efficient than all others by 10 times.
   Whereas a single feeding of a solution of 7,12-DMBA always induces
 breast tumors 33, intravenous injection of a concentrated lipide emulsion 34 of
 the aromatic is more efficacious and has an additional advantage - it introduces
 the compounds suddenly into the blood as a pulse-dose. When 3 pulse-doses
of 7,12-DMBA were given to Sprague-Dawley female rats, at age 50, 53
and 56 days, mammary tumors were evoked in all animals and large numbers
of breast cancers 35 were palpable within 4 weeks. The superficial location of
rat’s mammary glands readily permits detection of the cancers by palpation
and the end point is sharp because the cancers are firm in consistency and dis-
crete. A tumor weighing 8 to 10 mg can be detected with ease. The earliest
mammary cancer was found by histological search on day 11 and by palpation
on day 20 after the pulse- dose. This is somewhat comparable to a famous ex-
periment of Rous 36 who injected a cell-free filtrate of chicken sarcoma I into
other fowls and observed the first palpable tumor 10 to 21 days thereafter. In
contradistinction to the Rous virus, aromatic hydrocarbons elicit benign tu-
mors of the breast in addition to the cancers.
   The mammary cancers of the rat seldom metastasize but kill the host by at-
taining great size and invading adjacent tissues. Metastases can be produced
readily; in the experiments of Dao 37 injection of mammary cancer cells in
portal vein caused multiple cancers in the liver. The respiration values     38
                                                                                of the
mammary cancers are similar to those of normal lactating mammary gland.
The high rate of glycolysis, which Warburg 30 found to be distinctive of the
metabolism of cancer, prevailed in the induced carcinomas.
   Rats are also rather susceptible to the development of mammary cancer
after exposure to a big dose of ionizing radiation40. 7,12 -D M BA41 and radia -
tion42 possess in common the ability to inflict selective lesions of identical sort
in rat’s testis. With both agents the prime targets are those germinal cells
which multiply by mitosis and hence synthesize DNA; in contrast those cells
of testis which proliferate by meiosis and do not synthesize DNA are spared
from injury by 7,12-DIMBA.


        ENDOCRINE-INDUCED REGRESSION OF CANCER S                            243




Mammary cancers induced in the male rat by aromatics were not influenced
by orchiectomy an d hypophysectomy ; by definition, these neoplasms are
                                            4 3



hormone-independent. In contrast to male rat, most mammary cancers of
men wither impressively after deprival of supporting hormones.
The hormone-responsiveness of established mammary cancers induced in
female rat by aromatics 44 or ionizing radiation 45 is identical; it was a newly
recognized property of experimental breast cancers. Prior to this finding,
clinical study of patients with mammary cancer was the only material avail-
able for investigation of hormonal-restraint of neoplasms of the breast.
   In female rat, growth of the mammary cancers wasaccelerated in pregnan-
cy and by progestational compounds . We have not found any dosage of
                                           4 6



estradiol-17B which markedly enhanced the growth of these tumors.
    In female rat, many but far from all of the induced mammary cancers van-
 ished after removal of ovaries or the pituitary. In our experiments hypophys-
 ectomy was the most efficient of all methods to cure rat’s mammary cancer.
 Malignant cells which succumb to hormone-deprival, by definition, are
 hormone-dependent. The quality of hormone-dependence resides in the
 tumor cells whereas their growth is determined by the host’s endocrine status.
 Both man and the animals can have some of their cancer cells which are hor-
 mone-dependent while other neoplastic cells in the same organism are not
 endocrine-responsive.
  The cure of a cancer after hormone-deprival results from death of the
cancer cells whereas their normal analogues in the same animal shrivel but
survive. It is a basic proposition in endocrine-restraint of malignant disease
that cancer cells can differ in a crucial way from ancestral normal cells in re-
sponse to modification of the hormona l milieu intérieur of the body.




 It was unexpected to find that mammary cancers can be extinguished by pro-
 viding excessive amounts of ovarian steroids; this effect is cancer control by
 hormone-interference.
    We induced mammary carcinoma in rats which were then treated for a
limited time with large amounts of estradiol plus progesterone 46. This com-
bination of hormones excited such exuberant growth of normal mammary


244                       1966 CHARLES HUGGIN S

 cells that the breasts resembled those of rats late in pregnancy. Nevertheless,
 many of the mammary cancers were completely eliminated and 52 percent of
 the rats were free from cancer 32 six months after steroids had been discon-
 tinued. These rats had been cured of cancer because the tumors did not reap-
 pear during subsequent pregnancy. The heavy hormonal burden of preg-
 nancy upon mammary cancer had not reactivated dormant cancer cells if any
 had been present.
   In patients, the combination of huge amounts of progesterone and of estra-
diol injected intramuscularly induced measurable and worthwhile improve-
ment47 in patients with far advanced disseminated mammary cancer, both in
women and men. Moreover, benefit was obtained in patients in whom other
forms of endocrine therapy such as adrenalectomy and oophorectomy had.
previously promoted tumor regression followed by recrudescence.
    In another type of hormone-interference, cancer cells are exterminated in
parallel with normal cells of similar kind. Glucocorticoids will cause a remis-
sion of some lymphogenous tumors and leukemia. Heilman and Kendall
administered large amounts of cortisone to mice bearing a transplanted
lymphosarcoma - "Although dramatic and apparently complete cures are
produced, they are only temporary in a majority of animal         s48." In contrast to
the beneficial effects of cortisone, adrenalectomy enhances growth of lym-
phomas i n mouse 4 9. Pearson et al. 50 found that corticotropin (ACTH) or corti-
sone caused dramatic if temporary regression in certain cases of human leuke -
mia and Hodgkin’s disease.
   Dougherty and White 51 found that administration of pituitary ACTH to
the mouse causes a regression of lymph nodes and thymus. Regression of
lymphomas brought about by glucocorticoids does not differ in principle
from the effect of corticosteroids on. the lymphocytes of normal animals and
man.



                                        Conclusions

Cancer is not necessarily autonomous and intrinsically self-perpetuating. Its
growth can be sustained and propagated by hormonal function in the host
which is not unusual in kind or exaggerated in rate but which is operating at
normal or even subnormal levels.
  Hormones, or synthetic substances inducing physiologic effects similar
thereto, are of crucial significance for survival of several kinds of hormone-


       ENDOCRINE-INDUCED REGRESSION OF CANCER S                             245
 responsive cancers of man and animals. Opposite sorts of change of the hor-
monal status can induce regression and, in some instances, cure of such can-
cers. These modifications are deprivation of essential hormones, and hormone
interference by giving large amounts of critical compounds.
   The control of cancer by endocrine methods can be described in three prop-
ositions: (1) Some types of cancer cells differ in a cardinal way from the cells
from which they arose in their response to change in their hormonal environ-
ment. (2) Certain cancers are hormone-dependent and these cells die when
supporting hormones are eliminated. (3) Certain cancers succumb when
large amounts of hormones are administered.



                          Acknowledgment

This investigation was aided by grants from the Jane Coffin Childs Memorial
Fund for Medical Research and the American Cancer Society.
   The Upjohn Company, Kalamazoo, Michigan, through Paul Schurr, pro-
vided the lipide emulsions of hydrocarbons.




1. A. Lacassagne, Compt. Rend., 195 (1932) 630.
2. E. A. Doisy, C. D. Veler and S. Thayer, Am. J. Physiol., 90 (1929) 329.
3. C.B. Huggins and A.A. Johnson, Am. J. Physiol., 103 (1933) 574.
4. T. Mann, Biochemistry of Semen and of the Male Reproductive Tract, Methuen,
    London, 1964.
5. C. Huggins, M.H. Masina, L. Eichelberger and J.D. Wharton, J. Exptl. Med., 70
     (1939) 543.
  6. E.S.G. Barron and C. Huggins, J. Urol., 51 (1944) 630.
  7. R. Pazos Jr. and C. Huggins, Endocrinology, 36 (1945) 416.
  8. C. Huggins and P. J. Clark, J. Exptl. Med., 72 (1940) 747.
  9. W. Kutscher and H. Wolbergs, Z. Physiol. Chem., 236 (1940) 237.
10. A.B. Gutman and E.B. Gutman, J. Clin. Invest., 17 (1938) 473.
11. H.D. Kay, Brit. J. Exptl. Pathol., 10 (1929) 253.
12. C. Huggins and C. V. Hodges, Cancer Res., 1 (1941) 293.
13. C. Huggins and W. Neal, J. Exptl. Med., 76 (1942) 527.
14. H.J. Tagnon, W. F. Whitmore Jr. and N.R. Shulman, Cancer, 5 (1952) 9.
 15. E.C.Dodds, L. Golberg, W. Lawson and R. Robison, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London),
       Ser. B, 127 (1939) 140.
16. C. Huggins, R. E. Stevens Jr. and C.V.Hodges, Arch. Surg., 43 (1941) 209.
17. G.T. Beatson, Lancet, ii (1896) 104, 162.


246                       1966 CHARLES HUGGIN S

18. J.H. Farrow and F.E. Adair, Science, 95 (1942) 654.
19. C. Huggins and D.M. Bergenstal, Cancer Res., 12 (1952) 134.
20. G.W. Woolley, E. Fekete and C. C. Little, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S,), 25 (1939) 277.
21. R. Luft, H. Olivecrona and B. Sjögren, NordMed., 47 (1952) 351.
22. A. Haddow, J.M. Watkinson and E. Paterson, Brit. Med. J., ii (1944) 393.
23. A. Haddow, J. Pathol. Bacteriol., 47 (1938) 553; F.Bielschowsky, Brit. Med. Bull., 4
     (1947) 382; L. Foulds, Brit. J. Cancer, 3 (1949) 345.
24. O. Mühlbock, in A.R. Currie (Ed.), Endocrine Aspects of Breast Cancer, Livingstone,
     Edinburgh, 1958, p.291.
25. C.B. Huggins, E. Ford and E.V. Jensen, Science, 147 (1965) 1153.
26. L. A. Loeb and H.V. Gelboin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U. S.), 52 (1964) 1219.
27. H.G. Williams-Ashman and C.Huggins, Med.Exptl., 4 (1961) 223.
28. J.C. Arcos, A.H. Conney and N.P. Buu-Hoi, J. Biol. Chem., 236 (1961) 1291.
29. C. Huggins and R. Fuktmishi, J. Exptl. Med., 119 (1964) 923.
30. J. Maisin and M.-L. Coolen, Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., 123 (1936) 159.
31. H. Shay, E. A. Aegerter, M. Gruenstein and S. A. Komaro v, J. Natl. Cancer Inst., 10
      (1949) 255.
32. C. Huggins and N.C. Yang, Science, 137 (1962) 257.
33. C. Huggins, L.C. Grand and F.P. Brillantes, Nature, 189 (1961) 204.
34. R. P. Geyer, J.E. Bryant, V. R. Bleisch, E.M. Peirce and F. J. Star e, Cancer Res., 13
     (1953) 503; C. Huggins, S. Morii and L.C. Grand, Ann. Surg., 154, Suppl. (1961) 315.
35. C. Huggins, L. Grand and R. Fukunishi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. ( U.S.), 31 (1964) 737.
36. P. Rous, J. Exptl. Med., 13 (1911) 397.
37. T.L. Dao, Progr. Exptl. Tumor Res., 5 (1964) 157.
38. E.D. Rees and C. Huggins, Cancer Res., 20 (1960) 963.
39. O. Warburg, Metabolism of Tumours, Constable, London, 1930.
40. J.G. Hamilton, P. W. Durbin and M. Parrott, J. Clin. Endocrinol., 14 (1954) 1161;
     C.J. Shellabarger, E.P. Cronkite, V.P. Bond and S. W. Lippincott, Radiati on Res.,
     6 (1967) 501.
 41. E. Ford and C. Huggins, J. Exptl. Med., 118 (1963) 27.
 42. C. Regaud and J. Blanc, Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., 58 (1906) 163.
 43. C. Huggins and L. C. Grand, Cancer Res., 26 (1966) 2255.
 44. C. Huggins, G. Briziarelli and H. Sutton Jr., J. Exptl. Med., 109 (1959) 25.
 45. C. Huggins and R. Fukunishi, Radiation Res., 20 (1963) 493.
 46. C. Huggins, R. C. Moon and S. Morn, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 48 (1962) 379.
 47. R.L. Landau, E.N. Ehrlich and C. Huggins, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 182 (1962) 632;
      L.G. Crowley and L . Macdonald, Cancer, 18 (1965) 436; B. J.         Kennedy, Cancer, 18
      (1966) 1551.
 48. F.R. Heilman and E. C. Kendall, Endrocrinology, 34 (1944) 416.
 49. J.B. Murphy and E. Sturm, Science, 98 (1943) 568.
 50. O.H.Pearson, L.P. Ehel, R. W. Rawson, K. Dobriner and C.P. Rhoads, Cancer, 2
      (1949) 943.
 51. T.F. Dougherty and A. White, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 55 (1943) 132.
 52. H.W. Balme, Lancet, i (1954) 812; G. Crile Jr., J.Am. Med. Assoc., 195 (1966) 721.
 53. H. Kirkman, Natl. Cancer Inst. Monograph 1 (1959) 1-58.


        ENDOCRINE-INDUCED REGRESSION OF CANCER S                                247
54. H.J.G. Bloom, C.E. Dukes and B.C.V. Mitchley, Brit. J. Cancer, 17 (1963) 611.
55. R.M. Kelley and W.H. Baker, New Engl. J. Med., 264 (1961) 216.
56. O. S. Rodriguez Kees, J. Urol., 91 (1964) 665.
57. H. Kirkman and F. T. Algard, Cancer Res., 24 (1964) 1569.
58. S.W. Nielsen and J. Aftsomis, J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 14 (1964) 127.
