                      C O R N E I L L E J . F . HE Y M A N S


         The part played by vascular presso- and
          chemo-receptors in respiratory control
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1945



The physiology of respiratory control, of the adaptation of pulmonary gas
exchanges to the energy requirements of the organism, remains a funda-
mental problem on which many research workers are engaged.
   In this lecture I am privileged to describe contributions which my labora-
tory has made to the study of a number of physiological, physiopathological
and pharmacological mechanisms which act on and control the functioning
of the respiratory centre and thereby affect pulmonary ventilation and pul-
monary gas exchanges.
   It has been known for some time that variations in blood pressure affect
respiration. An increase in blood pressure inhibits respiration and sudden
marked hypertension may even produce apnea. We also know that hypoten-
sion increases respiration. It was generally believed that this interaction be-
tween blood pressure and respiration involved a direct action on the respira-
tory centre exerted by either the blood pressure or the rate of flow in the
cerebral circulation. The experiments which I shall now describe suggest that
this classical theory should be reconsidered and rejected.
   Since 1924, together with my father J. F. Heymans, my first and best
teacher, I have been engaged in research projects, using the following ex-
perimental technique (Fig. 1): the completely isolated head of a Dog B
under chloralose anaesthesia is perfused from a similar Dog A by means of
anastomoses between the two common carotids of Dog A and the ce-
phalic extremities of the common carotids of Dog B, and between the ex-
ternal jugular veins of the head B and the corresponding jugular veins of
Dog A. The isolated and perfused head of Dog B is connected to the trunk
(kept alive by its own circulation and artificial respiration) by the vago-
depressor nerves. The vascular anastomoses between the isolated head B and
the donor animal A are established by using Payr cannulas (Fig. 2) which
prevent coagulation at the point of anastomosis without making use of anti-
coagulants. Under these experimental conditions, the cephalic and cerebral
circulation of Dog B is entirely independent of the circulation in the trunk,


         PRESSO- AND CHEMO-RECEPTORS IN RESPIRATION                             461




     Fig. 1. Diagram of perfusion of an isolated head after J. F. and C. Heymans.
                 (Perfusion of the isolated head of Dog B by Dog A.)
(1) isolated head of Dog B; (2) isolated trunk of Dog B; (3) tracheal cannula;
(4) right vagus nerve of Dog B; (4’) left vagus nerve of Dog B; (5) anastomosis
between the cephalic extremity of the external jugular vein of Dog B and the cardiac
extremity of the external jugular vein of Dog A (right side); (5’) anastomosis between
the cephalic extremity of the external jugular vein of Dog B and the cardiac extremity
of the external jugular vein of Dog A (left side); (band 6’) anastomosis between the
cephalic extremity of the common carotid of Dog B and the cardiac extremity of the
common carotid of Dog A (right side); anastomosis between the cephalic extremity
of the common carotid of Dog B and the cardiac extremity of the common carotid
of Dog A (left side); ( 7) femoral blood pressure in Dog B; ( 7’) femoral blood pres-
      sure in Dog A; (8) respiratory movements in the isolated head of Dog B.


but the nervous pathways between head and trunk supplied by the vago-
aortic nerves remain intact. The respiratory movements which indicate the
 activity of the respiratory centre are recorded on the isolated perfused head
B which remains in a satisfactory living state.
   In some experiments the donor Dog A was replaced by an artificial heart-
lung apparatus.
   It was noted first of all that hypotension in the isolated trunk circulation
of Dog B stimulates the respiratory centre of the perfused head B. Converse-
ly hypertension in the trunk B inhibits the respiratory centre of the perfused


462                            1938 C.J.F.HEYMANS




           Fig. 2. Payr’s cannula for anastomosis between blood vessels.
(A) Longitudinal section of a Payr cannula; (B) one of thevessels attached to the
               cannula; (C) the second vessel attached to the cannula.
N.B. The anastomosis between vessels is established with intima in contact with in-
tima, so that the blood does not come into contact with the cannula or the sutures.




Fig. 3. The isolated head of Dog B is perfused from Dog A. The only link between
the isolated head of Dog B and his trunk, kept alive by artificial respiration, is provided
                              by the vago-aortic nerves.
Graph R : Respiratory movements of the isolated and perfused head of Dog B. Graph B:
                             Blood pressure of trunk B.
At ↑: intravenous injection of adrenaline into the trunk of Dog B. Hypertension in
the trunk B and reflex inhibition (apnea) of the respiratory centre of the perfused
                                   head of Dog B.


        PRESSO- AND CHEMO-RECEPTORS IN RESPIRATION                                463

head B. When a hypertensive dose of adrenaline is injected into the trunk B
it was found (Fig. 3) that respiratory movements of the isolated and perfused
head B were totally inhibited, producing apnea.
   These experimental results therefore demonstrated for the first time that
arterial hypotension limited to the trunk produces reflex stimulation of the
respiratory centre, while arterial hypertension in the trunk induces reflex
inhibition of the respiratory centre, sometimes to the extent of total apnea.
   The centripetal pathways of these respiratory reflexes, which are induced
by variations of blood pressure in the trunk, are supplied by the vago-
aortic nerves which constitute the only link between the trunk B and the
isolated and perfused head B.
   The next problem was to locate with greater precision the place of origin
of these respiratory reflexes. Together with J. F. Heymans we had first of all
noted that the respiratory reflexes under consideration persisted after all nerv-
ous connections between the trunk B and the perfused head B had been
cut, with the exception of those of the cardio-aortic area.
   In other experiments the isolated head of Dog B was perfused from Dog A
and the isolated heart-lung preparation or the isolated cardio-aortic area of
the trunk B was perfused from a third Dog C. The only link between the
head B and the isolated heart-lung preparation or the isolated cardio-aortic
area of trunk B was provided by the vago-aortic nerves. By using these ex-
perimental techniques we were able to observe that when arterial pressure
was increased either in the heart-lung preparation or in the isolated cardio-
aortic area of trunk B, reflex inhibition of the respiratory centre occurred;
conversely, when arterial pressure was reduced in the cardio-pulmonary
circulation or in the cardio-aortic circulation of the trunk B, the resulting
hypotension limited to these areas initiated a reflex stimulation of the respi-
ratory centre of the perfused head B. These respiratory reflexes did not occur
however when the arterial pressure was varied in the isolated pulmonary
circulation of the trunk B; in this case the vagus nerve provided the only
link between the perfused lungs of the trunk B and the perfused head B.
   Thus, this group of experiments carried out between 1924 and 1927 show-
ed that arterial hypertension in the cardio-aortic vascular area inhibits the activity of
the respiratory centre by a reflex mechanism, while arterial hypotension in the same
area has a stimulatory reflex effect on the activity of the respiratory centre.
   After Magendie’s and Cooper’s old experiments it has long been known
that clamping of the common carotid arteries produces hyperpnoea, while
unclamping of these arteries inhibits respiration.


 464                             1938 C.J.F.HEYMANS




                    Fig. 4a. Diagram of the carotid sinus in man.
(1) carotid sinus nerve; (2) glomus caroticum (reflexogenic chemo-receptor) ; (3)
beginning of the internal carotid where the reflexogenic presso-receptors are mainly
                     concentrated; (4) common carotid artery.




Fig. 4b. Diagram showing the technique by which endo-vascular pressure can be
modified in the carotid sinus with nervous links intact but previously isolated as regards
                     circulation and deprived of chemo-receptors.


         PRESSO- AND CHEMO-RECEPTORS IN RESPIRATION                        465

   Using the isolated and perfused head technique, we found that hypoten-
sion in the isolated cephalic circulation stimulates the respiratory centre,
whereas hypertension in the same area produces respiratory inhibition to the
point of apnea. We undertook to examine the mechanism of the interaction
between cephalic blood pressure and the activity of the respiratory centre.
   According to the classical theory, these respiratory reactions were con-
sidered to derive from the direct action of fluctuations in the blood flow, or
irrigation, on the respiratory centre. However, in 1900, Siciliano and Pagano
had already correctly noted that, although occlusion of the common caro-
tids does in fact give hyperpnoea, occlusion of the efferent branches of the
common carotid artery produces no effect on the respiratory centre. These
investigators therefore rejected the theory that this hyperpnoea was of cen-
tral origin and proposed the hypothesis that it was due to a carotid reflex
mechanism.
   Since 1924 the investigations of H. E. Hering and his associates, particularly
E. Koch, and our researches undertaken with our associates, among these J. J.
Bouckaert, P. Regniers, L. Dautrebande, and U. S. von Euler, and the work
of Moissejeff, G. Liljestrand, Y. Zotterman, C. F. Schmidt, R. Gesell, and other
investigators, have made it possible to show that the carotid sinuses, i.e. the
arterial regions located in the area where the common carotid artery bifur-
cates into internal and external carotids and occipital artery, containreceptors,
 as does the homologous cardio-aortic zone, who, by a reflex mechanism, act
upon and regulates the activity of the cardio-vascular centres and of the
respiratory centre. Fig. 4a presents the position of the human carotid sinus.
   A number of experimental procedures have enabled us to show that an
increase in endo-vascular pressure in the carotid sinus produces an inhibition
of the respiratory centre to the point of apnea, by a reflex arising from the
presso-receptors, and that hypotension in the carotid sinus produces reflex
stimulation of the respiration. Fig. 4b shows a diagram of one of the ex-
perimental procedures in which fluctuations in the endo-vascular pressure
 act exclusively on the presso-receptors of the carotid sinus. Fig. 5 shows re-
flex hyperpnoea produced by hypotension in the carotid sinus, and Fig. 6
 shows reflex respiratory inhibition produced by an increase of blood pres-
 sure acting on the presso-receptors of the carotid sinus. It should be noted
 that this respiratory inhibition is particularly evident in animals in which the
vago-aortic nerves have been cut.
   Apnea induced by intravenous injection of adrenaline is also related to
 arterial blood pressure which acts upon the respiratory centre by means of


466                            1938 C.J.F.HEYMANS




      Fig. 5. Hyperpnea in a dog produced by hypotension in the carotid sinus.


 the reflex pathways supplied by the presso-receptors of the cardio-aortic and
 carotid sinus zones.
    The several experimental observations summarized above thus demon-
 strate that variations in arterial blood pressure act on the respiratory centre by a re-
flex mechanism involving endo-vascular presso-receptors located in the cardio-aortic
 zone and in the carotid sinus. Fig. 7 gives a diagrammatic representation of the
 points of emergence and pathways of the presso-receptor nerves arising from
 the cardio-aortic zone and the carotid sinus. It should be remembered at this
 point that the same presso-receptor nerves also act, by reflex mechanism, on
 the cardio-vascular centres and in this way possess a regulatory function as
 regards the systemic blood pressure and the circulation in general.
    The next problem was to determine whether or not the respiratory centre
 is directly affected by variations in arterial blood pressure and arterial rate
 of flow? Numerous experimental observations carried out by means of dif-


        PRESSO- AND CHEMO-RECEPTORS IN RESPIRATION                                467

ferent techniques gave a negative answer to this question. The activity of
neither the respiratory nor the cardio-vascular centres was modified by (1)
clamping the efferent arteries of the carotid sinus, (2) clamping the common
carotid after denervation of the carotid sinus, (3) clamping of the vertebral
arteries, even after prior clamping of the efferent arteries of the carotid sinus.
Fig. 8 shows a graph of such an experiment.
   In other experiments an isolated head was perfused and it was observed
that considerable reduction in cerebral blood flow beyond physio-patholog-
ical limits was necessary before a stimulatory response was obtained by direct
action on the respiratory and cardio-vascular centres.
   All these observations lead to the conclusion that variations in arterial blood pres-




         Fig. 6. Dog under chloralose anaesthesia. The vagus nerves are cut.
(R) pneumogram; (SBP) systemic blood pressure; (CBP) carotid sinus blood pressure
               (chemo-receptors excluded). Time in S-second intervals.
At point I: increase in the endo-vascular blood pressure within the carotid sinus-
marked inhibition of respiration. At point 2: decrease in the endo-vascular blood pres-
sure within the carotid sinus - hyperpnoea. At point 3: same as at 1. At point 4: same
                                        as at 2.


468                          1938 C.J.F.HEYMANS




Fig. 7. Diagram of the nervous pathways of the cardio-aortic and carotid sinus zones.

sure exert an effect on the respiratory centre and on the cardio-vascular centres ex-
clusively by a reflex mechanism involving the aortic and carotid sinus receptors.
Variations in arterial blood pressure and cerebral bloodflow, within physio-patholo-
gical limits, exert no direct effect on the respiratory and cardio-vascular centres.
    It had long been accepted as an established physiological fact that the chem-
ical composition of the blood, i.e. the CO, and the oxygen contents, exerted
a direct effect on the respiratory centre by controlling and adapting its
activity in relation to the metabolic requirements of the organism. It was
also accepted that a large number of pharmacological substances exerted a
stimulating effect by direct action on the respiratory centre. These physiolo-
gical and pharmacological concepts have recently undergone considerable
modifications.
    Making use of the technique involving perfusion of an isolated head linked
to the trunk by only the vago-aortic nerves, J.F. Heymans and ourself in
 1926 observed that asphyxia or hypoxemia, limited to the sytemic circula-
 tion, produced reflex stimulation of the respiratory centre, while systemic
 hypercapnia produced reflex respiratory inhibition. Fig. 9 gives a graphic re-
presentation of one of these experiments which demonstrates reflex stimula-


       PRESSO- AND CHEMO-RECEPTORS IN RESPIRATION                              469

tion of the respiratory centre of the isolated head, induced by asphyxia in the
trunk which is connected to the perfused isolated head only by the vago-
aortic nerves.
   The different techniques described above made it possible to demonstrate




Fig. 8. Dog under chloralose anaesthesia. (A) pneumogram; (AD.) femoral blood
                          pressure. Time in s-second intervals.
Section I (at points 1 and 3): clamping of both common carotid arteries - hyperpnoea
and hypertension. Section I (at points 2 and 4) : unclamping of both common carotid
arteries - respiratory inhibition and hypotension. Section II: normal respiration and
blood pressure. Between Sections II and III: the efferent blood vessels from the two
             carotid sinuses are clamped - no hyperpnoea, no hypertension.


470                             1938 C.J.F.HEYMANS

that the reflex impulses from the systemic circulation, produced by condi-
dons of hypercapnia, hypocapnia, or hypoxemia in the blood, arise in the
cardio-aortic area which therefore contains reflexogenic chemo-receptors. In
the course of the same experiments it was also observed that certain pharma-




Fig. 9. Respiratory movements of an isolated and perfused head connected to the
                        trunk only by the vagi-aortic nerves.
At point A: asphyxia in the trunk induces reflex stimulation of the respiratory centre
in the perfused head. At point B: the aortic vagi-nerves connecting the-trunk and iso-
lated and perfused head are cut; stimulation of the respiratory centre of the perfused
                                      head ceases.


                                            B




Fig. IO. Diagram of the procedure for perfusion of the carotid sinus with intact nervous
             connections and isolated circulation in Dog B from Dog A.


       PRESSO- AND CHEMO-RECEPTORS IN RESPIRATION                            471

cological substances, such as nicotine, produce reflex stimulation of the res-
piratory centre by means of the same cardio-aortic chemo-receptors.
   Our later experiments on the physiological role of the carotid sinus, a
vascular zone similar to the cardio-aortic zone, led us to investigate if these
arterial areas also showed reflex chemo-sensitivity. Experimental findings
showed that this hypothesis was correct.
   In this work a number of experimental procedures were used. Among these
in particular was a technique involving perfusion of the carotid sinus which
was isolated from the systemic circulation, but in which the nerve connec-
tions were preserved, either by a donor animal (Fig. 10) or by an artificial
heart-lung preparation (Fig. 11).
   These experiments demonstrated first of all that the carotid sinus is sen-
sitive to the physiological stimulants contained in the blood, i.e. CO 2,
oxygen, and hydrogen ions.
   Hyperapnic blood acts upon the carotid sinus area and induces reflex hy-




                  Sinus nerves




Fig. 11. Diagram of the procedure for the perfusion of the carotid sinus with intact
nervous connection and isolated circulation. Perfusion is carried out by means of a
                               Dale-Schuster pump.


 472                          1938 C.J.F.HEYMANS

 perpnoea, while hypocapnic blood produces reflex respiratory inhibition.
 Hypoxic blood also acts on the carotid sinus area to produce reflex stimula-
  tion of the respiratory centre. In the same way hydrogen ions also stimulate
  the respiratory centre by acting on the carotid sinus chemo-receptors.
     These experimental findings were confirmed by many workers, in partic-
 ular, R. Gayet and D. Quivy, C. F. Schmidt, J. H. Comroe, R. Gesell, T.
  Bernthal, G. Liljestrand, U. S. von Euler, A. Samaan, G. Stella, Y. Zotterman,
  Samson Wright, etc.
     What is the part played by the chemo-sensitivity of the cardio-aortic and
  carotid sinus zones in the physiological and physio-pathological regulation
  of the respiratory centre?
     In the case of hypoxemia, our experimental findings and those of A. Sa-
  maan, G. Stella, U. S. von Euler, G. Liljestrand, Y. Zotterman, R. Gesell, C.
  F. Schmidt, and T. Bernthal demonstrated the marked sensitivity to oxygen
  want of the carotid sinus chemo-receptors.
     On the other hand, if the chemo-sensitive nerves from the aortic and
  carotid sinus areas are cut, the inhalation of a mixture containing a low pro-
  portion of oxygen no longer stimulates respiration or blood pressure, but on
the contrary produces progressive inhibition of respiration and a drop in
  blood pressure (Fig. 12), while in the case of an animal in which the chemo-
   sensitive nerves of the aortic and carotid sinus areas are intact, an identical
   oxygen want produces marked hyperpnoea and hypertension (Fig. 13),




  Fig. 12. Inhibition of respiration and circulation (blood pressure) by hypoxaemia in
  a dog from which the aortic and carotid sinus chemo-receptors have been excluded.
  Fig. 13. Respiratory and circulatory (blood pressure) reactions to hypoxaemia in a
                                       normal dog.


       PRESSO- AND CHEMO-RECEPTORS IN RESPIRATION                         473

   These findings were observed in both anaesthetized and non-anaesthetized
animals and clearly demonstrate that a lack of oxygen stimulates respiration
and produces hypertension by an essentially reflex mechanism involving the
chemo-receptors of the aortic and carotid sinus areas. Hypoxaemia, which
acts directly on the medullary centres, exerts a depressive, not a stimulating
effect. Only extreme anoxia or anaemia can exerts a direct stimulating effect
on the respiratory and cardio-vascular centres.
   The experiments carried out by C. F. Schmidt and J. H. Comroe proved,
in addition, that it is essentially the oxygen tension and not the saturation in
oxygenin arterial blood which acts on the aortic and carotid sinus chemo-
receptors. This explains why hyperpnoea does not occur in cases of carbon
monoxide poisoning and in cases of anaemia or methemoglobinaemia. The
oxygen tension in arterial blood is, indeed, normal in such cases. The same
workers also demonstrated the important part played by the chemo-sensi-
tivity of the aortic and carotid sinus zones in the reflex stimulation of the
respiratory centre when it is depressed by the direct effect exerted by a
number of narcotic drugs, such as morphine, ether, and barbiturates. In
these cases, hypoxaemia is responsible for this continued reflex stimulation
of the respiratory centre, by means of the chemo-sensitive nerves.
   The fundamental role of the aortic and carotid sinus chemo-receptors in
the respiratory and circulatory reactions arising from lack of oxygen due to
low atmospheric pressure at high altitudes was also demonstrated by a num-
ber of investigators.
   On the question of regulation of the activity of the respiratory centre by
CO2 all workers confirm our experimental findings, viz. that the CO2 con-
tents of the blood acts upon and stimulates the respiratory centre and cardio-
vascular centres by a reflex mechanism involving the aortic and carotid sinus
chemo-receptors. The experimental exclusion of these reflexogenic chemo-
receptors does not, however, as in the case of oxygen want, prevent the
regulating effect of CO2 on the respiratory centre itself.
   What are the respective roles played by the chemo-sensitive reflex mech-
anism and the direct central mechanism in the regulation by CO2 of the
activity of the respiratory centre? This is still a controversial question.
   Basing ourselves particularly on the fact that the chemo-receptors are ex-
tremely sensitive to CO2 and on the fact that CO 2 by acting on the chemo-
receptors, can produce and maintain hypercapnia in spite of the central
effect of simultaneous decreased CO2 in the blood, and also on the fact that
experimental exclusion of the chemo-receptors increases the alveolar con-


474                           1 9 3 8   C .J.F .H E Y M A N S


centration of CO2, we have suggested that CO2 exerts an effect on respira-
tion primarily by the chemo-sensitive reflex mechanism, and secondarily
by the direct central mechanism (Fig. 14). This hypothesis has received the
support of U. S. von Euler, G. Liljestrand, Y. Zotterman, Samson Wright,
R. Gesell, T. Bernthal. C. F. Schmidt and J. H. Comroe, however, favour
the opposite hypothesis that CO2 regulates the activity of the respiratory
centre primarily by the direct central mechanism and secondarily by the che-
mo-sensitive reflex mechanism.
   The aortic and carotid sinus chemo-receptors are not only sensitive to
physiological chemical stimulants but also to a number of pharmacological
substances. This was demonstrated in 1926 with J. F. Heymans, in the case of
the cardio-aortic zone.
   Our experiments carried out later with J. J. Bouckaert, L. Dautrebande,
U. S. von Euler, S. Farber, A. Samaan, Shen, Donatelli Marri and other co-
workers showed that a number of pharmacological substances such as nico-
tine, lobeline, cyanide, acetylcholine, and other choline derivatives, and po-
tassium sulphide produced intense stimulation of the chemoreceptors of the
carotid sinus and that they therefore stimulate the respiratory and cardio-
vascular centres by a reflex mechanism. The direct central effects of these
substances, on the other hand, are either absent or depressive, or stimulating
in very high doses. These findings were obtained by means of a number of
experimental procedures as perfusion of an isolated head, the sole link with
the trunk being provided by the vago-aortic nerves, perfusion of a carotid




Fig. 14. Diagram of the threshold and intensity of stimulation of respiration produced
by the reflex effects of CO2 on the chemo-sensitive receptors and by the direct central
                                     effects of CO2.
Threshold and intensity of respiratory reactions to CO2: - reflex chemo-sensitive
                           origin;--- direct central origin.


        PRESSO-      AND CHEMO-RECEPTORS IN RESPIRATION                           475




Fig. 15. Diagram of the procedure by which the circulation in the normally innervated
glomus caroticum is isolated on one side. The opposite carotid sinus is denervated and
the external carotid artery ligatured; the circulation in the common carotid is directed
                               towards the nervous centres.


sinus, isolated from the systemic circulation but with nervous connections
intact, alternate injection of the same pharmacological substance into the
blood stream of a normal common carotid and a common carotid from
which chemo-receptors have been eliminated (Fig.15).
   Fig. 16 shows the reflex stimulation of the respiratory centre and of the car-
dio-inhibitor vagus centre by acetylcholiie in contact with the carotid Sinus
chemo-receptors. It should be added that acetylcholine directly stimulates
the respiratory and cardio-inhibitor centres only when very high doses are
administered. If an anticholinesterase (neostigmine) is previously adminis-
tered, only a slight reinforcement is obtained of the direct central effect of
acetylcholine on the respiratory and cardio-inhibitor centres. It should also
be noted in this connection that neither does neostigmine reinforce the res-
piratory and cardio-vascular reflexes arising from the cardio-aortic and ca-
rotid sinus zones. This finding does not support the hypothesis that a cholin-
ergic mechanism is involved in the respiratory and cardio-vascular reflexes
arising from the presso- and chemo-sensitive aortic and carotid sinus zones.


476                         1938 C.J.F.HEYMANS

   The reflexogenic chemo-sensitivity of the carotid sinus in regard to a
large number of pharmacological substances has been confirmed by many
investigators, in particular R. Gesell, T. Bernthal, U. S. von Euler, G. Lilje-
strand, Y. Zotterman, Samson Wright, C. F. Schmidt, J. H. Comroe, etc.,
who made important contributions to the study of this new chapter in phar-
macology.
   What is the anatomical location of the presso- and chemo-receptors in the
cardio-aortic and carotid sinus areas?
   Histological research carried out by de Castro, Meyling and Gosses, and
our own experimental findings, obtained with J. J. Bouckaert and L. Dautre-
bande in particular, has led to the locating of the carotid sinus chemo-recep-
tors in the glomus caroticum and of the presso-receptors in the walls of the
large arteries arising from the carotid artery (Fig. 17).
   Various experimental techniques have made it possible to dissociate the
chemo-receptor zones from the presso-receptor zones in the carotid sinus.




Fig. 16. Graph A: pneumogram of a dog under chloralose anaesthesia. Graph B: blood
                pressure and cardiac rate. Time in s-second intervals.
Acetylcholine (0.1. mg) is applied to the chemo-receptors of the glomus caroticum.
                     Marked reflex hyperpnoea and bradycardia.


        PRESSO- AND CHEMO-RECEPTORS IN RESPIRATION                              477




Fig. 17. Diagram showing the site of the reflexogenic presso- and chemo-receptors in
                                 the carotid sinus.




             Fig. 18. Diagram of the carotid sinus and glomus caroticum.
(1) common carotid artery; (2) internal carotid artery; (3) external carotid artery;
(4) occipital artery, branch irrigating the glomus caroticum; (5) occipital artery
sub-branches; (6) afibrillar muscle cells on the afferent glomus arteries; (7) glomus
                           tissue; (8) efferent glomus vessels.


478                           1938 C.J.F.HEYMANS




Fig. 19. Diagram of the reflex regulation of the respiratory centre by the presso- and
chemo-receptors in the cardio-aortic and carotid sinus areas, and of the direct central
                      control exerted on the respiratory centre.


The glomus caroticum, which contains the carotid sinus chemo-receptors,
presents an interesting anatomical structure (Fig. 18).
    Histological studies, by J. F. Nonidez in particular, and J. H. Cornroe’s
experiments have led to the location of the cardio-aortic chemo-receptors
in the-aortic glomus tissue, whereas the presso-receptors are mainly located
in the wall of the aortic arch.
    The various experimental findings summarized in this lecture have thus
 brought to light a new physiological, physiopathological, and pharmacolo-
 gical mechanism which, by regulating the activity of the respiratory centre
 through the vascular presso- and chemo-sensitive reflexes (Fig. 19), estab-
lishes, thus, an even closer functional correlation between the blood circula-
 tion, the metabolism, and the pulmonary respiratory exchanges.
