FROM THE STRUCTURE OF ANTIBODIES TO
THE DIVERSIFICATION OF THE IMMUNE
RESPONSE
Nobel lecture, 8 December, 1984

by
CÉSAR MILSTEIN



Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road,
Cambridge, U.K.

                          elfin, escribió Cartaphilus, ya no quedan imágenes de1
       recuerdo; sólo quedan palabras. Palabras, palabras desplazadas y mutiladas,
       palabras de otros, fué la pobre limosna que le dejaron las horas y los
       siglos.
                                                                      J. L. Borges


 When an animal is infected, either naturally or by experimental injection, with
 a bacterium, virus, or other foreign body, the animal recognises this as an
 invader and acts in such a way as to remove or destroy it. There are millions of
different chemical structures that the animal has never seen and yet which it is
 able to recognise in a specific manner. How is this achieved? Scientists have
 been fascinated by this question for most of this century, and we continue to be
fascinated by the intricacies and complexities that still need to be clarified.
 Even so, looking back over the years since I myself became involved in this
 problem, progress in the understanding of the process has been phenomenal.
 Suffice it to remind our younger colleagues that 20 years ago we were still
 trying to demonstrate that each antibody differed in its primary amino acid
 sequence.
    What attracted me to immunology was that the whole thing seemed to
 revolve around a very simple experiment: take two different antibody mole-
 cules and compare their primary sequences. The secret of antibody diversity
 would emerge from that. Fortunately at the time I was sufficiently ignorant of
 the subject not to realise how naive I was being.
    Back in 1962, when I had by accident become the supervisor of Roberto Celis
 in Argentina, it occurred to me that antibody diversity might arise from the
joining by disulphide bridges of a variety of small polypeptides in combinator-
 ial patterns. I don’t know whether anybody else had the same idea at that time,
 but of-all the prevailing theories about antibody diversity that I am aware of,
 this is one that was widest of the mark. I hold it to my credit that I never put it
 into print. But it was of great value to me as it provided an intellectual
justification to work on disulphide bonds of antibodies. By the time I joined the
 Laboratory of Molecular Biology in 1963, the model of two heavy and two light

248


                                   From the Structure of Antibodies                                249




Light




Fig. 1. Antibodies are made of two or more pairs of heavy and light chains joined by disulphide
bonds. Each chain has two regions. The variable region differs in structure from one antibody to
another and contains the combining site. The antibody combining site is located at the tips of a Y-
shaped three-dimensional structure. The constant region is invariant within a given class or
subclass, and is responsible for effector functions (complement binding, attachment to and trans-
port across membranes etc). The number and position of the interchain disulphide bonds is
characteristic for the different classes and subclasses. In this figure, the structure depicted is the
mouse myeloma protein MOPC 21 which was the subject of much research in our laboratory.




chains joined by disulphide bonds (Fig. 1) had been established (l), and I was
eager to accept Dr. Sanger’s proposal that I should engage in studies of
antibody combining sites.

 The nature of antibody diversity
At first I looked for differences in fingerprints of digests of iodinated antibodies
directed against different antigens. The pattern that emerged from those stud-
ies implied that purified antibodies were too complex and differed only in a
subtle quantitative way from the totally unfractionated immunoglobulin. I
never published those results, which only led me to the conviction that the
protein chemistry of antibodies at that level was too difficult to tackle, and that
a different approach was needed.
   The study of the amino acid sequence around the disulphide bonds of the
immunoglobulins was my own short-cut to the understanding of antibody
diversity. I soon recognised the existence of what appeared to be a variable


250                           Physiology or Medicine I984


disulphide bridge and a common disulphide bridge (2,3), but the full meaning
of that observation only became obvious when Hilschmann and Craig de-
scribed the variable and constant halves of antibody light chains (4). The
variable half contained one disulphide bond, and the constant half the other.
This was followed, in later studies with Pink, Frangione, Svasti and others, by
the observation of the repeating pattern of similar S-S loops as a distinctive
common architectural feature of the different classes and subclasses of immu-
noglobulin chains. What distinguished them from each other was the diversity
of interchain S-S bonds (5).
   The period between 1965 and 1970 was full of excitement, both at the
experimental and theoretical level. How were these variable and constant
regions going to be explained? It was now not only a problem of millions of
antibody structures, but that in addition those millions of structures were part
of a polypeptide which otherwise had an invariant primary sequence encoded
by only one or very few genes. How to solve the puzzle? Dreyer and Bennett (6)
suggested that there were thousands of genes in the germline and that the
paradox was easy to solve if we postulated a completely unprecedented scheme.
This became known as the “two genes-one polypeptide” hypothesis. At the
time we did not like that, and proposed a mechanism of hyper-mutation
operating on selected segments of a gene (7). There were other ideas at the time
to generate antibody diversity. One of them, widely discussed in a Cold Spring
Harbor Symposium in 1967, was based on a mechanism of somatic cross-over
between gene-pairs (8). It was very exciting for me when soon after the
symposium I could show that in the human kappa chains at least three genes
must be involved (9). The predicted thousands of V-regions could be grouped
into a small number of families or subgroups. The fact that these families were
encoded by non-allelic V-genes (10) - coupled to the genetics of the C-region,
which indicated a single Mendelian C-gene - provided the experimental
evidence that convinced me and many others that the “two genes-one poly-
peptide” hypothesis was inescapable.
   After that, there was a period of consolidation and extension of the results.
The concept of V-gene families or subgroups became firmly established, as was
the existence of hypervariable residues within the variable segment (9,ll).
Crystallographic data showed that such hypervariable residues were near to
each other, justifying the idea that they were part of the antibody combining
site. This was directly shown with crystals of myeloma protein-antigen com-
plexes (12). The work with myelomas was not only totally vindicated, but also
generally accepted. The idea of separate pools of V- and C-genes that were
under continuous expansion and contraction was the last element added to the
picture. By 1970 we became convinced that “the section of the genome involved
in the coding of immunoglobulin chains undergoes an expansion-contraction
evolution: that the number of individual genes coding for basic sequences is not
large, and that it varies in different species and even within species at different
stages of its own history. The task of providing for the endless variety of
individual chains is left to somatic processes” (13).


                           From the Structure of Antibodies                   251



Light chain mRNA and the signal for secretion
I now began to feel a bit restless. It seemed that protein chemistry alone was
not going to get us much further. Furthermore, there was a lot of excitement in
the laboratory with the new methods for sequencing RNA being developed by
Sanger and his group. Perhaps even more important, one of my closest friends
at the laboratory, George Brownlee, was beginning to feel that the time was
ripe to attack molecules more complicated than 5S or 6S RNA. So we joined
forces in an attempt to isolate immunoglobulin mRNA. This was a difficult
problem and when George’s new research student, Tim Harrison, joined us we
decided to move from solid tumours (14) to cell lines in culture which were
kindly provided by colleagues from the Salk Institute (15). The first important
breakthrough in the field was a paper reporting in vitro synthesis of immunoglo-
bulin light chains (16). We immediately set to work to follow up that approach,
and to our delight ran into the unexpected observation of the existence of a
biosynthetic precursor of light chains. Further experiments led us to propose
that the extra N-terminal sequence was a signal for vectorial transport across
membranes during protein synthesis. That was the first evidence which indi-
cated that the signal for secretion was an N-terminal segment, rapidly cleaved
during protein synthesis (17,18).
   However, our major concern remained the sequence of the messenger RNA
for the light chains. In those days there was no DNA sequencing, only mRNA
sequencing via elaborate fingerprints of radioactive mRNA. Every radioactive
messenger preparation on which we could do sequence analysis involved the
labelling of cells with inorganic P- hosphate    at levels of 50 mCi. So there we
                                      32
                                            p
were, dressed up in our new-style laboratory coats (namely heavy lead aprons),
behind a thick plastic screen, labelling cells and then frantically working up our
messenger purification procedures and performing fingerprinting experiments,
before the inexorable radioactive decay. Although we didn’t go very far in our
sequencing, we could isolate oligonucleotides that corresponded to the protein
sequences (19). Among these were oligonucleotides spanning the V- and C-
regions, demonstrating that the protein chain was made from a single messen-
ger RNA and that, therefore, integration of the V- and C-genes did not
take place during or after protein synthesis (20). At this stage the radioactive
approach was stopped and we tested alternative methods for the sequencing of
mRNA, using synthetic primers and cDNA synthesis. This approach went on
in the background while our main efforts were moving in a different direction.
Eventually however, it paid off (21). I will come back to that later, because it
forms part of my story.



Spontaneous somatic mutants of a myeloma protein
The introduction of tissue culture methods to our laboratory had a major
impact on the direction of our research. With my new research student, D. S.
Secher, and soon after with R. G. H. Cotton, we decided to embark on an
analysis of the rate and nature of somatic mutation of myeloma cells in culture.
We were hoping that we might reveal a high rate of mutation of the hypervaria-


252                                 Physiology or Medicine 1984




Fig. 2. Protocol used for the screening of the isoelectric focusing pattern of the immunoglobulin
secreted by 7,000 clones of P3 myeloma cells. Mutants were detected and their primary defect
analysed by amino acid and mRNA sequence analysis. The results are described in Table 1 (taken
from Ref. 23).



ble segments. (The protocol is described in Fig. 2.) A continuous culture was
grown for a minimum of three months to allow mutants to accumulate, and
individual cells were taken and grown as colonies. These were incubated with
labelled amino acids and the radioactive immunoglobulin analysed to detect
mutants with altered electrophoretic properties. Our first structural mutant
appeared after a few thousand clones (22), and the final analysis of 7,000
individual clones gave us a pool of mutants which are described in Table 1. We
were believed that this elaborate experiment provided the first evidence at the
protein and nucleic acid levels of the existence of somatic mutations of mamma-
lian cells (23). Furthermore, the rate at which these mutations occurred sug-
gested an important role in the generation of diversity (24). But the mutations
were not in the variable region, and we were forced to conclude that in the cells


                           From the Structure of Antibodies                  253




IF3




IF4




we were studying, there was no evidence for a hypermutable segment. So that
in a sense we were back to square one.

 Hybrid myelomas
 While this work was going on, Cotton was preparing another type of experi-
 ment which turned out to be more important than we anticipated (25). This
 involved the fusion of two myeloma cells in culture (Fig. 3). That fusion
 demonstrated that the phenomenon of allelic exclusion was not dominant. On
 the contrary, fusion of two myeloma cells gave rise to a hybrid co-dominantly
 expressing the antibody chains of both parents. In addition, we proved that the
 expression of V- and C-regions was cis, probably because the V- and C-
 segments were already integrated at the DNA level by a translocation event in
 the precursors of plasma cells. This was in contrast to the assembly of heavy
 and light chains, which combined with each other to give rise to hybrid
 molecules.
    Armed with these results, I went to Base1 to give a seminar, and the
 important consequence was that Georges Köhler came to Cambridge. He
joined in our main research project of looking at somatic mutants in immuno-
 globulin-producing cells, and in the other minor project concerning the pheno-
 typic expression of somatic cell hybrids prepared between myelomas and
 myeloma mutants. It became increasingly clear that we could not go on looking
 for mutants by the procedure we had employed before, and the only way ahead
 was to use a culture of a myeloma cell line capable of expressing an antibody.
 Mutants from that cell could then be made based on the antibody activity.
 Although at that time there had been reports in the literature of myeloma cells


254                                  Physiology or Medicine I984




 Fig. 3. Co-dominant cis expression of antibody genes in hybrids of myeloma cells. The diagram
describes data taken from Ref. 25.


 capable of fulfilling that role, none proved suitable in our hands. The myeloma
 cell line P3 (MOPC 21) would have been ideal from a chemical point of view,
 because at the time sequencing the protein was a major undertaking and
 we knew how to deal with MOPC 21. But we were unable to find a suitable
 antigenic binding activity to this myeloma protein. We failed, but others who
 were pursuing similar types of experiments succeeded. Scharff and his co-
 workers were the first to demonstrate that one can isolate somatic mutants of a
 variable region in that way (26).


                                From the Structure of Antibodies …                          255




Fig. 4. The first successful hybridoma was prepared from cells from a mouse immunized with sheep
red blood cells (SRBC) (56). These were fused to a myeloma cell line producing the IgG protein
MOPC 21 (Fig. 1) growing in tissue culture and made resistant to azaguanine. Hybrids    were
selected by growth in HAT medium (57).


   And yet in a funny way our lack of success led to our breakthrough; because,
since we could not get a cell line off the shelf doing what we wanted, we were
forced to construct it. And the little experiment being done in the background
concerning hybridization between myeloma cells developed into a method for


256                                Physiology or Medicine 1984


the production of hybridomas. Thus, as illustrated in Fig. 4, instead of hybri-
dizing two myelomas, we hybridized a myeloma and an antibody producing
cell. The resultant hybrid was an immortal cell capable of expressing the




                                          I




 Fig. 5. Most generally used protocol for the derivation of hybridomas (taken from Ref. 58)


                                      From the Structure of Antibodies …      257



antibody activity of the parental antibody-producing cell the immortality
being acquired from the myeloma.
   So finally, we were able to obtain a continuously-growing cell-line expressing
a specific antibody and use it to search for mutants of the hypervariable region.
This was undertaken by my research student, Deborah Wilde. While she got
more and more discouraged by her lack of success in what she called “looking
for a needle in a haystack”, it dawned on me that it was up to us to demonstrate
that the exploitation of our newly-acquired ability to produce monoclonal
antibodies “á la carte” was of more importance than our original purpose.
After our early success we ran into technical difficulties and could not get our

Table 2. Selected list of monoclonal antibodies derived in our laboratory


258                          Physiology or Medicine 1984



fusion experiments to work for quite some time. Then Giovanni Galfré, who
had recently joined us, got us out of the deadlock when he discovered that one
of our stock solutions had become contaminated with a toxic substance. After
this an improved reliable protocol was developed (Fig. 5) and quick progress
made towards the first practical applications of the technology. For several
years I shelved the antibody diversity problem to demonstrate the practical
importance of monoclonal antibodies in other areas of basic research and in
clinical diagnosis (Table 2). W e were able to show that the hybrid myelomas
were capable of being used for the production of standard reagents such as anti-
histocompatibility antigens (27) and anti-Ig-allotypes (28). The procedure was
ideally suited to the study of cell surface and tumour antigens and to providing
reagents for cell fractionation (29-3 1). Monoclonal antibodies produced in
this way were suitable for radioimmunoassays and for neuropharmacology
(32), as blood group reagents (33) and for large scale purification of natural
products (34). W e also extended the hybrid myeloma technology to a second
species-the rat (35) and to the production of bi-specific immunoglobulins
(hybrid-hybridomas) (36).

 Genetic origin of antibody diversity
 In the period 1970- 1975, a considerable effort was being made to measure the
 number of germline genes coding for the variable regions of immunoglobulin
 chains. Our own contributions started when we persuaded Terry Rabbitts to
join us. After considerable effort and a lot more radioactivity we obtained
 results indicating that the number of germ line genes was not much higher than
 would be predicted from our understanding of subgroups, and this view was
 shared and reinforced by parallel work being conducted by others (37,38). By
 1976 this view was gaining general support (39). But then the impact of the
 recombinant DNA revolution began to be very strongly felt. Within a few
 years, and largely through the work of Tonegawa, Leder, Rabbitts, Hood,
 Baltimore, and others, a coherent picture of the arrangement and rearrange-


                                 From the Structure of Antibodies                              259



ment of immunoglobulin genes and their involvement in the generation of
diversity began to emerge (40).
   The precursors of the antibody producing cells do not express an immuno-
globulin, but during their differentiation into pre-B cells and B cells, they
express first the heavy chain and then the light chain (Fig. 6). The first
antibody produced is membrane bound and functions as a receptor
molecule, which receives antigenic signals. Triggered cells divide and differen-
tiate to antibody producing cells and memory cells. These events at the cellular
level are correlated with changes in the DNA structure (Fig. 7). The germline
DNA contains the V- and C-genes on different DNA fragments, as predicted.
But in addition, there are further fragmentations, and only some of them are
shown in the figure. Light and heavy chains can only be transcribed and
translated when certain fragments (one of the V and J in light chains, V, D and
J in heavy chains) are integrated by a deletion mechanism. During this process
 of integration enormous diversity is generated.
   To theorize about the genetic origin of antibody diversity was a “must”
among molecular immunologists for quite a number of years. How do those
theories contrast with the reality of today? The hard experimental facts made
possible by the methodological advances in molecular biology show that, while
none of them was right, most of them contained at least a grain of truth. There
were two major currents of opinion. One consisted of germline theories where-
by all the diversity was inherited as genes present in the germline. The other
included somatic diversification theories, whereby somatic processes were re-
sponsible for the generation of diversity, starting from a small number of
germline genes. As it turns out, the genetic mechanisms responsible for the




Fig. 7. Genetic arrangement of immunoglobulin genes in the germline. During differentiation into
pre B cells and B cells large deletions of DNA lead to the integration of fragments (rearranged
genes). Further proliferation leads to somatic mutation of the integrated gene and this is of major
importance in the maturation of the response.


260                                     Physiology or Medicine 1984


Table 3. Mechanisms that generate antibody diversity

I. GERMLINE: multiple V-gene segments
2. COMBINATORIAL: a) Different combinations of V-(D)-J
                             b) Different combinations Of V H a n d VL
3. JUNCTIONAL: variation at at V-J, V-D, and D-J boundaries
4. SOMATIC POINT MUTATION: nucleotide substitutions throughout the V region



 generation of diversity include a little bit of everything (Table 3). There are
 between 50 and 300 gene fragments in the germline encoding the light or the
 heavy chains. The number varies from species to species. So there is a consider-
 able germline contribution. Recombination and gene conversion arc probably
 important genetic events in the evolution and maintenance of that germline
 gene pool. We still do not know whether these events are significant as somatic
 generators of diversity (41). As shown in Fig. 7, the V-region is encoded by V,
 D and J segments (heavy chain) and V and J segments (light chain). Their
 combinatorial integration into a single gene, although an important component
 of the generation of diversity, is not the critical mechanism predicted by the
 mini gene hypothesis (42). Al so important is the diversity generated during the
joining process, and this contains an element of the errors and aberrations
 during repair predicted by other theories (7,43). And then there are the somatic
 point mutations for which a mechanism remains to be elucidated. It may
 involve error-prone repair enzymes (7), genetic hot-spots (24), appropriate
 selection either by antigen (44) or by other network elements (45), or quite
 possibly by a mixture of all or some of these. The instructional theories were
 largely forgotten as soon as the chemical diversity of antibodies was established
 (46). Yet they also may contain a grain of truth. It has recently been proposed
 that peptide segments of the antigen which appear to be mobile are better
 immunogens, presumably because they adapt their structure to a predefined
 antibody structure (47,48). It is also possible that to some extent the antibody
 combining site itself has a certain degree of mobility, which has a limited
 capacity to accommodate its own structure to that of the antigen. Of course
 dynamic adaptation has a price to pay in terms of affinity. Adaptability should
 not be confused with the generation of specificity. As I discuss below, an
 improved fit of binding to the ligand is the result of somatic mutation and
 antigenic selection.

Molecular analysis of an immune response using monoclonal antibodies and mRNA
sequencing
Let us return to an animal that is being immunized with a certain substance.
The immune system recognizes the substance as foreign, and the B cells are
triggered to produce antibody (Fig. 8). The different antibodies are secreted
and mixed in the serum. The individual antibody molecules are extremely
similar and once mixed cannot be separated from each other. For this reason,
and until the advent of the hybridoma technology, it was impossible to study
the diversity of the antibody response to a given immunogen. The derivation of
immortal cell hybrids solved this problem, because it affords individual anti-


                                 From the Structure of Antibodies                               261




Fig. 8. The dissection of the immune response by the hybridoma techniquc. When an animal is
injected with an immunogen the animal responds by producing an enormous diversity ofantibody
structures directed against different antigens, different determinants of a single antigen, and even
different antibody structures directed against the same determinant. Once these are produced they
are released into the circulation and it is next to impossible to separate all the individual
components present in the serum. But each antibody is made by individual cells. The immortaliza-
tion of specific antibody-producing cells by somatic cell fusion followed by cloning of the appropri-
ate hybrid derivative allows permanent production of each of the antibodies in separate culture
vessels. The cells can be injected into animals to develop myeloma-like tumours. The serum of the
tumour-bearing animals contains large amounts of monoclonal antibody.


262                                Physiology or Medicine I984



bodies separately produced, in culture vessels and as mouse myelomas. This
permits dissection of the individual components of the antigen. Monoclonal
antibodies prepared against hitherto undefined cellular components can them-
selves be used to identify the chemical nature of those components, to probe for
their function, and later for use as reagents for diagnostic and therapeutic
purposes. These are the fundamental properties behind the most important of
the general applications of monoclonal antibodies. When we started to explore
these applications, and until some years ago, it was possible to some extent to
summarize the main results obtained (49). In recent years their application to
basic research, clinical biochemistry, medical therapy, and in industry has
been so widespread that I do not intend even to attempt to discuss it any
further here.




 Fig. 9. Derivation of monoclonal antibodies at the onset and during the maturation of the response
 to oxazolone.


                                From the Structure of Antibodies                              263




Fig. IO. Avidity of monoclonal antibodies 7 and 14 days after immunization. Haptenated phage
inhibition (HPI) per µg of anti-phlOx immunoglobulin from supernatants of IgG-secreting hybri-
domas. Those on the left were from day 7 and those on the right from day I4 fusions. Black circles
represent oxazolone idiotype-positive IgG and open circles represent idiotype-negative IgG (taken
from Ref. 50).



   Different antibodies recognize different antigenic determinants of the im-
munogen, and the recognition of each determinant is complex in itself (Fig. 8).
It has been known for a long time that even the simplest antigenic determinants
are recognized by an unknown variety of antibody molecules. Monoclonal
antibodies can be made pure and used to answer the old questions of how
complex the collection of antibody molecules produced by the animal as a
response to a particular antigen is, and how the individual molecules differ
from each other. This brings me back to sequencing messenger RNA.
   While in the late ’70s the excitement about monoclonal antibodies and DNA
recombinant methods was simmering, Pamela Hamlyn was quietly adapting
Sanger’s fast DNA sequencing methods to the sequencing of light chain
mRNA. Her eventual success (21) added to our capacity to derive cell lines
secreting monoclonal antibodies to a predefined antigen, and to our ability to


264                               Physiology o-r Medicine 1984



sequence quickly the messenger RNA of the antibody molecule they produce.
So, instead of asking the question “What is the nature of antibody diversity?“,
we were now in a position to ask the question “How do antibodies diversify
during an immune response?” In other words, how, in real life in the animal,
are all those genetic events capable of producing antibody diversity actually
operate in response to an antigenic stimulus?
   In collaboration with Matti Kaartinen, Gillian Griffiths and Claudia Berek,
we have been conducting a study of the response to the hapten phenyl oxazo-
lone (50,51). The essence of the experiment is described in Fig. 9. The hapten
conjugated to chicken serum albumin as carrier is injected into mice, and 7
days and 14 days later animals are sacrificed, hybridomas are prepared and a
number of random clones isolated in each case. Other animals are left for a
couple of months, and hybridomas of the secondary response arc prepared.
   Hybridomas prepared 7 days and 14 days after primary immunization are
compared in Fig. 10. Each point on the figure represents the avidity of each one
of 32 monoclonal antibodies. The mixture of antibodies at each stage, as a first
approximation, represents a cross-section of the complexity of a typical anti-
serum. The average titres of the antibodies at both stages are not very different,
although the day 14 average is slightly higher. This is as expected. The
antibody titre of an antiserum, as well as its average avidity, increases during
the course of an immunization. It is what we refer to as the maturation of the
response. What distinguishes the results of the day 7 and day 14 is that while
the day 7 results cluster around the average, the scatter at day 14 is much
wider.
   Since each monoclonal antibody was the product of an immortal hybridoma,
we could go one step further and study the total amino acid sequence of each
one of these monoclonal antibodies. Better still, we could study the sequence of




Fig. 1 1 . mRNA sequencing strategy. Synthetic oligonucleotide primers designed to pair with
defined bases within segments of mRNAs were used to initiate reverse transcription. Using
dideoxynucleotides, specific stops in the cDNA can be generated and the nucleotide sequence
determined by gel methods (taken from Ref. 59).


                                  From the Structure of Antibodies                               265



the mRNA coding for each amino acid sequence. This not only provided more
information, but was also technically simpler. To do so, RNA was prepared
from the hybridoma cells and direct sequencing done on the impure messenger
preparations, as shown in Fig. 11. In this way, sequences of antibodies at
different stages of the immune response could be compared.
   What we have learned from this is that the majority of antioxazolone
antibodies at day 7 express a single set of germline V-genes taken from the total
pool of over 100 for each of the two chains (Fig. 12). This pair of germline genes
(which we refer to as VH-Ox1 and Vk-Ox1) are at this stage expressed in their
unmutated form. The few differences between them arise by junctional diversi-
ty - that is the variations introduced during integration of the DNA fragments
V, D and J which make up the variable region of the antibodies. At day 14 the
same germ line genes VH-Ox1 and Vk-Ox1 still seem to dominate the response.




Fig. 12. Diagrammatic comparison of the mRNA sequences from anti-phOx-secreting hybridomas
derived at different stages after immunization with Ox-CSA. Only sequences closely related to the
prototype are shown. The variable region sequences of each hybridoma have been compared with
the sequences of V H -Ox1 and V h -Ox1 respectively. Unbroken horizontal lines denote identical
sequences, broken lines represent extensive sequence differences. A black circle indicates that these
changes predict an amino acid difference at this position. Complementarity determining regions
(CDR-1, -2, -3) have been marked as have the D and J regions. Where different J segments are
observed these are represented accordingly. Dissociation constants determined by fluorescence
quenching (Kd in moles/litre) are shown on the right (taken from Ref. 51).


266                            Physiology or Medicine 1984


However, in sharp contrast to day 7, the day 14 antibodies express a small
number of point mutations which are responsible for a significant increase in
affinity for the same hapten. In other words, as the response matures, new
somatic mutants appear in a seemingly endless variety.
   The antibodies obtained during the secondary response, expressing the
germline gene combination characteristic of the primary response, show a
further small increase in point mutations (Fig. 12). However, the most impor-
tant feature of the secondary response is a shift towards other germline genes
(see Table 4).




   It appears therefore that the development and maturation of the immune
response to oxazolone - which we take as a model system - proceeds basically
in three stages. In the first the majority of the antibody reflects a very restricted
choice from a vast repertoire of germline gene combinations, self-selected for
their capacity to bind the antigen. In the second stage, cells expressing these
combinations proliferate, and during this proliferation mutants arise which
improve the affinity of the antibody for the antigen. In the third stage, as the
first type of germline gene combinations and their mutants reach a certain limit
of dissociation constants, new germline gene combinations and somatic mu-
tants arc selected for further improvements. Of course the three stages are not
absolutely separate and all three processes overlap to a certain extent. In many
ways, the system behaves as a Darwinian system, where adaptation is an
improvement in antigen binding. It remains to be seen to what extent other
regulatory constraints are critical to the process.

From monoclonal antibodies to antibody engineering
The immortalization of antibody-producing cells not only allows the perma-
nent supply of an antibody of a constant chemical structure but, more impor-
tant, affords all the advantages that can be derived from the techniques of cell
culture and somatic cell genetics. The most obvious is cell cloning, and this has
been at the root of the explosion in the use of this technology. And yet the
derivation of cell lines producing specific antibodies cannot go beyond the
immortalization of what already exists. We select hybrids producing mono-
clonal antibodies of desired properties, but if the immunized animal does not
make it, there is no way of immortalizing it. Fortunately we can go further.
   Hybridomas are established cell lines and are therefore capable of other “in
vitro” manipulations using somatic cell genetic and molecular engineering
techniques. We are at the beginning of a new era of immunochemistry, namely
the production of “antibody based” molecules. The derivation of hybrid hybri-


                            From the Structure of Antibodies…                   267



domas is one example of the utilization of such methods for the biosynthesis of
bi-specific antibodies (36). Another example is the derivation of class switch
mutant antibodies (52).
   Some years ago, I discussed the eventual use of recombinant DNA tech-
niques to make more drastic changes (53). R ecent developments have shown
the feasibility and potential of the approach. Antibody genes have been put into
suitable vectors, propagated, modified and re-introduced into myeloma cells
which will then secrete recombinant antibodies possessing novel properties.
For instance, in my laboratory Neuberger has developed a cell line which
secretes a mouse-human antibody molecule with a mouse anti-nitrophenacetyl
variable region and a human epsilon heavy chain constant region (54). In
another example, the Fc portion of the mouse antibody was replaced by
staphylococcal nuclease (55). A novel antibody was thus made which contains
an antigen specific Fab portion joined to an enzymatic effector function replac-
ing the normal Fc portion.
   More elaborate modifications will be made possible by the fast-developing
techniques of site-directed mutagenesis. These will allow well-planned specific
modifications of antibody combining sites. In this way we will be able to test
the contribution of individual point mutations to the generation of high affinity
antibody during the process of the maturation of the response. This brings us
back to the problems of the diversity of molecular recognition and the matura-
tion of the immune response.
   Exciting as these prospects are, they still require the basic starting genes
taken from a hybridoma line. With them, we can introduce changes at the
amino acid sequence level but with the exception of simple changes, the
ultimate folding pattern and their effect on protein-ligand interaction cannot
yet be reliably predicted. This will remain so for the time being. Total construc-
tion of antibody molecules to suit specific needs depends on a much better
understanding of protein folding.
   While selection is the strategy of the antibody response of an animal, the
immunochemistry of the future will revert to an instructional approach where
the antigen will tell us what antibody structure we should construct. Although
this is not science fiction, we need to overcome the theoretical problems
involved in the translation of one-dimensional reality into a valid three-dimen-
sional prediction. Although the way ahead is full of pitfalls and difficulties, this
is indeed an exhilarating prospect. There is no danger of a shortage of forth-
coming excitement in the subject. Yet, as always, the highlights of tomorrow
are the unpredictabilities of today.

Acknowledgements
The hybridoma technology was a by-product of basic research. Its success in
practical applications is to a large extent the result of unexpected and unpre-
dictable properties of the method. It thus represents another clear-cut example
of the enormous practical impact of an investment in research which might not
have been considered commercially worthwhile, or of immediate medical rel-
evance. It resulted from esoteric speculations, for curiosity’s sake, only motivat-


268                          Physiology or Medicine I984


ed by a desire to understand nature. It is to the credit of the Medical Research
Council in Britain to have fully appreciated the importance of basic research to
advances in medicine. We are delighted to belong to the small, lucky group of
those who are at the window-dressing end of the justification for the wisdom of
that policy.
   I learned what research was all about as a research student of Stoppani in
Argentina, and then with Sanger in the Department of Biochemistry at Cam-
bridge. I owe an enormous debt to the atmosphere of the Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, where all the work I have described here was done, mostly
under the Chairmanship of Max Perutz, and within the Division of Protein and
Nucleic Acid Chemistry, of which Fred Sanger was the Head. From them, I
always received an unspoken message which in my imagination I translated as
“Do good experiments, and don’t worry about the rest”.
   During my lecture I have tried to acknowledge those of my collaborators
whose contributions were critical at specific stages of the work. In addition, so
far unmentioned, is John Jarvis, my personal assistant for well over 20 years -
only months less than my involvement with immunology. Since this prize
mentions the discovery of the principles of the hybridoma technology, I would
like to acknowledge specifically the importance of the contributions of Dick
Cotton and David Secher, with whom preliminary work leading to that discov-
cry was made, and my tissue culture assistant, Shirley Howe, who was directly
involved not only in the preliminary work but also in some of the specific
experiments conducted with Georges Köhler. I would also like to acknowledge
other collaborators who were concerned in our own contributions to the dem-
onstration of the practical potential of the hybridoma technology in a variety of
fields, particularly G. Galfré, A. F. Williams and A. C. Cuello, and the
technical assistance of Mr. B. W. Wright. The list of acknowledgements is
certainly much longer, but I wouldn’t like to end it without recording my
indebtedness to my secretaries, Margaret Dowding, and Judith Firth. Their
handling of the press in the immediate period after the announcement of this
prize ranks high among my memories of that exciting moment.


                                  From the Structure of Antibodies…                               269



REFERENCES
 1. Edelman, G. M. and Porter, R. R. (1972) Nobel lectures.
 2. Milstein, C. (1964) J. Mol. Biol. 9, 836.
 3. Milstein, C. (1966) Biochem. J. 101, 352-368.
 4. Hilschmann, N. and Craig, L. C. (1965) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 53, 1403-1409.
 5. Frangione, B., Milstein, C. and Pink, J. R. L. (1969) Nature 221, 145-148.
    Svasti, J. and Milstein, C. (1970) Nature 228, 932.
 6. Dreyer, W. J. and Bennett, C. J. (1965) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 54, 864-869.
 7. Brenner, S. and Milstein, C. (1966) Nature 211, 242-243.
8. Smithies, O. (1967) Science 157, 267.
 9. Milstein, C. (1967) Nature 216, 330-332.
10. Milstein, C., Milstein, C. P. and Feinstein, A. (1969) Nature 221, 151-154.
11. Wu, T.T. and Kabat, E.A. (1970) J. Exp. Med. 132, 211-250.
12. Rcviewed in: Amzel. L. M. and Poljak, R. S. (1979) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 48, 961-997.
13. Milstein, C. and Pink, J. R. L. (1970) In: “Progress in Bioph. and Molec. Biol.” Vol. 21, pp. 209-
    263. Pergamon Press: Oxford and New York.
14. Potter, M. (1972) Physiological Reviews 52, 631-719.
15. Horibata, K. and Harris, A. W. (1970) Exp. Cell Res. 60, 61-70.
16. Stavnezer, J. and Huang, R.-C. C. (1971) Nature New Biol. 230, 172.
17. Milstein, C., Brownlee, G. G., Harrison, T. M. and Mathews, M. B. (1972) Nature New Biol.
    239, 117-120.
18. Harrison, T. M., Brownlee, G. G. and Milstein, C. (1974) Eur. J. Biochem. 47, 613-620.
19. Brownlee, G. G., Cartwright, E. M., Cowan, N. J., J arvis, J. M. and Milstein, C. (1973) Nature
    244, 236-240.
20. Milstcin, C., Brownlee, G. G., Cartwright, E. M., J arvis. J. M. and Proudfoot, N. J. (1974)
    Nature 252, 354-359.
21. Hamlyn, P. H., Gait, M. J. and Milstein, C. (1981) Nucleic Acids Res. 9, 4485-4494.
22. Cotton, R. G. H., Sechcr, D. S. and Milstein, C. (1973) Eur. J. Immunol. 3, 136-140.
23. Adetugbo, K., Milstein, C. and Secher, D. S. (1977) Nature 265, 299-304.
24. Secher, D. S., Milstein, C. and Adetugbo, K. (1977) Immunol. Rev. 36, 51-72.
25. Cotton, R. G. H. and Milstein, C. (1973) Nature 244, 42-43.
26. Rudikoff, S., Giusti, A. M., Cook, W. D. and Scharff. M. D. (1982) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79,
    1979-1983.
27. Galfré, G., Howe, S. C.. Milstein, C., Butcher, G. W. and Howard, J. C. (1977) Nature 266,
    550-552.
28. Pearson, T., Galfré, G., Ziegler, A. and Milstein, C. (1977) Eur. J. Immunol. 7, 684-690.
29. Williams, A. F., Galfré, G. and Milstein, C. (1977) Cell 12. 663-673.
30. Stern, P. L., Willison. K. R., Lennox, E. S., Galfré, G., Milstein, C., Secher, D. S. and Ziegler,
    A. (1978) Cell 14, 775-783.
31. Milstein, C., Galfré, G., Sechcr, D. S. and Springer, T. (1979) Ciba Foundation Symp. No. 66,
    “Human Biology: Possibilities and realities.” Excerpta Medica: Amsterdam, pp. 251-266.
32. Cuello, A. C., Galfré, G. and Milstein, C. (1979) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76, 3532-3536.
33. Voak, D., Sacks, S., Alderson, T., Takei, F., Lennox, E. S., Jarvis, J. M., Milstein, C. and
    Darnborough, J. (1980) V OX Sang. 39, 134-140.
34. Sechcr, D. S. and Burke. D. C. (1980) Nature 285, 446-450.
35. Galfré, G., Milstein, C. and Wright, B. W. (1979) Nature 277, 131-133.
36. Milstein, C. and Cuello, A. C. (1983) Nature 305, 537-540.
37. Rabbitts, T. H. and Milstein, C. (1977) In: “Contemporary Topics in Molecular Immunology” Vol. 6,
    Eds. R. R. Porter and G. Ada. Plenum Press: New York and London, pp. 117-143.
38. Tonegawa, S., Hozumi, N., Matthyssens, G. and Schuller, R. (1976) Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
    Quant. Biol. 41, 877-889.
39. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. (1976) 41 (various papers).
40. Reviewed in: Tonegawa, S. (1983) Nature 302, 57l-581.
41. Edelman, G. M. and Gally, J. A. (1967) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 57, 353.
42. Kabat, E. A., Wu, T. T. and Bilofsky, H. (1978) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75, 2429-2433.


270                                   Physiology or Medicine I984


43. Alt, F. W. and Baltimore, D. (1982) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79, 4118-4122.
44. Cohn, M. (1971) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 190, 529.
45. Jerne, N. K. (1971) Eur. J. Immunol. I, l-9.
46. Haurowitz, F. (1967) Symp. Quant. Biol. 32, 559-567.
47. Westhof, E., Altschuh, D., Moras, D., Bloomer, A.C., Mondragon, A., Klug, A. and Van
    Regenmortel, M. H. V. (1984) Nature 311, 123-127.
48. Tainer, J. A., Getsoff, E. D., Alexander, H., Houghton, R. A., Olson, A. J., Lerner, R. A. and
    Hendrickson, W. A. (1984) Nature 312, 127-134.
49. For example: Waldmann, H. and Milstein, C. (1982) In: “Clinical Aspects of Immunology” 4 t h
      ed., Vol. 1. Eds. P. J. Lachmann and D. K. Peters, Blackwells Scientific Publications, Oxford,
    pp. 476-503.
50. Kaartinen, M., Griffiths, G. M., Hamlyn, P. H., Markham, A. F., Karjalainen, K., Pelkonen,
      J. L. T., Makela, O. and Milstein, C. (1983) J. Immunol. 130, 937-945.
51, Griffiths, G. M., Berek, C., Kaartinen, M. and .Milstein, C. (1984) Nature 322, 271-275.
52. Preud’homme, J. L., Birshtein, B. K. and Scharff, M. D. (1975) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72,
    1427-1430.
53. Milstein, C. Wellcome Foundation Lecture. (1980) Proc. Roy. Soc. Land. B (1981) 211, 393-412.
54. Neuberger, M. S., Williams, G. T., Mitchell, E. R., Jouhal, S. S., Flanagan, J. G. and Rabbitts,
      T. H. (1985) Nature 324, 268.
55. Neuberger, M. S., Williams, G. T. and Fox, R. O. (1984) Nature, 312, 604.
56. Köhler, G. and Milstein, C. (1975) Nature 256, 495-497.
57. Szybalski, W., Szybalska, E. H. and Ragni, G. (1962) Natl. Cancer Inst. Monogr. 7, 75-89.
58. Galfré, G. and Milstein, C. (1981) In: Methods in Enzymol. Vol. 73. Eds. S. P. Colowick, N. O.
    Kaplan and J. J. Langone, H. Van Vunakis, Academic Press: New York and London, pp. 3-
    46.
59. Kaartinen, M., Griffiths, G. M., Markham, A. F. and Milstein, C. (1983) Nature 304, 320-324.
60. Howard, J. C., Butcher, G. W., Galfré, G., Milstein, C. and Milstein, C. P. (1979) In: I m m u n o -
    logical Reviews Vol. 47. Ed. G. Möller, Munksgaard: Copenhagen, pp. 139-174.
61. Pearson, T., Galfré, G., Ziegler, A. and Milstein, C. (1977) Eur. J. Immunol. 7, 684-690.
62. Barnstable, C. J., Bodmer, W. F., Brown, G., Galfré, G., Milstein, C., Williams, A. F. and
    Ziegler, A. (1978) Cell 14, 9-20.
63. Springer, T., Galfré, G., Secher, D.S. and Milstein, C. (1978) Eur. J. Immunol. 8, 539-551.
64. Springer, T., Galfré, G., Secher, D.S. and Milstein, C. (1979) Eur. J. Immunol. 9, 301-306.
65. Takei, F., Waldmann, H., Lennox, E.S. and Milstein, C. (1980) Eur. J. Immunol. 10, 503-509.
66. McMichael, A. J., Pilch, J. R., Galfré, G., Mason, D. Y., Fabre, J. W. and Milstein, C. (1979)
      Eur. J. Immunol. 9, 206-210.
67. Cuello, A. C., Priestley, J. V. and Milstein, C. (1982) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79, 665-669.
68. Voak, D., Lennox, E. S., Sacks, S., Milstein, C. and Darnborough, J. (1982) Med. Lab. Sci. 39,
      109-122.
