                             D   ANIEL   BOVET


The relationships between isosterism and competitive
   phenomena in the field of drug therapy of the
     autonomic nervous system and that of the
             neuromuscular transmission
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1957



Putting to good use the vast possibilities which organic synthesis offers, a
number of workers have directed their efforts towards applying it to thera-
peutics, and have sought to establish the bases of a science of pharmaceutical
chemistry, or, more exactly perhaps, the bases of a science of chemical
pharmacology worthy of this name. If such an ambitious programme has
not yet been fully realized, we are at least justified in recognizing, in the
work which has now been in progress for fifty years, the appearance of a
few guiding principles whose value has not ceased to assert itself. This is
particularly true, for example, in the case of ideas in isosterism and com-
petition.
   The origin of many drugs must be looked for in substances of a biological
nature, and in particular in the alkaloids. The elucidation of their structure
has been a starting-off point for chemists to synthesize similar compounds.
Cocaine, atropine, and morphia are particularly good examples in this
respect, since substances which are made like them have shown, clinically,
local anaesthetic, antispasmodic, and marked analgesic properties, respective-
ly. In each of these cases the physiological properties of the new compound
seem to be similar to the compound to which it is structurally related. This
has been verified in many other fields, but it is nevertheless evident that in
certain cases, molecules which are chemically closely related have very dif-
ferent and even antagonistic properties.
   Although the idea of an "antimetabolite" is based on experiments which
are now old, it is chiefly in the field of "antivitamins" that it is most clear:
the work of Woods (1940) and of Fildes (1940) on extracts horn yeast
which inhibit the bacteriostatic action of sulphonamides, and its identifica-
tion with p-aminobenzoic acid has had vast repercussions. The concept that
a substance whose properties approximate to those of a normal constituent


              PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                                    553
of the cell can modify the functions normally carried out by that constituent
has shown itself capable of a variety of applications. The success which this
concept has met with particularly in enzymology - where for the first time
it was clearly formulated by Quastel (1925-1928) - in chemotherapy, vi-
taminology, and in endocrinology, will excuse me from expanding on the
physico-chemical and biological bases on which the idea of competition is
founded today (Woolley, 1952). I should like, rather, to draw your attention
to the importance which the study of competitive phenomena assumes in
pharmacodynamics, and in particular in the pharmacology of the autonomic
nervous system, showing, in this way, how a vast chapter of Therapeutic
Chemistry relates a large number of alkaloids and products of synthesis to
a few hormones, chemical transmitters and products of tissue metabolism
of a particularly simple nature: adrenaline, noradrenaline, acetylcholine,
histamine, and 5-hydroxytryptamine.




One of the most brilliant and classical chapters in the chemistry and physiol-
ogy of alkaloids and hormones is that on the research carried out in this
field 8.
   We will recall only how, with regard to transmitter substances of the




Table 1. Drugs acting in competition with adrenaline, acetylcholine, histamine and 5-
                               hydroxytryptamines.


     554                            1957 D.BOVET

     sympathetic nervous system, the isolation of adrenaline by Takamine (1901)
     had been anticipated by the empiricism of the Chinese who a thousand years
     before, used mahuang - rich in ephedrine - and by the fortuitous discovery
     of the properties of tetrahydronaphthylamine by Bamberger (1888). The
     exact nature of noradrenaline was not discovered until comparatively re-
     cently, by von Euler (1946).
        In the field of parasympathomimetics, the observation of the properties
     of muscarine (1811) preceded by a century the discovery of the vagus-stoff
     by Loewi (1921), and the synthesis of acetylcholine (1866) that of its isola-
     tion from the tissues (1931) by fifty years. The synthesis of histamine (1907)
     shortly preceded its identification in products of animal and vegetable origin,
     and the names of Dale and Dudley (1910) are associated with this identifica-
     tion and the study of its pharmacological properties.
        The latest arrival, 5-hydroxytryptamine (Rapport, 1549) is the outcome
     of research by Erspamer on the enteramine first isolated from chromaffine
     cells 1937-1952), and of Rapport, Green, and Page (1947-1952) on sero-
     tonin, which is considered to be the principle vasoconstrictor in the serum.
        The relationships existing between adrenaline, tissue acetylcholine and the
     nervous system were recognized early on. In 1904, Elliot, struck by the
    similarity existing between the pharmological actions of adrenaline and the
     effects of stimulation of sympathetic nerves, put forward the hypothesis,
     according to which, adrenaline could be released at the sympathetic nerve
     endings and transmit the impulse of the nerve cell to the smooth muscle
     fibre.
        In 1912 Wieland, then le Heux in 1919, tried to produce evidence to
-    demonstrate the role of choline and acetylcholine as a local hormone, and
     their hypothesis was then, later on, developed with success, as we all how,
     by Loewi, Dale, Cannon, and Bacq, from whose experiments the very idea
     of chemical transmission grew.
        The hypothesis of an acetylcholine-like transmitter, at first formulated for
     the viscera innervated by the parasympathetic nervous system, was later
     extended by Dale, Feldberg, and Vogt (1936) to neuromuscular transmis-
     sion.
        Recent research into the physiology of the motor end plate has definitely
     confirmed the existence of an intermediate acetylcholine-like substance. The
     reaction between acetylcholine and its receptor, situated at the surface of the
     postsynaptic membrane, can, perhaps, today be integrated with the mass of
     electrophysiological data which has, in particular, demonstrated the inex-


              PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                               555
citability of the membrane towards electrical impulses and its great sen-
sitivity with respect to the transmitter substance (Kuffler, 1948; del Castillo
and Katz, 1956).
   In the field of antagonists of these various hormones and chemical trans-
mitters, it is still among the substances of natural origin, ergotoxine, atro-
pine, curare, that the models are found on which antiadrenaline and anti-
acetylcholine-like drugs have been made, while the antihistamines have only
been studied recently and represent the products of completely original
synthesis.
   In practice, the drugs of this group have found numerous applications in
the symptomatic treatment of those organs whose activity is normally under
the influence of the autonomic nervous system: heart, vessels, bronchi,
alimentary tract and uterus in particular. The adrenaline-antagonists have
found their most important use in the treatment of vascular disease and
hypertension; the antagonists of acetylcholine are chiefly used for their anti-
spasmodic, mydriatic, and curarizing effects. The antihistamines have found
their strongest indications in the therapy of urticaria, rhinitis, asthma, and
other allergies.
   We shall give three examples taken from different pharmacological
groups to illustrate these points. In the group of adrenaline-like substances
we shall refer to ergotamine, in that of antiacetylcholine-like substances to
curare, and for the third tissue hormone, histamine, we shall take synthetic
antihistaminic substances.




The sympatholytic drugs make up a group of substances.characterized by
their common pharmacological properties. They act as competitors, or as
"blocking agents", according to the terminology generally used by English
speaking authors, in opposing the effects of adrenaline and noradrenaline, so
that their most characteristic property lies in the fact that they prevent
hypertension and sympathetic vasoconstriction.
   As often happens, a variety of drugs of this group were introduced into
therapeutics empirically, well before the type of pharmacodynamic action
which they exercise was established. In 1909 Froelich had already noticed
that initial administration of high doses of the dextro-rotatory isomer of
adrenaline was likely to make the animal resistant to the natural laevorota-


556                            1957 D.BOVET

tory isomer by a mechanism which we interpret today as a partial block of
the receptors by a substance optically inversed and pharmacologically much
less active. Later on, Loewe (1927), Külz (1936), Raymond-Hamet (1937)
described some N-alkyl derivatives of phenylethylamine which showed
typical adrenaline inhibition. Analogous properties have been described in
the series of phenoxyethylamine (Anan, 1930; Levy and Ditz, 1933; Bovet
and Maderni, 1933; Bovet, Simon, and Druey, 1937), of phenylethylene




Table II. Similarity in structure between sympathomimetics and sympatholytics 5.
(Raymond-Hamet, 1937; Bovet and Simon, 1936; Druey, 1936; Bovet, de Lestrange,
and Fourneau, 1942; Hjort, de Beer, and Fassett, 1938; Hartmann and Isler, 1939;
                           Gross, Tripod, and Meier, 1951.)


              PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                                    557




     Fig. 1. Anti-adrenaline properties of diethylaminomethyl-2-benzodioxane.




Reversal of the hypertensive action of adrenaline on the blood pressure of a dog.
In I and III: ‘injections of adrenaline in the saphenous vein (0.02 mg/kg). In II:
              injection of 883 F (5 mg/kg) (Foumeau and Bovet’ 1933).


558                             1957 D.BOVET




Table III. Classification of the main groups of sympathomimetic and sympatholytic
                                        agent s.




Table IV. Similarities in structure between sympathomimetic and sympatholytic agents
from adrenaline to ergotamine7 (Marini-Bettólo, Chiavarelli and Landi-Vittory, 1950-
      1953; Bovet, Bovet-Nitti, Virno, Longo, Marotta, and Sollero, 1952)40.


                PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                                559
  diamine (Bovet, de Lestrange, and J. P. Fourneau, 1942), of isoquinolein
 (Hjort, de Beer, and Fassett, 1938), and of phenylaminoethylimidaazohne
  (Meier and Muller, 1939; Hartman and Isler, 1939). In each of these groups
  the similarity of structure which exists between antagonistic molecules
  showing sympathomimetic and sympatholytic properties is clearly shown.
  The degree of substitution on the amine, the suppression or simple move-
  ment of a phenol group, the closing of a chain, is enough to reverse the
  pharmacological action exercised. It is very significant that while in sym-
  pathomimetic and sympatholytic drugs the distance between the amine
  group and the aromatic nucleus remains constant, the amine group of the
  inhibitor molecule regularly is substituted for more and heavier radicals,
  generally appears more stable, and has a higher molecular weight.
      The sympatholytics, either natural or synthetic, which are most active and
  whose usefulness is sufficient to justify their use clinically, tend generally to
  be poly- or heterocyclic substances whose molecules have, in spite of their
  complexity, a basic structure in common with those products mention-
  ed above. Benzylimidazoline (Meier and Muller 1939), and dibenamine
  (Nickerson and Goodman, 1947), resemble the phenylethylamines, the am-
inoethylbenzodioxanes (Fourneau and Bovet, 1933) resemble the phenoxy-
  ethylamines, and phentolamine (Gross, Tripod, and Meier, 1951) resem-
  ble the derivatives of phenylethylenediamine.
      Work carried out at the Istituto Superiore di Sanitá by Marini-Bettólo
  and Chiavarelli on the chemical side, and by my wife, Longo, Marotta, and
   Guarino on the pharmacological side4 0, illustrate how the idea of isosterism
   and competition can help in investigations of this type. Following this work
   which resulted in the isolation and the determination of the structure of the
   ergot alkaloids, with which work the names of Stoll and Jacobs are partic-
   ularly associated, a large amount of work was done with the object of pre-
   paring partially or completely synthesized derivatives. This work resulted,
   in particular, in the preparation of di-hydrogenated derivatives (Rothlin,
   1947), new oxytocic compounds closely related to ergometrine (Rothlin,
   1947) and the discovery of the hallucinogenic properties of the diethylamide
   of lysergic acid (Stoll). Having decided to look for the active pharmaco-
   logical principle of the ergotamine molecule we worked on the idea which
   we have already illustrated of noting similarities between molecular struc-
   ture and antagonistic properties, as a working hypothesis.
      If we consider the molecule of the ergot alkaloids its structure appears at
   first sight very different from that of adrenaline or the sympathomimetic


560                             1957 D.BOVET




Table V. Synthetic oxytocic agents, derived from phenylglycinamide. (Bovet-Nitti,
                                 1952, 1954)12,40.

derivatives of phenylethylamine. Having noticed, however, the existence of
a /%tetrahydronaphthylamine skeleton in the lysergic acid molecule, we
decided to resume work on substances in this group.
  Pharmacological tests performed on relatively simple derivatives proved
the adrenaline antagonist properties of /?-tetrahydronaphthyldiethylamine
(843 I.S.S.). The study of more complicated molecules and, in particular,
derivatives with amine and amide groups of 2-tetraline represent a new
stage in the attempt to reproduce the skeleton of lysergic acid in its essential
parts. Progressing through a series of molecules of increasing complexity,
one can thus pass through successive stages from phenylethyIamine to tetra-
hydronaphthylamine or to 916 I.S. and to the ergot alkaloids, noting, in each
of these stages, a gradual decrease in sympathomimetic properties and the
appearance of adrenaline antagonistic properties.
   An oxytocic activity has been observed in a large number of derivatives,
and the class of substances of this type seems a large one, when compared to
the group of adrenaline antagonists.
   In the course of laboratory experiments performed on isolated uterus
preparations or on the rabbit uterus in situ, several derivatives of amino-
tetraline and aniline and even some aliphatic compounds showed an intense


              PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                               561
activity. We would mention particularly N,Ndiethyl-N’(2-tetralyl) glycin-
amide (621 I.S.), N,N-diethyl-N’-3,4-dimethylphenylglycinamide (1048 I.S.)
and N,N,N’,N’-tetraethylglycinamide (1062 IS.), (Bovet-Nitti, 1952)40.
   The main difficulty in this work, and that which has struck many workers,
is the absence of any close correspondence between the results obtained in
small laboratory animals and those seen in man. Generally speaking, the
problem of synthetic oxytocic substances would not yet seem to have re-
ceived any very satisfactory solution and the question is still under inves-
tigation.




The case of acetylcholine antagonists is a singularly complicated one because
of the multiplicity of ways in which the chemical transmitter acts. As well
as acting on viscera innervated by the parasympathetic nervous system, it
acts at the neuromuscular junction of voluntary muscle and at ganglionic
synapses. Great use, in the pharmacology of competitors, has been made of
the surprising fact that acetylcholine antagonists differ depending on the site
of action of the hormone. This is shown by atropine and benzoylcholine
which neutralize the muscarinic actions of acetylcholine on the heart, in-
testines and secretions, while the iodide of tetraethylammonium or hexameth-
onium block its nicotinic action on sympathetic or parasympathetic gan-
glia, and the curares represent the specific antagonists of acetylcholine at the
level of voluntary striped muscle.
    As for the structural similarities between antagonistic substances the study
of synthetic curares will provide us with a succession of examples com-
parable to those which we have already reviewed in the series of adrenaline
antagonists. This work was started in 1946 after King had, in 1935, been the
first to identify the structure of one of the physiologically active principles
 of curare from the Amazon district, to be followed by the introduction, by
 Griffith and Cullen, in 1942 , of a chemically pure alkaloid as an adjuvent
                               2 5



to anaesthesia.
    d-Tubocurarine which comes from a Menispermacea - Chondodendrum
 tomentosum - and which comes into the preparation of certain curares by the
 inhabitants of the Upper Amazon, is an alkaloid of the group bis-(benzyl
 tetrahydroisoquinoleine) whose molecule carries two quaternary ammonium
 groups.


562                             1957 D.BOVET




                     Table VI. Natural and synthetic curares39.
d- Tubocurarine (King, 1935; Wintersteiner and Dutcher, 1943) ; 3381 R.P. (Bovet,
Courvoisier, Ducrot, and Horclois, 1946); Gallamine (Bovet, Depierre, and de
Lestrange, 1947) ; Succinylcholine (Bovet, Bovet-Nitti, Longo, and Marotta, 1949;
                       Fusco, Pahzzo, and Knüsli, 1949).



   Work with our colleagues Viaud, Horclois, and de Lestrange, first directed
towards molecules which were chemically related to the chosen model, made
it possible to synthesize by successive changes relatively simple derivatives
with analogous properties. From one series of derivatives of a new type
whose molecules carried two quinoleinic nuclei with a quatemary ammo-
nium group, we first kept the diiodoethylate of 8’,8”diquinolyloxy-1,5-
pentane (3381 R.P.) which was the first synthetic product whose curarizing
activity showed itself in mammals with a selectivity comparable to that of
the natural alkaloids isolated from curare (1946).
   In the course of investigations it was noticed that the derivatives of amino-
phenol without quinoleinic or isoquinoleinic nuclei showed an analogous
activity, and a curare-like activity was noticed in compounds belonging to
the group of ethers of polyphenols and aromatic esters. The latest work for
further simplification is concerned with the activity of aliphatic derivatives.
   In England, Barlow and Ing, Paton and Zaimis (1948) have produced
very interesting data on the curare-like properties of the hydrate of decameth-
ylene-w-bis-trimethylammonium (decamethonium). In our Laboratory
of Therapeutical Chemistry at the Istituto Superiore di Sanitá the curare-


               PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                                       563
like action of succinylcholine, whose synthesis was first carried out by Hunt
as long ago as 1911; has been recognized for the first time.
   The number and variety of derivatives which are capable of acting like
curare, the relative simplicity of their mode of action, and the possibility of
producing accurate pharmacological effects has allowed a close study of
structure-activity relationships in the field of synthetic curare-like substances.
   I shall only bring attention to two important features which condition the
activity of bis-quaternary derivatives: the distance between the two quater-
nary ammonium groups and the rather large nature of the molecules.
   The first factor is illustrated by comparing the derivatives of polymethy-
lene-bis-trimethylammonium (Barlow and Ing, Patton and Zaimis, 1948)
 and by comparing those of the aliphatic diesters of choline (Bovet, Bovet-
Nitti, Guarino, Longo, Marotta, 1949).
   A close study of the pharmacology of new syntheses has established that
 their action is far from being always coincident with those of the natural
alkaloids.
   The differences which the action of the iodides of decamethonium and
 succinylcholine present in comparison with that of d-tubocurarine and of
 gallamine triiodoethylate have been particularly studied by Paton and Zai-
 mis,-Brown and bias, and in our own laboratories. The English authors




Fig. 2. Curarizing action of choline esters and aliphatic dicarboxylic acids with
                                    normal chains.
The curarizing activity has been estimated by determining the "head drop dose", of
different products administered intravenously to rabbits. The curarizing activity reaches
a maximum for Succinylcholine and decreases in higher homologues of the series (after
             Bovet, Bovet-Nitti, Guarino, Longo, and Marotta 193939.)


564                            1957 D.BOVET




         Table VII. Pharmacodynamic properties of synthetic curares4,9.

have suggested that the two groups should be called depolarizmg agents and
curare competitors. We, ourselves propose to denote decamethonium and
succinylcholine by the name of leptocurares, and tubocararine and galla-
mine by the title of pachycurares. The advantage of such a nomenclature
lies in the fact that it does not prejudge in any way the mode of action of
these substances.
  The main differences between the pharmacodynamic effects exercised by
the two types of curare rest chiefly in their action on Batrachian and bird
muscle. In birds the pachycurares are typically curare-like in action while
the leptocurares provoke a contraction followed by curarization. In mam-
mals the differences between the two groups of products seem less clear.
There are important differences between the reactions of different species,
and between those of different muscles in particular, because the reactions of
various species and different muscles of the same species are not exactly coin-
cident, and because there seems to be every gradation of action between
depolarization and curare competition. The distinction between the two
groups, which is only relative as regards the mechanism of action, and whose
significance varies according to the neuromuscular preparation under con-
sideration, keeps all its interest in the study of relationships between chem-
ical structure and pharmacological activity.
   From the clinical point of view, the main factor in the classification of
curares is the duration of action of the different compounds. In this respect,
the introduction of short-acting curare-like substances and, in particular,
succinylcholine is an important acquisition. The relative ease with which
 succinylcholine is hydrolysed by the pseudocholineesterases and the very


              PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                              565

low toxicity of the choline and the succinic acid which are formed explain
the short curare-like action and the remarkable tolerance of the organism
towards it (Bovet-Nitti, 194939).
  The first clinical observations regarding the short acting curares were pub-




                             Fig. 3. Pachycurares.




                              Fig. 4. Leptocurares.


     566                                1957 D.BOVET

     lished by V aldoni (1949) and by Scurr (1951) and concern suxamethonium.
--   The introduction of succinylcholine into anaesthetics was first proposed in
     Sweden by Thesleff (1951), Holmberg and Thesleff (1951), Tammelin and




                   Table VIII. Products of the hydrolysis of succinylcholine.




     Fig. 5. Chromatograms (a-e) of the enzymic hydrolysis of succinylcholine at dif-
     ferent stages; (f) of a mixture of succinylcholine and its products of hydrolysis; (g) of
                0.1 mg of succinylcholine subjected to non-enzymatic hydrolysis.
                             (After Whittaker and Wijesundera, 1952.)

     Löw (1951), and von Dardel (1951); and in Austria by Brücke et al. (1951)
     Mayrhofer and Hassfurther (1951), and Holzer (1951).
       In the light of these different pieces of research we can today recognize
     two separate sorts of use for succinylcholine; its use as a simple injection in


                PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                                        567




Fig. 6. Comparison between the curarizing action of d- tubocurarine and the effects of
    succinylcholine, given either by single injection or by continuous perfusiona.
Dog, under chloralose anaesthesia - (1st line): contraction of gastrocnemius following
rhythmic stimulation of the sciatic nerve; (2nd line): control for the speed of injection;
(3rd line): blood pressure.
The trace shows, in the first place, the difference between the duration of neuro-
muscular paralysis following a single injection of succinylcholine (370 I.S., 0.05 mg/
kg) and d-tubocurarine (0.1 mg/kg). Furthermore, comparing the effect of a single
injection of d-tubocurarine which corresponds to a continuous perfusion of succinyl-
choline (initial injection of 0.05 mg followed by injections of 0.0062 mg at each
marker) we may state that for practically equal duration of subtotal curarization
(about 80% for 20 min) the return to normal is very quick (about 10 min) in the
        first case and much more gradual (about 50 min) after d-tubocurarine.
                                  (After Reuse, 1953.)


568                              1957 D.BOVET

indications necessitating a particularly short action (endoscopy, electrocon-
vulsive therapy), and its use as a perfusion for long surgical procedures.
  Two tracings taken from a piece of work done in our laboratory illustrate
the most significant result of these two types of administration; they show
the advantage which curarizing action by perfusion of short-acting curares
have over the classical technique (Fig. 6).




 The last of the examples by which we shall illustrate the idea of competition
 concerns the antagonists of the third local hormone, histamine. This is a
 particularly rich chapter when we realize that in the course of only a few
 years interest in this branch of therapeutics has produced a large amount of
 varied research work. In 1937 in the laboratory of Fourneau and in collab-
 oration with Miss Staub, we considered the numerous similarities existing
 between histamine, adrenaline and acetylcholine, and planned to investigate
 substances showing a specific antagonism for histamine comparable to the
 antagonism shown by sympatholytics for adrenaline and parasympatholytics
for acetylcholine. The first positive results concerning the specific antago-
 nism of thymoxyethyldiethylamine (929 F) for histamine dates from 1939.
 Experimental work on this substance made it possible to make some criteria




Dog, under chloralose anaesthesia - A = femoral artery pressure (mmHg); V 1 =
pressure measured in catheter introduced centrifugally in the external jugular vein
(nun H2O); V 2 = pressure in the internal jugular vein (mm H2O). Injections in the
      saphenous vein, doses in mg/kg. (After Virno, Gertner, and Bovet, 1956.)


              PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                                     569




Table IX. Principal groups of synthetic antihistammics, related to (1) sympatholytics,
                       (2) antispasmodics, and (3) histamine.
929 F (Bovet and Staub, 1937); Antergan (Halpern, 1942); Antazoline (Meier and
Bucher, 1946); Diphenhydramine (Loew, Kaiser, and Moore, 1945); Promethazine
(Halpem and Ducrot, 1946); Chlorphenamine (Tislow, La Belle et al., 1949); Pyril-
amine (Bovet, Horclois, Walthert, and Foumel, 1944); Tripelennamine (Mayer,
       Huttrer, and Scholz, 1945); Thonzylamine (Reinhard and Scudi, 1947).


 for histamine antagonists. Staub (1939) herself extended the work to deriv-
atives of phenylethylenediamine. In 1942 the syntheses carried out by Mos-
 nier, the pharmacological analysis of Halpern and the first therapeutic results
 of Cuilleret, Thiers, Gate, Celice, Perrault, Decourt, and Durel with dimeth-
 ylaminoethylbenzylaniline (Antergan) definitely established the interest
 taken in products of this series. The role of histamine in many allergic
 phenomena was going to guarantee a vast field for clinical application to the
 products of this group. After the forerunners Maderni, de Lestrange, and
 Benoit (in the Laboratory of Fourneau in Paris), Viaud, Horclois, Mosnier,


570                              1957 D.BOVET

and Charpentier (in French industry), Hartman and Hofman (in Switzer-
land), Rieveschl, Scholz, Huttrer, and Roblin (in the U.S.A.), and Cavalini
(in Italy), about 500 chemists have in less than ten years performed about
5,000 syntheses in the field of antihistamines.
   If the pharmacologists were easily able to recognize the competitive na-
ture of the antagonism exercised by specific antihistamines, neither the
similarities in structure between antihistamines and histamines which should
logically constitute the first condition of their activity, nor the similarities
existing between the different groups of active derivatives, appeared very
clearly to the chemists. Whether one likes it or not, in view of the variety
of chemical classes to which the active substances belong, it has been nec-
essary to recognize the fact that the majority of results obtained in the lab-
oratory appear rather empirical.




       Table X. Similarities in the structure of histamine and antihistamines.
      Waker, Hunt, and Fosbinder, 1941; Niemann and Hays, 1942; Bovet and
                                  Walthert, 1943.)


               PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                               571




              Fig. 8. Histamine, pyridylethylamine, and pyrilamine.


   From the pharmacological point of view the existence has been proved of
 three groups of antihistamines which resemble (1) sympatholytics, (2) para-
 sympatholytics and sympatholytics, and (3) histamine itself.
    The phenol ethers (929 F) and the derivatives of phenylethylenediamine
 (157 F) studied at the Pasteur Institute, Halpern’s antergan, and Meier and
 Bucher’s antazoline belong to the first group. The substances of the second
 group are chemically much more homogeneous and possess a structure com-
 mon to the antispasmodics and atropine-like compounds. They are effective
 antispasmodics as well as antihistamines (diphenyldramine, Loew). Because
 of the absence of any side effects the derivatives of a-aminopyridine which
 make up the third group, show a higher degree of specificity. It is interesting
‘in the products of this type to remark on the reactions of isosterism which
 account for the pharmacological activity exercised. Walter et al. (1941) and
 Niemann and Hays (1942) have produced evidence to show that derivatives
 of a-pyridylethylamine have a typically histaminic activity and that there
 exists, in this respect, a fundamental difference between the tc, ,8 and 7
 isomer substitutes of pyridine. In this case the similarity in structure which
 doesn’t seem to be very clear between histamine and pyrilamine (Neo-an-


572                              1957 D.BOVET

tergan) on the other hand does appear between the two series of or-pyridyl-
ethylamine and cr-pyridine-ethylenediamine. The type of products in this
group is represented by pyrilamine but many other syntheses made in this
way have given active products.




The examples which we have just given certainly do not exhaust the field
of competitive agents. The pharmacologists are rather the "enfants terribles"
of physiology and have not waited until the battle has been won at the level
of the neuromuscular synapses before waging an even greater war by




Fig.9. EEG of rabbit, antagonist action of atropine on the desynchronization pro-
                                  voked by eserinc.
Injection of eserine (0.1 mg/kg i.v.) provokes desynchronization of the EEG which
disappears after administration of atropine (1 mg/kg i.v.) and gives place to a syn-
chronization with many slow waves. (After Longo, von Berger, and Bovet, 1954.)10


              PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                                 573
making known experimental results suggesting the intervention of chem-
ical transmitters at central nervous system level whose effects have already
been studied on the scale of the autonomic nervous system.
    Analysing results collected from different laboratories Feldberg (1950)
concluded by saying that the theory of acetylcholine as a transmitter in the
central nervous system provided the only convincing and satisfactory ex-
planation. If the intervention of non-cholinergic central nervous system
transmitters centrally is not excluded one must recognize that our know-
ledge of the probable roles of noradrenaline and adrenaline and of histamine
and 5-hydroxytryptamine is still very inexact.
    In the course of the last few years a considerable amount of research has
shown the effect of different types of substances, showing activity on the
autonomic nervous system, upon the reticular formation of the brain stem,
 whose physiological role was clearly shown by Moruzzi and Magoun in 1949.
    Rather paradoxically we see that cholinergic substances on one hand and
 adrenergic substances on the other, show their effects on the electrical activ-
 ity of the brain which reproduce the action of direct electrical stimulation
 of the reticular formation. In carefully conducted experimental conditions,
 acetylcholine (Bonnet and Bremer, 1937) and adrenaline itself (Bonvallet,
 Dell, and Hiebel, 1954) provoked a transitory stimulation as seen on the
 electroencephalogram. Administration of anticholinesterases (eserine, DFP
 and amphetamine [Bradley and Elkes, 1953]) is followed in the two cases
 by a strong and lasting desynchronization.
    From a strictly pharmacological point of view, the chief interest in work
 in this field is in the fact that one can observe at a central level, between the
 different groups of drugs, antagonisms comparable to that seen at the level
 of viscera innervated by the autonomic nervous system.
    As early as 1947 we suspected that a connection might exist between the
 central action - antiparkinsonian - of certain tertiary amines in extrapyra-
 midal lesions and the ganglion-blocking properties which one could rec-
 ognize in the same substances on the autonomic ganglia (Sigwald and Bovet,
 Dumont, 1947).
    The "antiparkinsonian drugs" are a relatively homogeneous group to
 which belong diethazine (diparcol), isothazine (parsidol), caramiphen (parp-
 anit), and benzhexol (artane) as well as certain antihistamines (diphenhy-
 dramine and promethazine).
    EEG studies have confirmed that really three groups of products, anti-
  parasympathetics (scopolamine and atropine), the central ganglion blockers


574                            1957 D.BOVET




             Table XI. Central ganglion blockers (Antiparkinsonics)
Diphenhydramine (Loew, Kaiser, and Moore, 1945); Diethazine (Sigwald, Bovet, and
Dumont, 1946; Bovet, Foumel, and Charpentier, 1947); Caramiphen (Domenjoz,
     1946; Grünthal, 1946); Trihexyphenidyl (Doshay and Constable, 1949).


or antiparkinsonian drugs and the sedatives (chlorpromazine, reserpine)
produce a tracing on the EEG similar to that seen normally during sleep and
are at the same time likely to upset the general cortical reaction normally
provoked by external stimuli (reaction to alarm) or by desynchronizing
substances like eserine and amphetamine (Bovet and Longo, 1956). The ac-
tion of such synchronizing agents can, at first approximation, be localized in
the reticular formation and shows the importance that chemical transmitters
seem to exercise at this level.
   Many observations today make it seem likely that there are special re-
ceptors for adrenaline, acetylcholine and histamine in the organism which
might be specific proteins whose configuration is complementary to that of
the transmitter itself. Fischer first formulated this concept and illustrated it
with his famous example of the lock and key. Physiologists studying taste
and smell have looked there for the explication of facts observed in the field
of the chemistry of smells and perfumes. Still more recently, following the
studies of Landsteiner and Pauling, the hypothesis of these "locks" has found a
very suggestive application in immunology.


               PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                                     575




Fig. 10. Antagonistic action of diethazine against convulsive patterns caused by
nicotine on the EEG of curarized rabbit. (A) Blocking reaction after acoustic stimulus
(black line). (B) Convulsive seizure by 2 mg/kg nicotine in normal animal. (C) After
injection of 5 mg/kg diethazine a second injection of nicotine no longer produces the
changes observed in (A); the acoustic stimulus fails to produce the blocking action.
                               (Longo and Bovet 195210.)


   At this stage in my exposition I cannot consider the variety of possible
reactions that can take place between chemical transmitters, its inhibitor and
its protein base without exceeding the time limit which has been set me.
   The particularly simple case of the fixation of acetylcholine by cholin-
esterase has been examined by Nachmansohn(1953-1954) and Wilson(1954),
who think that it is likely that an electropositive and an electronegative
group respectively, of the molecule become attached to the acetylcholine
molecules and they have drawn valuable conclusions not only in the case of
different types of anti-acetylcholinesterases but for the new group of drugs
called phosphorylated cholinesterases.
   If I wanted to go outside the already stretched framework of this exposi-
tion I could introduce other features and recall that different groups of
products act on the metabolism of transmitters, whose precursors they rep-
resent, or whose syntheses they inhibit, or whose liberation they slow or
accelerate, or again whose destruction they modify. On all these counts re-
search has been crowned with success, and the results seem very promising.


576                             1957 D.BOVET

   Finally the whole picture which we have tried to present here in running
the risk of telling you, on many of the points examined, data with which
you are already familiar, in spite of some inevitable gaps, appears to be a
clearly positive one. If, to conclude we look back, we shall see that in cov-
ering the vast field of pharmacology, the structure of a small group of
biological amines of a remarkably simple structure, has led us like Ariadne’s
thread, and has prevented us from becoming lost in a labyrinth of physio-
logical reactions and often diverse chemical structures.
   It has been said that the art of a lecturer consists of only speaking about
what he knows and hiding what he doesn’t. But it didn’t seem necessary
for me to have recourse to these artifices to present to you the real picture
of chemical pharmacology which, in the last analysis, only represents a sort
of "natural history" and a system of organic molecules.
   I could go so far as to say that the results which we have already, create
a good deal of optimism for they allow us to see the pharmacology of the
future as an ordered and defined science and in which foods, drugs and
poisons will have become integrated with metabolism of the simplest con-
stituents of living matter.
   Now I am nearing the end of this exposition and I think of the great
names which are associated with the study of pharmacological agents which
have allowed us to obtain the results we have today, I cannot evoke, without
emotion, all those who preceded me in this path, and particularly my master
Ernest Fourneau who has written such a large and glorious chapter in chem-
ical therapeutics and whose name will always be engraved in the history of
this science.
   And I feel torn between the immense joy I feel again for the honour done
me and the feeling of injustice of not being able to repay my masters and
colleagues for all that I owe them. This feeling is even stronger seeing that
therapeutic chemistry is a very young science whose progress in half a
century has been prodigious, and in no other field, perhaps, has the part of
 each one appeared with such clarity and continuity as in our research where
each formula carries a well-known, and sometimes very close, name.
   The future of pharmacodynamics is however so rich and promising, it
still allows so many theoretical and practical possibilities, that I still have the
hope of justifying, by my future work, not only the wonderful distinction
 paid to me today, but also the trust and friendship of my masters and col-
leagues whose work could not be separated from that which I now pursue
with confidence, enthusiasm, and love.


                 PHENOMENA IN NEUROPHARMACOLOGY                                        577
The references are mainly general reviews; as regards work carried out before 1948
the reader should refer to a work published with Mme. F. Bovet-Nitti5.

 1. Z. M. Bacq, La pharmacologie du système nerveux autonome, et particulièrement
    du sympathique, d’après la théorie neurohumorale, Ann. Physiol. Physicochim. Biol.
    10 (1934) 467-528.
 2. D. Bovet, Introduzione allo studio fisiologico e farmacologico del curaro, Boll.
    Soc. Ital.Biol. Sper., 25 (1949) 539-551.
 3. D. Bovet, Introduction to antihistamine agents and antergan derivatives, Ann.
    N.Y. Acad. Sci., 50 (1950) 1089-1126.
 4. D. Bovet, Some aspects of the relationship between chemical constitution and
    curare-like activity, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 54 (1951) 407-432.
 5. D. Bovet and F. Bovet-Nitti, Structure et Activité pharmacodynamique des Médica-
    ments du Système nerveux végétatif, Bile, 1948.
 6. D. Bovet and F. Bovet-Nitti, Curare, Experientia, 4 (1949)-325-348.
 7. D. Bovet and F. Bovet-Nitti, Rapports de structure entre sympathomimétiques et
    sympatholytiques. De l’adrenaline à l’ergotamine, Actualités Pharmacol., 6 (1953) 21.
 8. D. Bovet and F. Bovet-Nitti, La chlorure de succinylcholine, agent curarisant à
    breve durée d’action, Sci. Med. Ital., 3 (1955) 509-539.
 9. D. Bovet, F. Bovet-Nitti, S. Guarino, V. G. Longo, and R. Fusco, Recherches sur
    les curarisants de synthése. III. Succinylcholine et dérivés aliphatiques, Arch. Intern.
    Pharmacodyn., 88 (1951) 1-50.
10. D. Bovet and V. G. Longo, Pharmacologie de la formation réticulée du tronc
    cerebral, 20th Congr. Intern. Physiol. Sci., Brussels, (1956) 306-329.
11. D. Bovet and P. Viaud, Curares de synthése: chimie et pharmacologie, Anesthésie
    et Analgésie, 8 (1951) 328-384.
12. F. Bovet-Nitti and D. Bovet, Recherches sur les ocytociques de synthése: derives
    de la phénylglycinamide, Arch. Intern. Pharmacodyn., 96 (1954) 327-355.
13. F. Brücke, Dicholinesters of w- dicarboxylic acids and related substances, Pharmacol.
    Rev., 8 (1956) 265-335.
14. W. B. Cannon and A. Rosenblueth, Autonomic Neuroeffector System, New York,
     1937.
15. J. de1 Castilljo and B. Katz, Biophysical aspects of neuro-muscular transmission,
    Progr. Biophys. Chem., 6 (1956) 122-170, London.
16. H. H. Dale, Transmission of nervous effects by acetylcholine, Harvey Lectures, 32
    (1937) 229-245.
17. L. Donatelli and U. Serafini, Gli Antistaminici di Sintesi, Napoli, 1951.
18. J. C. Eccles, The electrophysiological properties of the motoneurone, Cold Spring
    Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 17 (1952) 175-183.
19. V. Erspamer, Pharmacology of Indolealkylamines, Pharmacol. Rev., 6 (1954) 425-
    487.
20. U. S. v. Euler, The nature of adrenergic nerve mediators, Pharmacol. Rev., 3 (1951)
    247-277.
21. S. M. Feinberg, S. Malkiel, and A. R. Feinberg, The Antihistamines, Chicago, 1950.


578                                1957 D.BOVET

22. W. Feldberg, The role of acetylcholine in the central nervous system, Brit. Med.
     Bull., 6 (1950) 312-321.
23. R. Fusco, G. Palazzo, S. Chiavarelli, and D. Bovet, Ricerche sui curari di sintesi.
     IV, Gazz. Chim. Ital., 79 (1949) 836848.
24. L. S. Goodman and M. Nickerson, Clinical application of adrenergic blockade,
     Med. Clin. N. Am., 34 (1950) 379-394.
25. H. R. Griffith and G. E. Johnson, The use of curare in general anesthesia, Anes-
     thesiology, 3 (1942) 418-420.
26. B. N. Halpern, Les antihistaminiques de synthèse, essais de chimiothérapie des
     états allergiques, Arch. Intern. Pharmacodyn., 68 (1942) 339-408.
27. B. N. Halpern, Sur le méchanisme d’action des antihistaminiques de synthèse,
     Presse Méd., 57 (1949) 949-952.
28. H. R. Ing, The curariform action of onium salts, Physiol. Rev., 16 (1936) 527-544.
29. S. W. Kuffler, Physiology ofneuromuscular junctions: electrical aspects, Federation
     Proc., 7 (1948) 437-446.
30. O. Loewi, Problems connected with the principle of humoral transmission of nerve
     impulses, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, B 118 ( 1936) 299-316.
31. G. B. Marini-Bettòlo, Contribution à l’étude des alcaloides des Strychnos du Brèsil,
     Festsch. Arthur Stoll, (1957) 257-280.
32. G. B. Marini-Bettòlo, S. Chiavarelli, and D. Bovet, Ricerche sui simpatolitici di
     sintesi della serie dell’ergotammina, Gazz. Chim. Ital., 80 (1950) 281-298.
33. A. R. McIntyre, Curare, Its History and Clinical Use, Chicago, 1947.
34. D. Nachmansohn, Metabolism and function of the nerve cell, Harvey Lectures, 49
    (1953-1954) 57-99.
35. W. D. M. Paton and E. J. Zaimis, The methonium compounds, Pharmacol. Rev.,
     4(1952)219-253.
36. M. Protiva, Chemie antihistaminových látek a histaminové skupiny, Naklad. &Sk.
     Akad. Ved. Praha, 1955.
37. M. M. Rapport, Serum vasoconstrictor (Serotonin) : IV, J. Biol. Chem., 180 ( 1949)
     961-969.
 38. Raymond-Hamet, Sur un nouveau cas d’inversion des effets adrénaliniques, Compt.
      Rend. Acad. Sci., 180 (1925) 2074-2077.
 39. Numero speciale sui Curari di Sintesi, Rend. 1st. Super. Sanitcà, -12 (1949) 1-264.
40. Numero speciale sugli Ergotamminici di Sintesi, Rend. 1st. Super Sanitcà, 15 (1952)
      723-1040.
41. E. R. Rothlin, The pharmacology of the natural and dihydrogenated alkaloids of
      ergot, Bull. Schweiz. Akad. Med. Wiss., 2 (1947) 249-273.
42. A. M. Staub, Recherches sur quelques bases synthétiques antagonistes de l’hista-
      mine, Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 63 (1939) 400-436.
43. S. Thesleff, Succinylchohne iodide. Studies on its pharmacological properties and
      clinical use, Acta Physiol. Scand., 27. Suppl. 99 (1952) 1-36.
44. D. W. Woolley, A Study of Antimetabolites, New York, 1952.
