                           E D W A R D C . KE N D A L L


The development of cortisone as a therapeutic agent
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1950



The first investigations which contributed to the development of cortisone
came in 1929 from physiologists. Two groups of workers, Hartman and his
           1
associates at the University of Buffalo, and Swingle and Pfiffner2 at Prince-
ton University, were the first to prepare extracts from the adrenal cortex
which successfully controlled the symptoms of adrenal insufficiency both in
adrenalectomized animals and in patients who had Addison’s disease.
                                                               3
   Cortisone was first separated as a new compound in 1935 . Investigations
concerned with the isolation and determination of the chemical structure of
cortisone were carried out simultaneously and independently by Winter-
                                                                                5
Steiner and Pfiffner4 at Columbia University, by Reichstein and his associates
at Zurich, Switzerland, and by my associates and myself at the Mayo Clinic 6.
   From the beginning of the investigation at the Mayo Clinic the work has
been carried out by an able group of associates. At this time it is a pleasure to
recognize the contributions made to both the theoretical and technical
aspects of the many problems by my colleagues, among whom are Lewis
L. Engel, Gerard A. Fleisher, Warren F. McGuckin, Bernard F. McKenzie,
Harold L. Mason, Vernon R. Mattox and Richard B. Turner.*
   The number of different compounds eventually separated from the adrenal
cortex 7 was 28. All these compounds belong to the family of steroids and
all are closely related one to the other. For the detailed investigation of this
large group of compounds, science is indebted to the very significant con-
tributions which have come from the laboratory of Professor Tadeus Reich-

* Essential contributions to our knowledge of the physiological significance of the
adrenal cortex came from the work of Dr. Frank C. Mann who performed the opera-
tions for adrenalectomy. Drs. Benjamin B. Wells and Roger M. Reinecke demon-
strated the influence of the adrenal cortex on the metabolism of protein and carbo-
hydrates. Dr. Dwight J. Ingle carried out the important work on the relation between
the adrenal cortex and activity of the muscle. Drs. William D. Allers, Hugo Nilson,
and Joseph Svirbely studied the metabolism of electrolytes in adrenalectomized
animals and Donald Krockow was responsible for care of adrenalectomized animals.
Drs. Willard M. Hoehn, Charles S. Myers, Harold R. Nate, Frank Stodola, and
Eugene L. Woroch have contributed to chemical phases of the investigation.


   DEVELOPMENT OF CORTISONE AS THERAPEUTIC AGENT                           271

stein. Some of these compounds contained two, some three, some four, and
a few contained five atoms of oxygen in the molecule. In certain of these
steroids there was a double bond adjacent to a ketone, and this small group
of compounds soon acquired special interest because they were the only ones
which possessed physiologic activity. If the double bond was removed, the
physiologic activity was abolished8. This fact focused attention on four com-
pounds which were designated in my laboratory as A, B, E, and F. Because
of the limited supply, it was decided that all of the material separated from
the gland should be used on small animals and that none should be employed
for investigations in clinical medicine.
    Work on the adrenal cortex at first was confined to a few physiologists,
and several years were required to accumulate evidence concerning the
physiologic activity of these compounds. Eventually, it was shown that com-
pounds A, B, E, and F had little effect on the metabolism of electrolytes but
 that they had marked influence on the metabolism of carbohydrates and pro-
     9
 tein . In addition, it was found that the muscles in adrenalectomized animals
soon lost the power to contract when they were stimulated, but that these
compounds would restore the ability of the muscle to respond10. Finally, it
became evident that the adrenalectomized animal could not resist in the
 normal manner toxic substances such as typhoid vaccine. Compounds A,
 B, E, and F restored the resistance of the animals to these toxic substances 11
 (Fig. 1).
    On the basis of these experiments on animals the hope was raised that
 these compounds from the adrenal cortex might be of help to patients who
 had suffered trauma including burns or who had certain types of infection.
 But when this hypothesis was tested with extracts of the adrenal cortex en-
 couraging results were not obtained. Today some of these failures can be
 explained, but at the time they were accepted at face-value. For many years
 there were few who believed that any product of the adrenal cortex would
 find a place in clinical medicine other than in the treatment of the relatively
 few patients who had Addison’s disease. Under these conditions, it is not
  surprising that pharmaceutical manufacturers were not interested in the
  commercial aspects of the adrenal cortex.
    In October, 1941, this situation changed suddenly and completely. The
  shadow of war was advancing and the medical departments of the army and
  navy approached the National Research Council of the United States with
  the request that the hormones of the adrenal cortex be made available. The
  National Research Council called a conference of those interested in the field,


272                           1950 E.C.KENDALL

and a serious attempt was made to prepare the hormones of the adrenal cor-
tex by partial synthesis from some material which could be obtained on a
large scale. At the first conference in October, 1941, the agenda called for a
discussion of the best way to proceed. Which of the four compounds A, B,
E, and F should be the objective? There was a consensus that the objective
should be compound A. The reason for this was that of the four substances,
compound A possessed the simplest chemical structure.
   The least complicated member of the pregnane series, desoxycorticoste-
rone, had been made in 1937 by Steiger and Reichstein 12 and was found to




        Structural formulas of compounds A, B, E, F and desoxycorticosterone. Com-
pounds E and F are identical with A and B respectively, except for the presence of an
additional hydroxyl group at position 17. Desoxycorticosterone-does not possess a
                            substituent either at 11 or 17.


influence the metabolism of sodium, potassium, chloride, and water; but it
also had been shown that desoxycorticosterone did not appreciably affect
the activity of muscle or the metabolism of carbohydrate and protein 13-16.
   There are three atoms of oxygen in desoxycorticosterone. The next more
complicated chemical structure is that of compound A which is identical
with desoxycorticosterone except that it has an atom of oxygen at position
11. Compound E is still more complicated. This hormone is identical with
compound A except for the presence of a fifth atom of oxygen7 at position 17.


   DEVELOPMENT OF CORTISONE AS THERAPEUTIC AGENT                         273

Under these circumstances the most practical procedure was first to make
compound A, for unless this was accomplished there was but little hope that
compound E could be made in satisfactory yield.
    I shall not describe the strenuous efforts expended in many laboratories to
make compound A. Different avenues of approach were tried, starting mate-
rials obtained from yeast, plants, and bile were used, information was ex-
changed at a series of conferences, but for three years all attempts in the
United States to make compound A failed.
    In Switzerland, Lardon and Reichstein17 prepared the first sample of com-
pound A from desoxycholic acid but the method which they used could not
be employed on a large scale. Someone has said that of all the projects
sponsored by the National Research Council, the work on the hormones of
 the adrenal cortex was the least productive. This, however, is not true. The
 investigations carried out furnished experience and contributed essential in-
 formation which subsequently made possible the manufacture of compound
 E on a factory scale.
    Compound A was produced by a practical method devised in my labor-
        18
 atory in 1944. Merck and Co., Inc., using the same method, prepared a
large sample of this compound in 1945. It was tested on adrenalectomized
 laboratory animals and was found to have physiologic activity identical with
 compound A which had been isolated from the adrenal glands of beef 19-22.
    Now, for the first time, it was possible to test this compound on a satis-
 factory scale in clinical medicine. The condition in which it should be of
 most value was Addison’s disease. Considerable interest surrounded this first
 utilization of one of the compounds of the adrenal cortex which had been
 prepared from starting material other than adrenal glands.
     The patient was closely observed by Dr. Randall G. Sprague and his
 associates and the results were clear. Compound A had but little influence
 either subjectively or objectively on the symptoms of Addison’s disease23.
 After all the work that had been expended, this result came as a surprise and
 was a great disappointment.
     In 1946 it was generally believed that the four compounds, A, B, E, and
 F, closely resembled each other in physiologic activity. It was believed also
  that larger doses of A and B were required than of compounds E and F to
  produce the same effect. At that time it could not be anticipated that within
  two years convincing evidence would be obtained which would show that
  compounds E and F possessed activity not shared with compounds A and B.
  Neither could it be foreseen that this essential information would come not


274                         1950 E.C.KENDALL

from experiments on animals but from work with patients. Yet before this
information could be obtained it was necessary for the chemist to make
compound E in suitable amounts.
   In spite of the disappointing results that had been obtained with com-
pound A, attempts to convert a compound closely related to compound A
into compound E were carried out both in the laboratories of the Mayo
Foundation and in those of Merck and Co., Inc. Dr. Lewis H. Sarett, in
the research laboratory of Merck and Co., Inc., first accomplished this con-
version, and in the summer of 1947 it became evident that a practical meth-
od to make compound E soon would be available24. From that time onward
the work progressed smoothly. The first few grams of compound E made
their appearance in May, 1948, and more was produced during the summer.
   Merck and Co., Inc. was faced with the problem: To whom should this
material be given and how should these first few grams be used? For many
months no satisfactory answer was found and this fact now furnishes a clear
demonstration of how little was known in 1948 about the function of the
adrenal cortex.
   Although little was known, there was much speculation, and among those
who speculated were Dr. Philip S. Hench and myself.
  In 1929 Dr. Hench had observed that the painful symptoms of rheumatoid
arthritis were relieved in a patient who developed jaundice, and in 1931 he
was equally impressed when another patient was also relieved after she be-
came pregnant. Throughout the following years these clinical observations
were augmented and provided evidence that rheumatoid arthritis was not
always a relentless, progressive disease.
   Dr. Hench believed that rheumatoid arthritis is a reversible condition. He
suggested that some agent which he designated substance X was present
during jaundice and in pregnancy, and that through the influence of sub-
stance X the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis were relieved. Dr. Hench
sought the help of others in an attempt to identify substance X, and during
the past 12 years we have had many conferences. After one of these con-
ferences in January, 1941, when a decision was reached to employ compound
E in rheumatoid arthritis, Dr. Hench made an entry to this effect in a note-
book. We did not realize that seven years would pass before compound E
would become available in amount sufficient to permit its use in clinical
medicine but neither of us forgot the decision made in 1941.
   I have described the result of administration of compound A to a patient
who had Addison’s disease as a great disappointment. However, this ex-


   DEVELOPMENT OF CORTISONE AS THERAPEUTIC AGENT                            275

perience with compound A made it possible to use compound E successfully.
Three things became evident: (1) Because of the insolubility of compound
E acetate* it was desirable to use the hormone in its free form, not as the
acetate. (2) The material should be injected as an aqueous suspension which
would be absorbed over a long interval and thus furnish a continuous supply
of the hormone. (3) The crystals should be ground to a fine powder to insure
absorption at a satisfactory rate. Large crystals would resist absorption for
several days.
    During the summer of 1948, compound E was administered in this manner
by Dr. Sprague of the Mayo Clinic to a patient who had Addison’s disease,
and the result was encouraging. There was a notable improvement in the
condition of the patient.
    A short time after this, Dr. Hench once more asked the question, "When
will compound E be available", and I replied that at last it soon would be
ready for his use. On September 21, Dr. Charles H. Slocumb, Dr. Hench’s
associate, administered the first injection of this hormone to a patient who
had rheumatoid arthritis. During the following seven months compound E
was given by Dr. Howard F. Polley, another associate of Dr. Hench, to
many more patients who had rheumatoid arthritis and rheumatic fever and
the adrenocorticotropic hormone of the anterior portion of the pituitary
body also was shown to produce similar result25.
    I shall not describe in detail the wide expansion of the use of compound E.
One immediate result was to produce confusion in the minds of some, con-
cerning the relation between vitamin E and compound E of the adrenal cor-
tex. It seemed desirable to give compound E a distinctive name and the word
cortisone was chosen.
    To tell the full story of the development of cortisone as a therapeutic agent
it will be nececessary to go back to the last months of 1944. At that time the
 first few milligrams of cortisone acetate were made by Dr. Sarett 26 in the
 research laboratory of Merck and Co., Inc. Although the method which he
 used could not be employed for large-scale production because of the very
low yield, nevertheless it was taken as a basis for calculating the amount of
starting material which would be required to make just 5 g of cortisone.
 This was most fortunate because it ensured the use of a large amount of
 starting material. It was also most fortunate that during 1947 and 1948 sev-
 eral important improvements of some of the steps in the preparation of com-
* Later it was found that finely ground compound-E acetate (particle size 5-10 mi-
crons) was absorbed at a satisfactory rate.


276                          1950 E.C.KENDALL

pound A were made in my laboratory
                                         19,27
                                               . Moreover Dr. Sarett made an
essential contribution for the conversion into cortisone of a compound
closely related to compound A - a new method of introducing the hy-
                                                     24



droxyl group at C(17).
   The result was that instead of the calculated 5 grams of cortisone, a total
of 400 grams became available, and when requests for cortisone continued
to come from the Mayo Clinic, Merck and Co., Inc. could continue to
supply the hormone, although at a limited rate. In so far as the clinical results
are concerned this is the most important single fact which stands out in retro-
spect. With the amount of cortisone made available it was possible within a
few months to obtain convincing evidence. With less material this would
have been impossible.
   All the cortisone which had been prepared by Merck and Co., Inc. had
been made on the laboratory or small pilot plant scale. The question then
arose as to whether the company now should enlarge the facilities to large
pilot plant and factory scale. There was one good reason why they should
expand the manufacture of cortisone. There were five good reasons why
they should not. The one good reason was the demand for cortisone. Op-
posed to this were: (1) The uncertainty of the future: how great would be
thedemand and how long would it continue? (2) No compound as complex
as cortisone had ever been made on a factory scale. The venture would be
without precedent. (3) For a long time the cost of manufacture would be
high and the volume of sales would be small because of the price. A large
amount of money would have to be invested. (4) The patent situation which
eventually would control the manufacture of cortisone by Merck and Co.,
Inc. and three other companies was complicated, confused and to many it
seemed hopeless. (5) Why not find something else as a substitute for corti-
sone, something just as good?
   You now know that Merck and Co., Inc. accepted the challenge, devised
apparatus with which cortisone could be made on a large scale, and above
all demonstrated that sound scientific endeavor and fortitude can find an-
swers to the most complicated and discouraging problems.
   To chemists, physiologists, and clinicians the results have brought assur-
ance and stimulation. For many patients hope has displaced despair. Progress
in the manufacture of cortisone can be illustrated by its price. In July, 1949
the price per gram was $200.00 and this continued until after January, 1950.
Since that time the price has been reduced five times: to $150.00, $135.00,
$95.00, $50.00, and on November 1, 1950, to $35.00. Furthermore, in


   DEVELOPMENT OF CORTISONE AS THERAPEUTIC AGENT                         277

1949 the supply of cortisone was allocated by a committee appointed by the
National Academy of Sciences, but today it is available to every physician in
the United States.
   The five questions which were cited as reasons why the large-scale manu-
facture of cortisone should not be undertaken in 1949 have all been answered.
The answers to the first three are obvious. The patent problem, number (4),
has been solved by the Research Corporation of New York through an
agreement among four large manufacturing companies and the Research
Corporation. This agreement allows the mutual use of all patents.
   The answer to question (5) will require brief discussion. It has been men-
tioned that in 1948 it was expected that cortisone would be employed for the
treatment of Addison’s disease and that it might be useful in trauma including
burns and in some types of infection, but the demonstration that cortisone
would have wide application in rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatic fever, and
in the collagen diseases came as a surprise to many of those interested. This
demonstration produced a situation which was quite different from the se-
quence of events associated with the isolation and use of the hormones from
other glands of internal secretion.
   For example: An extract of the adrenal medulla was known to increase
blood pressure and no one was surprised when crystalline epinephrine was
shown to do the same thing. Desiccated thyroid substance increased the basal
metabolic rate, and crystalline thyroxine possessed this same activity. An
extract of the pancreas lowered the concentration of blood sugar, and crystal-
line insulin is standardized by determination of its effect on blood sugar. But
no one had shown that an extract of the adrenal cortex could influence the
symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatic fever and asthma, and when it
was announced that cortisone possessed unusual physiologic activity which
was not associated with any known function of the adrenal cortex, there was
a tendency to regard cortisone not as a hormone of the adrenal cortex but
rather as a pharmacologic agent which was a member of a large and well-
known group of compounds - the steroids.
   This viewpoint, taken together with the element of surprise, immediately
led many investigators to believe that other surprises were just around the
comer and that many other compounds would be found which were as good
as or better than cortisone. This trend was unfortunate for it tended to re-
move cortisone from its rightful place among those few agents which are
recognized as hormones. Epinephrine, thyroxine, insulin, and parathyroid
hormone are physiologically active compounds which Nature has developed


 278                          1950 E.C.KENDALL

 and used during past ages; something just as good has not been found to
 replace any one of them. It is highly improbable that any product ever will
 be found which can be used in place of cortisone and the closely related com-
 pound F. At any rate, no substitute is known today, and all of the most
 promising compounds have been tested28 (Figs. 2, 3, 4, and 5).
    Cortisone now is being produced at a rate of many kilograms a month
 by Merck and Co., Inc. To the present all of it has been prepared from the
 bile of beef and sheep. There is a limit, however, to the amount of bile that
 can be collected, so that other more abundant starting material must be
 found. The next most likely source for starting materials are compounds
 found in plants, and some of those grown in Mexico may be used in the near
 future.
    The most satisfactory method for the production of cortisone would be
 by total synthesis from simple organic compounds, but to build up cortisone
 from such material is a major problem in organic chemistry, and it will re-
 quire patient and persistent labor for several years. I am confident, however,
 that it will be accomplished.
    Improvements in the process for the preparation of cortisone from bile
 may be expected. I have already mentioned that in 1947 Dr. Sarett discov-
ered a practical procedure for the introduction of a hydroxyl group at posi-
 tion 17 (Fig. 6). My associates, Drs. Colton, Nes, Van Dorp, Mason, and
 I now have found another series of reactions by which this step can be ac-
 complished 29, and I refer to it now because it illustrates in a striking manner
 the interplay of forces which influence the reactivity of various parts of the
 steroid nucleus.
    When pregnanolone with the ketone group at C(20) is brominated the
 first substitution with bromine is at C(17) . But if the same compound with
 an additional ketone group at C(11) , an atom of bromine at C(12) and an
 acetate group at C(21) is brominated, the first atom of bromine enters at
 C(21) . The second atom of bromine apparently substitutes the atom of hy-
 drogen at C(17) but the presence of the substituents at 11, 12, and 21 activates
 this atom of bromine to such an extent that dehydrobromination and forma-
 tion of a double bond        occurs spontaneously. This in turn increases the
 reactivity of C(15), and bromine is substituted for hydrogen at this position.
 The product is a 12,15,21-tribromo compound which is highly reactive and
 furnishes a short and convenient method for introduction of the hydroxyl
 group at C(17) without the use of osmium tetroxide (Figs.7, 8, 9).






    DEVELOPMENT OF CORTISONE AS THE RAPEUTICAGENT                                281




                                             E                            D
Fig. 7. Bromination of                                                          in an-
hydrous acetic acid with hydrogen bromide as catalyst affords two diastereoisomeric
compounds B and C with bromine at positions 12 and 21. Further bromination results
in substitution presumably at 17 (Formula D), and dehydrobromination with formation
of the     double bond (Formula E). Position 15 is then readily substituted to give the
                                        compound (Formula I).




atoms of bromine (II). Deacetylation in boiling dilute aqueous methanolic hydro-
chloric acid affords the                   compound (III) which is epoxidized (IV),
                    acetylated at C(21) and oxidized at position 3.


282                            1950 E.C.KENDALL




Fig. 9. Reductive removal of the bromine at C(12) is necessary to permit cleavage of
the 16,17-epoxide with hydrogen bromide to give VIII. Similar removal of the
bromine at C(16) affords 4,5-dihydrocortisone which is readily converted into cortisone
by bromination at C(4) and dehydrobromination through formation of a hydrazone
                                         at C(3).

   The other four alterations by which desoxycholic acid is converted into
cortisone are shown in Figs. 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. Crystalline cortisone is
shown in Fig. 15.
   I shall venture a word about the future place of cortisone in clinical medi-
cine. There is no doubt that the use of this hormone of the adrenal cortex will
continue to increase. Its effect is unique in rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatic
fever, asthma and hay fever, and other allergic conditions You also are
familiar with the use of cortisone in periarteritis nodosa, lupus-erythematosus,
pemphigus, psoriasis, and other intractable skin diseases, iritis and other
diseases of the eye . I shall not discuss the clinical phases of cortisone in
                     3 0



detail but I should like to report on a recent important advance in the meth-
od of administration of this compound, namely by mouth.
   Many years ago the observation was made in my laboratory that an ex-
tract of the adrenal cortex added to the drinking water of adrenalectomized
rats was more effective than the same amount of extract given by injection.
It has now been shown, at the Mayo Clinic and elsewhere, that 100 mg of
cortisone given by mouth in four tablets of 25 mg each throughout the day


    DEVELOPMENT OF CORTISONE AS THE RAPEUTICAGENT                              283




Fig. 10. The conversion of desoxycholic acid involves five alterations. These are in-
                         dicated in Figs. 11, 12,13, and 14.




Fig. II. The preparation of cortisone from desoxycholic acid requires thirty steps.


284                             1950   E.C.KENDALL




Fig. 12. Alteration 1. Removal of oxygen from C (12) and introduction of oxygen at
C (11) . The hydroxyl group at C(3) of methyl desoxycholate is benzoylated, the hy-
droxyl group at C(12) is converted to a ketone and the      double bond is formed with
selenium dioxide. After hydrolysis in dilute warm alkali the
                 acid is separated and esterified with methanol. Reduction of the C(12)
ketone to the hydroxyl group and treatment in a cold two-phase system of chloroform
and concentrated hydrochloric acid replaces the C (12) hydroxyl group with chlorine.
Dehydrochlorination in the same solvent with aqueous sodium bicarbonate forms the
3,9-epoxide with       double bond. Bromination affords a dibromo derivative in which
the atom of bromine at C(11) is almost quantitatively replaced by the ketone group
and the bromine at C(12) is not affected. After removal of the bromine at C (12) either
with zinc or by the Grignard reagent during formation of 24,24-diphenyl-das-cholene,
the 3,9-epoxide is opened with hydrogen bromide at 0º. The product is methyl
hydroxy-II-keto-12a-bromocholanate        or       3a-hydroxy-II-keto-12a-bromo-24,24-di-



                                                                                      32
is just as effective as 100 mg of cortisone given in one dose in the muscle .
This observation is difficult to explain unless a large part of the injected
material is absorbed rapidly and excreted rapidly. Absorption from the ali-
mentary tract may be less efficient but nevertheless the distribution and
utilization of cortisone in the body may be more uniform and continuous
when it is given by the enteral route. It is intended to investigate the factors
involved, but whatever the final explanation, oral administration of cortisone
will be welcomed by both patient and physician.
  There is another important aspect relating to the method of administration
which should be mentioned. I refer to so-called side reactions. It is to be ex-
pected that large amounts of cortisone injected daily are more likely to pro-


   D E V E L O P M E N T O F C O R T I S O N E A S T H E R A P E U T I C A G E N T   2 8 5




Fig. 13. Alterations 2 and 3. Removal of side chain and formation of 20,21-ketol acetate.
The 24,24-diphenyl-12α-bromO-Aza-cholene is brominated at C (22) and dehydrobro-
minated to form the diene structure in the side chain. The presence of the diene
increases the reactivity of C(21) which is readily brominated with bromosuccinimide.
The C(21) bromo compound is converted to the 21-acetate and ozonation affords
diacetoxy-11,20-diketo-12a-bromopregnane. The formation of the diene and oxidative
                            31
removal of the side chain is the only step not devised in the laboratory of the Mayo
                                     Foundation.


duce the signs and symptoms of overdosage than are minimal effective doses
administered more frequently. It has been observed that when cortisone has
been given orally in tablets of 25 mg each, the significant signs of overdosage
may not appear even after prolonged administration.
  On November 1, 1950, cortisone was made available to physicians of the
United States through drug supply houses. It then assumed its place as a
therapeutic agent among the many other new drugs which recently have
been developed. But cortisone will be unique, for it is new only in the sense
that it has been made available. From the time, ages ago, when cortisone was
first made in the adrenal cortex it has continued to serve as a powerful agent
in health and disease. Today the chemical structure of cortisone is known in
every detail but one more chapter remains to be written. What physiologic
processes are modified by cortisone and how this influence is exerted are
matters still locked within this hormone of the adrenal cortex. Said Shakes-
peare’s soothsayer, "In Nature’s infinite book of secrecy a little I can read."


                               1950 E. C. KENDALL




Fig. 14. Alteration 4. Formation of a     double bond. Bromination at C(4) and dehy-
drobromination through the activating influence of the 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone
at C(3) followed by restoration of the ketone group with pyruvic acid affords cortisone.
  Alteration 5. Introduction of a hydroxyl group at C (17) is described (Figs. 7,8,9).




                             Fig. 15. Crystals of cortisone.


    D E V E L O P M E N T O F C O R T I S O N E A S T H E R A P E U T I C A G E N T   2 8 7

 1. F. A. Hartman and K. A. Brownell, The hormone of the adrenal cortex, Science,
    72 (1930) 76.
 2. W. W. Swingle and J. J. Pfiffner, The revival of comatose adrenalectomized cats
    with an extract of the suprarenal cortex, Science, 72 (1930) 75-76.
 3. H. L. Mason, C. S. Myers, and E. C. Kendall, The chemistry of crystalline sub-
    stances isolated from the suprarenal gland, J. Biol. Chem., 114 (1936) 613-631.
 4. O. Wintersteiner and J. J. Pfiffner, Chemical studies on the adrenal cortex. III.
    Isolation of two new physiologically inactive compounds, J. Biol. Chem., 116
     (1936) 291-305.
  5. T. Reichstein, Über Bestandteile der Nebennieren-Rinde. VI. Trennungsmethoden
     sowie Isolierung der Substanzen Fa, H und J, Helv.Chim. Acta, 19 (1936) 1107-1126.
  6. H. L. Mason, W. M. Hoehn, and E. C. Kendall, Chemical studies of the suprarenal
     cortex. IV. Structures of compounds C, D, E, F, and G, J. Biol. Chem., 124 (1938)
     459-474.
  7. T. Reichstein and C. W. Shoppee, The hormones of the adrenal cortex. In R. S.
     Harris and K. V. Thimann, Vitamins and Hormones, Academic Press, New York.
     1943, vol. I, PP. 345-413.
  8. H. L. Mason, W. M. Hoehn, B. F. McKenzie, and E. C. Kendall, Chemical studies
     of the suprarenal cortex. III. The structures of compounds A, B and H, J. Biol.
    Chem., 120(1937) 719-741.
  9. E. C. Kendall, The adrenal cortex, Arch. Pathol., 32  (1941) 474-501.
10. D. J. Ingle and M. H. Kuizenga, The relative potency of some adrenal cortical
    steroids in the muscle-work test, Endocrinology, 36 (1945) 218-226.
 11. L. H. Ettelson, Inability of desoxycorticosterone acetate to protect adrenal-
      ectomized rats against typhoid vaccine, Endocrinology, 27 (1940) 340-342.
 12. M. Steiger and T. Reicktein, Desoxy-cortico-sterone (21-Oxy-progesteron) aus
                                    Helv. Chim. Acta, 20 (1937) 1164-1179.
 13. G. W. Thorn and L. L. Engel, The effect of sex hormones on the renal excretion
     of electrolytes, J. Exptl. Med., 68 (1938) 299-312.
 14. D. Kuhlmann, C. Ragan, J. W. Ferrebee, D. W. Atchley, and R. F. Loeb, Toxic
     effects of desoxycorticosterone esters in dogs, Science, 90 (1939) 496-497.
 15. C. Ragan, J. W. Ferrebee, P. Phyfe, D. W. Atchley, and R. F. Loeb, A syndrome
     of polydipsia and polyuria induced in normal animals by desoxycorticosterone
     acetate, Am. J. Physiol., 131 (1940) 73-78.
 16. C. N. H. Long, B. Katzin, and E. G. Fry, The adrenal cortex and carbohydrate
     metabolism, Endocrinology, 26 (1940) 309-344.
 17. A. Lardon and T. Reichstein, Über Bestandteile der Nebennierenrinde und ver-
     wandte Stoffe. Teilsynthese des II-Dehydro-corticosterons, Helv. Chim. Acta, 26
     (1943) 747-755.
 18. E. C. Kendall, Steroids derived from the bile acids: 3,9-epoxy-d            acid,
     an intermediate in the partial synthesis of dehydrocorticosterone. In G. Pincus,
     Recent Progress in Hormone Research, Academic Press, New York, 1947, Vol. I,
     pp. 65-81.
 19. E. C. Kendall; The chemistry and partial synthesis of adrenal steroids, Ann. N. Y.
     Acad. Sci., 50 (1949) 540-547.


288                             1950    E.C.KENDALL


20. L. A. Lewis and I. H. Page, Studies on the protective power of adrenal extract
    and steroids against bacteria1 toxins in adrenalectomized rats, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.,
    50(1949) 547-551.
21. R. I. Dorfman, The comparative activities of II-dehydrocorticosterone isolated
      from the adrenal gland and that produced synthetically, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 50
    (1949)551-553
22. E. H. Venning, Biological activity of synthetic II-dehydrocorticosterone acetate,
    Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 50 (1949) 553-555.
23. R. G. Sprague, C. F. Gastineau, H. L. Mason, and M. H. Power, Effects of syn-
    thetic II-dehydrocorticosterone (compound A) in a subject with Addison’s
    disease, Am. J. Med., 4 (1948) 175-185.
24. L. H. Sarett, A new method for the preparation of
    J. Am. Chem. Soc., 70 (1948) 1454-1458.
25. P. S. Hench, E. C. Kendall, C. H. Slocumb, and H. F. Polley, The effect of a
    hormone of the adrenal cortex (17-hydroxy-II-dehydrocorticosterone:compound
    E) and of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone on rheumatoid arthritis. (Prelim.
    Rept.), Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 24 (1949) 181-197.
26. L. H. Sarrett, The partial synthesis of dehydrocorticosterone acetate, J. Am. Chem.
    Soc., 68(1946) 2478-2483.
27. V. R. Mattox and E. C. Kendall, Steroids derived from bile acids. XII. Adrenal
    cortical hormones. Introduction of double bond, J.Bol.Chem., 188 (1931) 287-297.
28. H. F. Polley and H. L. Mason, Rheumatoid arthritis: effects of certain steroids
    other than cortisone and of some adrenal cortex extracts, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 143
    (1950) 1474-1481.
29. F. B. Colton, W. R. Nes, D. van Dorp, H. L. Mason, and E. C. Kendall, Introduc-
     tion of the hydroxyl group at position 17 in the partial synthesis of cortisone.
     (Read before the 118th National Meeting of the American Chemical Society, Chicago
     Illinois, September 8, 1950.)
30. Symposium on cortisone and ACTH in clinical medicine, Proc. Staff Meetings
     Mayo Clinic, 25 (1950) 474-502.
31. Ch. Meystre, H. Frey, A. Wettstein, and K. Miescher, über Steroide. 39. Ein
     einfacher Abbau der Gallensauren-Seitenkette zur Methylketonstufe, Helv. Chim.
     Acta, 27 (1944) 1815-1824.
32. R. H. Freyberg, C. T. Traeger, C. H. Adams, T. Kuscu, H. Wainerdi, and I. Bo-
     nomo, Effectiveness of cortisone administered orally, Science. 112 (1950) 429.
