314


FROM MOLECULAR PATTERNS TO
MORPHOGENESIS
THE LESSONS FROM DROSOPHILA

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1995

by
E RIC WIESCHAUS

Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton,
NJ 08544, USA


INTRODUCTION

During development, cells in an embryo face two major tasks. First they must
be programmed to form specific parts of the body, and second they must rea-
lize those fates by altering their shape, position and patterns of gene expres-
sion. Both the determination of cell fate and the corresponding alterations
in form occur progressively during development. The organism that results
from this process contains a wide variety of different cell types and functions,
arranged in a complex spatial pattern. In Drosophila this final pattern is
achieved about 20 hours after fertilization, when the embryo has formed a
larva of 40,000 cells. The most obvious external feature of this larva is a seg-
mentally repeated pattern of hairs and denticles secreted by the underlying
epidermis. Beneath these hypodermal cells are a complex array of muscles
also arranged in a segmentally repeated fashion. Internal to this somatic
musculature are other mesodermal derivatives, as well as equally complex
structures and organs of endodermal origin. By following the development
of individual cells, it has been possible to trace the precursors for each struc-
ture in the differentiated larva back to the earliest cellular stages in the
embryo (Poulson, 1950, Campos-Ortega and Hartenstein, 1985). In
Drosophila this stage (the “blastoderm”) consists of an oblong embryo
about half a millimeter in length, with about 100 cells along the future AP
axis and 40 along the DV axis. The epidermis is formed by cells on the late-
ral side of the embryo, the muscles and other mesodermal derivatives are for-
med from a stripe of cells on the ventral side of the blastoderm, and the
endodermal cells from two groups of precursors at the anterior and poste-
rior ends of the embryo.
   At the blastoderm stage, all these cells are similar in size and morphology.
A few minutes later, at the onset of gastrulation, the mesodermal precursors
initiate cell shapes changes that carry them into the interior of the embryo
 (reviewed in Leptin, 1995). Similar changes in cellular morphology then
internalize the endodermal cells. These morphogenetic movements are the
first of many examples where cells in an embryo change their shape in


                                  Eric Wieschaus                             315


response to the developmental programs that control their fate. The large
size of cells at gastrulation and the rapidity of these changes give gastrulation
a particularly strong visual impact. The cellular mechanisms underlying
these movements, however, utilize many of the same cytoskeletal and adhesi-
ve structures found in all cells. The pathway between a particular cell fate
decision and the mechanisms controlling cell form have not yet been worked
out in detail in any organism.
   The past 15 years have seen remarkable advances in our understanding of
how the changing pattern of gene activity in the Drosophila embryo directs
cells to their final fates. These advances have been produced by an unpreced-
ented combination of molecular biology and classical genetics. At this point
many of the genes that control cell fate have been cloned and their basic cel-
lular roles are understood. In principle, this information provides an ideal
starting point to address how cell fate is translated into cell form. This has
proven more difficult, largely because the genetic strategies that work so well
in elucidating cell fates have met unanticipated obstacles in the elucidation
of cell form. In today’s talk, I would like to review the general picture that
has emerged from our studies on how genes control cell fate in the
Drosophila embryo, and examine how the activity of those genes might be
related to the constantly changing form of the embryo.




THE HEIDELBERG MUTAGENESIS SCREENS.

It was to address both cell fate and cell form that Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard
and I began the mutagenesis experiments honored in Stockholm this week.
In the 1970’s when we were finishing our graduate studies in Base1 and
Tübingen, it was clear that development, like all processes in living cells,
depended on genes and gene products. Not only was the relationship bet-
ween DNA, RNA and protein known, but the analysis of several bacterial ope-
rons made it clear that gene activities could be controlled temporally and
spatially. Almost everyone believed that such temporal and spatial control
might explain the sequence of events giving rise to embryonic pattern. The
analysis of such genes seemed formidable, however. Molecular cloning was in
its infancy and there were no obvious tools for analyzing single genes in high-
er eukaryotes. What made the matter worse was the enormous diversity of
genes and gene products present in an embryo. RNA complexity experi-
ments estimated the number of different RNA species to be between 10,000
and 50,000 (reviewed in Davidson, 1986). These RNAs were expressed at
varying levels and in a changing pattern as the embryo progressed through
various stages. How could one sort out which gene products were essential
for particular steps in development, how could the relevant genes and
proteins be identified? To Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard and me, the genetic
techniques that had been established in Drosophila over the preceding sixty
years seemed to offer the best approach.


316                                        Physiology or Medicine 1995


  The particular mutagenesis strategy we adopted depended on two facts
established about the Drosophil a genome in the early 1970s. First, mutagen-
esis experiments involving small, cytologically defined chromosomal regions
(Judd et al., 1972) suggested that, regardless of the total molecular com-
plexity of the Drosophil a genome, only about 5000 genes present in the DNA
were essential for viability under laboratory conditions. This number set an
upper limit on the genes essential for embryonic development. Second, a


Table 1:   Results of Heidelberg Mutagenesis Experiments. Numbers are totals for experiments on thr X chromoso-
me and the two major autosomes. The number of mutations in the various classes have been corrected using

the Poisson distribution to account for those lines containing multiple mutations.




      Results of mutagenesis screens
           Total lines established and tested                                           26978
                         Lethal mutations                                                18136
      Mutations causing embryonic lethality                                                  4332
  Mutations causing embryonic phenotypes                                                         580
            Complementation Groups (Genes)                                                        139
detailed analysis of flies monosomic or trisomic for various genomic regions
(Lindsley et al., 1972) suggested that although flies are normally diploid, a
single copy of most genes was sufficient for viability. This meant that most
loss-of-function mutations would be recessive and could therefore be main-
tained in heterozygous stocks. These two observations suggested that the
requirements for gene activity during Drosophila embryogenesis could be
surveyed in large scale (but limited) mutagenesis experiments. If transcrip-
tion of a gene was essential for embryonic development, homozygous embry-
os should develop abnormally when that gene was eliminated. If the gene
played a specific role in patterning or cell fate, most structures in the affec-
ted embryo would be normal; the defects limited to specific regions of the
body or specific tissues. Based on these defects, it should be possible to
reconstruct the normal role of each gene. In that view, all that was required
for a saturating survey of development was to make enough mutant lines,
and to be able to recognize defects by looking at embryos.


                                 Eric Wieschaus                            317


   Because flies are diploid and most mutations are recessive, the mutagene-
sis scheme we settled on involved establishing inbred lines from single indi-
vidual carrying mutagenized chromosomes (Fig. 1). In two generations, this




                          Balancer




   cn bw*00                 cn bw*
                           Balancer


                   cn w *
                   cn bw*


inbreeding produces homozygotes whose development can be compared
with their heterozygous siblings. To obtain mutations in most or all genes in
 the genome, we had to establish enough mutagenized lines to hit most genes
 several times. Although Christiane and I carried out preliminary mutagene-
 sis runs ourselves, the final experiments were extremely labor intensive and
were completed with the help of Gerd Jürgens and Hildegard Kluding
 (Nüsslein-Volhard and Wieschaus, 1980; Nüsslein-Volhard et al., 1984;
Jürgens et al., 1984; Wieschaus et al., 1984). Over the course of a year (from
 fall of 1979 to summer of 1980), we established 27,000 inbred lines. These
 lines contained an estimated 18,000 independently induced mutations, each
 causing lethality at some point during the life cycle of the animal (Table 1).
 Only about a quarter of these lethal mutations prevented homozygous
 embryos from hatching to the larval stage, and only about 2. 5% caused visi-
 ble alterations in the external morphology of the embryo. These 580 muta-
 tions could be assigned by complementation tests to one of 139 different
 genes. The relative smallness of this final number was an important result,
 since it meant that each gene could be characterized in some detail. By exa-
 mining mutant embryos from the various stocks, Christiane and I were able
 to establish a general picture of how gene activity in the embryo directs the
 development of individual cells.


318                         Physiology or Medicine 1995


   In all species, many of the gene products present in the embryo are sup-
plied by the mother during oogenesis. These include most RNAs and pro-
teins needed for normal cell functions during early stages, as well as certain
inhomogeneities that are used to define initial axes. In our experiments,
homozygous embryos are derived from mothers that have a wild-type allele.
Consequently, the Heidelberg mutagenesis screens missed all maternally
supplied gene products. The 139 genes identified represent only those genes
whose products must be supplied by the embryo’s own transcription. We the-
refore explained the large number of the RNA and protein species in the
embryo as largely derived from maternal supplies.
   The fact that zygotically required transcripts were relatively rare suggested
that they might play specialized roles in development. One possibility was
that zygotic transcription allows particular gene products to be expressed in
one cell and not in its immediate neighbors, at particular times and not
others. This would contrast with the ubiquitous distribution generally ob-
served for maternally derived transcripts. In this view, the embryo would use
transcription to elaborate differences between adjacent cell populations, dif-
ferences that would ultimately account for the variety of cells fates and cell
behaviors observed in the embryo after the blastoderm stage.


THE HEIDELBERG MUTANT COLLECTION: A SURVEY OF ZYGOTIC
GENE ACTMTIES.

One historical coincidence that contributed to the significance of the
Heidelberg screens was the almost simultaneous development of molecular
techniques that allowed genes to be cloned based on their genetic position.
After publication of our screen, a number of Drosophila labs began a con-
certed effort to clone the genes identified by the mutations. This effort has
continued over the past ten years and is still going on today. Of 139 lines that
produce phenotypes, 20 were single hits, had relatively nondescript pheno-
types and were never given names or further characterized. Most were
eventually lost. Of the remaining 119, an informal survey of the Drosophila
database suggests that 75 have been cloned and their expression patterns
examined in embryos. These molecular analyses, coupled with phenotypic
descriptions begun in Heidelberg have generated an increasingly detailed
view of the kind of functions supplied by zygotic transcripts in the Drosophila
embryo.
   In general, the greatest insights into developmental mechanism came
when a number of different Heidelberg genes could be grouped together
because they affected the same developmental process. Sometimes, as in the
segmentation series (Nüsslein-Volhard and Wieschaus, 1980) peculiarities of
the phenotype of individual genes suggested regulatory hierarchies between
members of the group (Fig. 2). In other cases (e. g., armadillo and wingless,
Riggleman et al.), similar phenotypes pointed to unanticipated relationships
between previously characterized proteins.


                                                 Eric Wieschaus




Figure 2. Phenotypes of Mutations affecting   segmental pattern. The size and spacing of the pattern deletions in
mutant embryos at the end of development allows extrapolation back to requirements for gene activities at
blastoderm   stage. Segmentation genes can be grouped into threi: classes: mutations in gap genes show large
contiguous deletions in the pattern, mutations in pair-rule genes show pattern deletions spaced at double
segment intervals, and mutations in segment polarity genes cause pattern deletions in each segment. One
example is shown for each class.



   One of the most striking features of the Heidelberg mutant collection was
the restricted nature of the phenotypes. For a given line, certain cell types or
regions are affected in the mutant embryo, other cell types and regions are
normal. This phenotypic specificity was reinforced by molecular data once
the various Heidelberg genes had been cloned. Most genes show highly regu-
lated patterns of expression such that transcripts accumulate only in those
regions and cell types where they are needed. Defects associated with a given
mutant stock were generally different from those of other stocks, and expres-
sion patterns show a corresponding diversity. The two observations together
suggest that most of the genes play unique roles at morphologically distinct
steps in development.
   Mutants usually affect areas of the embryo, rather than specific cell types.
These areas generally do not correspond to obvious subdivisions and could
not have been predicted based on morphological considerations alone.
Obvious examples of these regional specificities are provided by the genes
affecting segmentation: one could not have predicted the domains of gap
gene expression, the existence of pair rule phenotypes, or the precise struc-
tures duplicated in segment polarity mutants. Because the region affected by
a particular gene ultimately gives rise to a variety of different cell types, the
genes seem to define positions or spatial coordinates, rather than tissues or
organs.


320                                         Physiology or Medicine 1995


   Genes often are used several times again during development. Most
segmentation genes, for example, are used later in the nervous system and
in other tissues as well (e.g. Krüppel in Maipighian tubules, Knipple et al.,
1985). This pleiotropy is not limited to genes controlling segmental pattern.
Many of the genes controlling dorsal-ventral patterning at the blastoderm
stage are used again at specific times in development. Even a gene like twist
that ultimately seems specific for muscle differentiation, shows a more com-
plicated, broader expression pattern at the blastoderm stage, suggesting a
role in determining ventral fates in general, rather than specific mesodermal
identities. These features make it difficult to relate early expression patterns
of particular genes to final aspects of differentiation. Again, these observa-
tions are consistent with a role for the genes in programming regions or
fates, rather than defining differentiated cell types per se.
   More that half of the 75 cloned genes encode transcription factors, judg-
ing from the presence of DNA binding motifs, or their homology to known
vertebrate or yeast transcription factors (Fig. 3). Their DNA binding pro-
perties might allow them to control expression of many different target




Figure 3.   Cellular Function   of Heidelberg Mutations. Based on the sequence of 75 cloned genes, most of the loci
identified in Heidelberg encode transcription factors, or cell signals and receptors.



genes. If used at various stages of development and in                               different combination
with other genes, they might therefore affect a variety                              of different develop-
mental pathways. Most of the cloned genes which are                                  not transcription fac-
tors are cell surface signals or receptors. Some of these                            signaling factors may


                                  Eric Wieschaus                             321


have immediate consequences on cell behaviors (see below), but most of this
signaling ultimately feeds back on positional identities not directly related to
final differentiated states.


GENES MISSED IN THE HEIDELBERG SCREENS: THE CONTROL OF
CELL FORM

During the period when patterns of cell fate are being established, the
embryo undergoes dramatic morphological changes. The final stages of cleav-
age occur when the embryo is still a syncytium. Once the number of nuclei
have reached 6,000, they stop dividing and cell membranes are pulled down
between individual nuclei. This process of cellularization involves a major
reorganization of the embryonic cytoskeleton and takes about an hour.
When it is completed, the embryo consists of 6,000 individual cells that are
still morphologically identical. They are molecularly different however, due
to expression of many of the 139 genes and transcription factors described
in the previous section. At the onset of gastrulation, these differences are
translated into changes of cell shape that result in the invagination of meso-
derm or endoderm during gastrulation. Overall, the 90 minutes from com-
pletion of cleavage through early gastrulation represents the major period of
morphological transformation that occurs in the Drosophila embryo.
   What is the relationship between these morphological changes and the
genes that we identified in the Heidelberg screens? When embryos from
each of the 139 mutant stock were examined, we found that even the earli-
est acting mutants showed no morphological defects before the onset of gas-
tulation. This suggested that the products of zygotic transcription were irrel-
evant for the early morphological events of cleavage and cellularization, and
were only required when cells in individual regions of the embryos began
their regionally specific cell shape changes. One way to test this was to block
all new RNA synthesis by injecting early embryos with drugs that inhibit RNA
polymerase. To our consternation, work from several labs (Arking and
Parente, 1980, Edgar et al., 1986) indicated that such treatment causes
embryos to become abnormal at the onset of cellularization, an hour before
the earliest defects produced by any of the Heidelberg mutants. These expe-
riments provided the first suggestion that the Heidelberg screens may have
missed early acting, morphologically important genes.
   To identify such genes, we developed a system of translocation crosses to
generate embryos deficient for defined chromosomal regions(Wieschaus
and Sweeton, 1988; Merrill et al., 1988). Using this system, it was possible to
work our way through the entire genome in a small number of crosses, ex-
amining deficiency embryos at early stages to detect relatively subtle devia-
tions in morphology. These experiments identified seven regions (or genes)
which taken together account for the defects observed in drug treated
embryos. These genes were identified because of their effects on early mor-
phology rather than viability or overall pattern at the end of embryonic devel-


322                           Physiology or Medicine 1995


opment. They therefore represent a different sampling of the transcrip-
tional requirements than the Heidelberg loci. Three of these seven genes
have now been cloned (James and Vincent, 1986; Rose and Wieschaus, 1992;
Schejter and Wieschaus, 1993). Unlike the Heidelberg genes, they do not
encode transcription factors or components of a cell signaling system.
Instead all three are cytoplasmic proteins associated with the cytoskeleton
(Schejter and Wieschaus, 1993, Postner and Wieschaus, 1994).
   Genes affecting morphology during gastrulation also appear to have been
missed in the Heidelberg screens (Leptin, 1995). For example, the two
Heidelberg genes absolutely required for mesodermal programming are
twist and snail. Both have been cloned and have been shown to encode
transcription factors (Boulay et al., 1987, Thisse et al., 1988). Immediately
before gastrulation, these genes are expressed in the nuclei of mesodermal
precursors on the ventral side of the blastoderm. When either gene is mu-
tated, no cells are programmed to mesoderm and no ventral furrow forms.
Thus, twist and snail not only direct blastoderm cells to a mesodermal cell
fate, they have an immediate read-out in terms of mesodermal cell behavior.
Since they are transcription factors, they must do this by controlling the
expression of other genes.
   What are these downstream targets? If they produced phenotypes visible
in the final cuticle, such genes would have been detected in the Heidelberg
screens. One candidate for such a target is folded gastrulation. In fog mutant
embryos, the cell shape changes of the ventral furrow are delayed and
uncoordinated. Wild type cells in the ventral furrow express fog immediately
before changing their shape (Costa et al, 1994). When ectopically expressed
outside the ventral furrow primordium, fog is capable of eliciting those same
initial cell shape changes, even in cells that lack twist or snail or any other fac-
tors normally associated with mesodermal fate (Morize et al, in prep.) All
this makes folded gastrulation an excellent downstream target for twist and
snail, one whose expression might account for the cell shape changes associ-
ated with mesodermal programming.
   Folded gastrulation is the only gene detected in the Heidelberg screen
(other than twist and snail) that affects ventral furrow formation. Because fog
embryos make slow uncoordinated invaginations, whereas twi or sna e m -
bryos make no ventral furrow at all, fog cannot be the only target of twist and
snail. Other genes not detected in Heidelberg must account for the diffe-
rence between the twi, snail and fog phenotypes, and for the delayed meso-
dermal invagination that still occurs in a fog mutant. These target genes may
not have been detected in Heidelberg because they may not be essential for
mesoderm invagination, as long as the embryo has a wild type alleles of fog.
They might however have been detected if mutant embryos had been scored
directly for morphological defects during gastrulation itself. Given the large
number of stocks examined, this was not possible in the Heidelberg mutat-
genesis experiments. On the other hand, relevant chromosomal regions
might be identified using translocation crosses, since only a small number of


                                           Eric Wieschaus                                         323


such crosses are needed to. examine the effects of most chromosomal
regions. Ongoing experiments of this kind in my lab suggest that there are
regions that affect ventral furrow formation in ways that cannot be explained
by any Heidelberg genes. Most of these morphological effects appear to be
transient, similar to the case in fog mutant embry os, embryos that are dele-,
ted for these genes eventually internalize their mesoderm. It is therefore pos-
sible that point mutations in genes responsible for these early morphological
effects may not cause lethality or easily visible effects on final morphology.


THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CELL FATE AND CELL FORM.

The efficiency with which mutagenesis screens identify mutations affecting
cell fate but not cell form may point to a difference in the way the two pro-
cesses are controlled. The existence of mutations affecting cell fate suggests
that patterning functions are not redundant, each gene being absolutely
essential for normal development. Having only single, non-redundant fac-
tors controlling cell fate might avoid ambiguity in determined states; in this
view, a precise cell by cell pattern of gene expression may not be as impor-
tant as having at least some cells unambiguously programmed to each fate.
Once a cell choice has been made, it must be realized in morphological
terms. At this point there may be an enormous advantage for redundancy,
since multiple pathways might ensure that a particular fate once chosen is
actually achieved. This redundancy need not be total; elimination of a sin-
gle target pathway may causes subtle deviations in the process similar in mag-
nitude to the defects observed in the ventral furrows of fog embryos. In this
view, cell shape changes at gastrulation would be the summed effect of
various targets, each of which would be necessary for the characteristic wild
type morphology, but not for the final outcome itself.
   Developmental biologist are a diverse lot; some are more interested in cell
fate and patterning, others in morphogenesis. Those interested in pattern
might focus on genes like twist and snail, since their expression at the blas-
toderm stage determines the ventral cells to become mesoderm (Fig. 4A). In




Figure 4. Contrasting views of devolopment . Panel A emphasizes programming of cells to specific cell
fates, whereas panel B emphasizes the cellular mechanisms that produce changes in morphology.


324                         Physiology or Medicine 1995


this view, genes like fog would be just one of many downstream regulators. On
the other hand, the cell shape changes that occur in mesodermal cells
during ventral furrow formation are not restricted to gastrulation. Genes like
fog are in fact expressed at other stages and in other primordia, not under con-
trol of twist and snail. Thus from the standpoint of the cellular morphology,
genes likefigbecome the central players in a research program (Fig. 4B). Fog
dependent cell shape changes may be activated in a variety of different
developmental programs by a variety of different cell fate genes, but its role
in cellular behaviour would be conserved.


CONCLUSIONS: THE POWERS AND LIMITATIONS OF THE GENETIC
APPROACH

Mutagenesis experiments are a mixture of random and biased elements.
Perhaps their strongest advantage is that we scientists have very little control
over the kind of mutations produced. Mutations occur randomly throughout
the genome, eliminating genes whether or not they have anything to do with
the process of interest. This means that the production of mutants is usually
not affected by biases about the kinds of molecules involved or the under-
lying mechanisms. Success depends on the experimenter’s ability to sort
through the mutations obtained and recognize and interpret phenotypes of
interest. It is this second step that introduces the major bias; it depends on
the individual’s response to mutant phenotypes, on his or her ability to
understand the nature of the defect and the proper context in which it can
be described. Because we used a dual observation microscope, Christiane
and I were often simultaneously confronted with particular phenotype for
the first time. It was not always easy to agree about defects, or to decide why
a particular stock was interesting. Because they were often the product of
intense discussions, our final descriptions benefited from a dual input.
However, Christiane and I were both primarily interested in spatial patterns
and gross morphological aspect of embryogenesis. Mutations affecting finer
aspects of cell differentiation were certainly produced in Heidelberg, but
even if they had caused embryonic lethality, they would have been discarded.
   In addition to the bias introduced by experimenters, genetic screens are
inherently biased by the organism. Drosophila embryos develop rapidly and
most gene products are supplied by maternal rather than zygotic transcrip-
tions. Development is highly regulative and cell signaling pathways ensure
that a constant final morphology is achieved even when starting situations
are different. One obvious limitation of the Heidelberg screen is that even
though we were interested in broad aspects of morphology and early cell
shape changes, we scored only final differentiation, and there only cuticle
pattern. Because the hypodermal cells that secrete cuticle represent a large
fraction of the blastoderm, we assumed that it would be not be possible to
cause morphological changes at gastrulation without altering final morpho-
logy. Our later experiments suggest that this may not be true. Thus although


                                         Eric Wieschaus                                     325


we were not necessarily biased between mutations affecting cell fate and cell
form, most genes actually detected altered fate, perhaps because effects on
form in Drosophila are often more transient.
   It is possible that different results would have been obtained had we cho-
sen a different organism. One is curious whether nematodes, which show,
extraordinarily constant lineages, would be more subject to subtle perturba-
tions in the movement and positioning of cells than in Drosophila. Develop-
ment in vertebrates on the other hand has been shown to be much more
variable in terms of cell lineage and much more regulative in achieving con-
stant final morphologies. In that respect, the ongoing screens for mutants
in zebra fish and mice may produce a spectrum of genes more similar to that
of Drosophila.
   Of course, one of the important lessons from the Heidelberg experiments
is that speculations have little predictive value. The phenotypes and genes
actually obtained by a particular mutagenesis protocol will only be known
once the experiments are done. The same lesson applies to the ongoing ana-
lysis of Drosophila development.In spite of enormous advances made in
understanding cell fates, we do not yet know how those programs produce
constant morphology and structure. The morphologies assumed by Drosophila
cells are often very similar to those in vertebrates. Moreover, the molecules
and therefore the underlying mechanisms have probably been conserved
over the course of evolution. By bridging the connection between cell fate
and cell form in Drosophila, we may therefore also reinforce the bridges that
connect developmental studies in many different organisms.


LITERATURE CITED
POULSON, D.F. (1950) Histogenesis, organogenesis and differentiation in the embryo of
   Drosophila melanogaster (Meigen). In Biology of Drosophila (ed. M. Demerec),.pp.168-274.
   John Wiley and Sons, New York.
 CAMPOS-ORTEGA, J. A., V. Hartenstein. (1985) The embryonic development of Drosofihila
    melanogaster. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
 LEPTIN, M. (1995) Drosophila Gastrulation: from Pattern Formation to Morphogenesis.
   Annu. Rev. CellDev. Biol. 11: 189-212.
 DAVIDSON, E. (1986) Gene activity in Early Development. Academic Press, Orlando, Florida.
JUDD, B. H., M. W. SHEN, T. C. KAUFMAN, (1972) The anatomy and function of a seg-
    ment of the X-chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 71: 139-156.
 LINDSLEY D. L.; L. SANDLER, B.S. BAKER, A. T. C. CARPENTER, R. E. DENELL, J. C.
    HALL, P. C. JACOBS, G. L. G. MIKLOS, B. K. DAVIS, R. C. GETHMANN, R. W.
    HARDY, A. HESSLER, S. M. MILLER, H. NOZAWA, D. M. PARRY, M. GOULD-SOMERO,
    (1972). Segmental aneuploidy and the genetic gross structure of the Drosophila
   genome. Genetics 71: 157-184.
 NÜSSLEIN-VOLHARD, C., and E. WIESCHAUS, (1980) Mutations affecting segment
    number and polarity in Drosophila. Nature 287: 795-801.
 NÜSSLEIN-VOLHARD, C., E. WIESCHAUS, and H. KLUDING. (1984)Mutations affect-
    ing the pattern of the larval cuticle in Drosophila melanogaster. I. Zygotic loci on the
    second chromosome. Roux’s Arch. Dev. Biol. 193: 267-282.
JÜRGENS, G., H. KLUDING, C. NUSSLEIN-VOLHARD, and E. WIESCHAUS (1984)
    Mutations affecting the pattern of the larval cuticle in Drosophila melanogaster. II. Zygotic
    loci on the third chromosome. Roux’s Arch. Dev. Biol. 193: 283-295.


326                               Physiology or Medicine 1995


WIESCHAUS, E., C. NÜSSLEIN-VOLHARD, G. JÜRGENS, (1984) Mutations affecting
   the pattern of the larval cuticle in Drosophila melanogaster. Ill. Zygotic loci on the X-chro-
   mo-some and the fourth chromosome. Roux’s Arch. Dev. Biol . 193: 296-307.
RIGGLEMAN, B., P. SCHEDL, E. WIESCHAUS (1990) Spatial expression of the
   Drosophila segment polarity gene armadillo is posttranscriptionally regulated by wing-
   less. Cell 63: 549-560.
KNIPPLE, D. C., SEIFERT, U. B. ROSENBERG, A. PREISS, H. JACKLE (1985) Spatial and
   temporal patterns of Krüppel gene expression in early Drosophila embryos. Nature 317:
   40-44.
ARKING, R., A. PARENTE. (1980) Effects of RNA inhibitors on the development of
   Drosophila embryos permeabilized by a new technique. J. Exp. Zool. 212: 183-194.
EDGAR, B. A.,C. P. KIEHLE, G. SCHUBIGER (1986). Cell cycle control by the nucleo-
   cytoplasmic ratio in early Drosophila development. Cell 44, 365-372.
MERRILL, P. T. ,D. SWEETON, and E. WIESCHAUS, (1988) Requirements for autoso-
   ma1 gene activity during precellular stages of Drosophila melanogaster. Development 104:
   495-509.
WIESCHAUS, E., and D. SWEETON (1988) Requirements for X-linked zygotic gene activ-
   ity during cellularization of early Drosophila embryos. Development 104: 483-493.
JAMES, A. and A. VINCENT (1986) The spatial distribution of a blastoderm stage-specific
   mRNA from the serendipity locus of Drosophila melanogaster. Devel. Biol. 118: 474-479.
ROSE, L. S. and E. WIESCHAUS, 1992 The Drosophila cellularization gene nullo produces
   a blastoderm-specific transcript whose levels respond to the nucleocytoplasmic ratio.
   Genes &Development 6:1255-1268.
 SCHEJTER, E. D. and E. WIESCHAUS (1993) Bottleneck acts as a regulator of the micro-
   filament network governing cellularization of the Drosophila embryo. Cell 75: 373-385.
 POSTNER, M. A. and E. WIESCHAUS (1994) The nullo protein is a component of the actin-
   myosin network that mediates cellularization in Drosophila melanogaster embryos. J. Cell
    Science 107: 1863-1873.
 BOIJLAY, J.-L., C. DENNEFELD, and A. ALBERGA (1987) The Drosophila developmental
   gene snail encodes a protein with nucleic acid binding fingers. Nature 330: 395-398.
 THISSE, B., C. STOETZEL, C. GOROSTIZA-THISSE and F. PERRIN-SCHMITT (1988)
   Sequence of the twist gene and nuclear localization of its protein in endomesodermal
   cells of early Drosophila embryos. EMBO 7: 2175-2183.
 COSTA, M., E. T. WILSON and E. WIESCHAUS (1994) A putative cell signal encoded by the
   folded gastrulation gene coordinates cell shape changes during Drosophila gastrulation.
    Cell 76: 1075-1089.
 MORIZE, P., M. COSTA, S. PARKS and E. WIESCHAUS (1996) Folded                                  is
   upstream of concertina in a pathway that mediates apical flattening and constriction.
    (in preparation).
