                            E R N S T B . CH A I N


         The chemical structure of the penicillins
                       Nobel Lecture, March 20, 1946



Before beginning with the subject proper of this lecture let me give you a
few details of the historical development of the chemical work on penicillin
and its organization. Work on the purification and the structure of penicillin
was started at Oxford immediately after the extraordinary chemotherapeutic
value of the compound had been established conclusively by our group. The
initial chemical work was done by my colleague Dr. E. P. Abraham and
myself in the Department of Pathology. Towards the end of 1942 we join-
ed forces with Dr. W. Baker (now Professor of Organic Chemistry at Bris-
tol) and Sir Robert Robinson. This group of chemists - Dr. Abraham, Dr.
Baker, Sir R. Robinson and myself - have formed the nucleus of research
workers whose efforts have led to the elucidation of the chemical structure
of the penicillins and the synthesis of some of their degradation products.
The success of this work has been due to the combined efforts of all the mem-
bers of our group, and I should like you to regard me tonight merely as its
representative.
    Shortly after the chemical work had been started at Oxford, a number of
other British research centres, both academic and industrial, began similar
 studies. Of these I should like to mention in particular the Imperial College
of Science whose group was under the leadership of Dr. A. H. Cook and
Professor Sir Ian Heilbron, the chemical laboratories of Burroughs Well-
come Ltd. in which the work was directed by Dr. S. Smith, the laboratories
of Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd., and the laboratories of the firm of
 Glaxo, under the direction of Dr. F. A. Robinson.
    Simultaneously with the work in England, American chemists began an
intensive study of the structure of penicillin with the aim of quickly achiev-
 ing a synthesis. This work was carried out on a very large scale, with some-
 thing like 200 academic and industrial research chemists taking part in the
 project. Until May 1944 this work was entirely independent of the British
 effort, and we in Britain had no information about the state of the American
 investigations, except for a few fragmentary rumours.
    In 1943 the British and U.S. Governments imposed a ban on the publica-


             CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                          111

tion of all chemical work on penicillin and simultaneously negotiations were
begun between the two governments for the purpose of finding a suitable
method for a complete exchange of information between the various groups
ofworkers on both sides of the Atlantic. These negotiations were protracted,
and while they were in progress we at Oxford got on with our studies and
were able to propose the first complete structural formulae for penicillin in
October, 1943. In February, 1944, agreement for exchange of information
between the British and American workers was reached; in Britain the Med-
ical Research Council (M.R.C.) formed the "Penicillin Synthesis Committee"
to which were sent papers by British authors; in America the Office of Sci-
entific Research and Development (O.S.R.D.) delegated Dr. Hans T. Clarke
of Columbia University to co-ordinate the chemical research work on peni-
cillin in the U.S.A. and to receive monthly reports from its contractors.
These two bodies, the M.R.C. and O.S.R.D., agreed to exchange their re-
ports at monthly intervals, and in April 1944 we received the first American
reports on penicillin. As I have already mentioned, the Americans have put a
tremendous effort into the investigations on the chemistry of penicillin, and
the following groups of chemists in the U.S.A. have participated in the
project: Academic - Dr. Du Vigneaud and his collaborators, of Cornell Uni-
versity, New York, Dr. W. Bachmann of Michigan University; Dr. Wood-
ward of Harvard University. Industrial - the Merck group, who have made
the most extensive and valuable contributions in the degradation work as
 well as in the synthetic studies; the Squibb group; the Pfizer group; the
 N.R.R.L. group of the U.S. Department of Agriculture at Peoria, Illinois;
 the Abbott group; the Eli Lilly group; the Upjohn group; the Shell group;
 and others.
    We at Oxford have been greatly handicapped in our work by lack of
 material. Altogether we had about 2 g of penicillin at our disposal; of this
 1.5 g were about 50% pure and only about 500 mg were about 90% pure.
 The American workers were in a more fortunate position; the Merck group
 alone has used up many hundred grams of pure crystalline penicillin.
    The Anglo-American collaboration continued until October 1945, and
 altogether about 700 reports were sent to the coordinating government com-
 mittees. These reports contain partly work directly concerned with the deg-
 radation of the penicillins, and partly synthetic work, concerned with the
 synthesis of degradation products, intermediates and model compounds. It
 is obviously impossible to give you a complete account of all the work
 embodied in the 700 reports, in which a good many new compounds have


112                            1945 E.B.CHAIN

been added to Beilstein. I shall limit myself to work bearing directly on the
purification and structure of the penicillins and shall quote only as much of
the synthetic work as is relevant to the arguments about the structure. For
the sake of presenting a coherent and clear picture it will not be always
convenient to follow strictly the historical course of events, but I shall try
to do so whenever possible. A comprehensive account of all the chemical
work on penicillin is being published in form of an Anglo-American mon-
ograph under the auspices of the National Academy of Sciences, Washing-
ton, U.S.A.
   During the purification studies it became clear that there existed several
penicillins which had very similar biological and chemical properties, but
which differed in their chemical composition. Later work showed that all
penicillins contain a common nucleus, but differ in the structure of their side
chains. So far four different penicillins have been obtained in the form of
their crystalline sodium salts. They are designated in England as penicillins
I-IV, according to the sequence of their historical discovery; in America they
are termed, F, G, X and K.
   Let me briefly bring back to your memory the most important physical
and chemical properties of penicillin. The penicillins are organic acids, read-
ily soluble in different organic solvents, such as esters, chloroform or ether,
but insoluble or only sparingly soluble in hydrocarbons. They are stable in
water only in the form of their salts, in a pH ranging between 5 and 8, and
rapidly lose their biological activity in aqueous solutions of higher acidity or
alkalinity. In addition to acid and alkali, the penicillins are also inactivated
by many other reagents, for example by most heavy-metal ions, including
those of Zn and Cd, by primary alcohols and amines, thiols, aldehydic or
ketonic reagents, oxidizing reagents and a specific enzyme, penicillinase,
which occurs in some penicillin-resistant strains of bacteria.
   There is not time to describe in detail the methods of purifying the peni-
cillins and a few general remarks about them must suffice. In view of the
high sensitivity of the penicillins to many reagents commonly used in pur-
ification processes we were limited almost exclusively to distribution of pen-
icillin between different solvents and to various forms of chromatography.
In particular, extensive use has been made of modifications of the method of
partition chromatography, a method invented in England by Martin and
Synge, which is capable of wide applicability.
   The success of the purification process depends entirely on the nature of
the starting material, in other words on the composition of the culture me-


             CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                                   113
dium, on the conditions of fermentation, and on the strain of Penicillium no-
tatum used. With the starting material as it is now available, the purification
of penicillins II and III presents no difficulty, and crystalline sodium peni-
cillin II has become a readily available substance.
    The first penicillin to be obtained pure was penicillin II, which was crys-
tallized in the form of its sodium salt. This was achieved about July 1943 by
Wintersteiner and MacPhillamy, working at the Squibb Institute in New
Jersey. About one week later, we at Oxford obtained the sodium salt of
 penicillin I in the crystalline state. Only the alkali salts of the penicillins and
 their salts with a few simple organic cations have so far been obtained crys-
 talline. Despite many attempts it has not yet been possible to obtain crys-
 talline their salts with any divalent metals. The sodium salts of penicillins I,
 II, and III can be crystallized from a mixture of water and butanol (1:20).
 Crystalline sodium salt of penicillin II is now produced on an industrial scale.
    The crystalline sodium salts of the penicillins are colourless needles. The
 pure substances are strongly dextro-rotatory,                 of penicillin I and II
 being +305º. Elementary analysis of the crystalline sodium salts has shown
 that the penicillins have the following composition:




On catalytic hydrogenation with Pt or Pd, penicillin-I takes up one mol of
H2. The other penicillins do not react with catalytically activated hydrogen.
   Analysis of the salts and electrometric titration curves have shown that the
penicillins are strong monobasic acids having pK’s about 2.9 (Fig.1). There
is no indication of the presence of any basic group in the electrotitration
curve. This fact has played an important role in structural considerations.
   The acid group in the penicillins is a carboxyl group that can be esterified
by the action of CH2N2. The methyl ester has been obtained in the crystal-
line state. Its activity in vitro, about 70 u./mg, is much less than that of peni-
cillin salts, but in vivo it possesses about the same activity as the salts. This
is due to the fact that it is hydrolyzed easily by enzymes occurring in the
body tissues. The methyl ester of penicillin cannot by hydrolyzed chemically
even under mild conditions (pyridine and one equivalent of alkali at 0°C)
without appreciable loss of antibacterial activity.


114                             1945 E.B.CHAIN




        Fig. 1. Electrometric titration curve of 2-pentenylpenicillin (0ºC).

   Molecular weight determinations of the penicillins by several methods
have shown that their molecular weights correspond to the simple formulae,
shown above. Penicillin I and IV have no characteristic u.v. absorption,
but penicillin II and III show clearly the fine structure of a benzene ring.
When penicillin is inactivated by keeping at acid pH (Fig.2), the electro-
metric titration shows that a new very strong acidic group, about pK 1.5,
and a basic group pK 7.6, is formed. The reaction product is insoluble in
organic solvents, in accordance with its zwitterionic structure.
   When penicillin is inactivated by alkali at pH 10, it is also converted into
a zwitterion with the formation of new acidic and basic groups, but this
compound differs from the product of acid inactivation, the newly formed
acidic group having a pK of 1.8, the new basic group a pK of 5. Both prod-
ucts, that of acid as well as that of alkaline inactivation, have been obtained
in the crystalline state. The product of acid inactivation is isomeric with pen-
icillin and is termed penillic acid. The product of alkaline inactivation con-
tains an additional molecule of H2O; it is thus a hydrolysis product and is
termed penicilloic acid. We shall discuss the structure of these important
degradation products later on.


                CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                                   115




Fig. 2. Electrometric titration of 2-pentenylpenicillin (0°C) before and after inactiva-
                                tion with acid and alkali.

   As a starting-point in the elucidation of the structure of the penicillin mol-
ecule we decided to investigate the nature of the two nitrogen atoms shown
to be present by analysis. Some indication of the nature of these nitrogen
atoms was obtained by hydrolysis of penicillin at 100º with normal acid.
After short hydrolysis (30 min-1h) one of the two nitrogen atoms appear-
cd in the form of NH2-nitrogen, estimable by the Van Slyke procedure
for the determination of a-amino groups; during prolongedhydrolysis (24
h) the other N was gradually liberated as ammonia. The acid hydrolysate of
penicillin gave a strong ninhydrin reaction, confirming the presence of the
a-amino acid suggested by the Van Slyke determination. This amino acid
was the first degradation product of penicillin to be isolated in crystalline
form. It is precipitated by HgCl2 and obtained crystalline after decomposi-
tion of the mercury complex with H2S. Elementary analysis shows that it is
a hydrochloride, having the formula C5H 11O 2NSHCl, and it is thus the
moiety of the penicillin molecule which contains the sulphur atom. The S-
containing amino acid was termed penicillamine; it gives strong nitroprus-
side and ferric. chloride reactions for SH. On oxidation with bromine it
yields a crystalline compound which was termed penicillaminic acid. This


116                         1945 E.B.CHAIN

substance afforded better analyses than penicillamine hydrochloride. It con-
tained three additional oxygen atoms indicating that it was the sulphonic
acid corresponding to penicillamine. The titration curve showed that it con-
tained two acid groups (the sulphonic acid and carboxylic groups) and one
basic group (the α- N H2 group), but no SH group. Like penicillamine, it
gives a strong ninhydrin reaction, and all its nitrogen appears as a-amino
acid nitrogen in the Van Slyke determination. That the amino and thiol
groups in penicillamine are in juxtaposition, is shown by the easy formation
of thiazolidines when the substance is warmed with ketones and aldehydes :




The titration of penicillamine shows clearly three proton binding centres
that correspond to the carboxyl group (pK 1.8), the            group (pK
7.9) and the SH group (pK 10.5) (Fig.3.)


              CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                           117
  Of the two possible isomeric structures for penicillamine, (II) appeared




other hand this finding was in accordance with structure (I), as it is known
from the work of Kuhn and Roth that gem-dimethyl groups such as are
present in structure (I) are not oxidized to acetic acid by chromic acid under
the conditions of the C-CH3 determination method. We concluded there-
fore that penicillamine had structure (I). This was conclusively proved by
synthesis. This synthesis is based on a method evolved by Carter, Stevens
and Ney (J. Biol. Chem., 139 (1941) 247) for the synthesis of methyl cys-
teine; it involves the addition of benzyl mercaptan to the double bond of
the azlactone obtained by condensation of hippuric acid with acetone. The
steps in this synthesis are indicated in the following scheme:




  The resolution of this amino acid is best achieved through fractionation of
the brucine salt of the N-formyl compound. Natural penicillamine belongs


118                            1945 E.B.CHAIN

to the "unnatural" d -configuration. This was anticipated from the optical
behaviour of penicillamine and its acetone derivative which was analogous
to that of d-cysteine. The d-configuration of penicillamine was finally proved
by treatment of the phenylureido derivative with Raney nickel, which led
to the phenylureido derivative of d-valine. Penicillamine is a new amino acid
which so far has not been found in any other biological material and it is yet
another example of an amino acid of "unnatural" configuration produced
by micro-organisms. These occur, for example, in the antibiotics gramicidin
and tyrocidine and in the antigen from Bacillus mesentericus.
   Penicillamine is similar to cysteine in many respects but it is much more
soluble in water. The same applies to the disulphide. The disulphide, how-
ever, differs from cysteine in its far greater stability towards reducing agents;
thus, unlike cysteine, it cannot be reduced by KCN. Neither d- nor l-pen-
icillamine, nor their disulphides, are attacked by enzymes occurring in an-
imal tissues.
   Penicillamine, which is a constituent common to all penicillins, accounts
for five of the 14 C atoms present in penicillin I. Another carbon atom is
accounted for in the form of CO 2, one molecule of which is liberated when
the free penicillin is heated to about 60º. The remaining eight carbon atoms
are found in an aldehyde C8H13O2N which is isolated in small amounts from
the acid hydrolysates of penicillin I, after removal of the penicillamine by
HgCl 2. This aldehyde was obtained in the form of the 2,4-dinitrophenyl-
hydrazone and as the dimedone derivative. It is obtained in larger amounts
after treatment of penicillin with alkali ("alkali inactivation") and subse-
quent treatment of the solution with HgCl 2. This precipitates penicillamine
in the form of its mercuric chloride complex and simultaneously one mol-
ecule of CO2 is liberated; the supernatant solution now gives in good yield
a precipitate with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine of the hydrazone of the alde-
hyde C8H13O2N. This aldehyde was termed penillo-aldehyde. Thus, all the
 14 carbon atoms in penicillin I had been accounted for and the equation

written. The constitution of the aldehyde C8H13O2N was elucidated as fol-
lows :
   Oxidation with Ag2O of penillo-aldehyde gave a crystalline acid C 8H13-
O3N. Information about the nature of the nitrogen in this acid was obtained
by hydrolysis at 100º with N HCl: the hydrolysate gave a strong ninhydrin
reaction for         acids and about 70% of the nitrogen present in it was
detectable as NH2-nitrogen by the Van Slyke procedure. Hence it was con-


             CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                           119
cluded that the acid C8H 13O 3N contained a peptide linkage. Its exact con-
stitution was deduced from information about the composition and behav-
iour on degradation of the American penicillin. The empirical formula of
this penicillin was telegraphed to the M.R.C. in July 1943; it was C 16H18O4-
N2S. Now we know that on acid hydrolysis the English penicillin decom-
posed according to the equation




As we were informed that the American penicillin afforded the same amino
acid penicillamine on acid hydrolysis, we assumed that its hydrolysis pro-
ceeded according to the equation




We had heard that the American workers had isolated phenylacetic acid
from acid hydrolysis of their penicillin. This is an easily recognizable sub-
stance which we never encountered among our own degradation products.
when we were informed that the American workers had isolated phenyl-
acetic acid from a crystalline degradation product of penicillin, we then
knew for certain that the American penicillin differed in chemical com-
position from our own penicillin and that the difference could only be in the
penilloaldehyde moiety. Assuming that the American penilloaldehyde con-
tained a phenylacetyl group and, like ours, a peptide linkage, its structure

acetaldehyde.
  If this assumption were correct our C8 aldehyde should have the structure

acid, derived from the aldehyde by oxidation should have the structure
C5H 9CONH · CH 2 · COOH, of a hexenoylglycine. The presence of glycine
in this acid was proved by its isolation in the form of the naphthalene-sul-
phony1 derivative. The structure of the unsaturated fatty acid C5H9COOH
was established by oxidation with cold permanganate which gave propional,
locating the double bond in the γ-position, and proving the structure as
C H3H 2C H = C H ·C H 2·COOH. This structure was also confirmed by
work at the Imperial College, where caproic acid, in the form of its p-
bromophenyl-phenacyl derivative was isolated after hydrogenation of the


120                           1945 E.B.CHAIN

acid and subsequent acid hydrolysis. The structure of penillo-aldehyde-I was
thus proved to be da-hexenoylamino-acetaldehyde, CH3CH 2CH=CHCH 2-
CONHCH 2· CHO. The acetal of this aldehyde was synthesized from the
acetal of aminoacetaldehyde and ∆2-hexenoylchloride. Treatment of the
products with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine in 2N H2SO4 gave a 2,4-dinitro-
phenylhydrazone identical with that obtained from natural penillo-alde-
hyde-I.
    The hexenoyl group in the penilloaldehyde moiety of the penicillin I mol-
ecule is responsible for the uptake of one molecule of H2 when penicillin I
is treated with H2 and Pt or Pd. Later we obtained the information that the
American penicillin II did in fact yield a penilloaldehyde of the constitution
we had postulated, namely phenylacetylamino-acetaldehyde. It had thus
been established that the penicillin molecule is built up from three parts: (1)
the thiolamino acid penicillamine, (2) a labile carboxyl group that readily
yields CO2 on heating free penicillin to 60º, or on treating alkali-inactivated
penicillin with HgCl2, and (3) an acylated aminoacetaldehyde termed pen-
illoaldehyde. The first two components, penicillamine and the labile car-
boxyl group, are common to all penicillins. The penilloaldehyde moiety
varies in the different penicillins. In penicillin I it is
aldehyde, in penicillin II phenylacetaldehyde.
    The two other penicillins that have been obtained in crystalline state
yielded, on degradation, penilloaldehydes which were recognized as p-hy-
droxyphenylacetylamino-acetaldehyde in penicillin III, and n -heptoylami-
no-acetaldehyde in penicillin IV. The question now remaining to be an-
swered was the manner in which the three components were linked together
in the penicillin molecule. It was hoped to obtain information on this point
 by obtaining larger breakdown products of penicillin. The study of the reac-
 tions occurring during the inactivation of penicillin by various reagents led
to the isolation of such products.
    Let us consider first the product that is obtained on inactivation of peni-
 cillin with alkali. We have seen that after alkali inactivation and subsequent
 addition of HgCl2 the mercury complex of penicillamine is precipitated and
 the supernatant solution contains the free penilloaldehyde. Penilloaldehyde
 appears only after the addition of HgCl2; before this, no precipitate is ob-
 tained with 2,4-nitrophenylhydrazine. Similarly, no reaction for SH or
 NH 2-N is given by alkali-inactivated penicillin, thus showing that no free
penicillamine is present in solution; the latter is formed only through the
 action of HgCl2 on the alkali inactivation product of penicillin. From these


            CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                             121

facts we concluded that penicillamine and penilloaldehyde were bound in
solution in a thiazolidine ring which was broken by HgCl2, in a manner
characteristic of thiazolidines:




Very soon after the precipitation of penicillamine with HgCl 2 from alkali-
inactivated penicillin, CO2 development sets in and finally one molecule of
CO 2 is liberated. The ease of liberation of CO 2 could best be explained by
the assumption that it derived from a carboxyl group in the β-position to
the potential aldehyde carboxyl group of penilloaldehyde. The most prob-
able structure of the alkali-inactivation product of penicillin was therefore a
thiazolidine with the formula:




   This compound has been isolated in the form of its crystalline sodium salt
and various crystalline derivatives, such as different esters, amides, and N-
acylated derivatives of these (Merck group). It is one of the most important
degradation products of penicillin and has been given the name penicilloic
acid. Its structure was proved by degradation and synthesis. The information
leading to the certain elucidation of its structure was obtained from the
study of the reaction products of penicillin with methyl alcohol and with
benzylamine, reagents which, as I mentioned before, readily inactivate peni-
cillin. When the sodium salt of penicillin I is dissolved in methyl alcohol its
antibacterial activity is lost in a few hours. The product of the reaction, a
monobasic acid like the original penicillin with roughly the same solubility


 122                            1945 E.B.CHAIN

 properties, contains one CH3O group. This group is easily split off by mild
 alkaline hydrolysis, e.g. at pH 10 at room temperature, with the appearance
 of a new acid group. The resulting dicarboxylic acid behaves in every re-
 spect like alkali-inactivated penicillin (penicilloic acid), giving an identical
 electrometric titration curve and, on decomposition with HgCl2, yielding
 penicillamine, penilloaldehyde and CO2. This suggested that the product of
 methanol inactivation of penicillin was a mono-methyl ester of penicilloic
 acid of the structure (III).
    This structure was proved (Merck group) by degradation of penicillin II




 with HgCl2 which produced penicillamine and the methyl ester of a
aldehydic acid, termed penaldic acid, which was obtained as the crystalline
 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone and as the amide (IV).
    The structure of this aldehydic acid was proved by catalytic reduction to
 hexahydrophenylacetylalanine.




 In a similar manner benzylamine reacts with free penicillin II in ether to give
 a crystalline compound which was shown to be the benzylamine salt of the
 benzylamide of penicilloic-II-acid (Merck group):


              CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                              123
  This compound is decomposed by HgCl2 into penicillamine and the ben-
zylamide of II-penaldic acid.




The structure of the benzylamide of penaldic acid was proved by reduction
to the benzylamide of hexahydrophenylacetylserine.




The latter compound was synthesized by phenylacetylating serine, ester-
ifying the product with CH2N 2, treatment of the methyl ester of phenyl-
acetylserine with benzylamine, and catalytic reduction. The isolation of peni-
cillamine after HgCl2 degradation of the benzylamine inactivation product
of penicillin (benzylamide of penicilloic acid) has also proved conclusively
that the free carboxyl group in penicillin belongs to the penicillamine
moiety.
   It may be helpful to say a few words about the nomenclature of the peni-
cilloic acids. The two carboxyl groups are termed a and          The two ester
groups are hydrolyzed by alkali with different velocities, the a-group com-
ing off very easily at pH 10, the            remaining untouched under these
conditions. It is thus possible to carry out a stepwise hydrolysis of penicilloic
acid di-esters. Four stereo-isomers are theoretically possible and three of
them have been synthesized in the form of the N-benzoyl derivatives of the
                 Their melting points and specific rotations differ consid-
erably as shown in Table 1. The fourth has been obtained in the form of its
crystalline copper salt by the action of copper sulphate on sodium penicillin
II or the           of penicilloic-II-acid. The isomers were prepared by mu-
tarotating the synthetic material (which is predominantly the γ-form) in
methanol, benzoylating the crude mixture and fractionating the N-benzoyl


124                           1945 E.B.CHAIN

derivative by crystallization from ether. Frequent use was also made of the
benzylamine salts and the perchlorates.

                                   Table 1.




   Before we turn to discussing possible formulae for penicillin it is necessary
to consider the structure of another degradation product obtained in good
yield on acid inactivation. When free penicillin acid, obtained-for example
by treating the barium salt with one equivalent of H 2SO4, is left in aqueous
solution at room temperature for about 30 minutes, about 80% of the mate-
rial becomes insoluble in organic solvents, and on evaporation of the aqueous
phase a nicely crystalline compound is obtained in good yield. This com-
pound has been termed penillic acid and was one of the first degradation
products of penicillin obtained in the crystalline state (Duffin and Smith,
Nature 151 (1943) 251). Its composition is the same as that of penicillin, but
its chemical and physical properties are totally different. It is thus a product
of some intramolecular re-arrangement of the penicillin molecule. Penillic
acid contains two acid groups and one basic group (Fig. 4). It is more strong-
ly dextro-rotatory than penicillin, having          + 529º, and it has a char-
acteristic u.v. absorption spectrum, with a maximum at 2350 Å. On heat-
ing with acid it yields the same products as are obtained on acid hydrolysis
of penicillin, i.e. penicillamine, penilloaldehyde and CO2.
   The structure of penillic-I-acid was deduced from a crystalline degrada-
tion product obtained by the action on it of HgCl2. When HgCl2 is added
to a solution of penillic acid, one molecule of CO2 is liberated and the mer-
cury complex of a base C13H20O2N2S precipitates. The hydrochloride of this
base is obtained on decomposition of the mercury complex with H2S. The
base was termed penillamine. It gives a strong SH test with ferric chloride
and sodium nitroprusside. Electrotitration (Fig. 5) shows up the SH group
indicated by the colour tests, and reveals in addition the presence of one
carboxyl group and one basic group. On heating it with 2,4-dinitrophenyl-
hydrazine, there is obtained the dinitrophenylosazone of glyoxal. On oxida-


              CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                                   125
tion with bromine it yields penicillaminic acid. The only possible formula
which could be constructed on the basis of these facts was (V). This formula
was later proved by synthesis (Abraham, Baker, Chain, and Robinson).




       Fig. 4. Electrometric titration curve of 2-pentenylpenillic acid (25°C).




Fig. 5. Electrometric titration curve of 2-pentenylpenillamine hydrochloride (25ºC).


126                            1945 E.B.CHAIN

   The construction of a formula for penillic-I-acid on the basis of the formula
for I-penillamine was a matter of placing into the right position the labile
carboxylic group that appears in the form of CO 2 when penillic acid is
treated with HgCl2 or is heated with aqueous HCl. The most reasonable as-




sumption was that this carboxylic group was in B-position to a potential
aldehydic carbonyl group, and on this assumption penillic acid could only
be formulated as (VI). This formula for penillic-I-acid was in accord with
all its known properties. It accounted for its two carboxylic groups and the
basic group revealed in the electrotitrations, for its solubility properties and
its easy transformation into penillamine by HgCl2. Treatment with HgCl2
involves opening of the thiazolidine ring by hydrolysis, loss of CO2 from
the aldehyde-ammonia compound formed and subsequent or simultaneous
elimination of H2O through the tendency of this compound to go over into
the very stable imidazole ring system. Further evidence for this formula was
obtained much later from the mild thermal decomposition of dimethyl pen-
illate- at 115º in vacuo, which gave (VII), a base which was considered to be
2-benzyl-4-carbomethoxy-imidazole. This assumption was proved correct
by synthesis.




  The formula of penillic acid was finally confirmed by total synthesis
(Merck group).
  When penillic acid 1 or II is treated with alkali or simply heated in meth-


               CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                             127
 anol, the thiazolidine ring is opened and a new isomeric crystalline com-
 pound, termed isopenillic acid, is obtained. This contains a free SH group,
 as indicated by the colour reaction with nitroprusside and FeCl 3, and has the
 structure (VIII) (Ox f ord workers). This structure has also been obtained by
 synthesis (Merck group).
    Knowing the structure of penicilloic and penillic acids it is possible to con-
 struct formulae for the penicillin molecule. In the attempt to do this the
 main considerations to be borne in mind are the following:
 (1) Penicillin is a monobasic acid, but the degradation products are dibasic
 acids. Penicillin must therefore have in bound form one carboxyl group that
 is easily liberated by alkali, methanol and primary amines at room tem-
 perature.
 (2) The free carboxylic acid in penicillin is the penicillamine-carboxylic
 group.
 (3) Penicillin has no basic group, not even of the weakest type.
 (4) The penicillin molecule is capable of undergoing a facile rearrangement
 to an imidazoline derivative.
    On the basis of these considerations our group at Oxford proposed two
formulae for penicillin later known as the "β-lactam" structure (IX) and the
 "thiazolidine-oxazolone"     structure(X).
    The main guiding principle leading to the construction of Formula (IX)
 was the non-basicity of penicillin, and the only feasible manner in which the
 penicilloic NH could be rendered non-basic was to connect it with the labile
 carboxyl group, producing a peptide linkage. This linkage produced an ad-
 mittedly very unusual four-membered ring which has not previously been
 observed in any natural product, but we were prepared to accept its exist-
 ence because we could not find any other reasonable way of producing two


128                          1945 E.B.CHAIN

the strain inherent in four-membered rings might account for its reactions
with methanol, primary amines, etc. Two arguments of purely chemical
character were advanced against Formula (IX). Firstly the possibility of the
existence of the four-membered ring system was considered unlikely; sec-
ondly, no reaction mechanism could be conceived which could explain in a
satisfactory manner the penillic acid rearrangement since the NH-CO-R
linkage as assumed in the              structure would be expected to be rel-
atively non-reactive and would certainly not be expected to pass over into
an imidazoline derivative on treatment with very dilute acid at room tem-
perature.
   The oxazolone-thiazolidine formula contained the well-known five-mem-
bered azlactone ring and appeared to explain very well the reactivity of pen-
icillin towards CH3OH, etc. Furthermore, a plausible reaction mechanism
for the penillic acid re-arrangement on the bais of the electronic theory of
Sir R. Robinson was suggested.
   At the same time when these formulae were proposed, very little was
known about thiazolidines or azlactones, but even then it was difficult for
some of us to see any reason for the non-basicity of the NH nitrogen in the
thiazolidine ring of structure (X). A nitrogen atom can only be made non-
basic by being bound to a strong electron-accepting centre, such as the C=O
group, and such centre was not present in Formula (X). It was argued that
the basic strength of the NH could be depressed by intraspatial interaction
of the carbonyl group in the azlactone group or by other factors of hitherto
unknown nature, but this argument appeared unacceptable for quantitative
reasons. The pK of penicilloic acid was known to be about 5 and to explain
the non-basicity of penicillin a shift of about 4 pK units would have to be
postulated to occur through the influence of unknown factors. However,
despite these considerations the oxazolone-thiazolidine structure was for a
long time most favoured by the majority of workers. In general, the attitude
of the investigators to the two formulae varied according to whetherthey
attached more weight to physico-chemical considerations, or to purely
chemical arguments, based on the likelihood of reaction mechanisms that
could be derived from the two formulae, to explain the various rearrange-
ments.
   Apart from Formulae (IX) and (X) many other formulae for penicillin
can be constructed on paper from the elements of penaldic acid and penicill-
 amine by the elimination of two molecules of water. Most of these formulae
 can be excluded a priori on account of their obvious disagreement with the


              CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                           129
properties of penicillin. Two of these (XI and XII) have, however, received
more serious attention in various quarters, in particular by those workers
who saw the difficulties inherent in the thiazolidine-oxazolone structure, but
were not prepared to accept the            structure.




    Formula (XI) (Im p erial College workers) contains the penillic acid skel-
eton performed, and explains thus in an easy way the facile formation of
penillic acid on acid inactivation of penicillin. It does not, however, explain
the reaction with methanol or primary amines, which in fact gives peni-
cilloic acid derivatives whereas Formula (XI) would be expected to lead to
penillic acid derivatives. Furthermore, Formula (XI) gave no satisfactory
explanation of the non-basicity of the thiazolidine nitrogen, which appears
in penillic acid as a fairly strong basic group. One would, in fact, expect a
compound of structure (XI) to possess two basic centres; Formula (XI) was
finally eliminated by X-ray diffraction analysis, and the same applies to For-
mula (XII), an intermediate between the azlactone and                formulae.
On chemical grounds Formula (XII) (Stodola, Northern Regional Research
Laboratory) seemed unacceptable because it contained a carbinolamine
 group; these groups are known to be strong bases and thus could not explain
the non-basicity of penicillin. Furthermore, carbinol-amines react with pri-
mary alcohols readily to give alkyl ethers, and Formula (XII) therefore pro-
vided no satisfactory explanation for the formation of penicilloic acid deriv-
 atives under the influence of primary alcohols.
    Formulae (IX) and (X) remained strong rivals for a long time, and were
 the object of many spirited discussions. As the work progressed, more and
 more evidence came in which was quite incompatible with Formula (X),
 but in good agreement with Formula (IX). This evidence was derived partly
  from synthetic model compounds, and partly from degradation studies. Let
 us first consider the evidence derived from synthetic work. As I have men-
 tioned before, at the outset of this work very little was known about either


130                            1945 E.B.CHAIN

azlactones or thiazolidines. What was known was not compatible with struc-
ture (X). The few known thiazolidines derived from cysteine and a few
simple aldehydes and ketones all showed a definitely basic group, having a
pK of about 7. During the course of the work, a great number of thiazoli-
dines deriving from penicillamine and from cysteine by condensation with
a large variety of aldehydes and ketones of widely differing chemical con-
stitutions were synthesized, as well as N-acyl derivatives of these. The thia-
zolidines are formed very easily by simple fusion of the thiolamino acid and
the corresponding aldehyde and ketone at 80-100ºC, with or without sol-
vents, or by heating the acetals of the aldehydes and ketones with the hydro-
chlorides of the thiolamino acids at temperatures from 80º to 110º. In most
cases they crystallize easily, or crystalline derivatives are formed readily.
   The investigation of the properties of the newly synthesized thiazolidines
has given the following general result:
   All tbiazolidines with non-acylated amino groups, without a Single excep-
tion, have properties which are widely different from those of penicillin.
   The N-acylated thiazolidines, on the other hand, resemble penicillin in
many of their properties. In particular the following facts are of interest in
this respect:
(1) All thiazolidines containing a non-acylated NH group possess a basic
group which manifests itself clearly through facile formation of salts and in
electrotitrations. The pK of the thiazolidines deriving from penicillamine is
somewhere near 5. The imido group of the thiazolidines can readily be acyl-
ated, and the N-acyl thiazolidines, as is to be expected, possess no basic
group. Penicillin cannot be acylated, even by the most active acylating rea-
gents, such as ketene or acid chlorides and pyridine; its biological activity is
unimpaired by these reagents. In order to investigate whether a carbonyl
group in the same position as the carbonyl group of the oxazolone postulated
in the thiazolidine-oxazolone structure could depress significantly the basic-
ity of the imido group of thiazolidines the following compound was syn-
thesized from α-acetyl-butyrolactone and penicillamine (Abbott group) :


              CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                             131
The pK of the imino group of this substance was very similar to that of other
thiazolidines, being about 4 (Eli Lilly group). Thus the carbonyl group of
the lactone ring had no significant influence on the basicity of the thiazoli-
dine nitrogen atom and the hypothesis of an intraspatial influence of the car-
bonyl group on the basic strength of the thiazolidine N had been rendered
untenable.
    During one stage of the discussion on the formula of penicillin the forma-
tion of hydrogen bonds between NH and CO of structure (X) was con-
sidered by some workers as another possible explanation for the non-basic-
ity of the thiazolidine nitrogen. To test this inherently unlikely hypothesis,
thiazolidines derived from penicillamine and p, m- or o -sahcylaldehyde were
made. All these compounds readily formed hydrochlorides and, when ti-
trated electrometrically, showed no significant differences in the pK values of
their NH groups thus excluding possibility that there was any influence by
the formation of hydrogen bonds on the pK’s of the thiazolidine NH.
     (2) All thiazolidines containing non-acylated NH groups react easily with
 I2 to form the corresponding S-S compounds. This is because in solution
 there exists an equilibrium between the thiazolidine and the free thiolamino
 acid and the carbonyl compound; this equilibrium is displaced by oxidation
 of the SH compound to S-S. N-acylated thiazolidines are much more stable
 and do not react with I,. Penicillin behaves like an N-acylated thiazolidine
 in that it does not react easily with I2. Its degradation products, penillic or
 penicilloic acid react readily, however, with iodine, as is to be expected from
 their structures.
    (3) All thiazolidines with free imino groups invariably poison Pt or Pd
 hydrogenation catalysts. Not only is it impossible to reduce catalytically un-
 saturated groups in N-non-acylated thiazolidines, but the presence of even
 small amounts of such thiazolidines prevents completely the catalytic hydro-
 genation of easily reducible substances, such as cinnamic acid. The reason for
 this is the formation of free SH groups, well-known catalyst poisons. N-
 acylated thiazolidines, on the other hand, are inert towards hydrogenation
 catalysts because of the greater stability of the thiazolidine ring (Eli Lilly
 group). Penicillin I, which contains an unsaturated hexenyl side chain, is
  easily reduced by Pt or Pd catalysts and behaves thus also in this respect like
 an N-acylated thiazolidine. Again, the breakdown products penillic and pen-
 icilloic acids behave like all other ordinary thiazolidines towards catalytic
 hydrogenation; i.e. they poison the catalysts irreversibly.
 (4) On oxidation with KMnO4, thiazolidines with free imino groups are


132                           1945 E.B.CHAIN

oxidized to the corresponding sulphonic acids while N-acylated thiazolidines
yield the corresponding sulphones. Penicillin methyl ester on oxidation with
KMnO 4 gives a sulphone (Merck group), a fact which is incompatible with
structure (X) but in agreement with structure (IX).
   To sum up, the following can be said: The examination of the properties
of many model thiazolidines has shown unequivocally that penicillin be-
haves in no way like a normal thiazolidine with a non-acylated free imino
group; its behaviour is therefore not compatible with the thiazolidine oxa-
zolone structure (X). It resembles much more a N-acylated thiazolidine,
which is in accordance with the               structure (IX). No evidence could
be found for the hypothesis that the basicity of the thiazolidine NH can be
depressed through the intraspatial influence of neighbouring groups.
   So much about thiazolidines. Apart from these, a great deal of effort has
been expended in the preparation of oxazolones and the study of their prop-
erties. The outcome of this work, which time does not permit me to discuss
in detail, has given the following main results:
   In accordance with earlier works in the literature no oxazolone of the type
(XIII) is stable in water at any pH; all are hydrolyzed more or less rapidly to




the corresponding acylated amino acids. Penicillin salts are, in contradis-
tinction, stable in water for an indefinite time.
   4-Hydroxymethylene oxazolones are stable in water in the form of their
alkali salts, but are rapidly decomposed in acid medium. All oxazolones, even
the most stable ones, react with liquid ammonia to give the-corresponding
amide with ring opening. Penicillin, on the other hand, is quite inert towards
liquid ammonia. Particular attention has been given to the preparation and
study of 2-benzyl-4-hydroxymethyleneoxazolone (XIV), and various meth-
ods of preparation of this compound have been worked out.


            CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                           133
   A few words about the properties of 4-hydroxymethylene oxazolones.
Their discussion is necessary for the understanding of certain degradation
reactions of penicillin which will be considered shortly. The hydroxyme-
thylene oxazolones give a strong blue colouration with FeCl3 and have no
pronounced aldehydic character. Their reactivity is more like that of acid
chlorides than of aldehydes. Thus they react with diazomethane to give me-
thoxymethylene compounds and combine readily with amines to give the
corresponding aminomethylene compounds. With ammo acids a similar
reaction occurs. Thus crystalline aminomethylene derivatives have been ob-
tained by combining 2-benzyl-4-ethoxymethyleneoxazolone with the ami-
no acids glycine, alanine, and valine. With thiolamino acids hydroxyme-
thylene oxazolones do not form thiazolidines, like normal aldehydes, but
both NH2 and SH groups react separately and independently. When molec-
ular proportions of thiolamino acids and hydroxy- or alkoxy-oxazolones
are combined, the amino group reacts preferentially; thus penicillamine and
2-benzyl-4-hydroxymethyleneoxazolone give the compound (XV)




Compounds of this type are of interest because, as will be shown later, they
are degradation products of penicillin; they have been given the name peni-
cillenic acids. 4-Aminomethylene oxazolones are recognized easily by their
characteristic absorption spectra; they have two absorption maxima, at 3,200
Å (E M 25,000) and ( a weaker one) at 2,700 Å (EM 5,000).
   The aminomethylene oxazolones tend to be more stable in acid solution
than the alkoxy- or hydroxy-methylene oxazolones; in alkali they behave like
the alkoxymethylene compounds, i.e. they are hydrolyzed to the sodium salt
of the hydroxymethylene derivatives. Thus sodium penicillenate is hydro-
lyzed by alkali to the sodium salt of 2-benzyl-4-hydroxymethyleneoxazolone.
   Let us now return to evidence based on the degradation studies. The Merck


134                            1945 E.B.CHAIN

 workers found that when penicillin methylester in ether solution is treated
 with HgCl2 and the resulting precipitate is decomposed with H2S, an amor-
 phous substance is obtained which exhibits the characteristic absorption spec-
 trum of penicillenic acid with two maxima at 3,150 Å and 2,700 Å.
    This finding attracted a good deal of interest. Ever since the thiazolidine
 oxazolone structure for penicillin was proposed, continuous attempts were
 made, particularly by the Merck group, to isolate the 2-benzyl-4-hydroxy-
 methyleneoxazolone which formed one component of this structure. The
 most obvious way to obtain this oxazolone, which was known to be quite
 stable in alkali, was to try to split sodium penicillin by the action of HgCl 2.
 All normal N-non-acylated thiazolidines are instantly decomposed by
 HgCl 2 into the mercury complex of the thiolamino acid and the carbonyl
 component. However, when the effect of HgCl2 on sodium penicillin was
 tried, it was found that - unlike the normal N-non-acylated thiazolidine -
 it did not react instantaneously, but only very slowly after an interval of
 many hours; and examination of the degradation products showed that it
 had been split into penicillamine and penaldic acid, but no trace of 2-benzyl-
 4-hydroxymethyleneoxazolone, easily detectable by its characteristic u.v.
 absorption spectrum, was ever observed. The behaviour of sodium penicillin
towards HgCl2 was in fact additional evidence against the thiazolidine-oxa-
 zolone structure and in favour of the             structure. Now, if the prod-
 uct obtained after reaction of HgCl2 on methyl penicillin was really peni-
 cillenic acid, then it would have been definitely proved that 2-benzyl-4-
 hydroxymethyleneoxazolone can be obtained from penicillin by a mild deg-
 radation process and this finding would have to be taken into account in the
 considerations of the structure of the penicillin molecule. The HgCl2 deg-
 radation product of methyl penicillin was therefore examined very carefully,
 and the result of the examination left no doubt that it was composed pre-
 dominantly of penicillenic acid from d -penicillamine and 4-hydroxymethy-
 lene-oxazolone; it was therefore an easily available compound whose prop-
 erties could be studied without difficulty. Penicillenic acid has two charac-
  teristic reactions:
 (1) On addition of benzylamine to penicillenic acid the characteristic u.v.
  absorption disappears and the α-benzylamide of penicilloic acid is formed.
 The HgCl2 degradation product of methyl penicillin behaves in the same
 manner; after addition of benzylamine, the a-benzylamide of penicilloic
 acid was isolated in the crystalline state and was shown to be identical with
 the synthetic material.


              CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                             135
(2) Synthetic penicillenic acid is hydrolyzed by alkali to penicillamine and
2-benzyl-4-hydroxymethyleneoxazolone which can be isolated as the crys-
talline Na salt and in form of crystalline derivatives. The HgCl 2 degrada-
tion product of methylpenicillin behaves in an identical manner, and the
Merck workers succeeded in isolating from its alkaline hydrolysates the so-
dium salt of 2-benzyl-4-hydroxymethyleneoxazolone in the crystalline state
and characterized it by various crystalline derivatives which were identified
with synthetic specimens.
    If we now consider the implications of the isolation of 2-benzyl-4-hydroxy-
methyleneoxazolone as a degradation product of penicillin for arguments
concerning the structural formula of penicillin, it must be admitted that, in
the absence of all other evidence, the isolation of one component of the
postulated thiazolidine-oxazolone structure would naturally be considered
 as strong evidence in favour of this structure; in fact it is the strongest ev-
idence that could be obtained from straightforward chemical degradation
 reactions. However, at the time when the oxazolone was isolated by the
 Merck workers, a great deal of very strong evidence against the thiazolidine-
 oxazolone structure had already been accumulated and this evidence could
 not simply be disregarded in front of the new finding. Consequently, the less
 simple explanation for the formation of the oxazolone during the degrada-
 tion of penicillin had to be taken into consideration, namely that it was
 formed as the result of a novel type of intramolecular rearrangement of the
 four-membered ring of the              structure present in the original peni-
 cillin molecule, induced by the reaction of HgCl2 with methyl penicillin. A
 distinct aversion to this assumption was noticeable among many chemists
 because no analogous reaction was known in the literature and no plausible
 reaction mechanisms for the rearrangement could be suggested.
     While the discussion on the significance of the isolation of the oxazolone
 for the structure of the penicillins was still in full swing, the Merck group
 isolated several new crystalline degradation products of penicillin II, and the
 elucidation of their structure neutralized completely all the arguments in fa-
 vour of the oxazolone-thiazolidine structure that could be advanced by the
  defenders of this structure from the isolation of the oxazolone. They suc-
 ceeded, in fact, in isolating in good yield and by a very mild degradation
 procedure, a product which was shown to possess the                 structure.
     It will be remembered that Mozingo, of the Merck Institute, had devel-
 oped a new method for desulphurization, by hydrogenolysis with Raney
 nickel, which led to an important advance in the elucidation in the structure


136                             1945 E.B.CHAIN

of biotin. This method consists in heating the sulphur-containing compound
for a short time with a suspension of finely divided Raney nickel through
which hydrogen had been passed. The sulphur is thereby removed as nickel
sulphide and is replaced by two atoms of hydrogen in a very smooth reac-
tion. This method has a wide applicability and has proved very useful in the
studies aimed at elucidating the chemical structure of the penicillins.
    When sodium penicillin II is treated with Raney nickel at 90°C for 1 min,
the sulphur is eliminated and two crystalline compounds C 16H 20O 4N 2 and
C 16H 22O 4N 2 are obtained, the first in very good yield, the latter in smaller
amounts. The first compound has the elementary composition of penicillin
II except that the sulphur is removed and replaced by two hydrogen atoms,
and it has accordingly been termed desthiopenicillin. The acid-base prop-
 erties of desthiopenicillin are the same as those of penicillin, i.e. it is a mono-
 basic acid with no detectable basic group. Chemically it is much more stable
 than penicillin; it does not react with acid, alkali, primary amines, or alcohols
 at room temperature. However, on heating for a short time in acid or alkali,
 desthiopenicilloic acid is obtained, a compound which was found to be iden-
 tical with desthiopenicilloic acid prepared from natural penicilloic acid by
Raney treatment.




   Electrometric titration of desthiopenicilloic acid shows that itpossesses two
acid groups and one basic group, pK 8.2.
   When desthiopenicillin is heated with benzylamine for three hours in re-
fluxing dioxan, the benzylamide of desthiopenicilloic acid is obtained. This
is identical with the compound obtained by hydrogenolysis of the penicilloic
acid benzylamide derived from natural penicillin.
    Only one formula (XVI) could be constructed for desthiopenicillin II that
was in agreement with its properties and chemical reactions. This formula
contained the four-membered ring postulated in the                  structure for
penicillin. An alternative formula (XVII) containing the oxazolone ring
could be disregarded, firstly because of the stability of desthiopenicillin and


             CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                                 137




secondly because of the absence of a basic group which should certainly have
been present if the oxazolone structure containing the NH group was correct.
   Thus the rather curious situation had arisen that the degradation work had
furnished apparent support both for the thiazohdine-oxazolone and the
lactam structure for penicillin; constituents of both formulae, an oxazolone
and a substance containing the four-membered                ring had been iso-
lated from penicillin by very mild degradation procedures. It then remained
to decide which of the two ring systems was originally present in penicillin,
and which the result of a rearrangement process. Which of the two rear-
rangements could be considered the more plausible was largely a matter of
personal opinion, and as might be expected the views on this question dif-
fered widely among the various investigators. The elucidation of the struc-
ture of the second degradation product which had been obtained by treat-
ment of penicillin with Raney nickel did not add anything decisive. It ap-
peared that this substance, C16H22O4N2S (m-p. 206-2070º), was phenyl ace-
tyl C (+) alanyl d (-) valine;




this was proved by synthesis (from the azide of phenylacetyl l (+) alanine
and d-valine). The importance of the isolation of phenylacetyl l (+) alanyl
d (-) valine in respect to the structure of penicillin lies in the fact that it has
settled the optical configuration of another of the three asymmetric carbon
atoms in the penicillin molecule. The penicillamine radical had, as was point-


138                           1945 E.B.CHAIN

ed out before, the unnatural d-configuration; the alanine radical was now
shown to possess the natural l-configuration. The simplest explanation for
the appearance of this substance was that it derived by hydrogenolysis from
the            which contained the two N-CO linkages preformed. It could,
however, also have arisen from the oxazolone by an internal acylation fol-
lowed by a rearrangement.
   To make the situation somewhat more confused a new crystalline isomer-
ization product of penicillin was found which differed from the two other
isomers penillic and penicillenic acids. This new product, termed penillonic
acid, is formed when methyl penicillin is heated in toluene in the presence of
a small amount of I2 (Merck group). As in the case of all the other crystalline
degradation products, the structure of the new isomer penillonic acid was
eagerly studied in the hope of finding a new line of approach to the problem
of the structure of penicillin. With the formulae for penicillin, penillic acid
and penicillenic acid already disposed of, the possibilities for new structural
arrangements were becoming rather limited and it became quite difficult to
think of yet another structural isomer of penicillin.
   It was found that methyl penillonate was also obtained from methyl peni-
cillenate, both natural and synthetic, by heating in toluene in the presence of
a small amount of I2; but in addition it was formed by simple sublimation in
vacuo of methyl penicillin, whereas methyl penicillenate gave no penillonic
acid under these conditions. Penillonic acid is therefore not merely a re-
arrangement product of methyl penicillenate, which would be of secondary
interest to structural considerations concerning penicillin, but is also formed
directly from penicillin, as the result of yet another rearrangement, in addi-
tion to the penillic and penicillenic acid rearrangements. The structure of
penillonic acid, a monobasic acid with no basic centre, was finally elucidated
by degradation of desthiopenillonic acid, C16H 20O 4N 2, obtained by treat-
ment of methyl penillonate with Raney nickel and subsequent saponifica-
tion. This compound is isomeric with desthiopenicilhn, but quite different in
its physical and chemical properties. It does not react with benzylamine, mer-
curic chloride or methanol, even under drastic conditions. It does not react
with acid or alkali at room temperature or when heated to 110º for a short
time. Prolonged hydrolysis with NaOH or conc. HCl at 100º yields phen-
aceturic acid, valine and one molecule of formaldehyde. These findings
were best reconciled with the following structures for desthiopenillonic II
acid and penillonic-II acid:


               CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                              139




The elucidation of the structure of penillonic acid, like that of the other deg-
radation products of penicillin, was thus of little use for obtaining unequiv-
ocal evidence about the structure of penicillin and was disappointing in this
respect. All it showed was the occurrence of yet another extraordinary re-
arrangement involving a reaction mechanism which was difficult to explain
on the basis of any formula. Ring expansion from the four-membered to a
five-membered ring would have to occur on the basis of the                   struc-
ture, a rearrangement of the oxazolone involving a migration of nitrogen on
the basis of the oxazolone structure. The latter rearrangement does in fact
occur, as penillonic acid is formed from synthetic penicillenic acid which has
a known structure containing the oxazolone ring; but no satisfactory ex-
planation for the reaction mechanism of this rearrangement has yet been put
forward.
   A great deal of most interesting degradation work on penicillin has been
carried out in addition to that mentioned above. Time unfortunately does
not permit me to give anything like an adequate account of this work, but I
want to mention the broad results. These were quite as ambiguous as those
obtained from the other degradation studies, and did not allow of a definite
decision in favour of one or the other of the two formulae under discussion.
   Thus, it was found, that free penicillin-II acid is easily inactivated by acetic
acid in an organic solvent (Squibb group); N-acetyl-II-penicilloic acid
(XVIII) is formed; the constitution of this compound was proved by syn-
thesis. Sodium penicillin II is inactivated by cysteine at pH 7 ( Squibb group).


140                            1945 E.B.CHAIN

The compound formed is a peptide of penicilloic acid and cysteine, with the
SH group free. The constitution of this compound (XIX) was proved by
benzylation with benzylchloride and splitting with HgCl2, which yielded
the aldehyde (XX). The two reactions just mentioned could be explained on
the basis of either structure (IX) or (X). With HN=C=S, penicillin-II meth-
yl ester reacts to give in good yield a crystalline product on which a con-
siderable amount of very ingenious degradation work was carried out by the
Cornell and Squibb groups of workers. This cannot be reported in any detail
but has led to the elucidation of the structure of this product (XXI). This




structure could be derived easily from structure (IX), but was not in good
agreement with structure (X). It was known from the literature that N-
acylated amino acids on heating with thiocyanic acid and acetic anhydride
gave I-acyl-2-thiohydantoins and it was assumed that this reaction proceeds
via the azlactones. A great deal of work on model oxazolones has shown that
I-acyl-2-thiohydantoins are indeed easily formed when they are treated with
thiocyanic acid at room temperature. Thus 2-benzyl-4,4-dimethyloxazolone
gives I-phenylacetyl-2-thio-5,5-dimethyl-thiohydantoin.




If penicillin had an oxazolone ring as one of the constituents of its molecule,
a thiohydantoin of the structure (XXII) would be expected to be formed on
treatment of penicillin-II methyl ester with thiocyanic acid. The actual reac-
tion product has a different constitution, as pointed out above, containing a
thiouracil nucleus. Thus, the structure of the thiocyanic degradation product
of penicillin is really against structure (X), though an intramolecular re-


              CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                           141




conditions of the reaction cannot, of course, be excluded.
   I have now come to the end of my account of the degradation studies on
penicillin. These certainly do not lack in variety and surprises and have led
to the discovery of several entirely novel rearrangements.
   Summarizing the evidence for the structure of penicillin obtained from
the degradation work it can be stated that no absolutely unequivocal conclu-
sion could be derived from it although the balance of the work was more
in favour of the plactam structure than of the thiazolidine-oxazolone struc-
ture. In particular the formation of the sulphone and of the reaction product
with thiocyanic acid was extremely difficult to explain except on the basis
of the            formula.
   The final solution of the problem of the structure of penicillin came from
crystallographic X-ray studies. This work, in which Mrs. D. Crowfoot and
her colleague Mrs. Barbara Rogers-Low have played a predominant rôle,
has led to the definite exclusion of the thiazolidine-oxazolone structure and
to the conclusive proof of the            structure. Through a series of Fou-
rier analyses of electron diffraction densities, obtained by X-ray pictures of
single crystals of the rubidium and potassium salts of penicillin II, Mrs.
Crowfoot and Mrs. Rogers-Low succeeded in measuring all bond distances
between the atoms in the penicillin molecule with an accuracy of 0-2 Å and
in thus mapping out clearly the whole penicillin molecule. The alkali metal
and the sulphur atom served as landmarks in the Fourier analyses. The meas-
urements of the atomic distances show clearly and unequivocally that there
exists a normal bond between the thiazolidine nitrogen and the carbonyl
group of the labile carbonyl group, but no bond exists between this carbonyl
group and the oxygen atom of the peptide side-chain. The four-membered
          ring is clearly visible. These calculations were completely con-


142                             1945 E.B.CHAIN

firmed by an independent group of X-ray workers, Dr. C. W. Bunn and
his colleagues of Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. Thus the structure of
penicillin was definitely proved to be the           structure (IX). The work
of Mrs. Crowfoot and Mrs. Rogers-Low is a considerable achievement; for
the first time the structure of a whole molecule has been calculated from X-
ray data, and it is the more remarkable that this should have been possible
in the case of a substance having the complexity of the penicillin molecule.
The ever-increasing importance of crystallographic X-ray work for the elu-
cidation of chemical structures in collaboration with the organic chemist has
been demonstrated in an impressive manner by these investigations.

The elucidation of the chemical structure of the penicillins has been a most
interesting and fascinating task in every respect from the very beginning.
It became apparent very soon that the chemical behaviour of penicillin was
in no way less interesting and original than its biological properties. Peni-
cillin is a simple dipeptide, composed of two simple amino acids:
valine and an acylated serine in which the alcohol group has been oxidized
to the aldehyde group. Through the incorporation of a peptide linkage in a
peculiar ring system so far not observed in any other natural product, this
peptide linkage has acquired a high reactivity, and it is the fusion of thia-
zolidine and              rings which confers to the penicillin molecule its unique
biological and biochemical properties. This is a fact which deserves attention
beyond the limited field of penicillin chemistry. The question of the nature
of the linkages by which naturally occurring peptides acquire their specific
and often very pronounced biological properties has been, and is, one of the
major problems in biochemistry. Now it has been shown in the case of the
penicillin molecule that a simple dipeptide can acquire most characteristic
and specific chemical and biological properties through a novel, but very
simple type of linkage of the two amino acids. Naturally, one is tempted to
ask immediately whether the occurrence of the                     type of peptide
linkage is limited to the penicillin molecule, and whether it does not occur
also in other natural products, such as proteins. Perhaps the                 struc-
ture is an important feature of many natural products and has escaped discov-
ery up to the present time only because it does not manifest itself by some
characteristic property serving as an indicator for its existence, as, in the case
 of penicillin, the striking bacterial action of this compound. This applies also
to the various rearrangements which the penicillin molecule has been shown
to undergo readily. These rearrangements, in particular the formation of


              CHEMICAL STRUCTURE OF PENICILLINS                                143
 imidazole derivatives and oxazolones from amides under very mild condi-
tions, are all of great general biochemical interest. The search for suitable
 reaction mechanisms for these entirely novel rearrangements will provide
 an attractive field of research for the theoretical organic chemist.
    To end this lecture, just a few words may be said about the present state of
 the work on the synthesis of penicillin. Despite the apparent simplicity of the
 penicillin molecule and despite a tremendous effort on the part of many
 competent chemists, no workable method of synthesis has as yet been
 evolved. All feasible routes that could possibly lead to such synthesis have
 been explored, but have not given positive results. In attempts to synthesize
 the oxazolone-thiazolidine structures, traces of biologically active material
 have been obtained both by the Merck group and the Oxford workers
 through condensation of 2-benzyl-4-methoxymethyleneoxazolone, and
 similar compounds with d-penicillamine. l -Penicillamine, or d- and l -cys-
 teine led to no activity. There can be no doubt that the active material syn-
 thesized in this manner is in fact penicillin. It acts against the same bacteria as
 does natural penicillin, and is inactivated by the same specific reagents that
 inactivate natural penicillin: acid and alkali, methanol and the specific en-
 zyme penicillinase. Furthermore, penicillamine containing radioactive sul-
 phur has been used for the condensation with 2-benzyl-4-methoxymethyl-
 eneoxazolone (Cornell group); when a large amount of natural crystalline
 penicillin II was added to the active product thus obtained and the mixture
 crystallized, it was found that on recrystallization, the radioactivity always
 followed the crystalline penicillin fraction, even after 14 recrystallizations of
 the sodium salt and a further 14 recrystallizations of the acid inactivation
 product penillic acid. This showed that the solubility properties of the syn-
 thetic active material were extremely similar to those of natural penicillin II,
 so that the identity of the synthetic with the natural material was made even
 more probable. All attempts to improve the very small yield of synthetic
 penicillin (about 0.1%) have failed, and it appears improbable that a syn-
 thetic process will be evolved that could compete successfully with the
 cheap biological production of penicillin.
