

DISCOVERY OF SOME OF THE BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF NITRIC OXIDE AND ITS ROLE IN CELL SIGNALING

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1998
by

FERID  MURAD

Department of Integrative  Biology, Pharmacology and  Physiology,  University of Texas  Medical  
School  at  Houston,  P.O.  Box  20707,  Houston,  TX  77030, USA



ABSTRACT
The  role of nitric oxide in cellular signaling in  the  past 22 years has become one  of  the   
most  rapidly  growing  areas  in  biology  with  more  than  20,000 publications  to date.  Nitric 
oxide  is a gas and  free  radical with  an  unshared electron  that  can  regulate  an  
ever-growing  list  of  biological  processes.  In many  instances   nitric  oxide   mediates   its 
 biological   effects   by  activating guanylyl cyclase and  increasing cyclic GMP synthesis from 
GTP. However,  the list of effects of nitric oxide  that are independent  of cyclic GMP is also 
grow- ing  at  a  rapid  rate.  For  example,  nitric  oxide  can  interact  with  transition 
metals  such  as  iron,  thiol  groups,  other  free  radicals,  oxygen,  superoxide anion, 
unsaturated  fatty acids and  other molecules.  Some of  these  reactions result in the oxidation 
of nitric oxide to nitrite and nitrate to terminate its ef- fect,  while  other  reactions  can  
lead  to  altered  protein  structure,  function, and/or catalytic capacity. These  diverse effects 
of nitric oxide  that are either cyclic GMP dependent or independent can alter and regulate 
important phy- siological  and   biochemical  events  in  cell  regulation  and  function.  Nitric 
oxide  can  function  as  an  intracellular  messenger,  an  autacoid,  a  paracrine substance, a 
neurotransmitter, or as a hormone  that can be carried  to distant sites for effects. Thus, it is a 
unique simple molecule with an array of signaling functions. However, as with any messenger 
molecule, there can be too little or too  much  of  the   substance  and   pathological  events  
result.  Some  of  the methods  to  regulate  either  nitric  oxide  formation,  metabolism,  or  
function have been  in clinical  use for  more  than a century as with  the use of organic nitrates 
and  nitroglycerin  in angina  pectoris that was initiated  in  the  1870’s. Current and future  
research  with  nitric oxide  and  cyclic  GMP will  undoubt- edly expand the clinicians'  
therapeutic armamentarium  to manage a number of  important  diseases  by  perturbing  nitric  
oxide  and  cyclic  GMP  formation and metabolism. Such promise and expectations have obviously 
fueled  the in- terests in these signaling molecules for a growing list of potential therapeutic 
applications.

Fed    Murad                                                    211

INTRODUCTION
As  a  combined  degree  student  in  the  laboratories  of Earl  Sutherland  and Theodore Rall 
shortly after the discovery of cyclic AMP, they taught me to en- joy science and I quickly became 
convinced  of the important role of second messengers in hormonal signaling systems. After 
additional clinical training, I went to NIH in 1967 to work with Martha Vaughan and cyclic GMP 
began to emerge as another  potential second messenger. Sutherland's laboratory and Aurbach's  
laboratory  independently  described  the  enzyme  guanylyl  cyclase that  catalyzed  its  
formation  from  GTP  (1,2). Also,  a  new  isoform  of  cyclic nucleotide   phosphodiesterase  
that  preferred   to  hydrolyze  and  inactivate cyclic GMP (3) and a subsequent novel cyclic 
GMP-dependent  protein kinase, presumably its molecular  target  (4), were described  (Figure  l).
5’-GMP





GTP


Guanylyl
Cyclase
Phosphodiesterase

cyclic GMP
Protein  kinase protein      ATP
protein phosphorylation
Figure 1. Enzymes involved in cyclic GMP synthesis,  metabolism  and  function.




The  cyclic  AMP area was  becoming  very  popular  and  crowded  due  to  new and simpler assay 
systems and more and more hormones mediating  their ef- fects through this intracellular messenger. 
Thus, cyclic GMP became more ap- pealing to me as I planned  to launch an independent academic 
career when I moved  to the University of Virginia in 1970. In our earliest studies, we did 
numerous descriptive experiments where we added one agent or another  to tissues or cells to 
correlate cyclic GMP accumulation with the function of the preparation.  While  these  early  
studies  seemed  necessary  at  this  time  and were  productive,  we  gained  little  insight  
into  the  true  regulation  of  cyclic GMP synthesis  and its functions. We  wanted  to address  
two simple, and ob- viously, naive questions: 1) how do hormones, neurotransmitters and various 
ligands regulate guanylyl cyclase activity and cyclic GMP synthesis?  (i.e. what are the molecular 
coupling events between hormone binding to its appropri- ate receptor and guanylyl cyclase 
activation), and 2) what are some biological functions resulting from increased cyclic GMP levels?

Physiology  or  Medicine  1998

POSSIBLE ISOFORMS OF GUANYLYL CYCLASE
After two to three years of what some of my trainees called  “dumping experi- ments”  where  we  
added  various  hormones  and  agents  to  preparations  and measured  cyclic  GMP accumulation,  
we decided  that there  must  be a better fundamental  approach  to our  questions. About 1973, 
Hiroshi  Kimura,  a fel- low with me, and I turned our attention  to an examination  of guanylyl 
cyclase in cell-free systems. We quickly learned  that there was enzyme activity in both high-speed 
supernatant and particulate fractions of most tissue homogenates. Furthermore,  the  activities  
were  quite  different  (see  Table  1)  (5—7).  While ATP inhibited both activities, the soluble 
activity was more sensitive to ATP in- hibition. Calcium ion could either activate or inhibit 
activity dependent upon its concentration, but the soluble and  particulate  activates had 
different sen- sitivities to these effects. The  most striking difference was that the soluble ac- 
tivity  gave  linear  kinetics  (double  reciprocal  plots)  with  regard  to  the  sub- strate  
GTP,  while  the  particulate  activity  gave  curvilinear  double  reciprocal plots indicating  
cooperativity  with  respect  to GTP with  presumably  multiple GTP binding sights. The  Hill 
coefficient  of  the soluble enzyme was 1.0 while the particulate activity had a Hill coefficient 
of about 1.7 (5—7).

Table 1. Guanylyl  cyclase  in  cytosolic  and  particulate  fractions  of homogenates  with  dif- 
ferent properties.
soluble                     particulate

Ca“                              stimulates                         inhibits
ATP, IC₅,                       0.4mM                            >1mM
GTP, Hill coef.                  1.0                                 1.74
detergent             stimulates 50-100%         stimulates >300%

From our  subsequent  work with  the characterization and  purification  of  the enzyme  and  the 
cloning  of  the cDNA's for guanylyl  cyclase  we were  able  to demonstrate  definitively  that  
several  isoforms  and  separate  gene  products were present in tissues  (8—11). Similar studies 
have since been done by other laboratories, most notably in the laboratory of David Garbers  (12, 
13) . Today we know that numerous soluble and  particulate isoforms can exist. This topic is beyond 
 the scope of this review and  interested  readers are referred to other reviews  (8—13) .

EFFECTS OF AZIDE, HYDROXYLAMINE  AND NITRITE
Our  initial reaction  to these early data was that we were dealing with  two dif- ferent isoforms 
of guanylyl cyclase, one  in the cytosolic compartment and one in  the  membranous  compartment  or 
organelles.  However,  we could  not  ex- clude that such differences in  the activities were due  
to artifacts and spurious

Ferid  Murad                                                  213

results  with   crude   high-speed   soluble   and   particulate   preparations.   We thought  that 
contaminating  phosphatases,  nucleotidases  and  perhaps cyclic nucleotide  phophodiesterases 
might  also  explain  our  observations.  At  the time we had  no desire or  plans to purify the  
protein (s) . A simpler approach was  to add  azide,  pyrophosphate,  hydroxylamine, 
phosphodiesterase inhibi- tors, fluoride, etc. individually or in combination  to preserve the 
substrate or product  and  recharacterize  the  crude  soluble  and  particulate  guanylyl  cy- 
clase. Quite surprisingly, we found  that azide, hydroxylamine  and  nitrite acti- vated  many, but 
 not  all of preparations of guanylyl cyclase  (l Al  7) . This was an  exciting  serendipitous  
observation  for  us,  because  any  hormones  or ligands  that  increased  cyclic  GMP  
accumulation  in  intact  cells  failed  to  in- crease cyclic  GMP synthesis in cell-free  
preparations. We,  therefore,  thought that  hormone-receptor  coupling  to  guanylyl  cyclase  
activation  would  be  a complicated  molecular event that was disrupted  in cell-free  
preparations.
In order  to establish  the molecular  events between  hormone  binding  and guanylyl  cyclase  
activation, it was necessary  to have a hormonally  responsive cell free system and ultimately 
purified and  reconstituted  components of the signaling  cascade.  We  thought  that  an  
understanding  of  the   activation  of guanylyl  cyclase  with  azide,  hydroxylamine  and  
nitrite  could  assist  us in  un- raveling the complex signaling cascade, perhaps analogous to the 
stimulatory effects  of  fluoride   that  assisted  with   the   characterization  of  the  
adenylyl cyclase  system.  This  intuition  was  correct  in  ultimately  leading  us  to  the 
mechanism  of hormonal activation  of guanylyl cyclase  as summarized  below. Thus,  we  made  a  
major  commitment   to  understand   the  mechanisms  of guanylyl cyclase activation  by these 
agents.

DISCOVERY  OF  PROTEINS  REQUIRED  FOR  AZIDE  ACTIVATION  AND
INHIBITION
The  activation  by azide was  tissue specific and  had a brief  time lag of several minutes before 
the time course became linear  (14—17) . Furthermore, the ac- tivation was absent in an anaerobic 
environment  requiring air or oxygen  and could be enhanced with  the addition of thiols  (14—17) . 
These results suggest- ed  to us that azide might  be converted  to another  compound  that served 
as the activating species. We then did a simple and  classical  biochemical experi- ment where we 
mixed crude soluble cell extracts that were activated  by azide with crude soluble extracts that 
were not  activated.
In our first experiment  (Table 2) we mixed crude supernatant fractions of rat liver  that could  
be activated  with azide with fractions of rat  brain  and  rat heart,  tissues  without  azide  
effects  on  guanylyl  cyclase  (14-17). Mixing  ex- tracts of liver with cerebral cortex resulted 
in an increased  azide effect, while mixing liver extracts with  heart extracts  resulted  in a 
loss of  the azide effect. Our  interpretation of  these data was that azide  activation  required  
the  pres- ence of other factors present in liver extracts that when added  to cerebral cor- tex   
permitted   azide   to   activate   the   enzyme   from   both   tissue   extracts. Furthermore,  
heart extracts  possessed  a factor(s)  that  blocked  azide  activa-

214                                      Physiology or Medicine  1998

Table 2. Effects of sodium azide on soluble guanylyl cyclase from rat liver, heart and cere- bral 
cortex  (with permission).



Enzyme
Cyclic GMP
-NaN₃                        +NaN₃
(pmol/min/mg protein)
Ratio
+N3/-N3


Liver                            38.8
Heart                           23.0
Cerebral cortex          46.0
Liver + heart               27.3
Liver                            23.0
+ cerebral cortex
595.4

23.2

42.0

23.1

899.0
15.3

1.0

0.9
0.8
39.1



tion  in  the  heart  extracts  and  in  liver  extracts  in  the  mixing  experiments. Subsequent  
experiments  proved  these  hypotheses  to be  true. The  apparent activating  factor(s)  in  liver 
and the inhibitor(s)  in  heart were  nondialyzable and  heat  labile.  Thus,  we  began  to  
purify  and  characterize  these  activators and inhibitors  (14—21).
We thought that if we thoroughly understood  the mechanism  of azide acti- vation of guanylyl 
cyclase, perhaps some day we could reconstitute  the appro- priate  components  and  factors  to  
observe  hormonal  activation  of guanylyl cyclase  in  cell-free  preparations,  a major  goal  of 
the  laboratory.  This  was  a major  research  commitment  that,  while  risky,  turned  out  to  
be  the  correct approach  and  that  led  us  to  the  discovery  of  the  first  biological  
effects  of nitric  oxide.  Our  University  of Virginia  colleagues  and  others  thought  we were 
crazy to waste  our efforts in pursuing  the effects of azide,  a known  me- tabolic poison  that 
was often  added to stored buffers and columns  to inhibit bacterial growth.

CHARACTERIZATION OF THE AZIDE ACTIVATORS  AND INHIBITORS
Hiroshi  Kimura,  Chandra  Mittal  and  I  purified  rat liver  extracts  and  found that  the  
macromolecular  factor  required  for  azide  activation  was  catalase (14—21).  Other  
heme-containing  proteins  such  as  horseradish   peroxidase and some of the  cytochromes  
(18—21), however, could substitute for the cata- lase  requirement. The inhibitory factors in  
heart extracts were also  purified and were found to be hemoglobin and myoglobin  (14—21). It 
rapidly became apparent  that  heme-containing  proteins  either  permitted  azide  to  activate 
guanylyl cyclase or  blocked its activation. These stimulatory and inhibitory ef- fects  of  
various  heme-containing  proteins  were  important  findings  in  that they led us to some much 
older literature describing the interactions of azide with catalase  to generate nitric oxide.

Ferid  Murad
215

EFFECTS OF AZIDE AND NITROVASODILATORS ON GUANYLYL CYCLASE ACTIVATION,  CYCLIC GMP ACCUMULATION  IN 
INTACT CELLS, AND SMOOTH  MUSCLE  RELAXATION
Azide,  hydroxylanine  and  nitrite  not only  activated  guanylyl  cyclase  in  cell- free 
extracts but also increased cyclic GMP accumulation  in numerous intact tissues  and  cell  types  
including  brain,  liver  and  some  cell  culture  models ( 14-21). One of the new fellows in my 
laboratory, Shoji Katsuki, was working with  bovine  tracheal  smooth  muscle  preparations  that 
we  developed  to  ex- amine  the role of cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP  in smooth  muscle motility.  
We developed  a  rather  homogenous  smooth  muscle  preparation   (about  90% smooth muscle)  with 
a sufficient amount of tissue that permitted us to moni- tor motility in an organ  bath after 
adding various agents. After quick freeze- clamping of tissue segments in liquid nitrogen, we could 
also measure  cyclic nucleotide levels or evaluate adenylyl or guanylyl cyclase activities  (22—25) 
. It was obvious to us that we should also add these new guanylyl cyclase activators to  bovine  
tracheal  smooth  muscle  segments  and evaluate  motility and cyclic GMP  accumulation.  We  found 
 that  these  agents as with  other  tissues  incre- ased  cyclic  GMP  levels  as expected  and 
simultaneously caused  relaxation  in precontracted  muscles  (22—25) .  Similar  results  were  
observed  when  we  ex- amined clean gastrointestinal smooth muscle segments (22—25). We intentio- 
nally avoided vascular segments due to the heterogeneity of the preparations with  endothelial  
cells,  blood cells, fibroblasts,  etc.. We felt that we could  not determine what cell types the 
cyclic GMP accumulation would occur in due to the marked cellular heterogeneity. In my previous 
studies with rat fat pads in Martha Vaughan's  lab we had great difficulty correlating  the effects 
of some known  lipolytic  agents  with  cyclic  AMP  accumulation   due  to  the  cellular 
heterogeneity of our preparations. The studies only become meaningful and helpful when  we examined 
 cyclic AMP accumulation  in  homogeneous  isola- ted fat cells (?6—28).
After   finding   that   these   agents   relaxed   tracheal   and   gastrointestinal
smooth  muscle  and  that  the  increase  in  cyclic  GMP  was  coincident  with  or preceded  
relaxation,  we  began  to  examine  other  smooth  muscle  relaxants such as nitroglycerin, 
nitroprusside, hydrazines,  etc.  (See Figure  2)  ( 19—25) . All of these agents increased cyclic 
GMP levels in several smooth muscle pre- parations,  as well as other tissues, caused smooth  
muscle relaxation  and acti- vated guanylyl cyclase  in most cell-free tissue extracts. We began  
to call these new guanylyl  cyclase  activators  “nitrovasodilators,” a simplified  “lab jargon” 
that permitted  us to communicate  more  readily.  While  these  new nitrovaso- dilators  did  not  
require  catalase  to  activate  guanylyl  cyclase  preparations, these effects were inhibited by 
hemoglobin  and myoglobin. The effects of al- tered redox conditions,  thiols and heme-containing 
proteins with  this grow- ing list of nitrovasodilators were  to become very important for us later 
to de- termine  the effects of endothelial-derived relaxant  factor  (EDRF)  on  cyclic GMP 
accumulation  in vascular preparations subsequent to Furchgott's discov- ery of EDRF in  1980  
(29).

2\6                                   Physiology or  Medicine  1998

DISCOVERY OF THE BIOLOGICAL  EFFECTS OF NITRIC OXIDE
The  effects of the  growing list of “nitrovasodilators” with nitro or nitroso func- tionalities 
and  the effects of  heme-containing macromolecules as factors for either activation or inhibition 
of these agents suggested  to us that perhaps the active  intermediate  or  proximal  activator  of 
guanylyl  cyclase  could  be  nitric oxide  or  one  of  its oxidized  or  reduced  products.  This 
was indeed  the case (20—25, 30). The formation of nitric oxide from various nitrovasodilator pre- 
cursor  molecules  or  “pro-drugs”  could  be  influenced  by a variety  of  condi- tions as noted 
in Figure 2. Furthermore,  the activity of nitric oxide could also be diminished  by a variety of 
oxidants such as methylene blue,     Fe(CN) 6, ex-
cess oxygen, etc. as well as sinks to trap nitric oxide such as hemoglobin  and
myoglobin  (Figure  2). Delightfully,  our  first chemical generator  to produce nitric oxide and  
ventilate the gas into guanylyl cyclase incubations was a suc- cess  (22—25, 30)  (Figure 3). The  
experiment was conducted  by Shuji Katsuki and  William  Arnold,  post-doctoral  fellows  in  my 
laboratory  the  evening  of December  2, 1976,  the  night  before  Katsuki  was  to complete  his 
fellowship and  return  with  his family  to Japan.  I  have  often  thought  that  had  Katsuki 
completed  his fellowship earlier, our discovery of the first biological effects of nitric oxide 
could  have been  delayed considerably.  Nitric oxide unlike some other activators  and  
nitrovasodilators increased  the  activity of  most guanylyl cyclase  preparations  and  increased  
cyclic  GMP  levels  in  virtually  all  tissues tested with few exceptions  (Table 3). 
Furthermore,  the stimulatory effects of nitric  oxide  and  various  nitrovasodilators on  cyclic  
GMP synthesis  were  not additive  suggesting  that they all shared  a similar  mechanism  of 
activation  of guanylyl cyclase  (30).








NH2OH
Catalase
Peroxidase                    02
Cytochromes
? Others



NO                    NO2

NaN3           H2O2

NaNO2
Phenylhydrazine



Oxidizing or
reducing agents
Oxidizing agents (O₂, methylene blue,
H₂0₂, K₃Fe(CN)›
Reducing Agents
(Thiols, ascorbate)

Nitroglycerin
Nitroprusside
or spontaneous                                   Hemoglobin
Nitrosoureas                                                                      Myoglobin
NitrosamineS          Inactive                                                     Active
Guanylate                                                     Guanylate
Cyclase                                                     Cyclase
Figure 2. Effects of some nitrovasodilators on cyclic GMP synthesis.  (with  permissiori) [19] .

Ferid  Murad
217

14



1C






4



0


4

3                                                           NOT

2


1

0
5        10
Time (Min)



15                  20
Figure 3. The  first demonstration  of  the  biological  effect  of  nitric oxide  to activate 
guanylyl  cy- clase preparations from rat lung  (panel A)  and  bovine  tracheal smooth  muscle  
(panel B).  (with permission)  [22].



Table 3. Effect of nitric oxide on  guanylyl cyclase activity from various tissues.

Cyclic GMP formed. pmol/mg
                               protein per min                  

Tissue
Fraction
-NO
+NO
Ratio
+NO/-NO

Rat liver                            S
P
Bovine lung                      S
Bovine tracheal                 S
smooth muscle               P
Rat heart                          S
Rat kidney                        S
Rat cerebral cortex           S P
Rat cerebellum                 S P
Rat skeletal muscle          S
Rat spleen                        S
Rat small  intestinal          S muscle
Rat adrenal                     S
Rat epididymal fat             S
Rat liver                            DEAE-
cellulose
Rat cerebral cortex           DEAE- cellulose
22.1                  674.2
12.4                    37.3
111.7                3625.5
8.9                  297.1
27.0                    35.3
10.5                  242.8
51.6                  975.9
55.7                1122.6
14.2                  209.1
23.7                  784.4
20.6                  201.2
6.1                    84.0
73.5                  381.7
42.9                  250.6

37.5                  394.2
9.4                  108.5
296.2                1406.3

57.2                  174.3
30.5
3.0
32.5
33.4
1.3
23.1
18.9
20.2
14.7
33.1
9.8
13.8
5.2
5.8
10.5
11.5
4.7

3.0

Bovine lung

Rat heart
Sephadex G-100
Sephadex
G-100
61.4                1672.1

30.2                   171.9
27.2

5.7

218                                   Physiology or Medicine  1998

Since  this was  the  first  and  only example  of a free-radical  activating  an  en- zyme, we 
committed ourselves to purifying the isoforms of guanylyl cyclase to homogeneity  in order to 
reexamine  the effects of nitric oxide. We could not exclude the possibility that nitric oxide was 
being converted to yet some other activating  species or  that it was not  inhibiting  an inhibitor 
 of  the enzyme  in our  crude  preparations.  The  inhibition  of a guanylyl cyclase  inhibitor  
could appear in our  assays as a possible activation due  to disinhibition.
After purifying the soluble guanylyl cyclase  to homogeneity, nitric oxide ac-
tivation  was still observed  (21,31).  In fact,  the  apparent  Kay for  nitric  oxide continued  
to  decrease  as we  purified  the  enzyme.  Purified  soluble  guanylyl cyclase  has a Kact  or  
EC50 for nitric oxide in  the  order of 1 to 10 nM depen- ding  upon  the  conditions  of  the  
assay  and   the  presence  of other  materials such as thiols, proteins, sugars, lipids, etc. that 
can form complexes with nitric oxide  and  alter  its effective  concentration  to  activate  
guanylyl  cyclase  (31) .
These  later  agents  can  act  as  traps  or  scavengers  to  form  nitro  or  nitroso adducts and 
 complexes  to increase  the Kay/EC50.   In some cases these com- plexes  can  themselves  also  
become  nitrovasodilators or  nitric  oxide  “pro- drugs” to re-release nitric oxide under 
favorable conditions.

IS NITRIC OXIDE A NATURAL ENDOGENOUS  GUANYLYL CYCLASE ACTIVATOR?
We proposed in 1978 that nitric oxide formation from some endogenous pre- cursor  could  perhaps  
explain  hormone,  autacoid  and  neurotransmitter  ef- fects on  cyclic  GMP synthesis in  intact 
cells and  tissue  (19,  21) . We  thought that  perhaps  appropriate   hormone  treatment  could  
influence   the  redox state of cells and  the formation of nitric oxide from an endogenous 
precursor or the metabolism  of nitric oxide. We also thought that nitric oxide could be an 
intracellular second messenger  to mediate  the effects of hormones. Thus, it could  perhaps join  
the short  but growing  list of second  messenger  mole- cules  that  included  cyclic  AMP,  
cyclic  GMP,  Ca++,  eicosanoids,  lipids,  pro- teins,  etc.  Again  our  colleagues  thought  we  
were  crazy  to  believe  that  a  re- active   free   radical   could   activate   an  enzyme   
and   function   as  a  second messenger. After all, nitric oxide was a known pollutant from the 
combustion of  numerous  substances  that  inactivated  or  destroyed  various  macromole- cules 
and  depleted  the ozone layer. It surely could  not  be a second  messeng- er signaling molecule 
we were told  by the skeptics.
In  order  to  prove  this  hypothesis  it  would  require  a  major  technical  ad- vance. If, 
indeed, nitric oxide was an endogenous second  messenger  and  re- gulator of guanylyl cyclase, one 
 would expect that tissue levels would be about
I  to 10 nM  (levels near  the Kay or  EC50)  in order  to be physiologically rele- vant and  
permit the fluctuations in nitric oxide concentrations to control en-
zyme activity. If the concentrations in tissue were much higher, one would ex- pect  the enzyme  to 
always be activated  and  the  physiological  significance  of nitric oxide as a regulator  would  
be less convincing  and  meaningful.  Unfor- tunately,  the assays for nitric oxide and its 
oxidation  products  (nitrite and  ni-

Ferid  Murad                                                    219

trate) were crude colormetric and spectrophotometric assays that were sever- al orders of magnitude 
less sensitive than needed (about millimolar to micro- molar) . Thus, our hypothesis  remained  
untestable  for several  years  until we and other developed  more specific and sensitive  assays 
for the free radical.

DISCOVERY OF EDRF
In  1980  Furchgott  presented  a  seminar  in  our  Pharmacology  Department while I was at  the  
University of Virginia. He was excited about his recent dis- covery of endothelium-derived relaxing 
factor  (EDRF)  and  the  ability of en- dothelial cells to generate and release a labile substance 
 that produced relax- ation of the  underlying smooth muscle in vascular segments  (29). The 
effects of EDRF shared many of the  features and  properties of nitrovasodilators and I suggested 
to him that perhaps increased cyclic GMP levels could explain his observations  with  light-induced 
 and  endothelium-induced  relaxation.  We even planned a collaboration  to test this hypothesis 
which never materialized because of our  subsequent  move  to Stanford University in 1981.
At  the   time,  Robert  Rapoport  was  one   of  my  new  fellows  working  with tracheal and 
vascular smooth muscle preparations and impatiently waited for the  collaboration  to  begin.  
After  a  brief  visit  to  our  new laboratory  by  the late Michael  Peach  in 1982 and  his 
queries about our  interests  in  EDRF, we then  proceeded  to  demonstrate  independently  that  
EDRF  did,  indeed,  in- crease cyclic  GMP synthesis in  the smooth  muscle compartment  of rat 
aorta segments  (32—38)  (Figure  4). We observed  similar  effects of EDRF on cyclic GMP formation 
with a variety of endothelium-dependent vasodilators such as







30                                                                            80
70
60
20                                     50
40
10                                                                            30
20
10

0   10  20  30             60             90            120
Time (sec)
Figure  4.  Effects  of acetylcholine  on  cyclic  GMP and  cyclic AMP accumulation  (solid  
symbols) and   relaxation   (open  symbols)  of  rat  aorta  segments  with  (solid  lines)  and  
without  (dashed lines)  endothelium.  (with permission) [32] .

220                                        Physiology  or  Medicine  1998

acetylcholine,  A23187,  thrombin,  ATP,  bradykinin,   etc.  (32—38) .  We  con- tinued the work 
to show that EDRF formation  as well as nitrovasodilators also increased  cyclic  GMP-dependent  
protein  kinase  activity  and  altered  protein phophorylation  of many endogenous  smooth  muscle 
 proteins including  the dephosphorylation of myosin  light chain  (32—38) .
Cyclic  GMP  accumulation  with  nitrovasodilators  or  endothelium-depen- dent vasodilators 
produced similar effects on cyclic GMP accumulation,  cyclic GMP-dependent  protein  kinase 
activation and altered 32PO4 incorporation  in the same family of proteins isolated with two 
dimensional  polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (32—38) . Subsequently,  we and others found that 
cyclic GMP decreased   phosphoinoside   metabolism    and   the   formation    of   inositol 
phosphates  including  inositol  trisphosphate  by decreasing  phospholipase  C activity  (39).  
These  and  other  effects  of  cyclic  GMP  would  be  expected  to decrease cytosolic free 
calcium  and the activity of myosin light chain kinase, a calcium/calmodulin-dependent enzyme.  The 
effect  of cyclic  GMP  elevating agents  to decrease  cytosolic  free  calcium  levels in  smooth  
muscle  and other tissues has been subsequently shown  by many laboratories.
Because  of  the  biochemical  similarities  of the  effects  of  nitrovasodilators and  EDRF  
producing  agents,  we  came  to  view  EDRF  as  the  “endogenous nitrate  or endogenous  
nitrovasodilator”  (40). Shortly  afterwards,  Furchgott and Ignarro  independently  proposed  that 
EDRF is nitric oxide  at a meeting at the Mayo Clinic in  the summer of 1986. I previously and 
continually  have argued  with  them  and others  that EDRF is probably  a famtly of  nitric  oxide 
adducts  or  complexes  as well  as  nitric  oxide.  This  controversy  remains  un- resolved  even 
 today in  that many nitro and nitroso  complexes  can  meet  the definition  of EDRF as originally 
defined  by Furchgott (29). These complexes are readily formed between  free nitric oxide in cells 
and the interstitial space with   various   cellular   constituents   such   as   thiols,   lipids, 
  proteins,   etc. Presumably,  many of  these substances can readily dissociate  their nitric 
oxide in  the correct environment to account for the free nitric oxide found in some vascular  
preparations.  Unfortunately, this pressing  issue may not be resolved in  the near future due to 
the low concentration  of EDRF expected. As noted above,  nitric oxide at concentrations of  1  to  
10 mM are sufficient  to activate guanylyl cyclase and permit the signaling  event. Clearly 
endothelial  cells and many other cells produce nitric oxide and the activator of the smooth muscle 
guanylyl  cyclase  is nitric oxide.  The  question  outstanding  is: what are  the in- tervening or 
intermediate  molecules presumably complexed with nitric oxide that Furchgott has called EDRF?
We and a number of laboratories showed that the effects of EDRF could be
blocked with  methylene  blue,  hemoglobin  arid other inhibitors of nitrovaso- dilator activation  
of guanylyl cyclase  (see Figure 2). The effects of nitric oxide or EDRF can also be mimicked by 
atriopeptins which  selectively activate par- ticulate  guanylyl  cyclase  (41,42)  (Figure  5).  
In  fact,  we  showed  that  atrio- peptin  receptors were  heterogeneous  with  two  receptor  
subclasses  (ANF-R1 and ANF-R2)  (43, 44). One of the atriopeptin  receptors  (ANF-R1)  is the ex- 
tracellular  domain  of  the  transmembrane  particulate  guanylyl  cyclase  (45).

Ferid  Murad                                                    22T





ENDOTHELIUM DEPENDENT VASODILATORS

ACETYLCHOLINE, HISTAMINE, THROMBIN,
AMP,
ETC.
ENDOTHELIUM

NI I RO- VASODILATORS

NO




EDRF
SMOOTH  MUSCLE

N”
SOLUBLE
*     GUANYLYL
CYCLASE
NO
CYCLIC  GMP


PARTIC.                   cGMP           cGMP GUANYLYL              KINASE        KINASE CYCLASE    
                                    (ACTIVE)
ANF-1                GTP


CGMP



GTP


G. CYCLASE ANF-1


NF  2

ATRIOPEPTINS

PROTEIN       P-PROTEIN


ANF 2                                                   Ca“'

P-MYOSIN                   MYOSIN
PLC       oc  LIGHT CHAIN     LIGHT CHAIN
Ca**

CONTRACTION      RELAXATION

Figure S. Effects of endothelium-dependent vasodilators, nitrovasodilators and atriopeptins in rat 
aorta segments.  PLC is phopholipase  C; PI,  phosphoinositides; DG, diacylglycerol; IP's, 
inositcil phosphates.  (with  permission) [50] .

This work  has been  elegantly  confirmed  by  the  cDNA cloning  studies from Garbers’ laboratory  
(46).

EFFECTS OF L-ARGININE ON GUANYLYL CYCLASE ACTIVATION  AND NITRITE AND NITRATE FORMATION
Degucci’s laboratory was also one of the earlier few laboratories interested in guanylyl  cyclase.  
In  1982,  Degucci's  laboratory  reported  that  brain  and/or neuroblastoma  extracts  possessed  
an  endogenous  substance  that  activated crude  or  partially  purified  preparations  of  
soluble  guanylyl   cyclase   (47). Furthermore,   this  substance  was  identified  as  
L-arginine.  Activation   by  L- arginine   was   blocked   by   hemoglobin   and   
methylhydroxylamine,   which blocked the effects of nitrovasodilators. We confirmed  their 
observations with crude or partially purified preparations  of guanylyl cyclase  but found  that L- 
arginine failed to block our highly purified guanylyl cyclase preparations  (our unpublished  
observations) . These  observations  were  the  first  to report  argi- nine activation  of 
guanylyl cyclase  with effects similar  to those of nitric oxide and  nitrovasodilators.  
Unfortunately,  neither   they  nor  we  pursued   these arginine  effects  at the  time which  
could have  led to  the  earlier discovery  of nitric oxide synthase.
5ubsequently  Hibbs’  laboratory in  1987 found that the cytotoxic  effects of macrophages  on  
tumor  cells in  culture  correlated  with  the accumulation  of nitrite  and nitrate  in  the  
conditioned  media  (48). The cytotoxic  effects and accumulation  of nitrite and nitrate were 
increased with L-arginine and block- ed with L-arginine  analogues such as L-N-methyl arginine, an 
agent that later proved  to be an effective  competitive  inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase.

222                                  Physiology or Medicine  1998

The findings of Degucci and Hibbs were important,  timely, and critical ob- servations that 
subsequently  permitted  our laboratory and  many other labo- ratories to move forward  rapidly in 
understanding the role of nitric oxide in cellular signaling  (49—52). Unfortunately, their 
laboratories have not  received sufficient recognition for these important observations.

CHARACTERIZATION OF NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE AND ITS ISOFORMS
Within  several years many laboratories  including  our own began  to characte- rize, purify and 
clone this novel synthetic  pathway  that converted  L-arginine to nitric oxide and citrulline.  
Initially the most active  and productive  labora- tories included Marletta and Stuehr, Palmer and 
Moncada, Bredt and Snyder, Stuehr  and  Nathans,   and  our  own   laboratory   (see  9—11   and  
references therein) .
The  first nitric  oxide  synthase  (NOS)  isoform  to be  purified  was  the  neu- ronal  or  
brain  NOS  or NOS-I,  also  called  Type  1  NOS  or constitutive  NOS (Table 4). The first 
investigators  to purify and characterize NOS-I were Bredt and Snyder  (53)  and our own  
laboratory  (54-57). This was followed  shortly thereafter  by  NOS-2  or  inducible  NOS,  also  
Type  II  NOS  by  Stuehr  and Nathans  (58) , and then NOS-3 or endothelial  NOS, Type III  NOS in 
our lab (59—fi2) . Monoclonal  and polyclonal antibodies to the purified isoforms and synthetic  
peptide  fragments  were  produced  as  were  the  cDNA  clones  for these   three  gene   products 
  (see   9—I 1   and   the   references   therein) .  The chromosomal  location  for each  isoform  
has been  identified  as  have  the  nu- merous  cosubstrates,  cofactors  and  prosthetic  groups  
(O  ,  NADPH,  FMN, FAD,  tetrahydrobiopterin,  and  heme)  (see  11  and  references  therein) . 
All three isoforms are regulated by calmodulin  but only NOS-1  and NOS-3  have


Table  4. Nitric oxide synthase isoforms.

NOS-1
(155kD)



NOS-2 (125kO)



NOS-3 (135kD)
neuronal, brain, Type I-NOS; central and peripheral neurons, NANC neurons, islets, endometrium, 
skeletal muscle, etc.


inducible, Type II-NOS; macrophage, liver, smooth muscle, endothelium, heart, etc; effects of LPS, 
cytokines and glucocorticoids

endothelial, Type III-NOS; endothelium,
brain, heart, etc.; acylation, phosphorylation

Ferid  Murad                                                    2t3

apparent and obvious regulation  with  altered cytosolic free calcium  concen- trations.  NOS-2  
contains  calmodulin  as a  tightly  bound  component  or sub- unit after translation  and assembly 
such  that dependency upon cytosolic free calcium  levels is not  demonstrable.  The  catalytically 
 active  isoforms exist as homodimers with a heme prosthetic group serving to facilitate dimer 
forma- tion. The  carboxy terminal domain  has considerable  homology  between  the isoforms,  and  
is homologous  to cytochrome  P450.  The  amino  terminal  do- main has less homology and  may 
serve to bind  to regulatory proteins and/or chaperones for its subcellular compartmentation. The 
homology of the  three isoforms is only about 50  to 60% while  the homology of a given  isoform  
be- tween  species  can  be  as great  as 85  to 92%.  Some  of  the  properties  of  the NOS 
isoforms are summarized  in Table 4.
NOS converts  L-arginine  to L-hydroxyarginine and  subsequently  to nitric oxide and  citruline as 
summarized  in Figure 6. The  transfer  of electrons for




H2N           NH2


NH





H3N        COO




Ca/CaM BH4 NADPH



H2O
OH
H2N


NH





H,N        COO-




Ca/CaM
BH4
d /O  tel A It  Of-I



H2O


H2N


NH

t          +   NO



H3N        COO


L-arginine             /\/-hydroxy-L-arginine           L-citrulline
Figure 6. The  nitric oxide synthetic pathway.




the oxidation  of the guanadino nitrogen of L-arginine  and the precise role of each  cofactor  
remains  unresolved.  This  continues  as  an  active  area  of  in- vestigation in many 
laboratories. Recent x-ray diffraction studies with crystals of some  NOS isoform fragments are 
currently underway in several laborato- ries. These studies should  shed some light  upon  the 
precise  roles of  the co- factors  and  prosthetic  groups.  These  studies  may  also  permit  
the  develop- ment of highly selective and  effective inhibitors of each of the NOS isoforms in  
order  to  determine  other  important  biological  roles of  nitric  oxide  and develop new and  
important  therapeutic  agents  (see below).
Presumably the  to itfu activity of NOS can be regulated  by the availability of substrate,  
cofactors  and   prosthetic  groups.  However,  to  date  most  of  the regulation  of  NOS-1  and  
 NOS-3  has focused  on  the  alterations  of  cytosolic

224                                  Physiology or  Medicine  1998

free calcium caused by a myriad  of hormones, autacoids,  neurotransmitters, etc.  (see Figure 7).
NOS-2  does  not  appear  to  be  present  under  normal  conditions  in  most cells. However, upon 
exposure  to endotoxin  (LPS)  interferon  y, IL 1, TNF n and  other proinflammatory cytokines, the 
 levels of mRNA, protein and cata- lytic activity begin  to increase within one  hour and reach  
maximal levels in 6 to  18  hours.  Various  anti-inflammatory  cytokines  and  glucocorticoids  
can decrease  the induction  of  NOS-2.  It is thought  that some of  the  pharmacol- ogical and  
biological effects of these factors may be explained by increased  or decreased nitric oxide 
formation. For example,  the hypotension  observed in septic shock as well as the ensuing “multiple 
organ failure syndrome”  (MOF) may be due  to excessive  nitric oxide formation from NOS-2 
induction.

TRANSLATIONAL  AND POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS  OF NOS
All  of  the  isoforms  can  probably  be  phosphorylated  by a variety  of  protein kinases  
including  cyclic  AMP-dependent  protein  kinase,  cyclic  GMP-depen- dent protein kinase, protein 
 kinase C and  Ca++/calmodulin-dependent pro- tein kinase  (63). With phosphorylation, the activity 
of  the enzyme can  be in- creased  or  decreased.  However,  the  physiological  relevance  of  
phosphoryla- tion  to  regulate  enzyme  activity  or  enzyme  translocation  from  one  cellular 
compartment to another is unknown  (9—11 and   references therein). In some cell-free  systems with 
 purified  NOS-1,  as many as 6 to 7 moles of  phosphate


Hormones
and other  + Receptor
ligands

Calcium/calmodulin
NADPH
Tetrahydrobiopterin
FMN, FAD
Heme


Arginine



EDRF/NO
Synthase (Types I-III)




Inhibitors (NMA, NNA)




Oxidizing or reducing agents and
EDRF
(Guanylyl Cyclase-Activating-Factor Endogenous Nitrovasoldilator)

scavengers   Inactive Soluble
Guanylyl Cyclase
NO               Active Soluble Guanylyl Cyclase

GTP              cyclic GMP
Figure  7.  Hormonal  regulators  of  nitric  oxide  and  cyclic  GMP  formation.  NMA,  
N-methyl-L- arginine; NNA, N-nitro-L-arginine. (with permission) [9].

Ferid  Murad                                                        225

can  be incorporated  into one monomer  of protein  (63). Studies with  intact cells and tissues 
with permeable and specific protein  kinase inhibitors are re- quired  to  determine  the  
physiological  relevance  of  NOS  phosphorylation with  regard  to  catalytic  activity,  enzyme  
compartmentation,  enzyme  regula- tion and participation  in various biological processes. 
Unfortunately, selective and permeable  protein kinase inhibitors are not widely available.
NOS-3 is also myristoylated  and palmitylated  and acylation  probably parti- cipates in the 
location of this isoform in the plasma membrane  and/or other organelles  (61, 64-66). Recently,  
Michels'  laboratory has described  the asso- ciation of NOS-3 with  the caveoloae of the plasma 
membrane  (65, 66). These structures  also  contain  many  other  proteins  participating  in  cell 
 signaling events.  Mechanisms  to  regulate  and chaperon  NOS-3  from  the  Golgi  to  the 
caveolae  and  the  recycling  of NOS-3  to  the cytosol  and perhaps  back  to  the plasma  
membrane  are  areas  of  active  investigation.  These  processes  could perhaps serve as 
important sites for regulation  and drug targeting.
The  three  gene  products  of  NOS  described  to  date,  possible  alternate mRNA splicing due to 
multiple promoters  (i.e. NOS-1)  (67) and various post- translational  modifications  should  
permit  a multitude  of NOS  isoforms and activities  for  regulation.  Undoubtedly   this  will  
be  a  complex  problem   to resolve with regard to NOS functions, regulation and selective 
inhibition  (see below) . Some cells possess only one isoform while other cells have several iso- 
forms  with  different  subcellular  locations  and  perhaps  different  functions. The  precise  
location  of  pools  of  nitric  oxide  in  cells and  their proximity  to guanylyl cyclase, 
thiols, fatty acids, heme-containing scavengers or sinks, other free  radicals  such  as  
superoxide  anions,  etc.  should  have  marked  and  pro- found  effects  on  the  biological  
and/or  cytotoxic  properties  of  nitric  oxide. Thus,  numerous  questions  regarding  nitric  
oxide  formation,  location,  and function  remain  to be addressed.

NOS INHIBITORS
Numerous  NOS  inhibitors  have  been  described.  Novel  arginine  based  and guanidine  based  
antagonists  are  areas  of  active  investigation   in  both  aca- demic and industrial 
laboratories  (see 9—11 and references therein). Most in- hibitors  to  date  are  competitive  
antagonists  and  may  be  partly selective  for one  or  another  isoform.  Commercially  
available  compounds  may  show  as much   as  100-  to  200-fold  selectivity   for  one  or  
another  isoform.  Unfor- tunately,  to date, there are no highly specific inhibitors of one or 
another iso- form.  Such  agents  could  prove  invaluable  to  sort  out  the  NOS  isoforms  in 
various  cell  types and the biological  events  that  they regulate.  Furthermore, investigations 
in this area could result in highly selective and perhaps specific and efficacious therapeutic 
agents without numerous side effects since one or more  isoforms  of  NOS  is  found  in  virtually 
 all  cells  with  few  exceptions. Currently,  some  NOS  inhibitors  are  in  clinical  trials  
for  patients  in  septic shock. Other clinical studies are under discussion  and consideration.
Unfortunately, the earliest clinical studies with NOS inhibitors were not suf-

226                                      Physiology or  Medicine  1998

ficiently selective as expected from previous ix vitro studies with the inhibition of  NOS 
isoforms.  Thus,  the initial enthusiasm  for the clinical  utility of  NOS inhibitors  is  
beginning  to  meet  with  some  concerns  and  skepticism  as  un- wanted  side effects become  
apparent, some of which  were predictable  from earlier basic biological studies. Perhaps  this 
could serve as a lesson  regarding the  selection  of  nonspecific  agents  for  clinical  
development  prematurely. None  the  less,  many  believe  that  these  molecular  targets  will  
prove  to  be valuable  approaches  to  some  diseases  with  excess  nitric  oxide  production. 
However, more selective agents are necessary due  to the broad distribution of the  many  NOS 
isoforms and  their  important  and diverse  roles in  biological regulation.

NO DONORS OR PRODRUGS IN CLINICAL MEDICINE
A number of NO prodrugs have been used successfully since the use of nitro- glycerin  and  other 
organic  nitrates for angina  pectoris more  than  a century ago.  Nitroglycerin  was discovered  
in 1847, and  it and  other organic  nitrates were first used clinically in  the 1870s. Ironically, 
Alfred  Nobel, who discover- ed  how  to safely formulate  dynamite  from  nitroglycerin, was  
prescribed  ni- troglycerin for his angina pectoris late in life, but  he  refused to take it 
because of the known vascular headaches of his factory workers. Other therapeutics of the  
“nitrovasodilator class” include  nitroprusside, organic  and  inorganic  ni- trites and  nitrates, 
nitrosamines,  nitrogen  mustards, hydrazines, nitrosoureas, etc. Many academic and industrial 
laboratories are actively synthesizing addi- tional  “NO-donors”  that release NO at  predictable  
rates in specific tissues or environments  or  can  be attached  to various grafts and  supports 
for vascular surgical  procedures  (see 11 and  references therein). The controlled  delivery of 
nitric oxide with a prodrug or device at a specific target site or vascular bed without  the  
tolerance  that  is  developed  to  nitroglycerin  would  be  a  most significant contribution  to 
therapy of several vascular disorders and other dis- eases. There is currently considerable  
promise  that such agents and  delivery methods can  be achieved  in  that  the work is becoming 
more of a medicinal chemistry  and/or  engineering  effort  with  obvious  targets.  An  important 
clinical indication  is reperfusion  injury after surgery or  instrumentation for vascular  
patency.  There  are  obviously  many  other  indications  that  can  be listed such as vascular 
remodeling,  tissue  transplantation, cancer vasculariza- tion,  etc.  with  the  known  effects  
of  nitric  oxide  on  platelet  aggregation, vascular smooth  muscle  proliferation, 
atherogenesis, angiogenesis,  cytotoxi- city, etc.
One  of  the  most  rapidly  advancing  area  of  clinical  application  is  the  in- halation of 
low concentrations of the  NO gas (see 11 and references therein). Interestingly, nitric oxide at 
low concentrations is quite stable and  minimally reactive. Its reactivity and  toxicity is a 
second order reaction dependent upon the concentration  of  nitric oxide and  its interaction  with 
other free radicals and  reactive oxygen species such as superoxide. At higher concentrations NO 
can  interact  with  many  transition  metals,  heme-containing  proteins,  thiol

Ferid  Murad                                                        t27

groups  and  can  oxidize  functionalities on  polynucleotides (RNA and  DNA) and  proteins  and  
can  form  strand  breaks  in  polynucleotides  (Figure  8). There is a rapid and almost 
diffusion-limited interaction  of nitric oxide with superoxide  to form the very reactive 
peroxynitrite. This is becoming a very in- teresting area of investigation  that undoubtedly 
relates to the toxic properties of these free radicals.



Hormones           Ca++
Neurotoxins
Etc.                          CM


G cyclase


cGMP
Figure 8. Formation and  fate of nitric oxide.
Nitrite, nitrate
Nitrosyls with transition metals
Nitrosation with thiols


ONOO"  —•     Protein nitration
Peroxynitrite

When  low concentrations of nitric  oxide  are administered  to premature  in- fants with low birth 
weights via nasal catheters, nitric oxide has marked bene- ficial effects on infant mortality. The  
pulmonary hypertension  is improved as is the pulmonary and systemic oxygenation  and  systemic 
hypertension  resul- ting  from  the  right  to  left shunting  via  the  patent  ductus  
arteriosus.  There may also  be  beneficial  effects in  infants and  children  with  congenital  
heart defects with right to left shunting and hypoxia. The  beneficial effects in adult patients  
with  various  pulmonary  disorders  including  pulmonary  hyperten- sion and/or acute respiratory 
distress syndrome  (ARDS)  are  less convincing and  more controversial. The controversy and  
variability of the response to in- haled  nitric  oxide in  adults undoubtedly  relates  to  the  
etiology of  their dis- ease  and  the  presence  or  absence  of some  “reversible  components”  
of  their pathology.  Some  of  the  molecular  targets  and  processes  regulated  by  NO and/ or 
cyclic GMP are  summarized  in Tables 5 and 6. These targets can ob- viously suggest other 
therapeutic uses for NOS inhibitors and  NO prodrugs.

SUMMARY
Since our  discovery of the first biological effects of nitric oxide more than two decades  ago,  
more  than  20,000  publications  have  appeared  on  this  topic. There have been more than 4500 
to 5000 publications per year in the recent several years and  the  number of publications 
continues to grow exponential- ly. It  has become almost impossible for investigators to read all 
the abstracts of

228                                      Physiology or Medicine  1998

Table 5. Nitric oxide and cyclic GMP targets.
Guanylyl cyclase
Cyclic nucleotide protein kinases Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases Cyclooxygenase (COX II)
Heme proteins, iron centers and thiol groups DNA modifications
Glutamate (NMDA) receptor regulation Phospholipase C


Table 6. Some processes regulated  by nitric oxide and/or cyclic GMP.
Smooth, cardiac and skeletal muscle relaxation Retinal phototransduction
Intestinal secretion and ion transport Renal tubular-glomerular feedback Endothelial permeability
Smooth muscle proliferation Platelet adhesion and aggregation Insulin secretion
Hormone production and secretion Neurotransmission
Long-term potentiation and memory Regulation of transcription
Tissue injury and inflammation Pathogen cytotoxicity
Tumor cytotoxicity
Calcium transport and redistribution



these  publications,  let  alone  the  full  papers.  At  times  it  can  be  difficult  to keep up 
with just the titles, authors and laboratories and remain current. This will  undoubtedly test the  
mentorship of many of us as we train students and fellows who need exciting and  novel publications 
and  the priorities required

Ferid  Murad                                                    229

to  find  positions  in  our  competitive  research  society  and  remain  funded. However,  there  
seems  to  be  no  obvious  saturation  of the  talent  required  in this exciting and growing  
field. Numerous important questions remain  to be addressed  and  answered.  I  have  attempted  to 
raise  some  of  these  areas  and questions here. What excitement  it has been  for  those  of  us 
who joined  the field early and were  able  to see such  major  advances  and progress  in  recent 
years. There  still remain  many nuggets available  in a vast gold mine of nitric oxide  biology.  
By no means  has  the  field  been  over-mined  with  a paucity  of gems to be found.
In recent years a number of laboratories  have made significant advances in nitric oxide research. 
Some current areas of active research are listed in Table
7. Undoubtedly,  other interesting  areas will also emerge and require increas- ing research  and 
attention.

Table 7. Some areas of active nitric oxide research.
transcriptional regulation overexpression and gene therapy gene knockouts
histochemistry, hybridization acylation, phosphorylation, etc.
cell types with NOS isoforms and functions cyclic GMP mediated effects
non-cyclic GMP mediated effects selective/specific NOS inhibitors novel NO donors


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like  to  thank  the eighty-two  trainees  to date who have shared in  this work with me. I 
must acknowledge  the major contributions chronologically of Hiroshi   Kimura,   Shoji   Katsuki,   
William   Arnold,   Mark   Braughler,   John Lewicki,   Scott  Waldman,   Robert  Rapaport,  
Yoshinari   Kamisaki,  Takayashi Kuno, Masaki Nakane, Kunio Ishii, Dale Leitman, Ulrich Fostermann, 
Harold
Schmidt, Jennifer   Pollock,  and  many  others who  participated  in  various  as- pects of  this 
work. Their collaboration, curiosity,  hard work,  sense of  humor
and  present  successes  have  added  even  more  to  my  excitement  of  an  aca- demic   career.  
 I  wish   to  also   thank   the  John   S.   Dunn   Foundation,   the University of Texas, and 
numerous agencies for their past grant support and in particular  the National Institute of Health.

230

REFERENCES
Physiology or Medicine  1998

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.


8.

9.

10.

11.



13.


14.

15.

\6.

17.

18.

19.

20.



21.



22.
Hardman, J.,  Beavo,  T., Gray, J.,  Chrisman,  T., Patterson,  W., and Sutherland, E.: The 
formation  and metabolism  of cyclic GMP.  Ann. N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  185: 27—35,  1971.
White,  A.:  Guanylate  cyclase  activity  in  heart  and  lung.  Adv.  Cyclic  Nucleotide  Res.  
5: 353—373,  1975.
Appleman,  M., and Terasaki, W.:  Regulation  of cyclic  nucleotide  phosphodiesterase.
Adv.  Cyclic Nucleotide Res. 5:  153—162,  1975.
Greengard,  P.:  Cyclic  nucleotides,  protein  phosphorylation and  neuronal  function.
Adv.  Cyclic Nucleotide Res. 5: 585—602,  1975.
Kimura,  H.,  Murad,  F.:  Evidence  for  two  different  forms  of guanylate  cyclase  in  rat 
heart. J.  Biol.  Chem.  249: 6910—19,  1974.
Kimura, H., Murad, F.: Two forms of guanylate  cyclase  in mammalian  tissues and pos- sible 
mechanisms  for their regulation.  Metabolism.  24: 439—45,  1975.
Kimura,  H., Murad, F.: Increased particulate  and decreased soluble guanylate  cyclase activity  
in  regenerating   liver,  fetal  liver,  and  hepatoma.   Proc.   Natl.   Acad.   Sci.   72: 
1965—69,  1975.
Waldman, S.A., Murad, F.: Cyclic GMP synthesis and function. Pharm. Reu. 39: 163—96, 1987.
Murad,   F.,  editor.  Cyclic   GMP   Synthesis,   Metabolism   and  Function,   In:  Adv.  In
Pharmacol., Vol. 26, pp 1—335, Academic Press,  1994
Murad,  F.: The  role of nitric oxide in modulating  guanylyl  cyclase.  Neuiotransmission.
Vol. X, 1—4,  1994.
Ignarro,  L. and Murad,  F.  (eds),  Nitric  Oxide:  Biochemistry,  Molecular  Biology,  and 
Therapeutic  Implications.  Advances  iti Pharmacology,  Volume  34, pp  1—516,  Academic Press,  
1995.
Chinkers,  M.  and  Garbers,  D.:  Signal  Transduction   by  guanylyl  cyclase.  Ann.  Reu. 
Biochemistry.  60: 553—575,  1991.
Barbers,  D.,  Lowe,  D.,  Dongatt,  L., Chinkers,  M.,  Thorpe,  D., Bentley,  C., Ramareo, 
Goeddel, and Singh,  S.: The membrane  form of guanylate  cyclase.  Cofd Spring Harbor Symp.  
Quart. Biol. 53: 99a-1003,  1988.
Kimura,  H., Mittal,  C.R, Murad,  F.: Activation  of guanylate  cyclase from  rat liver and other 
tissues with sodium azide. J.  Biol.  Clumi.  250: 801d—22,  1975.
Mittal, C.K, Kimura,  H., Murad, F.: Requirement for a macromolecular factor for so- dium azide 
activation  of guanylate  cyclase. J.  Cyclic Nucl.  fi'rs.  1: 261—69,  1975.
Kimura,  H., Mittal,  C.K, Murad,  F.: Increases in  cyclic  GMP  levels in  brain  and liver with 
sodium azide, an activator of guanylate  cyclase. Nature.  257: 700—02,  1975.
Kimura,  H., Mittal,  C.K, Murad,  F.: Appearance  of magnesium  guanylate  cyclase  ac- tivity in 
rat liver with sodium-azide  activation. J.  Biol.  Chem.  251: 7769—73,  1976.
Mittal, C.K., Kimura,  H., Murad,  F.: Purification  and properties of a protein  required for 
sodium azide activation  of guanylate  cyclase. J.  Biol.  Chem.  252: 4348—90,  1977.
Murad,  F.,  Mittal,  C.K.,  Arnold,  W.P.,  Katsuki,   S.,  Kimura,  H.:  Guanylate  cyclase: 
Activation  by azide,  nitro  compounds,  nitric  oxide,  and hydroxyl  radical  and  inhibi- tion 
by hemoglobin  and myoglobin.  Ads. Cyclic Nucl. Mrs. 9:  145—58,  1978.
Murad,   F.,   Mittal,   C.K,  Arnold,   W.P.,   Ichihara,   K.,  Braughler,   E.,   El-Zayat,   
M.: Properties and regulation  of guanylate  cyclase: Activation  by azide,  nitro compounds and 
hydroxyl radical and effects of heme containing proteins. Proc. of the NATO Adv. Study Inst. on  
Cyclic Nucleotides,  Italy,  1977, in  Molecular  Biology  and Pharmacotogf   of Cyclic 
Nucleotides,  Eds., G. Folca and R. Paoletti, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  pp. 33—42,  1978. Murad,  F.,  
Mittal,  C.K,  Arnold,  W.P.,  Braughler,  J.M.:  Effect  of  nitro-compound smooth  muscle 
relaxants and other materials on cyclic GMP metabolism.  Proc. of the 7"  International  Congress  
of  Pharmacology,  Paris,  France, July,  1978,  in  Advances  in Pharmacology  and 
Therapeutics,Vol. 3 Ions,  Cyclic Nucleotides,  Cholinergf, Ed., J.C. Stocklet, Pergamon  Press, 
New York, pp. 123—32,  1978.
Katsuki, S., Arnold, W., Mittal, C.K, Murad, F.: Stimulation  of guanylate cyclase  by so-

Ferid  Murad                                                      231

drum  nitroprusside, nitroglycerin  and nitric oxide in various  tissue  preparations  and 
comparison  to  the  effects  of  sodium  azide  and  hydroxylamine. J.  Cyclic  Nucl.  Res.  3: 
23—35,  1977.
Katsuki,  S., Arnold,  W.P.,  Mittal,  C.K, Murad,  F.:  Stimulation  of formation  and accu- 
mulation  of cyclic  GMP by smooth  muscle  relaxing  agents. Proc. of the  2  ᵈ Japanese Cyclic 
Nucleotide  Conference, July 7—9,  1977, pp. 44—50.
24.    Katsuki,  S., Murad,  F.: Regulation  of  cyclic  3’,5'-adnosine monophosphate  and  cyclic 
3',5’-guanosine  monophosphate   levels  and  contractility  in  bovine  tracheal  smooth muscle.  
Molecular Pharmacology.  13: 330—41,  1977.
25.    Katsuki, S., Arnold, W.P., Murad, F.: Effect of sodium nitroprusside, nitroglycerin  and 
sodium azide on levels of cyclic nucleotides and mechanical activity of various tissues. J.  Cyclic 
Nucl. Res. 3: 239—47,  1977.
26     Murad,  F.,  Manganiello,  V., Vaughan,  M.: Effects of guanosine  3’,5’-monophosphate on  
glycerol  production  and accumulation  of adenosine  3',5’-monophosphate during
incubation  of fat cells. J.  Biol.  Chem.  245: 3352—60,  1970.
27.    Manganiello,  V.,  Murad,  F., Vaughan,  M.: Effects of lipolytic  and antilipolytic  agents 
on cyclic 3',5’-adenosine monophosphate in fat cells./. Biol.  Chem.  246: 2195—02,  1971.
28.    Vaughan, M., Murad, F.: Adenyl cyclase activity in particles from fat cells. Biochemistry.
8:3092-99, 1969.

29.

30



32.

33.


34.





36.


3?

38.


39.


40.

41.
Furchgott,  R. and Zawadski, J.:  The obligatory  role of endothelial  cells in  the relaxa- tion 
of arterial smooth  muscle  to acetylcholine. Nature.  288: 373—376,  1980.
Arnold,  W.P.,  Mittal,  C.K,  Katsuki,  S.,  Murad,  F.: Nitric  oxide  activates guanylate  cy- 
clase  and  increases  guanosine  3',5’-monophosphate  levels  in  various  tissue  prepara- tions. 
Proc. Nat.  Acad.  Sci.,  USA. 44:  3203-£17,  1977.
Braughler, J  M., Mittal, C.K., Murad, F.: Purification  of soluble guanylate  cyclase from rat 
liver. Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.,  USA. 76: 219-22,  1979.
Rapoport,  R.M.,  Murad,  F.: Agonist-induced endothelial-dependent relaxation  in  rat thoracic 
aorta may be mediated  through  cyclic  GMP.  Circ.  Res. 52: 352—57,  1983.
Rapoport,   R.M.,  Murad,  F.:  Endothelium-dependent  and  nitrovasodilator-induced relaxation  of 
vascular  smooth  muscle:  Role  for cyclic  GMP. J.  Cyclic  Nucl.  and  Protein Phosphor. Res. 9: 
281—96,  1983.
Rapoport,  R.M.,  Draznin,  M.B.,  Murad,  F.: Endothelium-dependent vasodilator-  and 
nitrovasodilator-induced relaxation  may be mediated  through  cyclic  GMP formation and  cyclic  
GMP-dependent   protein  phosphorylation.  Trans.   Assoc.   Amer.   Phys.  96: 19—30,  1983.
Rapoport,  R.M., Draznin,  M.B., Murad,  F.: Endothelium  dependent  relaxation  in  rat aorta  may 
 be  mediated  through   cyclic  GMP-dependent   protein   phosphorylation. Nature.  306: 274—76,  
1983.
Fiscus, R.R., Rapoport, R.M., Murad, F.: Endothelium-dependent and nitrovasodilator- induced 
activation  of cyclic GMP-dependent  protein  kinase in rat aorta. J.  Cyclic Nucl. and Protein 
Phosphor.  Res. 9:  415—25,  1983.
Rapoport,  R.M.,  Murad,  F.: Effect of cyanide  on  nitrovasodilator-induced relaxation, cyclic 
GMP acumulation  and guanylate  cyclase activation  in rat aorta. Euiop. ].  Pharm. 104: 61—70,  
1984.
Rapoport, R.M., Draznin, M., Murad, F.: Sodium  nitroprusside-induced protein phos- phorylation  in 
 intact  rat aorta  is mimicked  by  8-bromo-cyclic GMP.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad. Sci., USA. 'f9: 
647O—74,  1982.
Hirata, M., Kohse, K,  Chang, C.H., Ikebe, T., Murad, F.: Mechanism  of cyclic GMP in- hibition  of 
inositol  phosphate  formation  in  rat aorta segments  and  cultured  bovine aortic smooth  muscle 
cells. /. Biol.  Chem.  265: 1268—73,  1990.
Murad,  F.:  Cyclic  guanosine  monophosphate  as  a  mediator  of vasodilation.  /.  Clin. Invest. 
78:  1—5,  1986.
Winquist, R.M., Faison, E.P., Waldman,  S.A., Schwartz, K,  Murad, F., Rapoport,  R.M.: Atrial  
natriuretic  factor elicits an  endothelium  independent  relaxation  and activates particulate  
guanylate   cyclase  in  vascular  smooth  muscle.  f'roc.  Nat.   Acad.   Sci.  81:

232               Physiology or  Nledicine  1998

7661-64, 1984.
42.     Waldman, S.A., Rapoport, R.M., Murad, F.: Atrial natriuretic factor selectively activates 
particulate  guanylate  cyclase and elevates cyclic  GMP in rat tissues. /. Biol.  Chem.  259: 
14332—334,  1984.
43.     Leitman,  D.C.,  Molina,  C.R., Waldman,  S.A.,  Murad,  F.: Atrial  natriuretic  peptide  
re- ceptors  and  the guanylate  cyclase-cyclic  GMP  system.  Proc.  o/ the UCLA  Symposium  on 
Atrial  Natriuretic                 in   Biological   and   Molecular   Aspects   of   Atrial  
Factors,   USLA Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology, 81: 39-56, 1988.
44.     Waldman,  S.A., Murad, F.: Cyclic GMP synthesis and function. Pharm.  Rev. 39: 163-96, 
1987.
45.    Kuno,  T., Andresen, J.W.,  Kamisaki,  Y, Waldman,  S.A.,  Chang,  L.Y,  Saheki,  S.,  Leit- 
man, D.C., Nakane, M., Murad, F.: Co-purification of an atrial natriuretic factor recep- tor and 
particulate guanylate  cyclase from rat lung. J.  Biol.  Chem.  261: 5817—23,  1986.
46.     Garbers,  D.L.: Guanyl cyclase linked receptors. Pharmacol.  Ther. 50: 337—345,  1991.
47.     Degucci,  T.  and Yoshiako,  M.:  L-arginine  identified  as  an  endogenous  activator  
for soluble guanylate  cyclase from neuroblastoma  cells. /. Biol.  Chem.  257: 10147,  1982.
48.    Hibbs,  J.,  Traintor,  R.  and  Vanin,  Z.:  Macrophage  cytotoxicity.  Role  for  
1-arginine deaminase  and imino nitrogen  activation  to nitrate.  Science.  235: 473, 1987.
49.     Murad, F.: The role of cyclic GMP in the mechanism of action of nitrovasodilators, en-
dotheliumAe pendent   agents   and   atrial   natriuretic   peptide.   Biochemical    Sociefi 
Transactions.  16: 490-92,  1988.
50      Murad, F., Leitman, D., Waldman,  S., Chang, C.H., Hirata, M., Kohse, K:  Effects of ni- 
trovasodilators,  endothelium-dependent  vasodilators  and  atrial  peptides  on  cGMP. Proc.  Cold 
 Spring  Harbor  Symposium  on  Qyantitatiue  Biology,   Signal  Transduction.   53: 
1005-1009,1988.

51.




52.



53

54.

55.


56.


si.

58.
Murad,  F.: Modulation  of  the guanylate  cyclase-cGMP  system  by vasodilators  and  the role of 
free radicals as second messengers.  Doc. of the NATO Advanced  Studies Institute on Vascular 
Endothelium:  Receptors  and  Transduction  Mechanisms.  Porto Carros,  Greece, June,  1988,  in  
Vascular Endothelium,  eds. j.D.  Catravas,  C.N.  Gillis and  U.S.  Ryan,  pp 157—164, Plenum 
Pub.,  1989.
Murad, F.: Mechanisms  for hormonal regulation of the different isoforms of guanylate cyclase. 
Proc.  of the 4Oth Mosbach Colloquium on Molecular Mechanisms  of Hormone Action, eds. Y.  Gehring, 
 E. Helmreich  and  G.  Schultz,  Springer,  Heidelberg,  April  1989.  pp 186-194,  1989.
Bredt, D. and Snyder, S.: Isolation of nitric oxide synthase, a calmodulin-requiring en- zyme. Doc. 
Nat.  Acad.  Sci., USA. 8'f: 682—685,  1990.
Gorsky, L., Ffirstermann, U., Ishii, K., Murad, F.: Production  of an EDRF-like activity in the 
cytosol of N1E-115 neuroblastoma  cells. FASEB Journal, 4: 1494—1500,  1990.
Ffirstermann,  U., Ishii, K,  Gorsky, L.D., Murad, F.: The cytosol of NIE-115 neuroblas- toma  
cells  synthesizes  and  EDRF-like  substance  that  relaxes  rabbit  aorta.  Naunyn Schmiedbergs  
Arch. Pharmacol  340: 771—774,  1989.
Fñrstermann,   U.,  Gorsky,  L.,  Pollock,  J.,   Ishii,  K,   Schmidt,  H.H.H.W.,  Heller,  M., 
Murad,  F.:  Hormone  induced  biosynthesis  of Endothelium-derived  relaxing  factor- Nitric  
oxide-like  material  in  N 1E-115  neuroblastoma  cells  requires  calcium  and  cal- modulin.  
Molecular Pharmacology. 38: 7—13,  1990.
Schmidt, H.H.H.W.,  Pollock, J.,  Nakane,  M., Gorsky, L., Fñrstermann,  U., Heller, M., Murad,  
F.:  Purificauon  of  a soluble  isoform  of  guanylyl  cyclase-activating-factor  syn- thase. 
Proc. Nat.  Acad.  Sci. 88: 365-€9,  1991.
Stuehr,  D., Cho, H., Kwon, N., Weise,  M. and Nathans, C.: Purification  and characte- rization  
of the  cytokine-induced  macrophage  nitric  oxide  synthase.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad. Sd., USA. 88: 
7'773—77,  1991.
59      Fñrstermann,  U.,  Schmidt,  H.H.H.W.,  Pollock, J.S.,  Heller,  M.,  Murad,  F.:  Enzymes
synthesizing guanylyl cyclase activating factor (GAF) in endothelial cells, neuroblasto- ma cells 
and rat brain. /. Cardiouasc.  Pharmacol  17  (Sup3) , 557—564,  1991.
60.    Ffirstermann,  U.,  Gorsky,  L.,  Pollock, j.S.,  Schmidt,  H.H.H.W.,  Ishii,  K,   Heller,  
M.,

Ferid  Murad                                                      2SS

Murad,  F.:  Subcellular  localization  and  regulation  of  the  enzymes  responsible  for EDRF   
synthesis   in   endothelial   cells   and   NIE-155   neuroblastoma   cells.   €ur  /. Pharmacol  
183: 1625—26,  1990.
61.    Pollock,  J.S.,  Fñrstermann,   U.,  Mitchell,  J.A.,  Warner,   T.D.,   Schmidt,   
H.H.H.W., Nakane, M., Murad, F.: Purification and characterization of particulate EDRF synthase 
from cultured and native bovine aortic endothelial cells. f'roc. Nat.  Acad.  Sci., USA. 88: 
10480-B4,  1991.
62.     Ffirstermann,  U., Schmidt, H.H.H.W., Pollock, J.S., Sheng, H., Mitchell, J.A., Warner, 
T.D.,  Nakane,  M.,  Murad,  F.:  Isoforms  of EDRF/NO  synthase:  Characterization  and 
purification  from different cell types. Biochem. Pharmacol.  42: 1849—57,  1991.
63.    Nakane,  M., Mitchell, J.A., Fñrstermann,  U., Murad, F.: Phosphorylation by calcium/ 
calmodulin-dependent protein  kinase  II and protein  kinase  C modulates  the activity of nitric 
oxide synthase. Biochem.  Biophys.  Res.  Com.  180: 1396—1402,  1991.
64.     Pollock, J.,  Klinghofer,  V.,  Fñrstermann,  U., and Murad,  F.: Endothelial  nitric  
oxide synthase  is myristylated. FEBS. Lett. 309: 402—404,  1992.
65.    Robinson,  L.J.,  Busconi,  L. and  Michel,  T.: Agonist-modulated palmitoylation of  en- 
dothelial  nitric oxide synthase. /. Biol.  them. 270: 995-998,  1995.
66.    Shaul, P.W., Smart, E.J    Robinson, L.J., German, Z., Yuhanna, I.S., Ying, Y., Anderson,
R. and Michel, T.: Acylation  targets endothelial nitric-oxide synthase to plasmalemmal caveolae.   
  Biol.  Chem.  271: 6518-22,  1996.
67.    Xie, J    Roddy,  P.,  Rife,  T.,  Murad,  F.  and Young,  A.:  Two closely  linked  but 
separate promoters  for  human  neuronal  nitric  oxide  synthase  gene  transcription.  Proc.  
Nat. Acad.  Sci. 92: 1242—1246,  1995.
