                                            JA C O B


                   Genetics of the bacterial cell



If I find myself here today, sharing with Andre Lwoff and Jacques Monod this
very great honor which is being bestowed upon us, it is undoubtedly because,
when I entered research in         I was fortunate enough to arrive at the right
place at the right time. At the right place, because there, in the attics of the
Pasteur Institute, a new discipline was emerging in an atmosphere of enthu-
siasm, lucid criticism, nonconformism, and friendship. At the right time,
cause then biology was bubbling with activity, changing its ways of thinking,
discovering in microorganisms a new and simple material, and drawing closer
to physics and chemistry. A rare moment, in which ignorance could become
a virtue.


                     Lysogeny and Bacterial Conjugation

The laboratory of Andre Lwoff was traversed by a long corridor where
everyone would meet for endless discussions of experiments and hypotheses.
At one end of the corridor, Jacques Monod’s group was adding
sides to bacterial cultures to initiate the biosynthesis of                  at the
other end, Andre Lwoff and his collaborators were dousing cultures of
        bacteria with ultraviolet light, having just discovered that means of
initiating the biosynthesis of bacteriophage. Each was therefore                 in
his own way, convinced that the two phenomena had nothing in common,
save a word.
   Having come to prepare a doctoral thesis with             Lwoff, I was assigned
the study of lysogeny in                             Thus I conscientiously set out
to irradiate this organism. However, it soon became apparent that the prob-
lem of lysogeny was primarily that of the relationship between the bacterium
and bacteriophage, in other words, a matter of genetics.
   The genetics of bacteria and bacteriophages was born just IO years earlier,
with a paper by Luria and                   It had continued to grow with the in-
vestigations of Lederberg and                Delbriick and          and


                 GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                              149
But this young science had already produced many surprises for biologists.
The most important was the demonstration by Avery, MacLeod, and Mc-
Carty5, and later by Hershey and Chase6, that genetic specificity is carried by
DNA. For the first time, it became possible to give some chemical and phys-
ical meaning to the old biological concepts of heredity, variation, and evolu-
tion. Such a molecular interpretation of genetic phenomena is exactly what
was provided in the structure of DNA proposed by Watson and Crick 7.
   Another surprise was the realization that their rapid growth rate, their abil-
ity to adapt to many different media, and the variety of their mechanisms of
genetic transfer make bacteria and viruses objects of choice for studying the
functions and reproduction of the cell. The work of Beadle and Tatum8, Le-
derberg9, and Benzer10 had shown that with a little imagination one can exert
on a population of microorganisms such a selective pressure as to isolate, al-
most at will, individuals in which a particular function has been altered by
mutation. Indeed, one of the most effective ways of determining the normal
mechanisms of the cell is to explore abnormalities in suitably selected mon-
sters.
   The first attempts to analyze lysogeny genetically, intended to determine
the location of the prophage in the bacterial cell, were carried out in 1952 by
E. and J. Lederberg11 and by Wollman 1 2. Certain crosses between lysogenic
and nonlysogenic bacteria suggested some linkage between the lysogenic
character-determined by the prophage of Escherichia coli and other char-
acters controlled by bacterial genes. However, other crosses gave anomalous
results. In fact, the answer obtained from these experiments could hardly be
decisive, since the mechanism of conjugation was not understood at the time.
   It was with the intention of continuing this study under somewhat different
conditions that I began to work with Elie Wollman; very soon our collabora-
tion became a particularly close and friendly one. We wanted in the first place
to understand the anomalies observed in crosses between lysogenic and non-
lysogenic bacteria, in particular the fact that the lysogenic character was not
transmitted to recombinants except when carried by the female. To study this
problem, we used a mutant male bacterium recently isolated by William
Hayes and named Hfr, because, in crosses with females, it produced recombi-
nants with high frequency13.   Upon crossing such lysogenic Hfr males to non-
lysogenic females, we were surprised to find out that the zygotes formed by
more than half the males happened to lyse and produce phage14. This phenom-
enon, termed zygotic induction, showed that the equilibrium between the
prophage and the bacterium is maintained by some regulatory system present


150                       1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB

in the cytoplasm of a lysogenic bacterium but absent from a nonlysogenic one.
Moreover, it showed that a genetic character transferred by the male can be
expressed in the zygote without being integrated into the chromosome of the
female bacterium. It thus became possible in bacterial conjugation to distin-
guish experimentally between transfer of genetic material and recombina-
tional event.
    In order to bring the analysis of conjugation down from the level of the
population to the level of the individual bacterial pair, we had to understand
how the genetic material of the male is transferred to the female. In particular,
one could try to interrupt conjugation after various times in order to find out
when the transfer takes place. Elie Wollman had the somewhat startling idea
of interrupting conjugation by placing a mating mixture in one of those
blenders which ordinarily find service in the kitchen. It turned out that the
shearing forces generated in the blender separate males from females; the male
chromosome is broken during transit, but the chromosomal fragment that
has already penetrated the female can express its potentialities and undergo
recombination. In this way, it could be shown that, after pairing, the male
slowly injects its chromosome into the female. This injection follows a strict
 schedule and, with any particular strain, the injection always starts at the same
 point 15. Marvellous organism, in which conjugal bliss can last for nearly three
 times the life-span of the individual!
    With this system, it became relatively easy to analyze the genetic constitu-
 tion of E. coli, to show that bacterial characters are arranged on a single linkage
 group, termed the bacterial chromosome, and to map them, not only by
 classical genetic methods, but also by physical and chemical measurements.
 Moreover, two new insights emerged from this study. First, the bacterial
 chromosome turned out to be a closed, or circular, structure. Second, it was
 not as fixed a unit as one might have believed: other genetic elements, termed
 episomes (for example, a phage chromosome or a sex factor), can be added to
 or subtracted from it16. These properties happened to be of great value in
 subsequent studies of the bacterial cell and of its functioning.




In addition to its interest for the analysis of strictly genetic phenomena, bacte-
rial conjugation proved particularly well adapted for the analysis of cellular
functions, since it provided a means of transferring to an entire population a


                  GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                                151
  given gene at a given time. The phenotypic effects produced by the sudden
  appearance of a new gene in the recipient bacterium are then manifested with-
  out the accompanying complications that occur in higher organisms as a
  result of morphogenesis and cellular differentiation.
    At his end of the corridor, Jacques Monod had reached the conclusion that
 further progress in the understanding of enzymatic induction required genetic
 analysis. Two types of mutations which altered the induced biosynthesis of
   -galactosidase were known at that time. One type abolished the capacity to
 produce an active protein. The other changed the inducible character of en-
 zyme synthesis so that it became constitutive, that is, able to proceed even in the
 absence of a - galactoside inducer. How are these genes expressed? What is
 the relationship between the genetic determinants revealed. by these muta-
 tions? What do the "inducible" or "constitutive" characters result from?
 Many of these questions could be experimentally approached through bacte-
 rial conjugation. By using male and female bacteria of suitable genotypes, one
 could transfer the desired allele of a given gene into a bacterium, and then
 study the conditions of enzyme synthesis in the zygote.
    Such experiments were carried out in collaboration with Arthur Pardee,
                                                            17
who had come to spend a year at the Pasteur Instituter . They led to two new
concepts. The first was relevant to the mechanism of induction itself. Transfer
into a constitutive bacterium of the genetic determinant for inducibility of the
enzyme by - galactosides resulted in formation of transitory diploids, hetero-
zygous for the characters "inducible/constitutive". Obviously, the phenotype
of such zygotes should permit a choice among the different hypotheses then
proposed to explain induction. The experiments showed that the "inducible"
allele can express itself independently of the gene controlling the synthesis of
the enzyme; and that it is dominant over the "constitutive" allele. This result
revealed the existence of a special gene which controls induction by forming
a cytoplasmic product that inhibits synthesis of the enzyme in the absence of
inducer. As we shall see later, this finding changed existing notions about the
mechanism of induction and made possible a genetic analysis of the systems
which regulate the rates of protein synthesis.
    The second observation concerned the functioning of the genetic material.
By transferring the gene that governs the structure of a protein into a bacte-
rium which lacks it, one can determine the conditions under which this gene
is expressed in the zygote. Here again, different predictions could be made,
depending on the nature of the mechanisms postulated for information trans-
fer in the formation of proteins. From kinetic analysis of protein synthesis,


152                      1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB

one could expect information concerning the primary gene product, the time
required for its synthesis, and its mode of action. The experiments showed
that, once transferred into a bacterium, and before genetic recombination has
occurred, the gene controlling the structure of a protein can begin to function
without detectable delay, producing protein at the maximal rate.
   This was quite a surprising observation, for it was inconsistent with the
notions that were prevalent at the time. Gene expression was then usually be-
lieved to consist in the accumulation of stable structures in the cytoplasm,
probably the RNA of ribosomes, which were assumed to serve as templates
specifying protein structures (see ref. 18). Such a scheme, which can be sum-
marized by the aphorism "one gene-one ribosome-one enzyme", was hardly
compatible with an immediate protein synthesis at maximal rate.
   Further study of this problem required the withdrawal of a gene from a
 bacterium in order to examine the consequences of this withdrawal on the
 synthesis of the corresponding protein: stable templates, if present, should
 permit residual synthesis. But, although conjugation made it easy to inject a
 particular gene, the extraction of a particular gene from a whole bacterial
 population appeared to be an impossible operation. What could be done,
 however, was to transfer a segment of chromosome heavily labeled with 32P
 and then destroy the gene under study by 32P decay. This delicate experiment
 was carried out by Monica Riley in the laboratory of Arthur Pardee; it showed
 unambiguously that capacity to produce the protein does not survive de-
 struction of the genera.
    The answer was clear: gene expression cannot proceed through formation
of stable templates. About the same time, the genetic and kinetic analyses of
induction further strengthened this belief. Induction appeared to take place
almost instantaneously and to act on structures which often specified several
proteins, not merely a single one. This finding was likewise inconsistent with
the theories then current, since it did not fit with the observed homogeneity
of the ribosomes.
    By virtue of their stability, their homogeneity, and their base composition,
the two known species of RNA did not fulfill the requirements for cytoplas-
mic templates. Since the notion that synthesis of proteins could occur directly
on DNA was incompatible with the cytoplasmic localization of the ribo-
somes and their role in this synthesis, only one possible hypothesis remained:
it was necessary to postulate the existence of a third species of RNA, the mes-
senger, a short-lived molecule charged with transmission of genetic informa-
tion to the cytoplasm2 0. According to this hypothesis, the ribosomes are non-


                GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                             153
 specific structures, which function as machines to translate the nucleic lan-
 guage, carried by the messenger, into the peptidic language, with the aid of
 the transfer RNA’s. In other words, the synthesis of a protein must be a two-
 step process: the deoxyribonucleotide sequence of DNA is first transcribed in-
 to messenger, the primary gene product; this messenger binds to the ribo-
 somes, bringing them a specific "program", and the nucleotide sequence of
 the messenger is then translated into the amino acid sequence. Despite the ob-
jections raised against it, this messenger hypothesis possessed two main vir-
 tues in our eyes: on the one hand, it allowed a coherent interpretation of a
 number of known facts which had, until then, remained isolated or incompa-
 tible; on the other hand, it led to some precise experimental predictions.
   In fact, even before it had appeared in print, the messenger hypothesis re-
ceived two experimental confirmations, Sydney Brenner and I had decided
to spend the month of June 1960 with M. Meselson, hunting for the mes-
senger in the laboratory of Max Delbrück at the California Institute of Tech-
nology. The best candidate for the role of messenger seemed to us to be the
RNA detected by Hershey21 and later by Volkin and Astrachan22 in bac-
teria infected with T2 phage. Thanks to the extraordinary intellectual and
experimental agility of Sydney Brenner, we were able to show, within a few
weeks, that the RNA formed by the phage associates with ribosomes syn-
thesized wholly before infection, to produce on them phage proteins. The same
ribosomes can thus make either phage or bacterial proteins, depending on the
messenger with which they associate. Accordingly, it is the messenger which
brings to the ribosomes a specific program for synthesis 23.
   At this time, another member of our group at the Pasteur Institute, François
Gros, had gone to spend several months at Harvard in the laboratory of J.D.
Watson. With their collaborators, they rapidly succeeded in demonstrating the
existence of a messenger fraction in the RNA of growing bacteria, and in estab -
lishing its principal properties 2 4. The course of events which led to the recog-
nition and isolation of the messenger has been described by J.D. Watson25.




Experiments on genetic transfer by conjugation not only led to a revision of
the concepts on the mechanisms of information transfer which occur in pro-
tein synthesis; they also made it possible to analyze the regulation of this syn-
thesis.


154                      1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB

   The most striking observation that emerged from the study of phage pro-
duction by lysogenic bacteria and of induction of -galactosidase synthesis
was the extraordinary degree of analogy between the two systems. Despite
the obvious differences between the production of a virus and that of an en-
zyme, the evidence showed that in both cases protein synthesis is subject to a
double genetic determinism: on the one hand, by structural genes, which speci-
fy the configuration of the peptide chains; on the other hand, by regulatory
genes, which control the expression of these structural genes. In both cases, the
properties of mutants showed that the effect of a regulatory gene consists in
inhibiting the expression of the structural genes, by forming a cytoplasmic
product which was called the repressor. In both cases, the induction of synthesis
(whether of phage or of enzyme) seemed to result from a similar process: an-
inhibition of the inhibitor. Thus, to our surprise, these two phenomena, studied
at opposite ends of the corridor, appeared to share a common fundamental
mechanism. It should be emphasized that this analogy was invaluable to us.
In biology, each material has its own virtues and is of particular value for a
certain kind of experimental investigation. The combination of two systems
significantly increased our means of analysis.
   The existence of a specific inhibitor, the repressor, had an immediate corol-
lary: the protein-forming apparatus must contain a site on which the repres-
sor acts in order to block synthesis. The repressor itself could be regarded as a
chemical signal emitted by the regulatory gene. The signal must have a re-
ceptor. The receptor had to be specific, hence genetically determined, and
hence accessible to mutation. In a system that permits induced biosynthesis of
an enzyme, any mutation damaging one element of the emitter-receptor sys-
tem which inhibits the synthesis should result in constitutive enzyme produc-
tion. Consequently it seemed difficult to distinguish mutations affecting the
emitter from those affecting the receptor, until we realized that the distinction
should be relatively easy to make in a diploid. This point can be illustrated by
a simple analogy. Let us consider a house in which the opening of each of two
doors is controlled by a little radio receiver. Let us suppose, furthermore, that
somewhere in the vicinity there exist two transmitters, each sending out the
same signal, which prevents the opening of the doors. If one of these trans-
mitters is damaged, the other continues to send out signals and the doors
remain closed: the damaged transmitter can be considered as "recessive" with
respect to the normal one. On the other hand, if one of the receivers is damaged,
it no longer responds to the inhibitory signal, and the door which it controls
(but only that one) opens. The damaged receiver is thus "dominant" over the


                  GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                                 155
normal one, but the lesion is manifested only by the door which it controls:
 the effect is cis and not trans, in genetic terminology26.
     Thus it should be possible in principle, by the use of diploid bacteria, to dis-
  tinguish, among constitutive mutations, those due to the regulatory gene
  from those due to the receptor. In fact, phage mutants corresponding to one or
  the other of these types had been known for a long time, although their nature
  became clear only in the light of this scheme. The existence of such mutations
  in phages encouraged us to search for analogous bacterial mutations affecting
  the enzymes of the lactose system. For that purpose, however, diploid bacteria
  were required. Although conjugation allowed formation of transitory di-
  ploids, their production was tricky and their analysis complicated. However,
  certain observations which had recently been made by Edward Adelberg led
  to the idea that the sexual episome F, which governs conjugation in E. coli,
  might under certain conditions incorporate and subsequently replicate a small
  fragment of the bacterial chromosome27. By using a series of strains in which
  the sexual episome was inserted at various points along the bacterial chromo-
  some, we succeeded in isolating episomes which had incorporated a neigh-
  boring chromosomal fragment. Bacteria harboring such an episome become
  stable diploids for a small genetic segment, so that it is easy to make all possible
  combinations of alleles in this segment28.
     Having thus constructed the requisite genetic tool for our analysis, we set
 out to isolate under different conditions a whole series of mutants constitutive
 for the lactose system, in order to subject them to functional analysis. These
 mutants proved to belong to two quite distinct groups, which possessed the
 predicted properties for the transmitter and the receiver, respectively.
    Many of these mutations were found to be "recessive" with respect to the
wild-type allele. They allowed a definition of the transmitter, that is, of the
regulatory gene. Some of these mutations possessed characteristic properties
which led to the indirect identification of the repressor, the product of the
regulatory gene . They are discussed in greater detail in Jacques Monod’s
                    29



lecture.
    In the second group, the mutations turned out to be "dominant" over the
wild-type allele, and only those genes which were located on the same chro-
mosome, that is, in cis position, were expressed constitutively. With these
mutations, it was possible to define the receptor of the repressor, termed the
operator3 0.
  The study of these mutants led, furthermore, to the notion that in bacteria
the genetic material is organized into units of activity called operons, which are


156                      1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB

often more complex than the gene considered as the unit of function. In fact,
the lactose system of E. coli contains three known proteins, and the three
genes governing their structure are adjacent to one another on a small seg-
ment of the chromosome with the operator at one end (Fig. 1). Constitutive
mutations, whether due to the alteration of the regulatory gene or of the oper-
ator, always display the remarkable property of being pleiotropic; that is,
they affect simultaneously, and to the same extent, the production of the
three proteins. The regulatory circuit therefore had to act on one integral
structure containing the information which specifies the amino acid sequences
of the three proteins. This structure could only be either the DNA itself or a
messenger common to the three genes. This idea was further supported by the
properties observed in mutations affecting the structural genes of the lactose
system. Whereas some of these mutations obey Beadle and Tatum’s "one
gene-one enzyme" rule in the sense that they abolish only one of the three
biochemical activities, others violate this rule by affecting the expression of
several genes at a time31,32 .
   The notion of the operon, a grouping of adjacent structural genes con-
trolled by a common operator, explained why the genes controlling the en-
zymes of the same biochemical pathway tend to remain clustered in bacteria,
as observed by             and Hartman . Similarly, it accounted for the co-
                                          33



ordinate production of enzymes already found in certain biochemical path-
way@. Although at first the operon concept was based exclusively on genetic
criteria, it now includes biochemical criteria as well. There are, in fact, a
number of experimental arguments, both genetics32,35 and biochemical36, in
support of the inference that an operon produces a single messenger, which
binds to ribosomes to form the series of peptide chains determined by the
different structural genes of the operon.
   We can therefore envision the activity of the genome of E. coli as follows.
The expression of the genetic material requires a continuous flow of unstable
messengers which dictate to the ribosomal machinery the specificity of the
proteins to be made. The genetic material consists of operons containing one
or more genes, each operon giving rise to one messenger. The production of
messenger by the operon is, in one way or another, inhibited by regulatory
loops composed of three elements: regulatory gene, repressor, operator. Spe-
cific metabolites intervene at the level of these loops to play their role as sig-
nals: in inducible systems, to inactivate the repressor and hence allow produc-
tion of messenger and ultimately of proteins; in repressible systems, to activate
the repressor, and hence inhibit production of messenger and of proteins. Ac-


                GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL




Fig. 1. The lactose region of Escherichin coli. The circle represents the E. coli chromosome
and shows the position of the lactose region (Lac) among other markers. An enlargement
of the lactose region is shown below. i, Regulatory gene; o, operator; p, promotor; z,
structural gene for                    y, structural gene for                  permease; Ac,
structural gene for galactoside transacetylase. The structural genes probably synthesize
a single messenger (of which the 5’-phosphate end is most likely at the operator end)
which associates with the ribosomes to form a polysome where the different peptide
chains (of which the amino end probably corresponds to the operator end) are synthe-
sized. The regulatory gene produces a specific repressor which, acting at the level of the
operator, blocks the production of the messenger and hence of the proteins. The
lactoside inducers act on the repressor to inactivate it, thus permitting the production of
    the messenger and consequently of the proteins determined by the operon.


158                        1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB

cording to this scheme, only a fraction of the genes of the cell can be expressed
at any moment, while the others remain repressed. The network of specific,
genetically determined circuits selects at any given time the segments of DNA
that are to be transcribed into messenger and consequently translated into
proteins, as a function of the chemical signals coming from the cytoplasm
and from the environment.
   From the beginning, the conception of the genetic material as being formed
of juxtaposed operons whose activity is regulated by a single operator site en-
tailed a precise experimental prediction: a chromosomal rearrangement
which would separate some structural genes from their operator and link
them to a different operon controlled by its own operator should place the
activity of these structural genes under a new regulatory control. But for a
while, although some genes could be separated from their operators as a re-
sult of certain mutations, they became reattached to an unidentified region of
the chromosome and consequently subject to an unknown system of regula-
tion which remained beyond our experimental reach37,38.
   Only recently has it become possible to obtain a fusion of the lactose operon
of E. coli with another known operon, by using bacteria which were diploid
for the chosen region 39. At present, we know only a limited number of genes
on the bacterial chromosome and a still more limited number of genes whose
activity can be modified by the action of external metabolites. Any deletion
which fuses two of these regions is likely to be relatively large and therefore
to include a gene whose product is required for growth or division; it would
thus be lethal in a haploid bacterium. In diploid bacteria, on the other hand, it
has been possible to isolate a series of deletions covering about 50 to 80 genes;
at one end, these deletions terminate in the gene controlling the structure of
                     and at the other, in different regions of the chromosome.
Some terminate in one of the two cistrons belonging to a purine operon, while
leaving the other cistron intact (Fig. 2).
    In these mutants, synthesis of the two proteins of the lactose region deter-
 mined by the two genes left intact by the deletion is no longer inducible by
                    Such a result could be predicted since the deletion has de-
 stroyed both of the elements (regulatory gene and operator) responsible for
 the specific regulation of the lactose system. But this synthesis has become repres-
 sible by the addition of purines. It is thus clear that, in the deletion, the fragment
 of the lactose operon and the fragment of the purine operon have been fused
 to form a new operon which, from all appearances, produces a single mes-
 senger containing the genetic information for the synthesis of the proteins


                    GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                                      159




Fig. 2. Deletion fusing a fragment of the lactose operon and a fragment of a purine op-
eron in E.coli. The upper part of the diagram represents the original heterozygous
diploid structure of a bacterium containing a sexual episome which has incorporated an
important chromosomal fragment by recombination. In the central part of the diagram,
the hatched region shows the zone eliminated by a deletion which occurred in the epi-
some. The lower part of the diagram shows the structure formed as a result of the dele-
tion. The latter connected a terminal fragment of the z gene (determining
dase) with an initial fragment of the Pur gene (determining an enzyme of purine
biosynthesis). A new operon is thus formed from the Pur gene (determining one of
the proteins of purine biosynthesis), a structure formed by part of the Pur gene and
part of the z gene (probably producing a hybrid peptide chain consisting at the amino
end of a Pur sequence and at the carboxyl end of a sequence from z ), the y gene (deter-
mining                 permease), and the AC gene (determining                        trans-
acetylase). The expression of the operon is repressed by purines, presumably at the level
of a purine operator, which is itself sensitive to a repressor specifically activated by pu-
                                      rines 39.

involved both in the biosynthesis of purines and in the utilization of lactose.
But the system which determines the regulation of this messenger must be the
operator of the purine region, sensitive to a repressor activated by purines.
   In the same way, deletions fusing the lactose operon with the operon con-
trolling tryptophan biosynthesis have recently been isolated40. The expression
of the genes of the lactose operon which are still intact has consequently be-
come repressible by tryptophan.
 The type of regulation imposed on the expression of the genes belonging to


160                      1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB

a given operon thus depends exclusively on the operator, that is, in some way,
on the nucleotide sequence located at the proximal extremity of the operon.
In this manner, both the nature of the metabolites on which regulation de-
pends and the inducible or repressible character of the regulation are deter-
mined by the respective positions of the genes along the chromosome and,
more particularly, by their association with a particular operator segment.
Obviously, it is the associations most favorable to the organism that are se-
lected.
    The presence of units of activity and regulation constituted by polycistronic
operons implies the existence of a double system ofpunctuation in the nucleic
text. One type of punctuation must permit the "slicing" of the long DNA
duplex into "sections of transcription" corresponding to operons: this must
serve as the point of recognition for the RNA polymerase, to show it not only
where to start and finish the transcription of an operon, but also which strand
of DNA is to be transcribed. Under certain conditions, one can obtain trans-
positions of the lactose operon into a region of the chromosome different
from the normal region, and these insertions can be oriented in either one
direction or the other40. It should be noted that, in case of an inversion, the
 3’, 5’ polarity of the DNA strands requires that the sequence to be transcribed
into messenger must change with respect not only to direction, but also to
strand (Fig. 3). For the insertions obtained, the lactose operon seems to be
equally well expressed whether or not there has been an inversion. Conse-




Fig. 3. Schematic diagram showing a change of polarity, and hence of strand, in an
                                   inversion.


                  GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                                      161

quently, it must be assumed that (i) all the genetic information of E. coli is not
necessarily contained in the same strand of DNA; (ii) a genetic signal ought
to indicate the start of the operon, as well as the direction of transcription;
and (iii) another signal ought to mark the end of the operon. If two operons
of opposite orientations occur in juxtaposition, in the absence of a signal "end
of transcription", the transcription of one operon could eventually proceed
along the other, in the DNA strand which is not normally supposed to be
transcribed.
   The second punctuation mark of the nucleic text must, at the time of trans-
lation, allow the "slicing" of the messenger into the various peptide chains
corresponding to the respective genes of the operon. This punctuation serves
as a signal to the translation system (ribosomes, tRNA, and so on) to delimit
the amino terminal and the carboxy terminal ends of each peptide chain.
   In the lactose system of E. coli, the analysis of a series of deletions shows that
the operator is situated outside the first known structural gene of the operon
(refs.41,38), from which it appears to be separated by a region called the
promotor, which is indispensable to the expression of the entire operon 37. The
promotor probably corresponds to one of the punctuation marks, either for
transcription or for translation. There are reasons to believe that the operator
itself is not translated into a peptide chain, but we still do not know whether
it is transcribed into messenger and whether the repressor acts at the level of the
messenger or of the DNA itself (Fig. 4). It is not possible to discuss in detail




is transcribed and translated into protein. B, The operator is transcribed but not trans-
lated. C, The operator is neither transcribed nor translated. Obviously, depending on
whether or not the operator is translated or is transcribed, the repressor could act at the
              level of the protein, of the messenger, or of the DNA itself.


162                       1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB

here the experimental arguments or the hypotheses20,32,42 concerning the
site of action of the repressor. However, the ensemble of results recently ob-
tained in various laboratories43 indicates that synthesis of the messenger from
its 5’-phosphate terminus, like that of the first peptide chain from its amino
terminus, both begin at the operator end of the operon. The simplest hypoth-
esis compatible with the results of genetic analysis, particularly with the study
of deletions covering different segments of the operator region, is that the
promotor represents the punctuation of transcription, providing the signal
for RNA polymerase to start the synthesis of the messenger for this operon on
one of the two DNA strands. If this is correct, the operator is not transcribed
into messenger and repression can be exerted only at the level of DNA. This
is the interpretation that now seems the most plausible to the geneticist; but
it is clear that, as usual, the last word will belong to the chemist.




 Genetic analysis had revealed the logic of the circuits involved in the regula-
 tion of protein synthesis by showing that these circuits are composed of ele-
 ments which can be connected in different ways to respond to the needs of the
 cell. It seemed reasonable to assume that analogous circuits, constructed on
 similar principles and using similar elements, might participate in other as-
 pects of cellular regulation, and in particular to direct the replication of DNA
 in coordination with cellular division.
   The systems involved in the replication of DNA seem to function more
subtly in the cell than when isolated in the test tube. There are a number of
experimental arguments in favor of a semiconservative mechanism of replica-
tion, as predicted by Watson and Crick from their model. Thanks to the work
of Kornberg44 and his collaborators an enzyme is known which can polymer-
ize deoxyribonucleotides in the order dictated by the sequence of a piece of
DNA serving as template. However, if a fragment of bacterial DNA is trans-
ferred into a recipient bacterium by transformation or incomplete conjuga-
tion, this fragment is incapable of replicating by itself. It can replicate only
when integrated by recombination with one of the genetic structures in the
host bacterium.
  In bacteria, the DNA is organized into much simpler units than those ob-
served in the cells of higher organisms. The essential information for the
growth and division of the bacterium is carried by a single element, the so-


                  GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                               163
 called "bacterial chromosome". In addition, other nonessential elements, the
 "episomes", may be introduced into the bacterial cell16.
    Many different kinds of work have revealed that the best known of these
 genetic elements, the chromosome, behaves genetically, structurally, and
 biochemically as a single, integrated element. It seems to consist of one dou-
 ble-stranded chain of DNA, very probably closed or circular 45. Replication
 appears to start at a fixed point on the molecule, and to continue regularly
 until the point of departure is reached again45,46. Under normal growth con-
 ditions, a new round of replication cannot begin until completion of the pre-
 vious one47.
    Although other bacterial genetic elements are less well understood, their
 properties seem to be analogous. The genetic equipment of a bacterium can
 thus be considered to consist of distinct structures, each containing a "mole-
 cule" of DNA which is circular and of variable length.
   Together with Sydney Brenner, we have tried to explain the regulation of
DNA synthesis by means of circuits resembling those involved in the control
ofprotein synthesis4 8. We have been led to postulate that each genetic element
constitutes a unit of replication or replicon, which determines a circuit con-
trolling its own replication in coordination with cell division. This hypothesis
carries with it three distinct predictions.
(1) If each element contains some genetic determinants controlling its own
replication, it should be possible to isolate mutants in which the regulatory
circuit is impaired. In fact, for each of the three elements examined-bacterial
chromosome, sexual episome, and phage-mutations can be obtained which
abolish replication of the mutated element but not of others49. The nature and
properties of these mutations suggest that they modify a diffusible product
which normally acts on a punctuation mark of the replicon, that is, on a par-
ticular nucleotide sequence, to permit the start of replication. Once the reac-
tion is initiated, the system replicates the entire sequence attached to this punc-
tuation.
   Here again, a genetically determined regulatory loop appears to operate.
But, whereas in the synthesis of proteins the regulation seems to be negative or
repressive, in the synthesis of DNA the available evidence indicates that the
regulation involves a positive element, that is, one which acts on the DNA to
trigger replication.
(2) The circumstances of bacterial conjugation can be best interpreted by as-
suming that the sexual episome is attached to the bacterial membrane near the
zone through which the male chromosome passes during mating. Further-


164                       1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB

more, to explain, during bacterial growth, the segregation of DNA after re-
plication and the distribution of the two DNA copies in the two bacteria
formed by cellular division, the simplest hypothesis consists in assuming that
all cellular replicons are attached to the bacterial membrane. It is the synthesis
of the membrane between the points of attachment of the two DNA copies
that would insure their normal segregation.
   The latter prediction appears to be confirmed by Antoinette Ryter’s elec-
tron microscopic study of the "nuclear bodies" in Bacillus subtilis50. Each of
these nuclear bodies seems to be attached to a "mesosome", a structure formed
by an invagination of the membrane (Figs. 5 and 6). Furthermore, by staining
the membrane with a tellurium salt, it can be shown that membrane synthesis
does not take place uniformly over the bacterial surface, but rather in particu-
lar zones close to the attachment sites of the nuclear bodies. It is thus the growth
of the membrane which seems to bring about the segregation of the DNA
elements formed by replication. Finally, François Cuzin has succeeded in dem-
onstrating that two independent replicons, such as the chromosome and the
sex factor, do not segregate independently but remain associated during bac-
terial multiplication51; presumably, each of these structures is linked to the
same element, possibly the same fragment of membrane. This fragment
which might remain intact during growth and bacterial division would thus
constitute the actual unit of segregation, analogous to a chromosome in a
higher organism.
(3) To explain the coordination between the replication of DNA and the
growth and subsequent division of the bacterial cell, it must be assumed that
DNA replication and its regulation occur in the membrane. This seems to be
indicated by certain phenomena observed during bacterial conjugation: pre-
sumably a surface reaction which occurs while the male and female come in
contact triggers, in some way, a round of replication in the male. One of the
structures thus synthesized remains in the male, while the other is progressively
driven, during its formation, into the femalesa. Furthermore, the idea that
DNA synthesis occurs in the membrane has recently received some biochem-
ical support53.
   Thus one comes to envision the genetic equipment of bacteria as formed of
circular DNA "molecules" constituting independent units of replication.
These units would be associated with one membrane element, which would
coordinate their replication with cell growth by means of regulatory circuits
(Fig. 7). The basic genetic information would be contained in the longest of
these units, but supplementary information could be added by the fixation of


                 GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                                   165




Fig. 5. Sections of Bacillus subtilis. The nuclear body (N) is bound to the membrane by
                                means of a mesosome (M)50.


 166                          1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB




Fig. 6. Sections of B. subtilis placed for 30 min in 0.5 M sucrose. The mesosomes have been
pushed out of the cytoplasm. During their retraction, they pull with them the nuclear
            bodies (N), which then appear bound directly to the membrane 50.


                    GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                                        167
other replicons to the membrane. It seems that one of the important steps in
the passage from the cellular organization of procaryotes to that of eucaryotes
involves invaginations of membranous structures followed by differentiation
into specialized organelles (mitochondria, genetic apparatus) whose functions
were originally carried out by the bacterial membrane.




Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of DNA replication in bacteria. The bacterium represented
contains two independent units: the "chromosome" and the sexual episome F. These
two replicons are shown attached to the membrane at two distinct stites. At a given point
in the division cycle, the membrane transmits to each replicon a signal permitting repli-
cation to start. Replication progresses linearly, each replicon turning slowly across the
membrane in which the enzymatic complex responsible for replication is thought to
occur. Two copies of each replicon are thus formed and are assumed to be attached to
the membrane side by side. Membrane synthesis is considered to occur between these
regions to which the two copies of each replicon are attached, thus drawing them to
either side, with the septum forming in the median region. No new round of replication
is allowed until the membrane, having returned to its original state following cell division
transmits a new signal. The process is simplified in the sense that: (i) since the replication
of DNA occurs one cycle ahead of division, bacteria generally have from two to four
nuclear bodies (and not from one to two); and (ii) each step is considered to be completed
                         before the start of the next one48.


It is remarkable that the study of the bacterial cell leads us to attribute to the
membrane such an important role in the coordination of growth and cell
division, since a similar conclusion has been reached on the basis of the study
of cells from higher organisms. In such cells, the process of morphogenesis and
contact phenomena among cells indicate that the cell surface must also control
cellular multiplication by means of signals transmitted, in one way or an-
other, to the nucleus, Despite the evident complexity of such cells in compari-
son with bacteria, it must be assumed that evolution has conserved a system
of molecular communication between cell surface and DNA.


168                      1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB




The two chemical activities of DNA, transcription, the copying of a single
strand into a ribonucleotide sequence, and replication, the copying of both
strands into deoxyribonucleotide sequences, are controlled by a network of
specific molecular interactions determined by the genes. The message in-
scribed in the genetic material thus contains not only the plans for the archi-
tecture of the cell, but also a program to coordinate the synthetic processes, as
well as the means of insuring its execution.
   Perhaps one of the most important contributions ofmicrobial genetics is the
definitive answer given to the old problem of the interaction between genes
and cytoplasm, between heredity and environment. Although the demonstra-
tion that acquired characters cannot be inherited had already been made by
classical genetics, the explanation for this fact is now provided by the nature
of the nucleic message and of the genetic code. It is clear, on the other hand,
that the expression of the genetic material is subject to external influences. Ten
years ago, it still seemed possible that, in certain processes such as the induced
biosynthesis of enzymes or of antibodies, the presence of specific compounds
could modify the synthesis of proteins, mold their configurations, and hence
alter their properties. The environment seemed to exercise an instructive action
on the genes, to use Lederberg’s expression 54, and thus to modulate the sense of
the genetic text. What the study of regulatory circuits has shown is that the
compounds in question serve only as simple stimuli: they act as signals to
initiate a synthesis whose mechanism and final product remain entirely de-
termined by the nucleotide sequence of the DNA. If the nucleic message may
be compared with the text of a book, the regulatory network determines
which pages are to be read at any given time. In the expression of the nucleic
message, as well as in its reproduction, adaptation results from an elective
rather than an instructive effect of the environment.
    Of course genetic analysis can do no more than indicate the existence of
 regulatory circuits. A chemical analysis, which should disclose the specific
 molecular interactions, remains to be made. No repressor has yet been isolated,
 and the nature of the complexes that it can form with an operator or a metab-
 olite remains obscure. We do not know how molecules find each other,
 recognize each other, and combine to constitute the regulatory network or
‘to form such cellular superstructures as a membrane, a mitochondrion, or a
 chromosome. We do not know how molecules transmit the signals which
 modify the activity of their neighbors. What is clear, however, is that the


                  GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                                  169
problems to be solved by cellular biology and genetics in the years to come
tend increasingly to merge with those in which biochemistry and physical
chemistry are involved.




The work summarized here could not have been pursued without the help of
so many collaborators that it is impossible for me to cite them without risking
the injustice of unintentional omissions.
  This work has been supported by successive grants from the Centre Natio-
nal de la Recherche Scientifique, the Delegation Générale à la Recherche
Scientifique et Technique, the Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique, the Fon-
dation pour la Recherche médicale française, the Jane Coffin Childs Memorial
Fund, and the National Science Foundation.




1. S.E. Luria and M. Delbrück, Genetics, 28 (1943) 499.
2. J. Lederberg and E.L. Tatum, Nature, 158 (1946) 558.
3. M. Delbrück and W.T. Bailey Jr., Cold Spring Harbor Symp.Quant.Biol., 11 (1946)
    33.
4. A.D. Hershey, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 11 (1946) 67.
5. O.T. Avery, C.M. MacLeod, M. McCarty, J. Exptl. Med., 79 (1944) 137.
6. A.D. Hershey and M. Chase, J. Gen. Physiol., 36 (1952) 39.
7. J.D. Watson and F.H.C. Crick, Nature, 171 (1953) 737.
8. G.W. Beadle and E.L.Tatum, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 27 (1941) 499.
9. J. Lederberg, in J.H. Comroe Jr. (Ed.), Methods in Medical Research, Vol. 3, Year
    Book Publishers, Chicago, 1950, p. 5.
10. S. Benzer, in W.D. McElroy and B. Glass (Eds.), The Chemical Basis of Heredity,
     Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, 1957, p. 70.
11. E.M. Lederberg and J. Lederberg, Genetics, 38 (1953) 51.
12. E.L. Wollman, Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 84 (1953) 281.
13. W. Hayes, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 18 (1953) 75.
14. F. Jacob and E.L. Wollman, Compt. Rend., 239 (1954) 455.
15. E.L. Wollman and F. Jacob, Compt. Rend., 240 (1955) 2449.
16. F. Jacob and E.L. Wollman, Sexuality and the Genetics of Bacteria, Academic Press,
      New York, 1961.
 17. A.B. Pardee, F. Jacob and J. Monod, J. Mol. Biol., 1 (1959) 165.
 18. T. Caspersson, Chromosoma, 1 (1940) 562; J. Brachet, Enzymologia, 10 (1941) 87;
      F.H.C. Crick, Symp. Soc. Exptl. Biol., 12 (1958) 138; R.B. Roberts, Microsonal Par-
      ticles and Protein Synthesis, Pergamon, Oxford, 1958; A. Tissières, J.D. Watson, D.


170                        1965 FRANÇOIS JACOB

      Schlesinger and B.R. Hollingworth, J. Mol. Biol., 1 (1959) 221; C.I. Davern and
     M. Meselson, J. Mol. Biol., 2 (1960) 153.
19. M. Riley, A.B. Pardee, F. Jacob and J. Monod, J. Mol. Biol., 2 (1960) 216.
20. F. Jacob and J. Monod, J. Mol. Biol., 3 (1961) 318.
21. A.D. Hershey, J. Dixon and M. Chase, J. Gen. Physiol., 36 (1953) 777.
22. E. Volkin and L. Astrachan, Virology, 2 (1956) 149.
23. S. Brenner, F. Jacob and M. Meselson, Nature, 190 (1961) 576.
24. F. Gros, W. Gilbert, H. Hiatt, C.G. Kurland, R.W. Risebrough and J.D. Watson,
     Nature, 190 (1961) 581.
25. J.D. Watson, The involvement of RNA in the synthesis of proteins, in Nobel Lectures,
      Physiology or Medicine, 1942-1962, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1964, p. 785.
26. G. Pontecorvo, Advan. Enzymol., 13 (1952) 121.
27. E.A. Adelberg and S.N. Burns, J. Bacteriol., 79 (1960) 321.
28. F. Jacob and E.A. Adelberg, Compt. Rend., 249 (1959) 189.
29. C. Willson, D. Perrin, M. Cohn, F. Jacob and J. Monod., J. Mol. Biol., 8 (1964) 582;
      S. Bourgeois, M. Cohn and L. Orgel, J. Mol. Biol., 14 (1965) 300.
30. F. Jacob, D. Perrin, C. Sanchez and J. Monod, Compt. Rend., 250 (1960) 1727.
31. F. Jacob and J. Monod, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 26 (1961) 193; N.
      Franklin and S.E. Luria, Virology, 15 (1961) 299.
32. B.N. Ames and P. Hartman, Cold Spring Harbor Symp.Quant.Biol., 28 (1963) 349.
33.                and P. Hartman, Ann. Rev. Microbial., 13 (1959) 377.
34. B.N. Ames and B. Gary, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 45 (1959) 1453.
35. J.R. Beckwith, Structure and Function of the Genetic Material, Akademie Verlag, Berlin,
      1964, p.119.
36. G. Attardi, S. Naono, J. Rouviere, F. Jacob and F. Gros, Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
    Quant. Biol., 28 (1963) 363; B. Guttman and A. Novick, Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
     Quant. Biol., 28 (1963) 373; R.G. Martin, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 28
     (1963) 357; S. Spiegelman and M. Hayashi, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 28
     (1963) 161.
 37. B.N. Ames, P. Hartman and F. Jacob, J. Mol. Biol., 7 (1963) 23; A. Matsushiro, S.
      Kido, J. Ito, K. Sato and F. Imamoto,. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun, 9 (1962) 204.
 38. F. Jacob, A. Ullmann and J. Monod, Compt. Rend., 258 (1964) 3125.
 39. F. Jacob, A. Ullmann and J. Monod, J. Mol. Biol., 13 (1965) 704.
40. J.R. Beckwith, E. Signer and W. Epstein, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 23
      (1966) 393.
 41. J.R. Beckwith, J. Mol. Biol., 8 (1964) 427.
42. L. Szilard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.(U.S.), 46 (1960) 277; G.S. Stent, Science, 144 (1964)
      816; W.K. Maas and E. McFall, Ann. Rev. Microbiol., 18 (1964) 95.
43. R.L. Somerville and C. Yanofsky, J. Mol. Biol., 8 (1964) 616; G. Streisinger, Mendel
      Symposium on the Mutational Process, Prague, 1965; H. Bremer, M.W. Konrad, K.
      Gaines and G.S. Stem, J. Mol. Biol., 13 (1965) 540; F. Imamoto, N. Morikawa and
    K. Sato, J. Mol. Biol., 13 (1965) 169; U. Maitra and J. Hurwitz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
 (U.S.), 54 (1965) 815; M. Salas, M.A. Smith, W.M. Stanley Jr., A.J. Wahba and
 S. Ochoa, J. Biol. Chem., 240 (1965) 3988; R.E. Thach, M.A. Cecere, T.A. Sunarajan
 and P. Doty, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 54 (1965) 1167.


                   GENETICS OF THE BACTERIAL CELL                                  171
44. A. Kornberg, The biologic synthesis of deoxyribonucleic acid, in Nobel Lectures,
     Physiology or Medicine, 1942-1962, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1964, p. 665.
45. J. Cairns, J. Mol. Biol., 6 (1963) 208.
46. N. Sueoka and H. Yoshikawa, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 28 (1963) 47;
     F. Bonhoeffer and A. Gierer, J. Mol. Biol., 7 (1963) 534.
47. O. Maaloe, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 26 (1961) 45; R.H. Pritchard and
     K.G. Lark, J. Mol. Biol., 9 (1964) 288.
48. F. Jacob and S. Brenner, Compt. Rend., 256 (1963) 298; F. Jacob, S. Brenner and
      F. Cuzin, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 28 (1963) 329.
 49. M. Kohiyama, H. Lamfrom, S. Brenner and F. Jacob, Compt. Rend., 257 (1963) 1979;
      F. Cuzin and F. Jacob, Proc. Intern. Congr. Genet. 11th, The Hague 1962, Vol. 1, 1963,
      p. 40; F. Jacob, C. Fuerst and E.L. Wollman, Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 93 (1957) 724.
 50. A. Ryter and F. Jacob, Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 107 (1964) 384,
 51. F. Cuzin and F. Jacob, Compt. Rend., 260 (1965) 5411.
 52. J.D. Gross and L.G. Caro, Science, 150 (1965) 1679; M. Ptashne, J. Mol. Biol., 11
      (1965) 829; A.A. Blinkova, S.E. Bresler and V.A. Lanzov, Z. Vererbungsl., 96 (1965)
      267.
53. A.T. Ganesan and J. Lederberg, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 18 (1965) 824.
54. J. Lederberg, J. Cellular Comp. Physiol., Suppl. 1, 52 (1958) 398.
