HIV: A DISCOVERY OPENING THE ROAD
TO NOVEL SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
AND GLOBAL HEALTH IMPROVEMENT

Nobel Lecture, December 7, 2008
by
Françoise Barré-Sinoussi
Institut Pasteur, Unit of Regulation of Retroviral Infections, Department of
Virology, 25 rue du Docteur Roux, 75724 Paris, Cedex 15, France.




THE EARLY DAYS
The story begins more than twenty-five years ago, when the initial clinical
observations of a alarming new epidemic were made. In June 1981 clini-
cians in the United States first reported a number of cases of Pneumocystis
carinii in homosexual men1. Subsequently the first cases of what would later
be known as AIDS were observed in France. At the time, I was working at
the Institut Pasteur with Luc Montagnier and Jean-Claude Chermann. In
December 1982, we were contacted by clinicians in France who provided us
with a lymph node biopsy from an AIDS patient, with the aim of isolating the
etiological agent causing the disease.
   The hypothesis at the time was that a retrovirus might be the etiological
agent responsible for AIDS. The only human retrovirus known at that time
was the Human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV), known to cause transforma-
tion of T cells, and arguably it would have been possible to culture the cells
from the lymph node biopsy, and simply observe for T cell transformation.
Luckily we did not assume that HTLV was necessarily the cause of the disease,
and we decided to sample the culture supernatant every three to four days to
screen for reverse transcriptase activity. Indeed we started to observe reverse
transcriptase activity, which decreased shortly after that, in correlation with
cell death. Initially we were concerned about possible toxicity related to tis-
sue culture components, but following the addition of fresh lymphocytes
and fresh components to the culture, the same cell death phenomenon was
observed in correlation with the detection of reverse transcriptase activity. We
thus realised that the virus itself was responsible for this phenomenon.
   The isolation of this new human retrovirus (at the time known as LAV,
lymphoadenopathy associated virus) was first reported and published in
May 19832. In this first report we described that LAV could be propagated in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and in cord blood lymphocytes. We also
described the viral protein p25, and importantly we determined that there
was no, or weak, cross reactivity with HTLV-1 proteins, indicating that we


                                                                            251


were dealing with a new human virus. In the same report we demonstrated
the presence of antibodies against LAV in a second patient affected by AIDS.
The report of the virus was, however, just the beginning.
   The isolation of the virus was not sufficient to convince the scientific com-
munity of the implication of the virus in AIDS. It was therefore essential to
further characterise the virus and establish a clear link between the virus
and the disease to persuade the scientific community and the relevant au-
thorities that the newly isolated virus was the etiological agent responsible
for the emerging epidemic. In 1983 we decided to immediately halt all other
research projects which were ongoing in the laboratory (including determin-
ing whether MMTV sequences could be associated with breast cancer – a
hypothesis still valid today) and to mobilise a network of efficient collabora-
tions with clinicians, immunologists and molecular biologists. In order to de-
termine whether this newly isolated virus was truly responsible for the disease
affecting AIDS patients, we quickly developed a serological test to perform
sero-epidemiological studies3. Crucially, this same test was subsequently used
as a diagnostic tool for blood testing. The development of the diagnostic test
was made possible by a strong and efficient partnership with the private sec-
tor, namely Sanofi Pasteur.
   In 1984 R. Gallo and colleagues and J. Levy and co-workers published re-
ports confirming the identification of the causative agent of AIDS4, 5.


FROM BED-SIDE TO BENCH TO BED-SIDE
These early years of HIV research were the reflection of clinical observations,
which prompted basic research in the laboratory, which in turn resulted in
the development of clinical tools. The identification and the initial character-
isation of the virus led to the first diagnostic tests that permitted blood testing
for the virus, and consequently the prevention of transmission by blood and
blood derivatives. The increasing knowledge of the virus, its proven link to
AIDS and its modes of transmission spurred the first programmes for volun-
tary counselling and testing and subsequently prevention of sexual transmis-
sion. The knowledge that the virus infected cells bearing the CD4 receptor6–8
and the fact that HIV could be cytopathogenic to CD4 lymphocytes was the
basis for CD4 cell monitoring in HIV infected patients. The characterisation
of viral reverse transcriptase activity provided the rationale for first using
azidothymine (AZT) as therapy for HIV patients9 and, importantly, as the
first therapeutic approach to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
The efficiency of AZT alone was rapidly reported to be limited in regards to
the first observation of resistance to monotherapy. These observations led
to the development in the early 1990s of combined therapy, also known as
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). The cloning and sequencing
of HIV10, 11, performed by molecular biologists at the Institut Pasteur, pro-
vided the necessary knowledge of the basis of the test to determine the viral
load and to monitor resistance to therapy (Figure 1).


252


Figure 1. HIV research: from bed-side to bench and back to bed-side.


The cloning and sequencing of HIV also permitted researchers to gain
insight into the tremendous diversity and the origin of HIV. Early studies
indicated that HIV-1 may have resulted from the introduction of a virus from
chimpanzee to humans. A collaboration with the Centre Pasteur Cameroun
identified a new group of HIV-1, isolated from a woman with AIDS: the
HIV-1 group N, distinct from groups O and M. Sequencing of simian viruses
revealed a chimpanzee virus very closely related to the HIV-1 N group, in
particular in specific genes12, 13.


DETERMINANTS OF HIV PATHOGENESIS
Since the discovery of the virus, we have learnt that HIV infection is much
more complex than we initially thought, and the mechanisms leading to
AIDS pathogenesis are still today not entirely understood. We have, however,
gained significant insight into the virus and the evolution of the disease it
causes; for example we now know that soon after infection by HIV, the virus
integrates into the host cells, establishing permanent reservoirs. Studies have
shown that the evolution of the infection and the progression of the disease
are linked to the viral load: indeed the peak of viral load correlates with
a sharp decrease in the number of CD4 cells, which are partially restored
in relation to the decrease of the viral load. In recent years, we have made
important progress in understanding that HIV infection causes chronic im-
mune activation. Very early after exposure to the virus, HIV infected patients
are characterised by markers of generalised and persistent T cell activation.
Given the close correlation between immune activation and the disease out-
come, markers of T cell activation may emerge as better prognosis markers
for disease progression than viral load and CD4 cell counts. It is also known


                                                                           253


today that HIV infection results in early massive depletion of CCR5+ CD4+
T memory cells in the gastrointestinal tract, associated with microbial trans-
location in the gut. Further studies will be necessary to determine whether
the microbial translocation is a cause or consequence of massive T cell deple-
tion14, 15.
   The evolution and progression of the disease caused by HIV is closely
linked to a number of determinants of both the virus itself and the host.
Indeed each particular path of disease progression is determined by a deli-
cate interplay between viral and host factors. The virus itself greatly varies: in
its tropism and replicative capacity, as well as the intrinsic immunosuppres-
sive properties of some viral proteins, all influencing HIV pathogenesis. A
number of host factors are also important in determining the distinct paths
of disease progression in different HIV infected individuals. The adaptive
immune responses (including CD8 cell and CD4 cell responses) are finely
tuned in each separate individual, resulting in differential control of the
infection. Equally different genetic polymorphisms of receptors, ligands and
key immune proteins all result in specific modulations of the host response
to HIV infection. Recently it has become apparent that humans and non-
human primates possess a number of proteins capable of restricting HIV/SIV
infection, and therefore play crucial roles in intracellular innate immunity.
In brief, therefore, the specific evolution of the disease caused by HIV is the
result of an intricate interplay between the virus and the host.


NATURAL MODELS OF HIV/AIDS PROTECTION
Natural models provide key insight into the mechanisms which underlie pro-
tection against HIV infection and disease progression.
   A very small number of individuals (known as exposed uninfected, EU) ap-
pear to be resistant to infection, despite repeated exposure to HIV. A study,
performed in collaboration with Vietnam, analysed two groups of intrave-
nous drug users (IDU) who routinely exchanged needles for drug injection.
Despite both groups being infected with hepatitis viruses and HTLV, one
group was consistently negative for HIV in both serological and PCR tests. To
address the mechanisms involved in this natural protection against infection
by HIV, the innate immune responses of the two groups were compared. The
two groups were characterised by a significant difference in the activity of the
natural killer (NK) cells; in fact the EU group of Vietnamese IDU typically
showed an increased level of NK cell activity16. We further analysed the NK
cell repertoire associated with this increased activity. The analysis revealed an
increased ratio of specific NK receptors in EU compared to control or HIV
infected individuals. Furthermore, the functional activated NK cells in EU
express significantly higher levels of the CD161 receptor than control indi-
viduals, suggesting that a specific subset of NK cells in EU might be involved
in their protection against HIV infection.
   Another insightful model, which permits us to shed light on some of the
mechanisms providing protection against HIV, is provided by the few indi-

254


viduals who, despite being infected by the virus, are capable of controlling
its replication. These rare individuals (known as HIV controllers, or elite
controllers) are defined by having been infected for more than 10 years
while presenting undetectable plasma viral RNA, despite being naïve of
antiretroviral therapy. In 2007 we reported that the CD8 T lymphocytes of
HIV controllers possess HIV suppressive capacities, being able to suppress
HIV replication in the CD4 T cells17, 18. The majority of HIV controllers in-
cluded in this first study possess CD8 T cells capable of eliminating infected
CD4 T cells. Further analyses showed that the CD8 T cells of HIV controllers
were activated, but to a lesser extent than in HIV progressors. Although the
majority of HIV controllers appear to possess suppressive CD8 T cells, some
individuals are not characterised by this trait, while still efficiently control-
ling the virus. This observation indicates that there is likely more than one
immune mechanism contributing to the tight control of HIV replication in
these lucky few individuals.
   Animal models represent a key component of many domains of bio-
medical research. HIV and its closely related counterpart, the Simian
Immunodeficiency Virus (SIV), are strictly primate-specific viruses, so sim-
ian models which are susceptible to SIV infection play a key role in under-
standing infection and disease progression. Most naturally infected African
primates, like the African Green Monkey (AGM) do not develop AIDS, in
contrary to the Asian Rhesus Macaque; they therefore provide a unique
model to investigate protective mechanisms against AIDS19, 20. Interestingly,
SIV is capable of replicating in both pathogenic and non-pathogenic simian
models, suggesting that viral replication is not the only key determinant of
an AIDS outcome. Both models show a massive depletion of CCR5+ CD4+
cells in the gastrointestinal tract. Partial restoration of CD4+ cells and the
absence of apoptosis, however, ensure that the intestinal mucosa remains
intact in the non-pathogenic model, therefore impeding microbial transloca-
tion. Comparative analyses between the two primate models show that T cell
activation during the chronic phase of viral infection is a key difference be-
tween the non-pathogenic and the pathogenic infections. Indeed chronic T
cell activation is the hallmark of HIV-1 infection in humans and pathogenic
SIV infection in Rhesus Macaques. The profiles of T cell activation are deter-
mined by the innate immune responses, mediated in particular by dendritic
cells. The Rhesus Macaque model shows a more persistent recruitment of
plasmacytoid dendritric cells (PDC, the principal producers of interferon-A)
to the lymph nodes21, 22. More recently we have used microarrays to compare
the gene profiles of the two primate models. This technique has allowed us
to observe that interferon type 1 pathways are activated in both models, but
only transiently in the non-pathogenic model in the very early phases of in-
fection. This observation contributes to the hypothesis that key events which
determine the disease progression occur in the very early stages of infection.
Important differences are observed in the early acute phase of SIV infection
in the non-pathogenic and pathogenic models, including a higher induction
of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the pathogenic model (Figure 2).

                                                                             255


Figure 2. Non-pathogenic versus pathogenic SIV infection – eary acute phase markers.


The early acute phase of HIV infection appears, therefore, to be crucial in
determining disease progression. Given the importance of this very early
phase following infection, the role of the innate immune system, our body’s
first line of defence against infections, should strongly be considered.
   More detailed insight into the role of the innate immune system in HIV
has been gained by an in vitro model of a co-culture of natural killer (NK)
cells and dendritic cells (DC), which are natural target cells of HIV infection.
This in vitro model has highlighted that the expression of a number of NK
cell surface receptors, in particular the CD85j receptor, is reduced when the
cells are in contact with infected DCs. We also observed that the subpopula-
tion of NK cells which express the CD85j receptor is capable of strongly sup-
pressing HIV replication in DCs23. This suppression is only partially relieved
by incubation with monoclonal antibodies against HLA class I (the natural
ligands of CD85j) but strongly abolished by incubation with a recombinant
CD85j protein, suggesting that the interaction between the CD85j receptor
and a peculiar (as of yet unknown) ligand might result in signalling pathways
necessary for suppression.
   Future research will need to focus on understanding in greater detail the
complex cross-talk between DC, NK and T cells during HIV infection, as well
as the modulation of signalling pathways and soluble factors which can influ-
ence disease progression (Figure 3).




256


Figure 3. Potential mechanisms of HIV control. The control of HIV may be determined by
a complex interplay between innate and adaptive immune systems. Natural killer (NK)
cells might control HIV by directly eliminating infected cells or by providing the optimal
cytokine environment. HIV-specific CD8 cells with cytotoxic properties could also play a
key role in controlling HIV infection. Other control mechanisms include the production
of neutralising antibodies and intracellular restriction factors which counteract the HIV
replicative cycle.


HIV/AIDS: THE STATE OF THE EPIDEMIC IN 2008
AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
At the end of 2007, 33 million people were living with HIV, 2.7 million were
newly infected and a further 2 million died of AIDS24. These numbers dem-
onstrate that HIV/AIDS still remains a crucial global health issue. Since the
discovery of HIV, enormous progress has been made in the development of
antiretroviral (ARV) drugs, and in expanding their availability to those who
require treatment. In 2002, only approximately 2% of people needing treat-
ment received it; this figure has since increased to 30% in 2008. Despite this
massive increase in access, for every new person starting ARV treatment, 2–3
new cases of HIV infection are reported. The benefits of ARV are irrefutable;
their importance is clearly illustrated in Botswana where the introduction of
ARV in 2002 has been followed by a decrease in the number of AIDS-related
deaths in the country.
   Despite the immense benefits of ARV treatment, many issues still need to
be tackled. ARV treatment remains a life-long commitment with consequent
economic limits. Moreover, life-long treatment is associated with the emer-
gence of drug resistance, metabolic disorders and cancers. In the absence of
a cure for HIV, it is essential to continue investigating and promoting all pre-
vention measures. The accomplishments of prevention programmes for HIV
infection have been proven by the success in limiting sexual transmission
(mainly through the promotion of condom use) and in limiting mother-to-
child transmission of HIV by improving diagnosis and introducing ARV treat-
ment to pregnant HIV+ women. Research on prevention methods continues,


                                                                                     257


and recently we have also learnt that male circumcision can diminish the risk
of infection, and therefore could be considered as part of a comprehensive
prevention plan. Prevention programmes which are currently being inves-
tigated include pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis, and further research
directed on specific anti-viral microbicides, which so far have only provided
disappointing results, could lead to beneficial outcomes.
   Despite innumerable advances in the field of HIV research over the last
twenty-five years, many new aspects of HIV infection and immunopathogen-
esis are still emerging. It is clear that there are currently many areas of HIV
research which require investigation, and many domains will benefit from a
strong emphasis on basic research. Further insight into the very early stages
of HIV infection, including the establishment of viral reservoirs and the im-
mune responses induced, is crucial for the development of novel therapeutic
and vaccinal strategies. Future directions for new intervention strategies
which should be investigated in further detail include, for example, the
identification of new targets and the use of siRNA to restrict HIV infection.
Recent years have highlighted the central role of chronic immune activation
in disease progression; if microbial translocation is confirmed to be respon-
sible, at least in part, for this immune activation, drugs limiting microbial
translocation need to be considered as alternative therapeutic strategies.
   Co-infection between HIV and other diseases should not be overlooked.
Co-infections in HIV+ patients are currently an acute public health issue,
and further clinical attention and basic research are required to address this
delicate problem. A salient example is provided by the co-infection of HIV
and tuberculosis: in sub-Saharan Africa and other resource-limited regions,
tuberculosis is a major cause of death among people living with HIV.
   An effective vaccine against HIV represents the ultimate prevention ap-
proach. HIV, however, exhibits several scientific challenges. HIV is a virus
characterised by a high degree of genetic variability, enabling the virus to
evade the human immune system. Furthermore, the very early establishment
of viral reservoirs, characteristic of HIV, hinders the development of an effec-
tive vaccine. To add to the complexity, HIV is transmitted not only by cell-free
virus, but also by cell-to-cell contact, and it is still unclear what mechanisms
are necessary to impede cell-to-cell transmission. To achieve progress in the
development of an effective vaccine, it is essential to understand the complex
dysfunctions of the immune system which are more rapidly induced by HIV
than the specific immune response following infection. A key step in the
development of an effective vaccine will be the identification and definition
of the viral determinants responsible for early pathogenic signals and mecha-
nisms to prevent such harmful pathogenic pathways25–27 (Figure 4). In addi-
tion to the indispensable advances in basic science, the development of an
effective HIV vaccine requires innovative and creative strategies, within the
context of a clearly defined international agenda to promote collaboration.




258


Figure 4. HIV vaccine research: re-thinking future strategies.


BENEFITS BEYOND HIV/AIDS
HIV can be a powerful tool for unravelling future scientific knowledge.
Research on HIV has significantly contributed to the understanding of the
delicate relationship between viruses and hosts. Continued effort to under-
stand this complex virus has also revealed novel cellular partners which may
be involved in controlling infection. HIV can also help identify new receptors
and ligands and novel signalling pathways. Future research on understanding
the immune responses induced by HIV will provide more information on the
complex cross-talk between innate and adaptive immunity. This cross-talk be-
tween innate and adaptive immunity is crucial for the induction of effective
immune responses to infections, and the elucidation of these mechanisms
will prove important for other diseases as well.
   Given the complexity of developing an effective HIV vaccine, we need to
think of new innovative and creative concepts and strategies for vaccines.
These new strategies may likely prove useful for the development of vaccines
against other infectious diseases or even cancer.
   The use of lentiviral vectors in gene therapy for a number of diseases,
including cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, has already been widely
investigated. Despite some setbacks, new promising results are encouraging.
The field is still at an early stage, but further research may provide new thera-
peutic strategies.




                                                                             259


IMPROVING GLOBAL HEALTH: A KEY ROLE OF THE FIGHT
AGAINST HIV/AIDS
Importantly, the fight against HIV is also a key element in the improvement
of global health. It is now widely recognised that investment in health is one
of the key components of sustainable development. International efforts in
close collaboration with national programmes in HIV/AIDS have promoted
an overall amelioration of global health, which is not limited to people living
with HIV. Global interventions in HIV/AIDS reinforce local infrastructure,
contribute to capacity building and increase human resources, contributing
greatly to better overall health in a country (Figure 5).




Figure 5. Benefits beyond HIV: global health systems improvement.


The effect of HIV/AIDS interventions on general public health improvement
is exemplified by the case of Cambodia. In 1994–95, we started working in
collaboration with Cambodia. At the time, human resources were extremely
limited, if at all existent. We and others quickly started to train people, who
were very keen and determined to learn about progress in science and medi-
cine. In 1995, the first Voluntary and Confidential Counselling and Testing
(VCCT) site was created at the Institut Pasteur in Cambodia. Over the years,
we and others have been working to improve the quality of human resources
in the country, the quality of health infrastructures and the number of VCCT
sites has greatly increased to more than 200 in the entire country in 2008. A
similar trend was noted in clinical sites for treatment of opportunistic infec-
tions and antiretroviral therapy. Theses sites are present in the entire coun-
try, covering a large part of its territory, and the services provided are not
only HIV monitoring and treatment but also care for other infections. Today,

260


approximately thirty thousand patients are under antiretroviral therapy and
Cambodia may well be one of the first countries to reach the objective of uni-
versal access by the year 2010. Such progress would not have been possible
without the strong political determination of the government.
  Although the road ahead is still long, we are on the right path to achieve
a world without AIDS. This goal will be reached by following a model of re-
search, echoing the tradition of Louis Pasteur: continued basic and clinical
research, investment of both public and private sectors, public health inter-
ventions and the participation, which should be strongly acknowledged, of
people living with HIV/AIDS.




                                                                          261


REFERENCES
1.    Gottlieb, M. S. et al., “Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and mucosal candidiasis in
      previously healthy homosexual men: evidence of a new acquired cellular immunode-
      ficiency”, N Engl J Med 305, 1425–31 (1981).
2.    Barré-Sinoussi, F. et al., “Isolation of a T-lymphotropic retrovirus from a patient at risk
      for acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)”, Science 220, 868–71 (1983).
3.    Brun-Vezinet, F. et al., “Detection of IgG antibodies to lymphadenopathy-associated vi-
      rus in patients with AIDS or lymphadenopathy syndrome”, Lancet 1, 1253–6 (1984).
4.    Gallo, R. C. et al., “Frequent detection and isolation of cytopathic retroviruses (HTLV-
      III) from patients with AIDS and at risk for AIDS”, Science 224, 500–3 (1984).
5.    Levy, J. A. et al., “Isolation of lymphocytopathic retroviruses from San Francisco pa-
      tients with AIDS”, Science 225, 840–2 (1984).
6.    Dalgleish, A. G. et al., “The CD4 (T4) antigen is an essential component of the recep-
      tor for the AIDS retrovirus”, Nature 312, 763–7 (1984).
7.    Klatzmann, D. et al., “T-lymphocyte T4 molecule behaves as the receptor for human
      retrovirus LAV”, Nature 312, 767–8 (1984).
8.    Klatzmann, D. et al., “Selective tropism of lymphadenopathy associated virus (LAV)
      for helper-inducer T lymphocytes”, Science 225, 59–63 (1984).
9.    Broder, S. et al., “Effects of suramin on HTLV-III/LAV infection presenting as
      Kaposi’s sarcoma or AIDS-related complex: clinical pharmacology and suppression
      of virus replication in vivo”, Lancet 2, 627–30 (1985).
10.   Alizon, M. et al., “Molecular cloning of lymphadenopathy-associated virus”, Nature
      312, 757–60 (1984).
11.   Wain-Hobson, S., Sonigo, P., Danos, O., Cole, S. & Alizon, M., “Nucleotide sequence
      of the AIDS virus, LAV”, Cell 40, 9–17 (1985).
12.   Simon, F. et al., “Identification of a new human immunodeficiency virus type 1 dis-
      tinct from group M and group O”, Nat Med 4, 1032–7 (1998).
13.   Apetrei, C., Robertson, D. L. & Marx, P. A., “The history of SIVS and AIDS: epide-
      miology, phylogeny and biology of isolates from naturally SIV infected non-human
      primates (NHP) in Africa”, Front Biosci 9, 225–54 (2004).
14.   Cadogan, M. & Dalgleish, A. G., “HIV immunopathogenesis and strategies for inter-
      vention”, Lancet Infect Dis 8, 675–84 (2008).
15.   Douek, D. C., Roederer, M. & Koup, R. A., “Emerging Concepts in the
      Immunopathogenesis of AIDS”, Annu Rev Med (2008).
16.   Ravet, S. et al., “Distinctive NK-cell receptor repertoires sustain high-level constitu-
      tive NK-cell activation in HIV-exposed uninfected individuals”, Blood 109, 4296–305
      (2007).
17.   Saez-Cirion, A. et al., “HIV controllers exhibit potent CD8 T cell capacity to suppress
      HIV infection ex vivo and peculiar cytotoxic T lymphocyte activation phenotype”,
      Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104, 6776–81 (2007).
18.   Saez-Cirion, A., Pancino, G., Sinet, M., Venet, A. & Lambotte, O., “HIV controllers:
      how do they tame the virus?”, Trends Immunol 28, 532–40 (2007).
19.   Silvestri, G., “AIDS pathogenesis: a tale of two monkeys”, J Med Primatol 37 Suppl 2,
      6–12 (2008).
20.   Liovat, A. S., Jacquelin, B., Ploquin, M. J., Barré-Sinoussi, F. & Muller-Trutwin, M. C.,
      “African non human primates infected by SIV – why don’t they get sick? Lessons from
      studies on the early phase of non-pathogenic SIV infection”, Curr HIV Res 7, 39–50
      (2009).
21.   Diop, O. M. et al., “Plasmacytoid dendritic cell dynamics and alpha interferon pro-
      duction during Simian immunodeficiency virus infection with a nonpathogenic out-
      come”, J Virol 82, 5145–52 (2008).
22.   Kornfeld, C. et al., “Antiinflammatory profiles during primary SIV infection in
      African green monkeys are associated with protection against AIDS”, J Clin Invest 115,
      1082–91 (2005).


262


23.   Scott-Algara, D. et al., “The CD85j+ NK cell subset potently controls HIV-1 replication
      in autologous dendritic cells”, PLoS ONE 3, e1975 (2008).
24.   UNAIDS, Global Report on AIDS Epidemic. (2008).
25.   Barouch, D. H., “Challenges in the development of an HIV-1 vaccine”, Nature 455,
      613–9 (2008).
26.   Haynes, B. F. & Shattock, R. J, “Critical issues in mucosal immunity for HIV-1 vaccine
      development”, J Allergy Clin Immunol 122, 3–9; quiz 10–1 (2008).
27.   Walker, B. D. & Burton, D. R., “Toward an AIDS vaccine”, Science 320, 760–4 (2008).
Portrait photo of Françoise Barré-Sinoussi by photographer Ulla Montan.




                                                                                        263
