                             FRITZ LI P M A N N


        Development of the acetylation problem:
                 a personal account
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1953


The fact that my Swedish colleagues have honored me with the Nobel Prize
gives me some confidence to consider my own effort more seriously as a part
in the general effort of biochemistry of today. I therefore thought of tracing,
in the segment of my interest, the recent development of facts and ideas
which led, it seems, to a fuller understanding of the chemical functioning of
 the organism. When I started out in the middle twenties, biochemistry was
just trying to break away from the major concern with breakdown processes
and procedures. With the slowly increasing comprehension of biosynthetic
 mechanisms, a rather radical change of attitude ensued which is, I feel, not
 quite fully realized even at the present time. Out of the early, justifiably
 stubborn empiricism grew up a definite rational structure. Process patterns
 emerged and it became important to recognize certain rules and introduce
new terms, thereby emphasizing the fact that biochemistry was now devel-
oping into an adult science, best characterized, may be, as organismic tech-
nology.
    In my development, the recognition of facts and the rationalization of
 these facts into a unified picture, have interplayed continuously. After my
 apprenticeship with Otto Meyerhof, a first interest on my own became the
 phenomenon we call the Pasteur effect, this peculiar depression of the waste-
 ful fermentation in the respiring cell. By looking for a chemical explanation
 of this economy measure on the cellular level, I was prompted into a study
 of the mechanism of pyruvic acid oxidation, since it is at the pyruvic stage
 where respiration branches off from fermentation. For this study I chose as a
 promising system a relatively simple looking pyruvic acid oxidation enzyme
 in a certain strain of Lactobacillus delbrueckii1. The decision to explore this
 particular reaction started me on a rather continuous journey into partly
 virgin territory to meet with some unexpected discoveries, but also to en-
 counter quite a few nagging disappointments.


    414                             1953 F.LIPMANN




      Fig. 1. Formation of acid in the methylene blue reduction. Action of phosphate.
               Addition of phosphate, equivalent to a total concentration of 4.10-3 M.
       O-O Without phosphate.




     The most important event during this whole period, I now feel, was the
     accidental observation that in the L. delbrueckii system, pyruvic acid oxida-
    tion was completely dependent on the presence of inorganic phosphate. This
     observation was made in the course of attempts to replace oxygen by meth-
     ylene blue. To measure the methylene blue reduction manometrically, I
     had to switch to a bicarbonate buffer instead of the otherwise routinely used
     phosphate. In bicarbonate, to my surprise, as shown in Fig. 1, pyruvate
     oxidation was very slow, but the addition of a little phosphate caused a
.    remarkable increase in rate. The next figure, Fig. 2, shows the phosphate
     effect more drastically, using a preparation from which all phosphate was
     removed by washing with acetate buffer. Then it appeared that the reaction
     was really fully dependent on phosphate.
        In spite of such a phosphate dependence, the phosphate balance measured
     by the ordinary Fiske-Subbarow procedure did not at first indicate any phos-
     phorylative step. Nevertheless, the suspicion remained that phosphate in
     some manner was entering into the reaction and that a phosphorylated inter-
     mediary was formed. As a first approximation, a coupling of this pyruvate
     oxidation with adenylic acid phosphorylation was attempted. And, indeed,
     addition of adenylic acid to the pyruvic oxidation system brought out a net
     disappearance of inorganic phosphate, accounted for as adenosine triphos-
     phate (Table 11). In parallel with the then just developing fermentation pic-


         DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                             415
        Table 1. Disappearance of inorganic phosphate with adenylic acid.




ture, I now concluded that the missing link in the reaction chain was acetyl
phosphate. In partial confirmation it was shown that a crude preparation of
acetyl phosphate, synthesized by the old method of Kämmerer and Carius 2
would transfer phosphate to adenylic acid (Table 2). However, it still took
quite some time from then on to identify acetyl phosphate definitely as the
initial product of the pyruvic oxidation in this system 3,4. Most important




                         0   1    2   3    4   5    6   7    0

               Fig. 2. Phosphate dependence of pyruvate oxidation.


416                             1953 F.LIPMANN

Table 2. Transfer of phosphate from acetyl phosphate to adenylic acid with bacterial
                                   preparations.




during this and later work became the development of procedures 5 and in
                                                      6
particular of the very handy hydroxamic acid method for the determination
of acyl phosphates and other reactive acyl derivatives.
   At the time when these observations were made, about a dozen years ago,
there was, to say the least, a tendency to believe that phosphorylation was
rather specifically coupled with the glycolytic reaction. Here, however, we
had found a coupling of phosphorylation with a respiratory system. This
observation immediately suggested a rather sweeping biochemical signifi-
cance, of transformations of electron transfer potential, respiratory or fer-
mentative, to phosphate bond energy and therefrom to a wide range of bio-
synthetic reactions7.
   There was a further unusual feature in this pyruvate oxidation system in
that the product emerging from the process not only carried an energy-rich
phosphoryl radical such as already known, but the acetyl phosphate was even
more impressive through its energy-rich acetyl. It rather naturally became
a contender for the role of "active" acetate, for the widespread existence of
which the isotope experience had already furnished extensive evidence. I
became, therefore, quite attracted by the possibility that acetyl phosphate
could serve two rather different purposes, either to transfer its phosphoryl
group into the phosphate pool, or to supply its active acetyl for biosynthesis
of carbon structures. Thus acetyl phosphate should be able to serve as acetyl
donor as well as phosphoryl donor, transferring, as shown in Fig. 3, on either
side of the oxygen center, such as indicated by Bentley’s early experiments
 on cleavage7a of acetyl phosphate in H218O.
   These two novel aspects of the energy problem, namely (1) the emergence
 of an energy-rich phosphate bond from a purely respiratory reaction; and
 (2) the presumed derivation of a metabolic building-block through this same
 reaction, prompted me to propose not only the generalization of the phos-
 phate bond as a versatile energy distributing system, but also to aim from


          DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                             417




             Fig. 3. Acetyl phosphate as acetyl and phosphoryl donor.

 there towards a general concept of transfer of activated groupings by carrier
 as the fundamental reaction in biosynthesis8,9. Although in the related man-
 ner the appearance of acetyl phosphate as a metabolic intermediary first
 focussed attention to possible mechanisms for the metabolic elaboration of
 group activation, it soon turned out that the relationship between acetyl
 phosphate and acetyl transfer was much more complicated than anticipated.
     Since a better understanding of the mechanisms of group activation seemed
 to become a most urgent problem in biosynthesis, I now set out to find a
 suitable system to check on the assumption that acetyl phosphate represented
 active acetate. After working out a relatively easy method to prepare the
 compound 5,10, a first unexpected difficulty arose when it appeared that
animal tissues contain rather generally a very active, specific and heat-stable
 acetyl phosphatase 11,9. In crude preparations of muscle, liver and other tissues
 the half life of acetyl phosphate is only a few minutes. This strange activity in
 animal tissues made tests with this substance very difficult.
     In looking for a sensitive method to study acetyl transfer, the acetylation
  of aromatic amines was chosen eventually as a most promising and tech-
  nically easy procedure. We were furthermore quite confident that any results
  obtained with this method could be generalized over the whole metabolic
  territory concerning the transfer of active acetate including such reactions as
  citrate, acetoacetate and lipid synthesis. Acetylation of sulfonamide had been
  found to occur in rabbit liver slices 1 2. However, for our purposes, we had to
  eliminate cell membrane barriers to test for the activity of complex interme-
  diary metabolites. Although acetylation was found with rabbit liver homo-
  genate, the reaction was rather weak. In search of a more active system,
  pigeon liver homogenate was tried and found to harbour an exceedingly
  potent acetylation system (Ref. 11, cf. also Ref. 12). This finding of a partic-
  ularly active acetylation reaction in cell-free pigeon liver preparations was
  most fortunate and played a quite important part in the development of the
  acetylation problem.


418                          1953 F.LIPMANN

   We had now eventually arrived at the point where the desired test for
acetyl phosphate as an acetyl precursor could be performed. Although the
acetyl phosphatase activity of the pigeon liver homogenate was considerable
and, to some extent, obscured the test with acetyl phosphate, it became,
nevertheless, clear to us that in this preparation, acetyl phosphate did not
furnish active acetate11. Under anaerobic conditions with massive concentra-
tions of acetyl phosphate, no acetyl groups for the acetylation of sulfonamide
could be derived under conditions where an easy acetylation occurred with
a respiring homogenate.
   It furthermore appeared that as an energy source the particle bound oxi-
dative phosphorylation of the kind observed first by Herman Kalckar 14 could
be replaced by ATP, as had first been observed with the acetylation of
choline in brain preparations by Nachmansohn and his group 15,16 . Using
ATP and acetate as precursors, it was possible to set up a homogeneous par-
ticle-free acetylation system obtained by extraction of acetone pigeon liver.
In this extract likewise acetyl phosphate was unable to replace the ATP-
acetate as acetyl precursor.




In spite of this disappointment with acetyl phosphate, our decision to turn to
a study of acetylation started then to be rewarding in another way. During
these studies we became aware of the participation of a heat-stable factor
which disappeared from our enzyme extracts on aging or dialysis. This co-
factor was present in boiled extracts of all organs, as well as in micro-
organisms and yeast. It could not be replaced by any other known cofactor.
Therefore, it was suspected that we were dealing with a new coenzyme.
From then on, for a number of years, the isolation and identification of this
coenzyme became the prominent task of our laboratory. The problem now
increased in volume and I had the very good fortune that a group of exceed-
ingly able people were attracted to the laboratory; first Constance Tuttle,
then Nathan O. Kaplan and shortly afterwards, G. David Novelli. More
recently, Morris Soodak and John Gregory, and quite a few others have
made here most important contributions to the advance of this problem.
   Early data on the replacement of this heat-stable factor by boiled extracts
are shown in the next table (Table 3). The pigeon liver acetylation system
proved to be a very convenient assay system for the new coenzyme 17 since


          DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                                 419
           Table 3. Reversible inactivation through dialysis or autolysis.




(1 ml of extract in a total volume of 2 ml; magnesium chloride and sodium acetate
were present in 0.02 M concentration. The experiment was started through addition of
a mixture of 0.32 mg of adenyl polyphosphate P, 88 y of sulfanilamide, and fluoride to
0.05 M final concentration.)


on aging for 4 hours at room temperature, the cofactor was completely auto-
lyzed. Fortunately, on the other hand, the enzyme responsible for the de-
composition of this factor was quite unstable and faded out during the aging,
while the acetylation apoenzymes were unaffected.
  The next figure, Fig. 4, shows coenzyme A (CoA) assay curves obtained




Fig. 4. Concentration-activity curves for coenzyme A preparations of different purity.
The arrow indicates the point of 1 unit on the curve. (o) crude coenzyme, 0.25 unit
                 per mg; (x) purified coenzyme, 130 units per mg.


420                            1953 F.LIPMANN

with acetone pigeon liver extract. Finding pig liver a good source for the
coenzyme, we set out to collect a reasonably large quantity of a highly
purified preparation and then to concentrate on the chemistry with this
material. In this analysis we paid particular attention to the possibility of
finding in this obviously novel cofactor one of the vitamins, then not as yet
metabolically identified. In this task we were very fortunate to have the
help of the great experience of Dr. Roger Williams’ laboratory. Dr. Beverly
Guirard, who occupied herself with this preparation, at first seemed not to
find any appreciable amounts of the known vitamins. However, she became
aware of the fact that on prolonged enzymatic treatment, the value of panto-
thenic acid, as determined microbiologically, did slightly increase. This gave
the hint that the coenzyme may not release the pantothenic acid so easily, a
fact well known from experience with pantothenic acid assay in tissue ex-
tracts. In confirmation, she found on acid hydrolysis of the coenzyme, con-
siderable amounts of             corresponding to 11 per cent of pantothenic
acid in this preparation which, as we now know, was 40 per cent pure. The
results of Dr. Guirard’s vitamin survey, which gave us the practical assur-
ance of the presence of pantothenic acid in the new coenzyme 18, are shown
in Table 4.

                   Table 4. Vitamin content of preparation A.




   The appearance of a B-vitamin in the preparation was of course a most
exciting event for our group and gave us further confidence that we were
dealing here with a key substance. We still felt, however, slightly dissatisfied
with the proof for pantothenic acid. Therefore, to liberate the chemically
rather unstable pantothenic acid from CoA, we made use of observations on


          DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                           421
enzymatic cleavage of the coenzyme. Two enzyme preparations, intestinal
phosphatase and an enzyme in pigeon liver extract, had caused independent
inactivation. It then was found that through combined action of these two
enzymes, pantothenic acid was liberated18,19.
   The two independent enzymatic cleavages indicated early that in CoA
existed two independent sites of attachment to the pantothenic acid mole-
cule. One of these obviously was a phosphate link, linking presumably to
one of a hydroxyl group in pantothenic acid. The other moiety attached to
pantothenic acid, which, cleaved off by liver enzyme, remained unidentified
for a long time. In addition to pantothenic acid, our sample of 40 per cent
purity had been found to contain about 2 per cent sulfur by elementary
analysis and identified by cyanide-nitroprusside test as a potential SH-
grouping 20,21 . Furthermore, the coenzyme preparation contained large
amounts of adenylic acid21.
  In the subsequent elaboration of the structure, the indications by enzyme
analysis for the two sites of attachment to pantothenic acid have been most
helpful. The phosphate link was soon identified as a pyrophosphate bridge 22;
5-adenylic acid was identified by Novelli23 as enzymatic split product and by
Baddiley 24, through chemical cleavage. At the same time, Novelli made
observations which indicated the presence of a third phosphate in addition to
the pyrophosphate bridge. These indications were confirmed by analysis of
a nearly pure preparation which was obtained by Gregoryas from Strepto-
myces fradiae in collaboration with the research group at the Upjohn Com-
pany 26. The generous help of the Upjohn Laboratories has been of great


           Table 5. Composition of best preparation21 of coenzyme A.21

                             Calculated*




* Pantothenic acid, 2-mercaptoethylamine, 3 phosphoric acid, adenosine, - 5H2O;
molecular weight 767.
** Liberated by prostate phosphomonoesterase.


422                           1953 F.LIPMANN

 importance for the final identification of the structure of CoA. The analysis
 of this practically pure preparation is presented in Table 5.
    It was at this period that we started to pay more and more attention to the
 sulfur in the coenzyme. As shown in Table 5, our purest preparation con-
 tained 4.13 per cent sulfur corresponding to one mole per mole of panto-
 thenate. We also found26 that dephosphorylation of CoA yielded a com-
 pound containing pantothenic acid and the sulfur carrying moiety, which
 we suspected as bound through the carboxyl. Through the work of Snell
 and his group27, the sulfur-containing moiety proved to be attached to pan-
 tothenic acid through a link broken by our liver enzyme. It was identified as
 thioethanolamine by Snell and his group, linked peptidically to pantothenic
 acid.
    Through analysis and synthesis, Baddiley now identified the point of at-
                                                                          24
 tachment of the phosphate bridge to pantothenic acid in 4-position and
 Novelli et al.28 completed the structure analysis by enzymatic synthesis of
 "dephospho-CoA" from pantetheine-4’-phosphates and ATP. Furthermore,
                                                                  29
 the attachment of the third phosphate was identified by Kaplan to attach in
  s-position on the ribose of the 5-adenylic acid (while in triphosphopyridine
 nucleotide it happens to be in 2-position). Therefore, the structure was now
established, as shown in Fig. 5.




                        Fig. 5. Structure of coenzyme A.


        DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                                 423

                        The metabolicfunction of CoA

Parallel with this slow but steady elaboration of the structure, all the time we
explored intensively metabolic mechanisms in the acetylation field. By use of
the enzymatic assay, as shown in Tables 6, 7, 8, and 9, CoA was found
present in all living cells, animals, plants and microorganisms 17. Furthermore,
the finding that all cellular pantothenic acid could be accounted for by CoA 17

                     Table 6. Coenzyme A in animal tissues.
        (All values are given in units of coenzyme A per g of fresh tissue.)




* We wish to thank Dr. H. W. Deane and Dr. R. O. Greep for the demedullated
glands.
                   Table 7. Coenzyme A in micro-organisms.*




* We wish to thank Mr. G. D. Novelli for collaboration in these experiments.


424                             1953 F.LIPMANN

made it clear that CoA represented the only functional form of this vitamin.
The finding of the vitamin furnished great impetus; nevertheless, a tempta-
tion to connect the pantothenic acid with the acetyl transfer function has
blinded us for a long time to other possibilities.
   The first attempts to further explore the function of CoA were made with


                      Table 8. Coenzyme A in plant material.




(All tubes contained 1.0 ml of extract, 0.025 M oxalacetic acid, 0.0016 M NaHCO3,
0.02 M MgCl 2, and 0.01 M cysteine in a final volume of 2.5 ml. The concentrations of
the additions were as follows: sodium acetate 0.05 M, sodium ATP 0.02 M, lithium
acetyl phosphate 0.004 M, and coenzyme A 17 units.)


pantothenic acid-deficient cells and tissues. A deficiency of pyruvate oxida-
tion in pantothenic acid-deficient Proteus morganii, an early isolated observa-
tion by Dorfman30 and Hills31, now fitted rather well into the picture. We
soon became quite interested in this effect, taking it as an indication for
participation of CoA in citric acid synthesis. A parallel between CoA levels
and pyruvate oxidation in Proteus morganii was demonstrated32. Using panto-


          DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                                      425
          I                                                                       I




Fig. 5a. Effect of coenzyme A on acetate oxidation in yeast. Pantothenate-deficient
yeast was preincubated in glucose-phosphate medium with 50 γ of pantothenate, 100 y
of thiamine, and 100 γ of niacin in separate flasks; 5.6 mg of dry weight of each suspen-
sion were added to individual Warburg vessels. Total fluid volume 3.0 ml of 0.06 M
          KH2PO4, and 0.01 M acetic acid; temperature 37º; gas phase air.

thenic aciddeficient yeast, Novelli et al.33 demonstrated a CoA-dependence
of acetate oxidation (Fig. 5a) and Olson and Kaplan34 found with duck liver
 a striking parallel between CoA content and pyruvic utilization, which is
shown in Fig. 6.
    But more important information was being gathered on -the enzymatic
 level. The first example of a generality of function was obtained by com-
paring the activation of apoenzymes for choline- and sulfonamide-acetyla-
tion respectively, using our highly purified preparations9 of CoA. As shown
in Fig. 7, similar activation curves obtained for the two respective enzymes.
Through these experiments, the heat-stable factor for choline acetylation
that had been found by Nachmansohn and Berman35 and by Feldberg and
Mann36 was identified with CoA.
   The next most significant step toward a generalization of CoA function
for acetyl transfer was made by demonstrating its functioning in the enzymat-
ic synthesis of acetoacetate. The CoA effect in acetoacetate synthesis was
studied by Morris Soodak37, who obtained for this reaction a reactivation


426                                1953 F.LIPMANN




                        0    20 40 60


Fig. 6. Relationship between net pyruvate utilization (net- Qpyruvate) and coenzyme
A content of liver slices from deficient, pantothenic acid-treated, and normal ducks.
Net - Qpyruvate values for individual liver slices are plotted against their respective
coenzyme A values in units per g of fresh weight of slice. The following symbols
represent the various groups: ( l ) deficient,         ) deficient treated in vitro, (A) defi-
cient treated in vivo by intraperitoneal injection of 10 m of calcium pantothenate per 100
    g of body weight, 1 to 2 hours before observation, and (o ) normal controls
                                       fed ad libitum.


curve quite similar to those for enzymatic acetylation, as shown in Fig. 8.
Soon afterwards Stern and Ochoa38 showed a CoA-dependent citrate syn-
thesis with a pigeon liver fraction similar to the one used by Soodak for ace-
toacetate synthesis. In our laboratory, Novelli et al. confirmed and extended
this observation with extracts of Escherichia coli39.
   In the course of this work, which more and more clearly defined the acetyl
transfer function of CoA, Novelli once more tried acetyl phosphate. To our
surprise and satisfaction, it then appeared, as shown in Table 9, that in
Escherichia coli extracts in contrast to the animal tissue, acetyl phosphate was
more than twice as active as acetyl donor for citrate synthesis than ATP-
acetate39. Acetyl phosphate, therefore, functioned as a patent microbial acetyl
donor. Acetyl transfer from acetyl phosphate, like that from ATP-acetate,
was CoA-dependent, as shown in Table 9. Furthermore, a small amount of
"microbial conversion factor", as we called it first, primed acetyl phosphate
for activity with pigeon liver acetylation systems40, as shown in Table 10.


         DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                                   427
Table 10. Acetylation of p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) by pigeon-liver enzyme, acetyl
                          phosphate, and C. kluyveri extract.




(Conditions: tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane buffer (pH 8.1), 0.2 M; cysteine, 0.01
M; acetyl-P, 0.025 M, PABA, 0.001 M; CoA (67 units per mg), 10 units; bacterial
transacetylase (acid ammonium sulfate fraction, 43 to 86 per cent saturation), 0.3 mg;
pigeon-liver fraction (A-60-4)8, 0.3 ml. Find volume 1.0 ml,28º, 60 minutes.)




 .




Fig. 7. Activation curves for acetocholinekinase and acetoarylaminekinase by purified
                               coenzyme A preparations.


428                           1953 F.LIPMANN




Fig. 8. Coenzyme A dependence of acetoacetate formation from acetate + ATP with
                    ammonium sulfate pigeon-liver fraction.


Eventually the microbial conversion factor was identified by Stadtman et
al.40 with the transacetylase first encountered by Stadtman and Barker in
extracts of Clostridium kluyveri41 and likewise, although not clearly defined as
such, in extracts of Escherichia coli and Clostridium butylicum by Lipmann and
Tuttle 42.
   The definition of such a function was based on the work of Doudoroff et
al.43 on transglucosidation with sucrose phosphorylase. Their imaginative use
of isotope exchange for closer definition of enzyme mechanisms has been
most influential. Like glucose-I-phosphate with sucrose phosphorylase, ace-
tyl phosphate with these various microbial preparations equilibrates its phos-
phate rapidly with the inorganic phosphate of the solution. As in Doudoroff
et al. experiments, first a covalent substrate enzyme derivative had been pro-
posed 43. However, then Stadtman et al.40, with the new experience of CoA-
dependent acetyl transfer, could implicate CoA in this equilibration between
acetyl- and inorganic phosphate and thus could define the transacetylase as an
enzyme equilibrating acetyl between phosphate and CoA:


          DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                             429




Fig. 9. Acetylation of PABA with Fractions A-40 and A-60 added in various propor-
tions. The system contains M tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane buffer (pH 8.3). 0.2
ml; 0.1 M cysteine, 0.1 ml; 0.05 M sodium ATP, 0.1 ml; M sodium acetate, 0.1 ml;
0.1 M MgCl2, 0.1 ml; M NaF, 0.1 ml; 0.01 M PAPA, 0.2 ml; and CoA, 11 units in
            0.1 ml. Total volume 1.4 ml. Incubated at 30º for go minutes.




In the course of these various observations, it became quite clear that there
existed in cellular metabolism an acetyl distribution system centering around
CoA as the acetyl carrier which was rather similar to the ATP-centered
phosphoryl distribution system. The general pattern of group transfer be-
came recognizable, with donor and acceptor enzymes being connected
through the CoA ---- acetyl CoA shuttle.
   A clearer definition of the donor-acceptor enzyme scheme was obtained
through acetone fractionation of our standard system for acetylation of sul-
fonamide into two separate enzyme fractions, which were inactive separately
but showed the acetylation effect when combined. A fraction, A-40, sepa-
rating out with 40 per cent acetone, was shown by Chou 44 to contain the
 donor enzyme responsible for the ATP-CoA-acetate reaction, while with
 more acetone precipitated, the acceptor function, A-60, the acetoarylamine-
 kinase as we propose to call this type of enzyme. The need for a combination
 of the two for overall acetyl transfer is shown in Fig. 9. This showed that a
 separate system was responsible for acetyl CoA formation through inter-
action of ATP, CoA and acetate (cf. below) and that the overall acetylation
 was a two-step reaction:


430                           1953 F.LIPMANN




These observations crystallized into the definition of a metabolic acetyl trans-
fer territory as pictured in Fig. 10.
   This picture had developed from the growing understanding of enzymatic
interplay involving metabolic generation of acyl CoA and transfer of the
active acyl to various acceptor systems. A most important, then still missing
link in the picture was supplied through the brilliant work of Feodor Lynen45
who chemically indentified acetyl CoA as the thioester of CoA. Therewith
the thioester link was introduced as a new energy-rich bond and this discov-
ery added a very novel facet to our understanding of the mechanisms of
metabolic energy transformation.




 In spite of many similarities between the general aspects of group transfer
 involving phosphoryl and acetyl groupings, there is a considerable differ-
ence insofar as the grouping transferred in the acetyl territory is an organic
grouping and displays a quite different versatility for condensation reactions,
 yielding eventually large and complex carbon structures. There is one feature
 in this picture which always has attracted our particular attention: the two-




                         Fig. 10. Acetyl transfer scheme.


        DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                           431
fold type of activation involving (1) the carboxyl end or the "head" of the
acetyl; and (2) its methyl or "tail" end.
   The definition of the head reaction is relatively simple. Acetylation of
arylamine or choline is a typical head reaction. There is to be mentioned,
furthermore, the observation by Chantrenne46, introducing CoA as a rather
general catalyst of acyl activation. He demonstrated the activity of CoA in
benzoyl transfer such as hippuric acid synthesis. The mechanism of this syn-
thesis was elaborated recently by Taggart47, who clearly defined benzoyl
CoA as the benzoyl donor in this reaction. An even greater and more prom-
inent generalization is offered through the more and more developing im-
portance of succinyl CoA in intermediary metabolism.
   The second type, the methyl or tail activation, is not as well understood.
In citric acid synthesis, as may be seen from Fig. 11, the methyl end engages
 in an aldolase type of condensation with the carbonyl group of the oxal-
acetate as acceptor. This condensation requires an energy input which must be




                  Fig.11. Tail reaction. Citric acid synthesis.


derived from the thioester link and at the end of the reaction CoA appears to
be liberated in some manner.
  The complexity of the citrate condensation is emphasized through the
existence of an ATP-CoA-citrate reaction recently observed by Srere et al.48,
which results in the disruption of citrate to oxalacetate and acetyl CoA.


432                              1953 F.LIPMANN

The mechanism remains still to be understood in greater detail. The reaction
is mentioned here because it introduced the new variety into the citric acid
cycle through a conversion of phosphoryl via citrate into acetyl.
   For a long time the citrate reaction was the only known tail condensation.
However, recently another interesting example has developed in the study
of the precursors in steroid and isoprene synthesis. The initial condensation
product in this series appears to be b-methyl,                      (dicrotolic
acid), formed through condensation of acetoacetate with acetyl CoA. The
striking analogy between this and the citrate condensation appears on Fig.
12. This initial condensation seems to be followed by decarboxylation and
dehydration to              crotonic acid first demonstrated by Bonner et al.49
as intermediary in rubber synthesis.
   In a third type, a combination of head and tail reaction takes place with
 two acyl CoA’s reacting with each other in a head-to-tail condensation.
When studying acetoacetate synthesis, we were at first not quite aware of its
 belonging to this third type of reaction. The calculation of the energy re-




Fig. 12. Tail reaction. Synthesis of                        glutaric acid(dicrotolicacid).
                      (Note the similarity to citric acid synthesis.)


quired had yielded a figure of around 15 kilocalories which could be covered
by one energy-rich bonds. However, by using as acetyl donor carboxyl-
labeled acetyl phosphate, fed through transacetylase, the marker appeared in
the carbonyl as well as the carboxyl part of acetoacetate (Table 11). This
demonstrated a head-tail character for the reaction. The finer mechanism of
this reaction between two acetyl CoA’s, as shown in Fig. 13, has been more


        DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM

           Table 11. Synthesis of acetoacetate from CH3C14OOPO3=.




recently elaborated in particular by Lynen’s group50, by Green’s51 laborato-
ry and by Ochoa and his group . Presumably in the building up of longer
                                 52



terpene chains, a head-tail condensation may occur between two
crotonyl CoA’s, followed by hydrogenation and dehydration-(Fig. 14).
   A quite new type of head-tail condensation, presumably between succinyl
CoA and glycyl CoA was recently suggested by Shemin’s work on hemin
synthesis53. The thus primarily formed keto, amino dicarboxylic acid then
appears to be decarboxylated to          levulinic acid. Shemin synthesized
the latter marked with 14C and showed its incorporation into the heme mol-
ecule.




In the recent past we have been mostly occupied with the mechanism through
which the phosphate bond in ATP converts to acetyl bond in acetyl CoA. In




Fig. 13. Head-to-tail condensation. Acetoacetate synthesis and follow reactions in
                         straight-chain fatty acid synthesis.


434                            1953   F.LIPMANN




animal tissue where acetyl phosphate appeared not to be an intermediate,
the conversion mechanism remained for a long time very puzzling. Before
considering this reaction, it will be advantageous to review first the micro-
biological mechanism of such interconversion and in particular the role of
acetyl phosphate as an intermediary. This transformation is rather straight-
forward: a sequence of two independent enzymatic reactions, the first a
transphosphorylation from ATP to acetate and the second, as discussed, a
transacylation from acetyl phosphate to CoA:




                        0                         0   -PO,’   0   0




   It should be noted that in the first transphosphorylation step the acetyl
phosphate cleaves and condenses between 0 and P. In the second transacyla-
tion reaction, however, acetyl phosphate cleaves and condenses between C
and O. Thus the same molecule reacts on either side of the oxygen bridge
between the carbon and the phosphorus. This shift of the site of cleavage in
the sequence is significant. This possibility attracted my early attention (see
Fig. 3) and was one of the reasons that prompted me into this whole ex-
ploration. A shift from P~O.C to P.O~C should actually be a feature of
many condensations initiated by a phosphoryl split from ATP. These be-


         DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                                  435
come increasingly numerous such as in glutamine, glutathione, pantothenate
and seemingly in protein synthesis.
   The finer mechanism generally is obscured by enzyme bound steps. In all
these reactions, however, somewhere along the line a shift from transphos-
phorylation to transacylation seems to be inherent. This shift stands out very
clearly in the microbial two-step reaction. But in animal tissue, the energy
transmission from phosphoryl to acetyl occurs through a continuous enzyme
bound reaction chain which is more difficult to elucidate. Nevertheless, some
progress has been made, which also starts to reflect on other mechanisms of
this type.
  Jones et al.54,55,56 have explored the reaction with liver and with yeast and
a surprising feature was uncovered, namely, that the initial phosphoryl split
of ATP occurs between the pyrophosphoryl group and-AMP. The cleavage
products of ATP were identified as inorganic pyrophosphate (PP) and aden-
ylic acid (AMP). The mechanism was obscured by the presence of pyro-
phosphatase which, however, could be suppressed with fluoride. Table 12


              Table 12. Effect of fluoride on pyrophosphate formation.




(Each vessel contained in 1 ml: 12     ATP; 10      potassium acetate; 10     MgCl2;
20      H2S; 200 yM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane buffer, pH 7.5 and 0.02 ml
(20 units) of yeast enzyme fraction 4. Vessels were incubated at 37º for 30 minutes.)
   * 1 µM CoA = 310 units.
 ** Determined by colour increase.
*** Determined by Mn precipitation method.


shows the course of reaction in the presence and the absence of fluoride,
using the hydroxamate formation as an index.
     Some further rather revealing information was obtained by the use of
isotopes. This was suggested by Lynen during his visit to our laboratory50.
It was found that ATP and radioactive inorganic pyrophosphate exchange


436                              1953 F.LIPMANN

in the absence of CoA or acetate. Such an exchange is best compatible with
an initial reaction between the enzyme and ATP, resulting in a covalent
binding of AMP to the enzyme, E,




It furthermore was found that acetyl CoA exchanges with radioactive free
acetate in the absence of ATP or pyrophosphate. This exchange would in-
dicate an exchange of acetyl for enzyme in the final step. Therefore, an over-
all sequence ( En standing for enzyme) was proposed as follows*:




The middle step, that is the substitution of enzyme-bound AMP by CoA,
is the most problematic but also the most interesting one since it may fore-
shadow mechanisms implicating nucleotide activation for polynucleotide
formation. No indications were found for the identity of the grouping on
the enzyme through which the initial binding of AMP and further ex-
change with CoA might occur. A further purification of the enzyme would
be necessary before obtaining fuller information.
   A pyrophosphoryl split of ATP also was found by Maass 57,58 to initiate
pantothenate synthesis. In contrast to the ATP-CoA-acetate reaction this
peptide synthesis appears to occur by way of a pyrophosphoryl-enzyme in-
stead of AMP-enzyme intermediary. This phenomenon of a priming of an

 * Note added in proof in 1963: The liberation of pyrophosphate in the ATP-CoA-acetate
reaction has meanwhile been resolved into an initial formation of acetyl adenylate, fol-
lowed by a transacetylation to CoA to yield acetyl CoA as the end product (P. Berg, J.
Biol.Chem., 222 (1956) 991; W.P.Jencks and F.Lipmann, J.Biol.Chem., 225(1957)207).


         DEVELOPMENT OF THE ACETYLATION PROBLEM                                     437
enzyme for peptidic synthesis by phosphorylation has been very tentatively
used as a start for developing possible schemes for polypeptide synthesis59.
   Altogether, in this area, a diversified picture is rapidly developing. There
is good reason to hope that in the not too distant future, out of the fair con-
fusion of the present, a clearer understanding will eventually evolve. A new
level of complexity seems slowly to unravel and the gap between the bio-
chemical and biological approach further narrows down.




 1. F. Lipmann, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 7 (1939) 248.
 2. H. Kämmerer and L. Carius, Ann., 131 (1864) 153.
 3. F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 134 (1940) 463.
 4. F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 155 (1944) 55.
 5. F. Lipmann and L. C. Tuttle, J. Biol. Chem., 153 (1944) 571.
 6. F. Lipmann and L. C. Tuttie, J. Biol. Chem., 159 (1945) 21.
 7. F. Lipmann, Advan. Enzymol., 1(1941) 99.
 7a. R. Bentley, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 8 (1948) 11.
 8. F. Lipmann, in Currents in Biockemical Research, D. E. Green (Ed.), Interscience Pub-
     lishers, N.Y., 1946, p. 137.
 9.. F. Lipmann, Advan. Enzymol., 6 (1946) 231.
10. E. R. Stadtman and F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 185 (1950) 549.
11. F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 160 (1945) 173.
12. W. O. Sykes, Biockem. J., 38 (1944) xxix.
13. J. R. Klein and J. S. Harris, J. Biol. Chem., 124 (1938) 613.
14. H. Kalckar, Biochem. J., 33 (1939) 631.
15. D. Nachmansohn, H. M. John, and H. Waelsch, J. Biol. Chem., 150 (1943) 485.
16. D. Nachmansohn and A. L. Machado, J Neurophysiol., 6 (1943) 397.
17. N. O. Kaplan and F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 174 (1948) 37.
18. F. Lipmann, N. O. Kaplan, G. D. Novelli, L. C. Tuttle, and B. M. Guirard, J.
     Biol. Chem., 167 (1947) 869.
19. G. D. Novelli, N. O. Kaplan, and F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 177 (1949) 97.
20. F. Lipmann, N. O. Kaplan, and G. D. Novelli, Federation Proc., 6 (1947) 272.
21. F. Lipmarm, N. O. Kaplan, G. D. Novelli, L. C. Tuttle, and B. M. Guirard, J.
     Biol. Chem., 186 (1950) 235.
22. G. D. Novelli, N. O. Kaplan, and F. Lipmann, Federation Proc., 9 (1950) 209.
23. G. D. Novelli, Physiol. Rev., 33 (1953) 525.
24. J. Baddiley and E. M. Thain, J. Chem. Soc, Sept. (1951) 2253.
25. J. D. Gregory, G. D. Novelli, and F. Lipmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 74 (1952) 854.
26. W. H. de Vries, W. M. Govier, J. S. Evans, J. D. Gregory, G. D. Novelli, M.
      Soodak, and F. Lipmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 72 ( 1950) 4838.
27. E. E. Snell, G. M. Brown, V. J. Peters, J. A. Craig, E. L. Wittle, J. A. Moore,
     V. M. McGlohon, and O. D. Bird, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 72 (1950) 5349.


438                             1953 F.LIPMANN

28. J. Baddiley, E. M. Thain, G. D. Novelli, and F. Lipmann, Nature, 171 (1953) 76.
29. L. S. Shuster and N. O. Kaplan, J. Biol. Chem., 201 (1953) 535.
30. A. Dorfman, A. Berkman, and S. A. Koser, J. Biol. Chem., 144 (1942) 393.
31. G. M. Hills, Biockem. J., 37 (1943) 418.
32. G. D. Novelli and F. Lipmann, Arch. Biochem., 14 (1947) 23.
33. G. D. Novelli and F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 171 (1947) 833.
34. R. E. Olson and N. O. Kaplan, J. Biol. Chem., 175 (1948) 515.
35. D. Nachmansohn and M. Berman, J. Biol. Chem., 165 (1946) 551.
36. W. Feldberg and T. Mann, J. Physiol. London, 104 (1946) 411.
37. M. Soodak and F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 175 (1948) 999.
38. J. R. Stem and S. Ochoa, J. Biol. Chem., 179 (1949) 491.
39. G. D. Novelli and F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 182 (1950) 213.
40. E. R. Stadtman, G. D. Novelli, and F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 191(1951) 365.
41. E. R. Stadtman and H. A. Barker, J. Biol. Chem., 184 (1950) 769.
42. F. Lipmann and L. C. Tuttle, J. Biol. Chem., 158 (1945) 505.
43. M. Doudoroff, H. A. Barker, and W. Z. Hassid, J. Biol. Chem., 168 (1947) 725.
44. T. C. Chou and F. Lipmasm, J. Biol. Chem., 196 (1952) 89.
45. F. Lynen, E. Reichert, and L. Rueff, Ann., 574 (1951) 1.
46. H. Chantrenne, J. Biol. Chem., 189 (1951) 227.
47. D. Schachter and J. V. Taggart, J. Biol. Chem., 203 (1953) 925.
48. P. A. Srere and F. Lipmanu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 75 (1953) 4874.
49. J. Bonner and B. Arreguin, Arch. Biochem., 21 (1949) 109.
50. F. Lynen, Harvey Lectures, 48 (1954) 212.
51.D. E. Green, S. Mii, H. R. Mahler, and R. M. Bock, J. Biol. Chem., 206 (1954) 1.
52. S. Ochoa, Advan. Enzymol., 15 (1954) 183.
53. D. Shemin and C. S. Russel, J Am. Chem. Soc., 75 (1953) 4873.
 54. M. E. Jones, F. Lipmann, H. Hibs, and F. Lynen, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 75 (1953) 3285.
 55. M. E. Jones, S. Black, R. M. Flynn, and F. Lipmann, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, 12
      (1953) 141.
 56. M. E. Jones, Federation Proc., 12 (1953) 708.
 57. W. K. Maas, Federation Proc., 12 (1953) 241.
 58. W, K. Maas and G. D. Novelli, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 43 (1953) 236.
 59. F. Lipmarm, in Mechanism of Enzyme Action, W. D. McElroy and B. Glass (Eds.),
      Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1954, p. 599.
