                          G   EORG VON     BÉKÉSY


       Concerning the pleasures of observing, and
            the mechanics of the inner ear
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1961


                  Trying to do science in an unscientific way

For me, the most stimulating book on hearing was Helmholtz’s Die Lehre
von den Tonempfindungen. It was published in 1863. Although some of its
details are not confirmed by measurements with today’s instruments, the
basic concepts still retain their value, and Helmholtz´s method of viewing
physiology and psychology in physical terms is today just as fresh as the day
it was written. Hehnholtz’s magnificent start, however, was followed by
stagnation in auditory research, and for almost 100 years the universities
taught about the same thing. The whole field of acoustics made very little
progress compared with the tremendous achievements in other areas of
physics.
   This may seem surprising, since acoustics and concepts of waves con-
tinued to influence the development of physics, particularly theoretical phys-
ics; and there are many instances in which acoustical concepts served to
initiate new theories. For instance, the Mach wave was the model for the
                                                                               1
discoveries in the field of light radiation of Cerenkov, Frank, and Tamm ,
the Nobel Laureates of 1958.
   Looking back, I think it is not too difficult to understand the slow progress
in the physiology of hearing. Fig. 1 shows, along the ordinate, the vibration
amplitudes of air particles and of the basilar membrane in the inner ear of
man for sounds that were just audible at the frequencies noted on the ab-
scissa. (The vibration amplitudes of the basilar membrane are plotted because
the auditory nerves terminate in cells that are seated on that membrane; and
as a result, its vibrations seem to be responsible for the stimulation of the
auditory nerve.) As you can see, the vibration amplitudes are extremely
small. At 3,000 cps (cycles per second), we can hear a vibration of the air
particles that is 100 times smaller than the diameter of the orbit travelled by
an electron around the nucleus of a hydrogen molecule. Even for sound pres-
sures so high that they would produce unbearable pain in the ear, the vibra-


      PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                                 723
       -1




Fig. 1. Vibration amplitude of air particles, and of the basilar membrane of the inner
ear at the threshold of hearing (solid lines), compared with the diameter of a hydrogen
atom. Given for comparison are the vibration amplitudes of the basilar membrane for
the maximum sound pressure that can be tolerated even for a few seconds (dashed line).

tion amplitudes for higher frequencies would be relatively small. There were
until recent times no methods for measuring these small amplitudes, though
these measurements constitute the most essential data on which to begin
acoustic research. It was only with the invention of the amplifier that this
difficulty was overcome.
   Oddly enough, in my research on the mechanics of the inner ear, am-


724                       1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY




                     Fig. 2. Baboon, Egypt, ca. 1,400 B.C.

plification has played only a minor role in the crucial experiments that were
planned to decide between the different possible theories. But what was of
importance to me was the kind of new concepts that were being developed
in the field of communication engineering - concepts such as damping, tran-
sients, filter bandwidth, phase distortion, non-linearity, and so forth. These
concepts originated with the mathematical treatment of transients by Heavi-
side 2, their exact formulation by K. W. Wagner3, Carson4, Küpfmüllers,
Barkhausen 6, Laurent7, and Feldtkeller8, to mention only a few.
   Helmholtz, in a well-remembered talk, described the two roads to re-
search: (i) the shaky ladder that every scientist has to climb, and (ii) the
smooth royal path on which the results are presented to an audience. Since
both Stevens and Davis9, and Wever and Lawrence10 reviewed my earlier


     PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                             725




           Fig. 3. Black-stone monkey from Bogas-Koi, ca. 3,000 B.C.


work, and WeverII edited all my earlier publications, I would like to talk
not about the red carpet, but about some of the things that happened be-
tween the published lines.
   I must admit that I have never liked to work hard. Preparing for college
examinations was something I could do, but I hated to do it. Even today, I
dislike deadlines. But there is one thing I am always ready to do, and that is
to look at beautiful things. I can look for hours at an art object, and I am
convinced that I owe a large part of my education to the museums of many
countries. I mention this because curators of museums seldom receive prizes.
It was in the museums that I first realized that there is something like a time-
less beauty that persists in spite of all the endless wars and intrigues. A
baboon from 1,400 B.C. (Fig. 2) gives us the same feeling of dignity now


726                        1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY




             Fig. 4. Bronze figure of a fox, Greece, 8th century B.C.




Fig. 5. Lion-man, 12th century. (Reprinted with permission from T. H. White, "The
                 Book of Beasts", G. P. Putnam, New York, 1954.)


      PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                                  727




Fig. 6. Fantastic dog, 12th century. (Reprinted with permission from T. H. White, "The
                   Book of Beasts", G. P. Putnam, New York, 1954.)


that he did in his day. A Hittite monkey (Fig. 3) looks just as helpless today
as he did 5,000 years ago; and an early Greek fox (Fig. 4) behaves with all
the shrewdness of a growing important nation.
   In my student years I was very much concerned with the question, why
it is so difficult to imagine something new? Where are the limits of fantasy,
was my daily question. It is very difficult to recognize these borderlines in a
chemistry or physics book. But it is easy to see them in the history of art.
Between the 12th and 15th centuries it was the custom in Europe to use
fantastic animals as decoration. If you compare the Figs. 5 through 9, it will
surprise you to see how limited the fantasy really is, for most of the figures
are nothing more than the combination of parts of other figures. They were
much more original in the Near East in the first half of the first millennium
B.C. But even so, my question remains, how is it possible to produce new
discoveries in science when our imagination is so limited?
    It was the study of the drawings of Leonardo da Vinci that gave me the
answer. If you compare the drawing of the flower in Fig. 10 with the draw-
ing of the storm in Fig. 11, you will have the impression that da Vinci was
able to cover a velocity range that to my knowledge no other artist has been


728                       1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY




                  Fig. 7. Luristan bronze handle, ca. 800 B.C.

able to equal. Why? I believe it is because da Vinci did not try to outdo
Nature with his fantasy, but, quite the opposite, he tried to learn from Na-
ture. It was this very simple finding that gave me, in my student years, the
hope that perhaps in time I would be able to produce something of enduring
interest.



                           Preliminary experiments

After the First World War, the only place in Hungary that had some sci-
entific instruments left and was willing to let me use them was the research
laboratory of the Post Office. There were four floors and all of us there were


     PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                               729




               Fig. 8. Achameneid head (pink stone), ca. 500 B.C.


friends, forged together by the very hard facts of postwar life. At that time,
many of the important telephone lines went through Hungary and there
were constant complaints that Hungary did not keep its lines in order. The
method used to test a telephone line was to put an A.C. voltage on a line,
beginning in Budapest, let the current go to the different capitals, and then
feed it back to Budapest and compare the input with the output voltage for
different frequencies. A single measurement of the speech frequency range
took more than 20 minutes. A few minutes after the measurement was com-
pleted, the lines were apt to be out of order again.
   I wanted to find a method that could complete the test in a second. The
idea was that, when a musician tests his violin by pluckinga string, he can
tune it immediately. Theoretically, by plucking a telephone line it should
be possible to obtain instantly all the data that are obtained by the cumber-
some 20-minute test. Therefore, I transmitted a click through the line by
switching in a small D.C. voltage and then listening and observing the
returning signal. It turned out that the operator’s switch always had some
D.C. potential difference, and before long I was able to tell precisely in
which city a disturbance of the lines had occurred just by listening to the
clicks. After the clicks were localized, a private toll call stopped the complaint.
   A little later the question came up, how could we improve the com-


730                        1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY




               Fig. 9. Terra cotta from North Syria, ca. 2,000 B.C.


munication? Should our attention go first to the earphone, the microphone,
or the lines? To find an answer to this question, I simply applied a brief
mechanical click to the eardrum and the microphone, and an electrical D.C.
pulse to the earphone and the telephone lines. After a few days it was clear
that our earphones were much inferior in quality to the eardrum. Fig. 12
shows the transient oscillations of the eardrum after it is subjected to a sharp
click. From the form of these transients we can determine precisely the va-
rious resonant frequencies of the eardrum and the damping of the free
oscillations. The higher the resonant frequencies are, the wider is the fre-
quency range that is correctly transmitted; and the shorter the transient time,
the flatter the frequency transmission. The upper photograph of Fig. 13
shows the response of the membrane of a telephone receiver to stimulation


           PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                         731

with a sharp D.C. pulse; the lower drawing gives the response of a high-
fidelity earphone to similar stimulation.
   Because of its simplicity, this click method has attained primary impor-
tance in research on the inner ear. In those days it was generally assumed by
the medical profession that the mechanical properties of the tissues of the ear
changed rapidly after death, and that there was virtually no possibility of
determining the mechanical properties of the inner ear of man. Since it was
clear to me from the beginning that if I started to make measurements of the
inner ear it would take 2 or 3 years to collect the required data, I wanted to
know, as precisely as possible, how fast the tissues disintegrate. With the
click method, measurements can be made with such great precision that
changes in elasticity or friction as small as 1 or 2 per cent can be detected.
My studies of the tissues of the ear centered first on the eardrum, because the
drum is so thin that a change in any part of the ear would result in drying or
loosening there.
   The first step in the test of the tissues was to record the vibrations of the
handle of the hammer of the eardrum. When all the higher-order vibrations
were filtered out, we obtained very regular damped oscillation, as is shown




Fig. 10.    Drawing by Leonardo da Vinci (no movement). (Royal Collection, Windsor
             Castle; reproduced by gracious permission of H. M. Queen Elizabeth II.)


732                         1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY




Fig. 11. Drawing by Leonardo da Vinci (maximum movement). (Royal Collection,
     Windsor Castle; reproduced by gracious permission of H. M. Queen Elizabeth II.)


in Fig. 14. The amplitude of the oscillations, their decay, their resonant fre-
quencies, and even the change in their decay and resonant frequency with
amplitude can be measured with astounding precision under a microscope
or a comparator. As a check on the method, vibrations were applied to a
metallic membrane for days, but no change occurred.
   In the investigation of the tissue, the tendons of the stapes and tympanic
muscles of anesthetized animals were severed, and changes in the properties
of the eardrum were observed during and following the animal’s death. If the
relative humidity was kept at 100 per cent, even at room temperature there
was only an insignificant change, and that mostly in the friction. An even
more sensitive method was developed specifically to test the changes in elas-
tic property of the cochlear partition, and again with the same results. After
these preliminary observations, the road was open to measure the mechanical
properties of the cochlea in man and to compare it with the cochleas of dif-
ferent animals.


     PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                                  733

                              The travelling wave

It was very fortunate that even in Helmholtz’s time the great anatomical
discoveries by Corti12, Kölliker13, and Hasser14 had already made it clear that
the vibrating tissue most important for hearing is the basilar membrane of
the inner ear, because the cells on which the nerve endings terminate are
seated on this membrane. Later research by Retzius15, Kolmer16, and Held17
described the anatomy of the inner ear with such perfection that the prob-
lem of how we hear was reduced largely to a mechanical question: how does
the basilar membrane vibrate when the eardrum is exposed to a sinusoidal
sound pressure ? Since nobody could see these vibrations, a number of
theories developed, which have been reported in a masterly way by Waetz-
mann 18. And naturally, as time went on, all the possible mechanical vibra-
tions were suggested. We had resonating systems, travelling waves, standing
waves, and even no waves at all - just a bulged membrane.
   Looking back now, I see that I had good luck with my first experiment.




       Fig. 12. Vibration of the eardrum after exposure to a very short click.


734                           1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY




Fig. 13. (Upper curve): response of the membrane of a telephone receiver to direct cur-
  rent applied suddenly. (Lower curve): similar response of a high-fidelity earphone.

I took a tuning fork and touched its stem to any materials I could find -
threads, chains, springs, membranes, human skin, fluid surfaces - and with a
stroboscope observed the vibrations (Fig. 15). I think my most exciting dis-
covery was the observation that, if the frequency of the vibrations was high
enough, all objects that had internal elasticity showed traveling waves. The
waves travelled from the vibrator to the edge of the object, from which they
were more or less reflected back. Therefore, I could see no physical reason
whatsoever why the basilar membrane - a gelatinous mass imbedded in fluid
- should not also have travelling waves when one section of it was put in
motion by alternating pressure (Fig. 16). It would have been ridiculous for
me to submit these experiments for publication in a physics journal, for to a
physicist this was obvious. And I hesitated also to submit them to a phys-


  PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS 735

iological journal, because in any handbook of physiology, one need only
turn a few pages to see the connection between the movements of the basilar
membrane and the pulse waves of the arteries.
   The next problem was extremely difficult, and so I put aside my discovery
in spite of all the enthusiasm of a young Ph.D. As you can see from Fig. 17,
there are many types of wave, and not just one. There are: (a) compression
waves, (b) shear waves, (c) dilation waves, (d) Rayleigh waves, (e) ordinary
bending waves. My question was, which of these waves are present in the
inner ear, and which one contributes to the stimulation of the auditory end
organs? Clearly, if several of these waves were present simultaneously and
in the same order of magnitude, my further investigations would have no
chance for success. The difficulty is that, in a system as complex as the
cochlear partition, if one type of wave lost its energy while traveling along
the membrane, it would be able to get a new supply of energy from another
type of wave that was not so damped during the travel. This interplay of
energy would make any analysis or mathematical treatment very com-
plicated. Therefore, it was essential to find out whether one of the waves




Fig. 14. Click response of the handle of the hammer of the eardrum after the higher
resonances have been filtered out. This procedure permits precise measurements of
            changes in the pattern of oscillation over long periods of time.


736                        1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY




Fig. 15. Travelling waves observed on different objects brought in contact with a
                                    vibrator.

exceeded the others in magnitude to the extent that, at least for a first ap-
proach, the others could be neglected. I well remember the crucial night
when I finally became convinced that, at least over the lower frequency
range, the ordinary bending of the basilar membrane furnished an adequate
description of the vibrations that stimulate the nerve endings. To appreciate
that night, you have to remember that the whole inner ear of a guinea pig is
about as large as a drop of water at the end of an eye dropper.
   This new possibility focused all my attention on the elasticity and friction
of the basilar membrane, and I decided to measure these variables on fresh
human temporal bones as well as on animals. I laid down a program of how
I would proceed for the next 10 to 15 years. First I wanted to measure and
map all the vibration amplitudes and phases for sinusoidal forces on the
stapes footplate. After that, I wanted to determine the physical constants that
are responsible for these vibration patterns. Even in a description that took
account of the bending waves only, the number of constants involved would
be so great that it would be impossible to measure them all. Consequently,
the most important question was, which variables would suffice to produce
a wave pattern that corresponded to the pattern observed in the inner ear?


     PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                               737

With this knowledge a mechanical model could be constructed in which
only the essential variables would be represented. If the wave pattern in the
model should turn out to be identical with the pattern found in the inner
ear, the road would then be open for a mathematical approach to the prob-
lem. No simple mathematical solution was likely, and plenty of pitfalls could
be expected in the hydrodynamic part; for it is well known that hydro-
dynamics is a science in which there are more paradoxes than laws.
  The shape of the travelling wave in the human cochlea is shown in Fig. 18




Fig. 16. Schematic diagram of the inner ear showing the basilar membrane on which
the sensitive nerve cells are located. The vibrations of the eardrum are transmitted
                          through the stapes to the inner ear.


738                      1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY




              Fig. 17. The different types of waves (after Berger).

for stimulation by a tone of 200 cps. The envelope of the vibration amplitude
has a maximum, but the maximum is relatively flat. This flatness indicates
that very little mechanical frequency analysis is done by the inner ear. This
conclusion is confirmed for the higher frequencies in Fig. 19 which shows
the displacement of the maximum of the envelope for different frequencies.
But although the maximum of the envelope is flat, it is clear that it shifts
towards the left as the frequency of the stimulation is increased.
  These measurements were not simple, since first it had to be established
that the opening of the cochlear wall did not disturb the vibration pattern.
I worked for 4 or 5 months to develop cements that would adhere to bone
under water. (From a purely physical point of view, the problems of adhe-


     PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                           739




Fig. 18. Travelling wave along the human basilar membrane, showing the formation
                        of eddies in the surrounding fluid.

sives are almost as interesting as the ear and very little has been written about
them.) To my surprise, the vibration pattern turned out to be quite stable.
It is hardly affected by an opening, it is independent of an increase in the
dimensions of the space around it, and one can even change the mechanical
properties of one section of the membrane without disturbing the vibration
pattern of the remainder. Mathematically, we have, at present, no under-
standing of why the vibration pattern is so stable. Here again Nature is far
ahead of us.
   With these observations of vibration patterns, together with some quite
specific measurements of variables of elasticity, such as the volume elasticity
of the cochlear partition, it was possible to construct a model of the cochlea
from a rubber membrane on a metal frame - a model that responded to
stimulation with precisely the same vibratory behavior as the real cochlear
partition. Thus with this model I was able to reduce the number of variables
to the essential one. This mechanical model that I mention is not to be con-
fused with the quite different models that have become popular in non-
physical sciences, such as psychology, where they are now trying to develop
mathematical models of human behavior. In my opinion, they should be
called not models but rather analogies. In illustration of this point, the photo-
graph in Fig. 20 shows a gold bracelet fashioned in Greece in about 1,000
B.C. It represents two snake heads facing each other. The fascinating feature
is that each head has only one eye. The artist, 3,000 years ago, felt that this
was a better representation of the situation than to give each of the heads
two eyes. I do not know your judgment, but I would agree with him, even
after so many years have passed, that it is a perfect artistic solution though it
is not an anatomically correct representation. I feel the same way about some
behavioral models.
   As I mentioned before, a great number of hearing theories were proposed
in the years before it was possible to observe directly the vibration pattern of


740                         1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY

the waves on the cochlear partition. These theories fall into four major
classes: (1) the resonance theory of Helmholtz; (2) the telephone theory,
which assumes that the cochlear partition moves as a whole up and down,
(3) the travelling-wave theory, and (4) the standing-wave theory of Ewald19.
For many decades, there was rivalry among these hypotheses, with little
productive result.




Fig. 19. Showing the shift in the place of maximum vibration amplitude along the
basilar membrane for stimulation with different frequencies. (Abscissa: distance from
                                       stirrup.)


     PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                                 741




Fig. 20. Golden bracelet from the Mediterranean (with snake heads, each of which has
                            a single eye), ca. 1,000 B.C.


   Although the handbooks especially were much occupied with pointing
out the differences among the four theories, I reversed the question and tried
to find their common features. The result was surprising: it turned out that
it was possible to go continuously from one theory to the other merely by
changing the numerical value of one parameter, namely, the volume elastic-
ity. Thus, all these apparently contradictory theories belonged to one large
family. Their close relatedness can be demonstrated easily on the metal model
with a rubber membrane. As is shown in Fig. 21, we can make a rubber
membrane whose lateral tension is such that a point pressed into the mem-
brane produces an elliptical bulge; this membrane behaves in exactly the way
described by the resonance theory. If we make the rubber membrane quite
thick, deformations on it are almost round, as in the second drawing, and
the whole membrane moves up and down as a unit, at the same time, in the
manner predicted by the telephone theory. If the membrane is made thinner,
travelling waves appear; and if the membrane is still thinner, the waves
change into standing waves. Fig. 22 shows the different vibration patterns
that result from changes in the volume elasticity of the membrane. Thus it
became clear that the way to decide which of the four theories was repre-
sentative of the inner ear was simply to measure the volume elasticity, since


742




Fig. 22. All the different hearing theories form one family of vibration patterns, dif-
                     fering only in the stiffness of the membrane.


          PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                            743

     it is the magnitude of this variable that determines the pattern. These meas-
--
     urements, which are not difficult to make, confirm the existence of travelling
     waves along the basilar membrane. A simple mechanical model can be used
     successfully to demonstrate, not only these basic question, but some very
     detailed problems also, as Tonndorf20 has shown.
         Unfortunately, the mathematical approach is much more difficult than the
     experimental one. The pioneer work in this field was done by Fletcher 21. I
     am deeply grateful to Ranke22 who quite early applied the theory of the pulse
     waves to the vibrations of the basilar membrane and brought out several
     new findings that have been important for the experiments. Recently, Zwis-
     locki 23 and Zwicker24, as well as scientists at the Bell Telephone Laboratories,
     have contributed valuable new information. It is easy to understand why
     the mathematical approach is so difficult. The cochlear partition-consists of a
     membrane whose elastic properties change continuously from very stiff to
     very soft. At the present time, mathematical tools have not been developed
     that can handle wave motions along such continuously varying media, and
     the propagation of the waves is sometimes strange and paradoxical. It is the
      same in optics, where light travels in circles if it is propagated through a
      medium of continuously changing optical properties, in total contradiction
      to our concept of the straight path of a light beam.




     Since the essential variables and their magnitudes were now in hand, it was
     now possible to think about building an enlarged model of the cochlea. It is
     common practice to start with small models of airplanes and boats in order
     to test their performance, and if they are satisfactory to enlarge them, ac-
     cording to well-known rules, to their final size; all modern airplanes are
     constructed in this way. For the cochlea it was necessary to develop a special
     set of rules, and this was done by Diestel25 in the widely known laboratory
     of Erwin Meyer in Göttingen. After some modification, the final version of
     the model consists of a plastic tube filled with water, and a membrane 30
     cm in length; when it is stimulated with a vibration it shows travelling waves
     of the same type as those seen in the normal human ear. The usable frequency
     range is two octaves.
        Since this development went along so easily, I decided to go one step
     further and make a model of the inner ear with a nerve supply. An attempt


744                           1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY




Fig. 23.   Enlarged model of the human cochlea with nerve supply showing a very close
                 analogy to the phenomena observed during hearing.


 to use a frog skin as a nerve supply had at an earlier time proved to be im-
 practical, and so I simply placed my arm against the model (Fig. 23). To my
 surprise, although the travelling waves ran along the whole length of the
 membrane with almost the same amplitude, and only a quite flat maximum
 at one spot, the sensations along my arm were completely different. I had
 the impression that only a section of the membrane, 2 to 3 cm long, was
 vibrating. When the frequency of the vibratory stimulus was increased, the
 section of sensed vibrations travelled toward the piston (at the right of the
 figure), which represents the stapes footplate of the ear; and when the fre-
 quency was lowered, the area of sensation moved in the opposite direction.
 The model had all the properties of a neuromechanical frequency-analyzing
 system, in support of our earlier view of the frequency analysis of the ear.
 My surprise was even greater when it turned out that two cycles of sinusoidal
 vibration are enough to produce a sharply localized sensation on the skin,
just as sharp as for continuous stimulation. This was in complete agreement
 with the observations of Savart26, who found that two cycles of a tone pro-
 vide enough cue to determine the pitch of the tone. Thus the century-old
 problem of how the ear performs a frequency analysis - whether mechan-
 ically or neurally - could be solved; from these experiments it was evident
 that the ear contains a neuromechanical frequency analyzer, which combines
 a preliminary mechanical frequency analysis with a subsequent sharpening of
 the sensation area.
    I think the happiest period of my research was when I started to repeat all


     PLEASURES OF OBSERVING-INNER EAR MECHANICS                                   745
the great experiments that have been done on the ear in the past - but now
on the model ear with nerve supply. All the small details could be duplicated
on the skin. Nothing has been more rewarding than to concentrate on the
little discrepancies that I love to investigate and see them slowly disappear.
This always gives me the feeling of being on the right track, a new track.
   The simple fact that on the model the whole arm vibrates (as can be seen
under stroboscopic illumination), but only a very small section is recognized
as vibrating, proves that nervous inhibition must play an important role.
Further investigation has shown that every local stimulus applied on the skin
produces strong inhibition around the place of stimulation. This seems to be
true, not only for the skin, but also for the ear and the retina. Involuntarily,
this had led me to begin an investigation of the analogies between the ear
and the skin and the eye. Maybe the time is not too far-off when these three
sense organs - ear, skin, and eye - so sharply separated in the textbooks of
physiology, will have some chapters in common. This would lead toward
 a simplification of our descriptions of the sense organs.




 1. P. A. eerenkov, I. M. Frank, and I. E. Tamm, Les Prix Nobel en 1958, Stockholm,
     1959, pp. 78-133; Nobel Lectures Physics 1942-1962, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1964,
     pp. 426 ff
 2. O. Heaviside, Electric Papers, 2 (1886-1887).
 3. K. W. Wagner, Operatorenrechnung, Johann Ambrozius Barth, Leipzig, 1940.
 4. J. R. Carson, Electric Circuit Theory and Operational Calculus, McGraw-Hill, New
     York, 1926.
 5. K. Küpfmüller, Die Systemtheorie der elektrischen Nachrichtenübertragung, S. Hirzel
      Verlag, Zurich, 1949.
 6. H. Barkhausen, Lehrbuch der Elektronen-Röhren, S. Hirzel Verlag, Leipzig, 1931.
 7. T. Laurent, Vierpoltheorie und Frequenztransformation, Springer, Berlin, 1956.
 8. R. Feldtkeller, Siebschaltungstheorie, Leipzig, 1939.
 9. S. S. Stevens and H. Davis, Hearing, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1938.
10. E. G. Wever and M. Lawrence, Physiological Acoustics, Princeton University Press,
     Princeton, New Jersey, 1954.
11. G. von Békésy, Experiments in Hearing (Translated and edited by E. G. Wever),
     McGraw-Hill, New York, 1960.
12. A. Corti, Recherches sur l’organe de l’ouie des mammifères, Z. Wiss. Zool., 3
     (1851).
13. A. Kölliker, Mikroskopische Anatomie oder Gewebelehre des Menschen, Leipzig, 1852.
14. C. Hasse, Die Schnecke der Vögel, Z. Wiss. Zool., 17 (1867).
15. G. Retzius, Das Gehörorgan der Wirbeltiere, Stockholm, 1884.


746                           1961 G.VON BÉKÉSY

16. W. Kolmer, Histologische Studien am Labyrinth, Arch. Mikroskop. Anat., 74 (1909).
17. H. Held, Die Cochlea der Sauger und der Vogel, ihre Entwickhlung und ihr Bau,
     in Handbuch der normalen und pathologischen Physiologie, Receptionsorgnne I, Springer,
     Berlin, 1926.
18. E. Waetzmann, Hortheorien, in Handbuch der normalen und pathologischen Physiologie,
     Receptionsorgane I, Springer, Berlin, 19.26.
19. J. R. Ewald, Zur Physiologie des Labyrinths, Pflüger’s Arch. Ges. Physiol., 76 (1899)
     147-188; 93 (1903) 485-500; Bemerkung zur Schallbildtheorie, Zentr. Physiol., 28
     (1914) 756.
20. J. Tonndorf, Harmonic distortion in cochlear models, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 30 ( 1958)
     929-937; Fluid motion in cochlear models, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 29 (1957) 558-568.
21. H. Fletcher, Auditory patterns, Rev. Mod. Phys., 12 (1940) 47-65; On the dynam-
     ics of the cochlea, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 23 (1951) 637-645.
22. O. F. Ranke, Die Gleichricht-Resonanztheorie, J. Lehmann, Munich, 1931; Hydro-
     dynamik der Schneckenflüssigkeit, Z. Biol., 103 ( 1950) 409; Physiologie des Gehörs,
     Springer, Berlin, 1953.
23. J. Zwislocki, Theorie der Schneckenmechanik. Qualitative und quantitative An-
     alyse, Acts Oto-Laryngol., Suppl. 72 (1948) 1-26.
24. E. Zwicker, Über ein einfaches Funktionsschema des Gehörs. Acustica, 12 ( 1962)
     22-28.
25. H. G. Diestel, Akustische Messungen an einem mechanischen Modell des Innen-
     ohres, Acustica, 4 (1954) 489.
26. F. Savart, Über die Ursachen der Tonhöhe, Ann. Phys. Chem., 51(1840) 555-561.
