SELECTIVE INHIBITORS OF DIHYDROFOLATE
REDUCTASE
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1988

by
GEORGE H. HITCHINGS, JR.
President of The Burroughs Wellcome Fund, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, U.S.A.




My interest in nucleic acids, their constitutents and metabolism can be
traced to the discovery of adenosine triphosphate in muscle by Fiske and
Subbarow (1). I had entered Harvard University as a candidate for a Ph.D.
degree in 1928 and transferred to Harvard Medical School in 1929. Otto
Folin, then head of the Department of Biological Chemistry, designated my
first predoctoral year to be spent with Cyrus J. Fiske, then involved in
momentous discoveries of phosphocreatine and the labile phosphorus com-
pounds of muscle and other tissues. I was soon immersed in the discovery of
analytical tools with which to follow the metabolism of adenosine triphos-
phate (2).
   Other lines of thought coalesced with this interest when I joined Bur-
roughs Wellcome Co. in 1942 as the sole member of the Biochemistry
Department. Meantime, the antimetabolite principle had been expressed by
Woods (3) and Fildes (4). I saw the opportunity to explore nucleic acid
biosynthesis in a new and revealing way by employing synthetic analogues of
the purine and pyrimidine bases in a system utilizing these heterocyclic
compounds for biosynthesis.
    I was able to interest Elvira Falco who was then an assistant in the
 company’s Bacteriology Department. Together we worked out a system
 using Lactobacillus casei, which would grow either with a then-unknown “L-
 casei” growth factor or with a mixture of thymine and a purine (Fig. 1) (5).
This system quickly gave us encouraging results. In a simple screening test
 for antibacterial activity, analogues were found to inhibit strongly not only
 the L. casei system but pathogenic bacteria as well. We had added toxicity
 testing in growing rats and other biological screening procedures and were
 becoming more and more excited by the results.
    By 1947, six or seven of us were pursuing this work, and the feeling in the
 group was, “Now we have the chemotherapeutic agents; we need only to
 find the diseases in which they will be active.” At that point I made two
 arrangements for collaborative studies, one with Sloan Kettering Institute
 for antitumor testing using sarcoma 180 in mice, and another with outside
476


                       Selective Inhibitors of Dihydrofolate Reductase      477




 laboratories for expansion of antibacterial and antimalarial testing. The
 antimalarial testing was included through the insight of Peter B. Russell,
 also a member of our research group. Russell noted the resemblance of a 5-
 phenyl-2,4-diaminopyrimidine to a hypothetical conformation of the anti-
malarial proguanil. It turned out later that this theory was prescient; the
dihydrotriazine is the active metabolite of proguanil (6).
    The next year, two leads developed almost simultaneously. Falco began a
series of selective inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase with the synthesis of
 2,4-diamino-5-phenoxypyrimidine, and Gertrude Elion synthesized 2,6-dia-
 minopurine (7). The latter was among the first four compounds we submit-
 ted to Sloan Kettering Institute. It was found to be active in the S-180 test,
was taken into clinical trial by Joseph H. Burchenal and gave at least one
spectacular remission (8). This was sufficient to establish cancer chemo-
 therapy as a continuing primary goal of our group. The purine analogue
story, which has been a major theme in Gertrude Elion’s career, is the topic
of her Nobel address.
    The main theme of this essay is the continuing topic of selective inhibitors
of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). Biochemical knowledge of the role of
folates was developing concomitantly. Figure 2 shows that dihydrofolate is
 synthesized de novo in prokaryotes (microorganisms) while the higher spe-
cies of eukaryotes (host) must have the vitamin preformed. I will pick up the
story of selective inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase in medias res and
carry it forward to current exciting developments.
    A short review of our line of research was presented in a symposium
honoring Sir Henry Wellcome (9). Papers in Advances in Enzymology (10),
Advances in Enzyme Regulation (1l), and Enzyme Inhibitors as Drugs (12) tell
 the story of selectivity among 2,4-diaminopyrimidines from its first recogni-
 tion before 1950 to its confirmation. Proof was developed through inhibi-
 tor analysis sequencing, conformations, induced mitogenesis, computer
assisted conformation studies, and new syntheses based on this type of
information.


478                               Physiology or Medicine 1988




Figure 2. Folate metabolism. Upper left shows biosynthesis in prokaryotes; upper right shows
the uptake of preformed vitamin in mammals. The subsequent utilization for the biosynthesis of
nucleic acid components is shown below. The importance of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR)
and the selectivity of its inhibitors takes a central place. Folic acid (FA); dihydrofolic acid
(H2FA); tetrahydrofolate (H4FA); thymidylate (dTMP); deoxyuridylate (dUMP); p-aminobenzoic
acid (pAB); phosphoribosyl transferase (PRT) (10).



   The earliest proof of the mechanism of action of these compounds
is illustrated in Fig. 3 (13). The growth of Streptococcus faecium was easily
inhibited by a diaminopyrimidine when the growth was induced by folic
acid, but it took 500 to 1000 times as much inhibitor when folinic acid
(tetrahydrofolate) was supplied. This was correctly interpreted as inhibition
of the yet-unknown enzyme responsible for the reduction of folate to
tetrahydrofolate.
   By 1950, we had concluded that we were dealing with selective inhibitors
of dihydrofolate reductase. From this work it appeared probable that details
of fine structure in dihydrofolic reductase vary from species to species and
that a given inhibitor may exhibit considerable selectivity as a result of
looser or tighter binding to the corresponding enzyme of host or parasite,
respectively (14). The full structural analogue of MTX shows little selectiv-
ity, while pyrimethamine is highly active against the malarial enzyme and
trimethoprim against a bacterial enzyme. Neither has notable toxicity
against the rat liver enzyme.
   Isolation and characterization of this enzyme led first to inhibitor analysis
(Table 1). This documented unequivocally the different structures of repre-
sentative dihydrofolate reductases from different sources. This was soon
followed by amino acid analyses and sequence determinations.


Figure 3. The concentration of pyrimethamine required to inhibit growth of Streptococcus faecium
depends on whether folic acid (0) or a form of tetrahydrofolate     is used in the medium (13).




Table I. The concentration (I.C.50) of methotrexate (MTX) pyrimethamine (Pyr) or trimetho-
prim (Tmp) required to inhibit the DHFK derived from E. coli, rat liver and P. berghei (9).




   Concomitantly developing knowledge of the roles of folate derivations in
biosyntheses and metabolism gave a fuller appreciation of the significance
of inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase (Figs. 4, 5). The activity of the
enzyme is necessary to produce tetrahydrofolate initially and to recycle it
after its reoxidation, molecule for molecule, in the formation of thymidylate
from deoxyuridylate.


480                               Physiology or Medicine 1988




Figure 4. The metabolic reactions catalyzed by derivatives of tetrahydrofolate (FAH4): thymidy-
late (dTMP); deoxyuridylate (dUMP); aminobenzoic acid (PAB); glutamate (GLU) (12).




 Figure 5. Details of reactions of specific folate-containing cofactors. Counter clockwise, formyl,
 methanyl, methylene, and methyl tetrahydrofolates (FH4). Serine (Ser); methionine (Met);
 inosinate (IMP). See Table 1 and Fig. 4 for other abbreviations (12).


                           Selective Inhibitors of Dihydrofolate Reductase               481



                         DIHYDROFOLATE REDUCTASE




Figure 6. A graphic illustration of the configuration of the dihydrofolate reductase molecule


   Amino acid sequence determinations brought out a full appreciation of
the high variability of the basic constituents of this enzyme in a range of
species (15). Between the enzymes of two bacterial species there is only 30
percent homology, and between prokaryotes and eukaryotes only 30 per-
cent. It is only the higher species that exhibit as much as 90 percent
homology. Hitchings and Roth found 16 identities between the enzymes
from Escherichia coli and those from the mouse tumor L1210 (12). They
predicted correctly that study of a wider range of enzymes would reduce the
number of identities. If one takes into account enzymes not in the main-
stream, e.g. those from protozoa plasmids, the number is even smaller.
   The mainstream enzymes (from bacterial and mammalian sources) have
similar conformations. That published by Richardson (16) may be regarded
as the type (Fig. 6). Although mammalian enzymes are larger than this
bacterial enzyme by some 3000 daltons, the extra residues exist as loops that
do not greatly alter the main conformation. On the other hand, the enzymes
from other types of organism can be so different as to raise doubts about
whether they are intrinsically dihydrofolate reductase, or whether their
activity in that field is secondary to some other unknown function, e.g.,
Matthews (17). Figure 7 (18) shows some possible origins of Type II DHFR.


482




 Figure 7. Possible origins of untypical dihydrofolate reductase (18)




    It is pertinent at this point to refer to some of the applications of selective
inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase. A major application is, of course, the
establishment of co-trimoxazole as an antibacterial of major importance. Its
creation derived from the knowledge that in combining trimethoprim with
sulfamethoxazole, one was creating a sequential blockade of a major bio-
synthetic pathway in a bacterium or in other prokaryotes. The minimal
effects on the host reflect the absence in eukaryotes of the reactions leading
to the biosynthesis of dihydrofolate such as occurs in prokaryotic cells.
    The strong potentiation that occurs is indicated by the data of Table 2
(19), which show that minimum inhibitory concentrations of one compo-
nent may be reduced as much as l0- or 20-fold when the second component
is also present. Moreover, the combination may be effective against organ-
 isms that would not be inhibited by the individual drugs, e.g., Klebsiella sp. and
 Streptococcus Group C, where the individual inhibitory concentrations would be
 borderline or unattainable.
     One further illustration of the possible utility of biochemically related
  inhibitors is given in Fig. 8 (20), where the addition of 8-azaguanine to an
 already potentiative combination of diaveridine (B.W. 21OU49) with sulfa-
 diazine enhances the potency. Such biochemically orientated triple combi-
 nations have not been used in a major way, but their potential remains
 exploitable.
    I should like to focus now on the uses of individual inhibitors of the
enzyme dihydrofolate reductase.
     Chronologically first, and perhaps still first in importance in cancer
 chemotherapy, is methotrexate from the Lederle Laboratories. Methotrex-
 ate had assumed a role in the therapy of acute leukemia as early as 1948 (2 1)
 and is still of major interest today. As shown in Table 1, however, it is


                             Selective Inhibitors of Dihydrofolate Reductase               483



Table 2. Effect on minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) on combining one part of trimetho-
prin with 20 parts sulfamethoxazole.




Figure 8. Fractional inhibitory concentrations of B.W. 21OU49 and sulfadiazine required for 50
percent inhibition of P. vulgaris in the presence and absence of 8-azaguanine:           no 8-
azaguanine; 0-0. 1 µg/ml.;             10 µg/ml. (20).


                                  Physiology or Medicine 1988




Figure 9. Schematic illustration of the active site of L. casei dihydrofolate reductase showing the
binding of methotrexate and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphonate (NADPH) (22).




  Figure 10. Schematic illustration of the cofactor in chicken liver DHFR showing the binding of
  trimethoprim (TMP) and NADPH (23).


                            Selective Inhibitors of Dihydrofolate Reductase




Figure 11. E. coli dihydrofolate reductase with induced specific mutations (24).




relatively unselective. Its therapeutic utility depends mainly on differences
in uptake, glutamylation, cellular excretion, cellular metabolic balance, and
other factors.
   Whereas methotrexate is a close structural analogue of folate, our own
antifols were significantly different and highly selective. These facts will be
brought out by examination of details of structure and active centers of
several enzymes.
   For example, it may be illustrated by contrasting the fine structure of the
complex of methotrexate and cofactor in the L. casei DHFR (Fig. 9) (22)
with that of trimethoprim and cofactor in the chicken liver enzyme (Fig. 10)
(23). It is obvious that the methotrexate molecule is much more space-filling
than trimethoprim. Such contrasts are observable in all situations where the
small molecule inhibitors are observed, and the contrasts in the active
centers of the enzymes are consistent with the selectivities of the small
molecule-inhibitors.
   There have been a number of studies of the functions of specific amino
acid residues. One of the most cogent was reported by Kraut and coworkers
(24) in a paper that combined several experiments. In this study of the E .
coli enzyme, the replacement of aspartate by asparagine reduced activity to


486                             Physiology or Medicine 1988



Table 3. Comparison of binding constants and kinetic values of polyglutamates in enzymatic
reactions in folate metabolism. Thymidylate synthase (T.S.); AICAR transformylase (AICAR
TF); GAR transformylase (GAR TF) (25). Number of glutamate residues (n).




0.1% of that of the unaltered enzyme, showing the importance of the
ionizable carboxyl group (Fig. 11). The substitution of alanyl for glycyl, next
up, completely inactivated the enzyme, probably by distorting its conforma-
tion. However, substitution of SH for OH (cysteine for serine) had little
effect. This type of experiment may provide the background for the synthe-
sis of new and useful inhibitors.
   An aspect of folate metabolism that appeared relatively late is the identifi-
cation of the high molecular weight derivatives of folic acid as polygluta-
mates. Since the chain length of most of these exceeds that of the longest
form that can be transported into the cell efficiently, most cells contain a
pteroylpolyglutamate synthetase. The number of glutamyl residues varies
with time and with cell type. The immense complexities of this situation are
only beginning to appear. Nevertheless, it is interesting and instructive to
compare the binding constants and kinetic values of polyglutamates in some
of the enzymatic reactions involved in folate metabolism (Table 3) (25).


                                                                          487




   The inhibitor methotrexate is subject to polyglutamylation as well as the
tetrahydrofolate. In many cases the ratio of folate polyglutamate to inhibi-
tor polyglutamate is not markedly changed, but it is predictable that among
the vast number of possibilities some of the anomalies and some of the
therapeutic indices will find solid explanations. A few of the effects of
glutamylation on specific biosynthetic enzymes are shown in Table 4 (26).
   I wish to turn now to the intimate details of the structure of specific
enzymes and their exploitation in the synthesis of more active inhibitors.
Figure 12 (27) shows the fit of trimethoprim in the dihydrofolate reductase
of E. coli. In the upper left (residue 57), one can see the guanidino group of
arginine. This was exploited by Lee Kuyper who replaced the m -methoxyl of
trimethoprim with a series of carboxyalkoxy radicals. The optimum length
proved to be 5 carbon atoms, and the product, the carboxyl amyloxy
derivation, bound the enzyme some 50 times more tightly than did trimeth-
oprim (28). In the same vein, Barbara Roth synthesized bromoacetoxyphen-
oxy analogues of trimethoprim and found that the derivative bound to the
histidine-22 residue of the enzyme with a covalent linkage (29). These
examples may be regarded as probes of a vast and exciting future.
  Resistance to antifols in multiple aspects appeared soon after work on
these inhibitors began. Among various expressions of resistance (Fig. 13)
was a loss of the cellular transport mechanism, which has stimulated the
investigation of lipophilic inhibitors that do not depend on this mechanism


488                                Physiology or Medicine 1988




Figure 13. Mechanisms of resistance to inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase (18).




Figure 14. Chemical structures of trimetrexate and piritrexim, two potentially useful drugs.


                           Selective Inhibitors   of Dihydrofolate   Reductase            489




Figure 15. The thymidylate synthetic cycle. Methylene tetrahydrofolate (CH2 H4FA); Nicotina-
mide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH).




for transport into the cell. At present the two potentially useful drugs are
trimetrexate and piritrexim (Fig. 14). Exploitation of these inhibitors is in
its infancy, but each has exhibited interesting properties of its own. The
effects of trimetrexate and methotrexate are compared in Table 5 (30).



Table 5. Efficacy of trimetrexate and methotrexate against transplantable rodent tumors and in
xenografts (30).


490                               Physiology or Medicine 1988



Table 6. Effect of the piritrexim-sulfadiazine combination in treatment of murine toxoplasmosis.
Sulfadiazine (S) was administered orally by gavage at concentrations of 4, 40, and 400 mg/kg per
day, and piritrexim (P) was administered ip at a concentration of 20 mg/kg per day (32).




Both trimetrexate and piritrexim have shown interesting activities against
infectious prokaryotic organisms. The combination of trimetrexate and
leucovorin has been used successfully to treat pneumocystic pneumonia in
AIDS patients (31). Table 6 shows the effect of combining piritrexim and
sulfadiazine to treat murine toxoplasmosis (32).
   Finally, to be mentioned is a selective inhibitor of thymidylate synthase
(Fig. 15). The first of these is 5,8-dideazaisopteroylglutamate (IAHQ) (Fig.
16). IAHQ and specific inhibitors of other biosynthetic reactions involving
tetrahydrofolate represent the beginning of a biochemically orientated
improved cancer chemotherapy (33).
   I am incredibly blessed to have been involved for well over four decades
in a field that continues to become more exciting with every passing year.
Figure 17 (34) charts the history of increasing knowledge concerning dihy-
drofolate reductase, beginning with our work in the 1940s. Those early,
untargeted studies led to the development of useful drugs for a wide variety
of diseases (Fig. 18) and has justified our belief that this approach to drug
discovery is more fruitful than narrow targeting. In 1988, this line of
research continues to generate useful new compounds.




                OH




Figure 16. Chemical structure of IAHQ(5,8-dideazaisopteroylglutamate), a selective inhibitor of
thymidylate   synthase.


                          Selective Inhibitors of Dihydrofolate Reductase              491



                         EVENTS IN THE HISTORY OF DHFR




Figure 17. Accrual of information about dihydrofolate reductase, beginning with untargeted
studies in the 1940s and continuing in the 1980s with discovery of new useful compounds and
methods of drugs design (34)


492                              Physiology or Medicine 1988



   I should like to close with a quotation from one of my own papers:
   “To the biochemical chemotherapist, it is not only a matter of faith, but
an obvious fact, that every cell type must have a characteristic biochemical
pattern, and therefore be susceptible to attack at some locus or loci critical
for its survival and replication.” (35).




REFERENCES
 1.   C.H. Fiske and Y. Subbarow, Science, 70, 381 (1929).
 2.    G.H. Hitchings, Dissertation, Harvard University (1933).
 3.    D.D. Woods, Brit. J. Exptl. Path., 21, 74 (1940).
 4.   P. Fildes, Lancel I, 955 (1940).
 5.   G.H. Hitchings, E.A. Falco and M.B. Sherwood, Science, 102, 251 (1945).
 6.   E.A. Falco, G.H. Hitchings, P.B. Russell and H. VanderWerff, Nature, 164, 107
       (1949).
 7.    G.H. Hitchings, G.B. Elion, H. VanderWerff and E.A. Falco, J. Biol. Chem., 174,
        765 (1948).
 8.    J.H. Burchenal, D.A. Karnofsky, E.M. Kingsley-Pillers, C.M. Southam, W.P.
        Laird Meyers, G.C. Escher, L.F. Craver, H.W. Dargeon and C.P. Rhoads,
        Cancer, 4, 549 (1951).
 9.    G.H. Hitchings, Drug Intell. Clin. Pharm., 16, 843 (1982).
10.   G.H. Hitchings and J.J. Burchall, Adv. Enzymol., 27, 417 (1965).
11.   G.H. Hitchings and S.L. Smith, Adv. Enzyme Reg., 18, 349 (1980).
12.   G.H. Hitchings and B. Roth, in Enzyme Inhibitors as Drugs, Ed. by M. Sandler,
       Baltimore, University Park Press, pp. 263-280 (1980).
13.   G.H. Hitchings, E.A. Falco, G.B. Elion, S. Singer, G.B. Waring, D.J. Hutchison
       and J.H. Burchenal, Arch. Biochem. Biophys, 40, 479 (1952).
14.   G.H. Hitchings, in Drugs, Parasites and Hosts, Ed. by L.C. Goodwin and R.H.
       Nimmo-Smith, Boston, Little-Brown, pp. 196-210 (1962).
15.    A.C.Y. Chang, J.H. Nunberg, R.J. Kaufman, H.A. Erlich, R.T. Schimke and
       S.N. Cohen, Nature, 275, 617 (1978).
16.   S. Richardson, Adv. Protein Chem., 34, 167 (1981).
17.   D.A. Matthews, S.L. Smith, D.P. Baccanari J.J. Burchall S.J Oatley and J. Kraut,
       Biochemistry, 25, 4194 (1986).
18.   J. Burchall, Wellcome Scientist Lecture (1983).
19.   S.R.M. Bushby, in Trimethoprim-sulfumethoxazole, Microbiological, Pharmacological
       and Clinical Considerations, Ed. by M. Finland and E.H. Kass, pp. l0-30 (1973).
20.   G.B. Elion, S. Singer and G.H. Hitchings, Antibiot. Chemother., 10, 556 (1960).
21.   S. Farber et al., N. Engl. J. Med., 238, 787 (1948).
22.   B. Roth, E. Bliss, and C.R. Beddell, in Molecular Aspects of Anti-Cancer Drug
       Action, Ed. by S. Neidle and M.J. Waring, London, Macmillan, pp. 363-393
       (1983).
23.   D.A. Matthews, J.T. Bolin, J.M. Burridge, D.J. Filman, K.W. Volz, B.T. Kauf-
       man, C.R. Beddell, J.N. Champness, D.K. Stammers and J. Kraut, J. Biol. Chem.,
       260, 381 (1985).
24.    J.E. Villafranca, E.H. Howell, D.H. Voet, M.S. Strobel, R.C. Ogden, J.N.
       Abelson and J. Kraut, Science, 222, 782 (1983).
25.   J.J. McGuire and J.K. Coward, in Folates and Pterins, Vol 1, Ed. by R.L. Blakley
       and S.J. Benkovic, New York, Wiley, pp. 135-190 (1984).
26.    C.J. Allegra, J.C. Drake, J. Jolivet and B.A. Chabner, in Proceedings of the Second
        Workshop on Folyl and Antifolyl Polyglutamates, Ed. by I.D. Goldman, New York,
       Praeger, pp. 348-359 (1985).


                        Selective Inhibitors of Dihydrofolate Reductase           493



27. C.R. Beddell, in X-ray Crystallography and Drug Action, Ed. by A.S. Horn and C.J.
     DeRanter, Oxford, Oxford Univ. Press, 169-193 (1984).
28. L.F. Kuyper, B. Roth, D.P. Baccanari, R. Ferone, C.R. Beddell, J.N. Champ-
     ness, D.K. Stammers, J.G. Dann, F.E. Norrington and D.J. Baker, J. Med. Chem.,
     28, 303 (1985).
29. J.H. Chan, L.F. Kuyper and B. Roth, 189th Am. Chem. Soc. Meeting Abstracts
     MEDI 87 (1985).
30. J.T. Lin and J.R. Bertino, J. Clin. Oncol., 5, 2032 (1987).
31. C.J. Allegra, B.A. Chabner, C.U. Tuazon, D. Ogata-Arakaki, B. Baird, J.C.
     Drake, J.T. Simmons, E.E. Lack, J.H. Shelhamer, F. Balis, R. Walker, J.A.
     Kovacs, H.C. Lane and H. Masur, N. Engl. J. Med., 317, 978 (1987).
32. F. Aruajo, D.R. Guptill and J.S. Remington, J. Infect. Dis., 156, 828 (1987).
33. D.J. Fernandes, J.R. Bertino and J.B. Hynes, Cancer Res., 43, 1117 (1983).
34. G.H. Hitchings, in Discoveries, Ed. by A. Burgen, Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, in press.
35. C.H. Hitchings, Cancer Res., 29, 1895 (1969).


Acknowledgment: I am greatly indebted to Mara Gabriel and Coyla Barry
for skillful and energetic work that made completion of this paper possible.
