                            G ERHARD D O M A G K


               Further progress in chemotherapy
                     of bacterial infections
                       Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1947


Excellency, honoured colleagues, I am unable to express my profound grati-
tude for the high honour conferred upon me in the award of the Nobel
Prize for Physiology or Medicine for 1939 - which I was not allowed to ac-
cept at the time - in any other way than by reporting on the further develop-
ments in the field which had then just been opened up.
   The first decisive phase was the discovery of the curative action of certain
sulphonamide-containing azo compounds, which had been synthesized by
Klarer and Mietzsch. The most effective of these had taken their place under
the names Prontosil rubrum and Prontosil solubile in the armoury against the
streptococcal infections of man. This first phase was surveyed by Professor
Nanna Svartz in Les Prix Nobel en 1939.
  The problem of chemotherapy of bacterial infections could be solved
neither by the experimental medical research worker nor by the chemist
alone, but only by the two together working in very close cooperation over
many years. I therefore feel under a profound obligation, in view of the high
honour which has been conferred upon me as one who has taken part in such
collaboration, to pay tribute to all my colleagues. In particular I must men-
tion the two chemists Dr. Mietzsch and Dr. Klarer who, thanks to the sub-
stances produced by them, enabled me to discover the curative action against
bacterial infections after I had worked out and extended step by step, en-
tirely on my own initiative, all possible methods oftesting. Convinced that a
way could be found I had persevered with this work over a period of many
years, despite all the scepticism prevailing in this sphere. I should also like to
express my gratitude for the advice given to me by the pharmacologist Dr.
Hecht. I am particularly fortunate in having had these experienced and well-
tried colleagues, who were mentioned in 1935 in the first article "Ein Beitrag
 zur Chemotherapie der bakteriellen Infektionen" (A contribution to the
chemotherapy of bacterial infections), published in the Deutsche Medizinische
Wochenschrift (1935), and in having been able, with them, to continue the
work to this day in the field which at that time had been newly opened up


           CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                             491
and to discover still further therapeutically valuable anti-bacterial sulphon-
amides. I should also like to thank many other loyal colleagues who assisted
me with my investigations, often under dangerous conditions, with the great-
est industry and infinite patience. At the same time, I wish to express sincere
thanks to all clinicians and colleagues who have helped to apply the experi-
mental results in practice for the benefit of patients. I also have to thank far-
sighted men of industry who made it possible for me to set up a laboratory
where I was able to carry out my work on the requisite scale. I recall with
particular gratitude the magnificent help given me by Professor Horlein.
Unfortunately many difficulties stood in the way of our work during and
after the war, difficulties with which to some extent we still have to contend.
Nevertheless the management of the Bayer Wuppertal-Elberfeld dye fac-
tories always found ways and means of supporting us - who were engaged in
scientific research - indeed, they assisted us far more than did the state, whose
first duty it should in fact have been to help its citizens, through research, to
combat disease. And this shows the high sense of responsibility of enterprises
created and built up by the energy of great personalities such as Friedrich
Bayer, Carl Duisberg, and Heinrich Horlein. Few if any sickness funds or
insurance companies have shown such a great sense of responsibility or such
a sense of duty to the community in the carrying-out of work at the research
establishments maintained by them, despite the fact that these institutions are
under a greater obligation to look after the healthand welfare of their mem-
bers, and mostly have much more capital at their disposal. The Rockefeller
Institute in America and throughout the world, and the Kaiser Wilhelm In-
stitutes in Germany were created by responsible individuals. We are and al-
ways shall be deeply indebted to these great men - and foremost among them
 Alfred Nobel - for what they have done for the advancement of science.
 Nowhere does science enjoy such respect as in this hospitable land of Sweden.
 We thank this country, its Royal Family and our Swedish colleagues most
 sincerely for what they do each year on the anniversary of Alfred Nobel’s
 death, on 10th December, in the striving towards true humanism, towards
 the building of a new and better world and towards a peaceful understanding
 between nations. May this land one day be rewarded for its services in this
 field to the entire world and may other states follow this example in noble
 and peaceful competition.
    In spirit I bow in reverence before my old teachers at the German universi-
 ties who equipped me to carry out the work for which you have honoured
 me, on the further development of which I wish to report now. Within the


492                          1939 G.DOMAGK

time at my disposal I can draw attention only to the principal phases in the
development of chemotherapy as I see them at present and as they emerge
from our work. Even the numerous compounds tested with experimental
streptococcal infections during the first phase of the development revealed
important laws, which have proved of value to all subsequent workers in the
sulphonamide field. It was found, in fact, that only those compounds which
contained the sulphonamide group in the para-position in relation to the
group containing nitrogen were of therapeutic value, whereas compounds
with the sulphonamide group in the ortho- or meta-position were found to be
inactive.
   Prompted by the German publications on Prontosil - but independently of
our own as yet unpublished experiments which were conducted with a view
to discovering colourless active sulphonamides outside the azo series - Tré-
fouël, Tréfouël, Nitti and Bovet began to study the same problem. We are
indebted to these authors for having drawn attention for the first time in
literature to the fact that 4-aminobenzenesulphonamide, which Mietzsch and
Klarer had used as initial material for the synthesis of their sulphonamide-
containing azo compounds, was therapeutically active as such. This substance
was later used in practice as Prontosil album, Prontalbin, and Sulphanilamide.
    It was again Klarer and Mietzsch who initiated a further phase in the de-
velopment of chemotherapy of bacterial infections by placing at my disposal
substances in which the sulphonamide group is no longer unsubstituted, as in
the Prontosil compounds, but is modified by an organic radical with replace-
ment of a hydrogen atom. In the case of substances of this type I discovered
the action against staphylococci and pneumococci; although there had been
a hint of this in Prontosil, which had been reported by me as far back as
 1935, it was now considerably increased. Furthermore, I now established for
the first time that such compounds, known under the names




had a noteworthy effect upon gonococci. The Uliron compounds were the
first sulphonamide compounds used in Germany against gonorrhoea after
the experiments with Prontosil compounds had proved unsatisfactory.


            CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                             493
   A further improvement in the action against staphylococci, pneumococci,
and gonococci was brought about by introducing a heterocyclic ring in place
of the hydrogen in the SO2NH2 group. A series of such compounds had al-
ready been made available at an early date by Mietzsch and Klarer; however,
an intensive study of this field - this time in all advanced countries throughout
the world - began only when




which had been synthesized by Philipps and Evans, was shown in England
by Whitby’s experiments to have an effect on pneumococcal infections going
beyond that produced by the Prontosil compounds; the broad experience of
British clinicians very soon confirmed this experimental finding. This sulpha-
pyridine compound is still in use today in the treatment of lobar forms of
pneumonia, but has been superseded more and more by sulphathiazole - sub-
sequently also known by the names Cibazol and Eleudron - which are ap-
proximately equally effective against pneumococci and meningococci and
still more effective against staphylococci and gonococci, since it very fre-
quently, especially when administered in large doses, causes serious stomach
disorders and vomiting. Sulphathiazole




or p-aminobenzenesulphonamidothiazole, was produced and a patent was
applied for in respect of it independently by several people, but first by Hart-
mann and Merz. So far sulphathiazole has firmly held its position, although
its efficacy in the case of gonorrhoea has progressively declined. For a time
people used to speak of a "lightning cure" for gonorrhoea, but ultimately the
results became less and less satisfactory although the doses were continually
increased. This fact is too well known to require any detailed explanation by
me. But we should learn from this undeniable fact and should try to discover
the reasons for it. At first the failures were attributed to anatomical causes.
People used to speak of the role of sites difficult to reach ("Hohlraumeffekt"),
etc. But this explanation was unsatisfactory and was not sufficient for all
cases. Then it was thought that the war might have reduced the patients’
resistance, but this explanation likewise did not always hold good. I have


494                            1939 G.DOMAGK

constantly emphasized that cooperation by the body is an important factor
with any sulphonamide treatment. We all remember how at the beginning
of the sulphonamide era it was repeatedly observed that fresh cases of gonor-
rhoea in men responded best to sulphonamide treatment when suppuration
had already occurred for several days, and not at the first appearance of the
disease. Perhaps the lowering of natural resistance due to war-time condi-
tions explains why a considerable falling-off in the successes in Germany
should to some extent have occurred at a time when optimum results were
still being obtained in Switzerland. With the present catastrophic shortage of
protein in the diet many patients probably find it difficult to make up the
protein losses due to the destruction of leucocytes resulting from an inflam-
matory condition. However, these facts alone are not sufficient to explain the
number of failures. Introduction of resistant strains due to the general upheav-
al during and after the war was therefore suspected. Finally the question
whether gonococci might, like protozoa, possibly become resistant to the
drug during treatment was discussed. We ourselves never succeeded in ren-
dering a strain sulphonamide-resistant by treating with small doses of sul-
phonamide under experimental conditions. However, if this phenomenon
should occur in very exceptional cases this would in no way explain the
great number of failures. Of decisive importance for a clarification of this
question, however, is the fact, which was established by Felke at the begin-
ning of the sulphonamide era, that gonococcal strains of widely differing
sensitivity existed from the outset. Felke distinguished strains which would
grow on ascites plates with 0.6, 1.2, 2.5, and even 5 mg% Uliron C. It is
noteworthy that the clinical failures occurred in the case of carriers of highly
resistant strains. Hagerman (Lund) determined the different degrees of re-
sistance of gonococci by another method. He dripped graduated concentra-
tions of sulphonamide solutions on to a kind of ascites agar plates, allowed
the drops to be absorbed and then inoculated the plates uniformly with one
strain. He expressed the resistance to sulphathiazole by the numbers 0-11.
o denoted the highest concentration, 1 : 200; and 11 the lowest, ca.1 : 400,000.
He came to the following conclusion: In the case of gonorrhoea which has
been treated with sulphathiazole the prognosis depends mainly on the resist-
ance to sulphonamides of the gonococcal strain in question. In any particular
 case of gonorrhoea the prognosis can be made with great reliability by means
 of chemoresistance determinations in vitro. Later Schmith (Copenhagen)
 also settled satisfactorily the question of primarily resistant strains. He tested
 50 old strains from the pre-sulphonamide era; among these he found approx-


           CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                            495
imately the same resistance percentage ratio as he had found with his fresh
strains. There can therefore be no doubt that even before the sulphonamide
era there were gonococcal strains with a high primary resistance. The resist-
ant strains therefore existed before the sulphonamide era and have not come
about as a result of sulphonamide treatment with insufficient doses, or any
similar cause. They are due to natural selection. The spread of these resistant
strains would have been avoided if the few patients who were carriers of
them in 1937 had received careful treatment and had been subjected to clini-
cal supervision until their cure was absolutely certain. But this was not done.
   Today we are faced with the same question with regard to the use of peni-
cillin. If we are not to suffer the same disappointment at some future time,
the patients with resistant strains must be kept under treatment until they
have been definitely cured. Felke rightly maintains that gonorrhoea will not
be eradicated - even if we have the best remedies at our disposal - until a
woman infected with gonococci is not given a clean bill of health before a
cervical culture has been grown. In women the reservoir of the gonococcus
is not primarily the urethra but the uterus, and especially the tube angles
when the adnexa are affected. Felke describes treatment of gonorrhoea in
women without the growing of a culture as anachronistic. This applies in
particular to determination of the female infection sources. Jadassohn’s view
that the culture should be used only in doubtful cases is not longer valid. The
superiority of the culture over microscopic examinations has once again been
shown very recently by Veltman of the Grütz clinic (Z. Haut-Geschlechts-
bank., No. 7 (1947) 203). He found positive cultures in 52 cases following
completion of a course of penicillin treatment in hospital and negative mi-
croscopic findings. He reports that in the course of a year 86 patients would
have been discharged from the clinic as cured if culturing had not made it
possible to prove the presence of gonococci. The culturing method - at least
in the case of women - is therefore absolutely necessary in addition to mi-
croscopic examination, since it is more efficient than microscopic examina-
tion alone. Now that penicillin treatment, with the follow-up period re-
duced to 5 days has been introduced, an additional examination by the cul-
tural method is in fact very important. Since relapses after penicillin treat-
 ment do not usually occur until after the first 3 days, at least one culture
should be taken a week after completion of the treatment. Otherwise one
 would be only too justified in asking, as Clarke recently did: "Penicillin:
help or hindrance in venereal disease control?", for we already see the first
signs that, if treated patients are not subjected to a very thorough check-up,


496                           1939 G.DOMAGK

penicillin - like the sulphonamides - is being misused, with the inevitable
result that resistant strains will survive and then spread. Huriez and Desur-
mont (Lille) have already drawn attention to the fact that since October 1946
there has been a distinct decline in successes with penicillin, which has ne-
cessitated the combination of penicillin with fever, with sulphonamides and
local treatment (Presse Med., No. 2 (1937), Ref. Z. Haut-Geschlechtskrank.
No. 2 (1947) 217-218). If the spread, through natural selection, of still more
resistant strains of gonococcus is to be avoided in future, these demands for a
particularly careful check on treated patients will not have to be overlooked,
irrespective of whether sulphonamides or penicillin are used. This is in no
way to say that the use of sulphonamides in the treatment of gonorrhoea
should now be completely abandoned. Hopf of Hamburg recently stated
that in Hamburg and northern Germany 70% of fresh cases of gonorrhoea
were still being cured at the first attempt by intensive treatment with Eleu-
dron or Cibazol, administered at the rate of 6 g each day for 3-5 days. Ac-
cording to this report the number of sulphonamide-resistant strains in Ham-
burg and northern Germany is smaller than in other areas. Hopf described
the sulphonamides as indispensable for the treatment of relapses, even after
penicillin. Schreus reported in 1946 that he had obtained the best results with
injections of sterile milk and 3 x 5 tablets of Eleudron for 2 days. After the
first course of intensive treatment 75% were free from gonococci, after the
second the figure was 90.8%. Of the remaining uncured patients a further
80%. could be cured with a combination of sulphonamides and Olobinthin,
which meant that only 2% resistant cases remained. Felke found that if a
second course of treatment with penicillin was necessary it should always be
combined with a three-day course of massive doses of sulphonamide, with
200,000 units penicillin given on the second day of the usual intensive course
of sulphonamide treatment.
   Why some gonococcal strains are more resistant than others is still not
clear. It is suspected that some gonococcal strains, like some staphylococcal
strains, can produce more p-aminobenzoic acid or other antisulphonamide
factors. This possibility might be suggested by our observation that certain
gonococcal strains are inhibited to a greater extent by Marbadal - the sulpha-
thiourea salt of Marfanil - and Supronal (the effectiveness of which is well
known to be only partially impaired, if at all, by p-aminobenzoic acid) than
by Eleudron. It would therefore appear possible that the 100% success a-
chieved by Bernhard in the treatment of gonorrhoea in women may to some
extent be due to this, and not merely to the fact that higher doses are possible


           CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                             497
thanks to better tolerance. Another way of achieving better results might be
to find pyretic agents which would bring about moderate degrees of fever
for a relatively long period, on the same lines as typhoid bacillus vaccines.
A rise in body temperature during sulphonamide treatment intensifies the
biochemical reaction between drug and pathogen, while at the same time
the heat itself injures the heat-sensitive gonococci. According to Felke 1ºC
above normal, extending over a sufficiently long period, is enough. Intensive
courses of Pyrifer treatment are too short-lasting to give the optimum re-
sults, and this is no doubt the main reason why 40% Olobinthin, which usu-
ally gives slight pyrexia lasting 3-4 days, is superior. Boas and Marcussen
gave 10 x 1g sulphathiazole for 3 days and on the third day induced fever
for a period of 5-5½: hours by hyperthermia. Of 20 patients, 19 were cured
 (Ugeskrift Laeger, 106 (1944) 16).
   During the past few years we have often been too easy-going with sulphon-
amide treatment of gonorrhoea, giving 2 Eleudron tablets 5 times a day at
intervals of 2 hours. With this regimen adequate blood and tissue concentra-
tion was achieved for only a small part of the day, whereas during the rest of
the day and during the night the cocci could recover. Intervals between in-
dividual doses should not exceed 4-6 hours.
  All other specialized fields of medicine have learnt from dermatology, in
which massive doses of sulphonamides were given consistently at 4-6 hourly
intervals, and massive doses over a short period are now the rule in the treat-
ment of acute infections of any kind.
   For gonococcal infections sulphathiazole has even now not been surpassed
by other sulphonamide compounds to any extent worth mentioning. In the
case of streptococcal infections, on the other hand, sulphathiazole is greatly
surpassed in effectiveness by the sulphapyrimidine compounds, and especi-
ally by 2-(p-aminobenzenesulphonamido )-pyrimidine




The sulphapyrimidine compounds were also developed independently at
different laboratories. In the patent literature they were first described by the


498                            1939 G.DOMAGK

Deutsche Hydrierwerke (Hentrich) and by the firm of Schering (Dohrn and
Diedrich); the first scientific publication was that of Roblin, Williams, Win-
nek and English.
   The following experiment on mice, which were infected intraperitoneally
with                 streptococci of group A, illustrates the superiority of sul-
phapyrimidine compared with experimental infections with haemolytic
streptococci of group A :




This result is for a single treatment. Where the animals were given three
doses - 1, 6, and 24 hours after being infected - the superiority of sulphapyri-
midine is even clearer.




   Apart from this, with streptococcal infections certain sulphone compounds
show specific superiority over all earlier sulphonamides - for instance, Tiba-
tin, galactoside of 4.4’-diaminodiphenylsulphone,




which was synthesized at Elberfeld by Behnisch and Pöhls.


             CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                         499
   In the following experiments 80 mice, which had been infected intraperi-
toneally with               streptococci, were given, 10 in each case, 5%. 0.5
and I cc per 20 g body weight by mouth Prontalbin, sulphapyridine and sul-
phathiazole and 0.5 cc and 1.0 cc of a 2.5%. solution by subcutaneous injec-
tion for comparison.

Single dose, 3 hours after infection:




Three doses, 1, 6, and 24 hours after infection:




   Experiments on rabbits also showed Tibatin to be more effective than
Prontalbin, sulphapyridine or sulphathiazole. However, these sulphone com-
pounds are distinctly more effective only when introduced parenterally;
when administered orally they are unreliable and, obviously owing to un-
controllable decomposition, have undesirable side-effects, such as severe
cyanosis, etc.
   Whereas the effectiveness of the sulphonamide and sulphone compounds
so far considered had been confined almost exclusively to aerobic micro-
organisms and had as yet shown an observable effect against Clostridium sep-
ticum infections in only a few cases, e.g. with Uliron compounds, I was able
to show a really specific action on anaerobic microorganisms in the case of
the compound produced by Klarer:


500                           1939 G.DOMAGK

the hydrochloride of p-aminomethylbenzenesulphonamide, later named
Marfanil. I look upon this observation as the beginning of a third phase in
the fight against bacterial infections with sulphonamides. The action was de-
tectable in vitro as well as in experiments on animals. Although Marfanil and
its derivatives were effective against streptococci in vitro but not in animal
experiments, the derivatives were occasionally found to have a considerable
effect, even in animal experiments, on certain strains of streptococcus which
were little affected by other sulphonamides. But their main value does not lie
in this direction. Their greatest importance lies in the fact that they can be
used in the fight against the most serious wound infections, gas gangrene in
man and animals. The experiments which we conducted into the specific
effects of Marfanil and its derivatives on the various gas gangrene organisms
were repeated, under somewhat modified conditions, by Zeissler. This au-
thor used human blood for the culture, whereas we had used rabbit’s blood,
and the results agreed almost exactly. We will give the results of a few of the
experiments conducted by Zeissler to show how sulphathiazole and the other
sulphonamides are ineffective in the case of these microorganisms and how,
in contrast, the action of Marfanil is specific.




502                          1939 G.DOMAGK




Whereas no growth of the bacilli is possible at concentrations of 1 : 10,000
or 1 : 20,000 Marfanil depending on the sowing, the microorganisms grow
so densely at concentrations of 1 : 1250 sulphathiazole that matting occurs
and separate colonies can no longer be counted.
   The general effect of Marfanil when administered parenterally or orally is
illustrated by the following report:
   Mice infected with Clostridium septicum by intramuscular injection in the
thigh.




Two or four animals were given, by subcutaneous injection or by mouth,
0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5 and 1.0 cc per 20 g body weight of 4% aqueous solutions or
suspensions of each preparation. The animals which were given only one
dose were treated approx. 2 hours after being infected; those which were


            CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                             503
given a total of three doses were treated 2, 8 and 24 hours after being infected.
  The efficacy against each of the gas gangrene microorganisms which are
pathogenic in man, when applied generally and locally, was evaluated.
Timely local application gave by far the best results, as is shown by the
following:
   Rabbits infected by intramuscular injections of earth containing the spores
of the following microorganisms: Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium novyi,
Clostridium septicum, Histolyticus, Gigas. Earth was left in the wound.




* MP = Marfanil Powder.

  Rabbits infected in a wound in the back muscle with earth N III containing
the most common and the most dangerous causative agents of gas gangrene,
namely Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium novyi, Clostridium septicum, and
Histolyticus.




Local treatment. with Marfanil powders immediately after infection (earth left in
wound) and intravenous injection of gas gangrene serum.


504                            1939 G.DOMAGK




Local treatment with Marfanil powders 3 hours after infection (earth left in wound)
and intravenous injection of gas gangrene serum.




Local treatment with Marfanil powders 6 hours after infection (earth left in wound)
and intravenous injection of gas gangrene serum.




This experiment on rabbits shows in a very impressive manner how vital
the time factor is and how important it is to use the correct sulphonamides
early in these serious wound infections. In this experiment Marfanil was com-
bined with other sulphonamides in order also to produce a satisfactory effect
on other microorganisms - such as streptococci and staphylococci - in the
wound. The mixture in the ordinary MP powder was 1 part Marfanil to 9


             CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                           505
parts Prontalbin : this was because large quantities of Marfanil were not avail-
able at first. Later the following MPE compounds, which were still more
effective, were mainly used for local treatment of wounds :




In the latter mixtures a readily soluble rapidly penetrating type of Marfa-
nil was combined with a difficultly soluble Marfanil derivative which gave
a still better local effect and which also had a considerable effect against te-
tanus infection. By using Marfnil B, the difficultly soluble naphthalene-1,5-
disulphonic acid salt of 4-aminomethylbenzenesulphonamide, we succeeded
in our experiments in preventing tetanus even in cases where, despite gas
gangrene serum and tetanus serum, fatal tetanus otherwise occurred after 14
days. Marfanil B and powders containing Marfanil B are also recommended
for use in the prevention of umbilical tetanus. The use of Marfanil powders
on wound patients has given convincing results where they were adminis-
tered in time. Anyone who has not treated a wound infected with gas gan-
grene by applying MPE powder externally within the first 3 hours and,
where appropriate, by giving the patient large doses of Marfanil internally
as well (if the wound is not easily accessible from outside), is bound to re-
main sceptical as to the value of sulphonamide treatment of wound infec-
tions. Processes which with other infections take days or even weeks take
only hours with gas gangrene infections. Only swift action can help here.
   In the light of experience to-date in the treatment of wounds, and espe-
cially those contaminated with earth, dust, etc., how should we proceed?
   There is no question that all such wounds should first receive proper sur-
gical treatment as quickly as possible. However, if there is no certainty that
this can be done within the first three hours, as was often the case following
air raids and always in the field, wounds should first be treated externally
with Marfanil powder; up to 10 g, depending on the size of the wound,
should be used in order to form a thin coating. If it is suspected that soil par-


506                           1939 G.DOMAGK

titles or shell splinters, stones or wood fragments with soil clinging to them
have entered the layers of tissue to such a depth that they are inaccessible to
external treatment, then 2 g Marfanil, Marbadal, or Supronal should be given
by mouth, preferably with a little gruel, milk, coffee, or the like. After sur-
gical treatment of the wound, it should again be dusted with powder con-
taining Marfanil; the total daily dose for adults should not exceed 20, or at
most 25 g.
    With wounds of very large area, such as were frequent as a result of severe
burns suffered during air raids, it was found advisable not to apply more than
about 10 g sulphonamide powder at once, since in such cases absorption is
 too rapid and symptoms of poisoning may appear. In order to prevent
adhesion of dressings and to relieve pain, when the dressings are changed,
during the first few days moist compresses with valerian tea or boiled water
should be applied after the powdering, and then after a few days sterilized
cotton cloths thinly smeared with ordinary ointment. This method is very
economical from the point of view of consumption of ointment and is also
 more efficient than the use of sulphonamide ointments.
    A dose of 10 g should likewise not be exceeded where MPE powders are
being used in the abdominal cavity. That local treatment in cases of gunshot
 wounds in the abdomen has proved extremely efficient, is clear from the
 large series of observations made by Konjetzny and his pupils Haferland and
 Klostermeyer, as well as from the many observations made by Krueger and
 others.
    Peipper, Tönnis and other specialists in the field of brain surgery have re-
ported that even in cases of brain injury sulphonamides can be introduced
 directly into the wound cavities, thereby preventing abscess formation and
 meningitis, which are often fatal.
    In Britain and America sulphonamides with additions of penicillin have
 been used, as well as pure sulphonamides, for the treatment of wound infec-
 tions. Whether or not better results than with sulphonamides alone can be
 obtained in this way has not yet been reported.
    Klostermeyer, who has had a very great deal of experience in the field
 with the correct and early application of sulphonamides, has told me that he
 cannot imagine better results than those obtained by him with this treatment.
 He draws particular attention to his results with severe wounds of the extrem-
 ities, including the much dreaded wounds of the knee joint.
    One further observation seems to me to merit special mention. In some of
 the great air raids all the severely wounded received suitable and prompt


           CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                           507
surgical treatment and Marfanil. The results were correspondingly good. As
the number of casualties was so great, however, it would have been impossi-
ble to give similar suitable surgical treatment to those with multiple minor
injuries or even to incise the wounds and then treat them with Marfanil.
These patients received no treatment, and the percentage of them who died
was abnormally high, in contrast to that of the severely wounded (Hennig
and others). The injuries were regarded as so trifling that no sulphonamides
were administered, even internally. The wound infections which subse-
quently proved fatal could undoubtedly have been prevented in a great many
cases by large oral doses of sulphonamides.
    Whereas in World War I, the U.S. army lost 8.25% of its wounded by
 death, in World War II, when sulphonamides were used extensively, only
4.5% died. In World War I 1,68% of men reporting-sick in the American
 army died; now the figure is less than one tenth, i.e. 0.1% (Long, J. Am. Med.
Assoc., (1946)). The only reason why results of sulphonamide therapy of
 wound infections still vary so greatly from one section of the army to another
 is, in my view, that treatment is inadequate, and mostly too late. Even our
 experimental work showed dearly that better results can be achieved by
 correct chemotherapeutic treatment than by surgical treatment of wounds
infected with gas gangrene, even when surgical attention is available 3 to 6
 hours after the injury. In every case the best results were obtained by a com-
 bination of early and suitable surgical wound cleansing and sulphonamide
 treatment, preferably with the addition of gas gangrene serum. It goes with-
 out saying that even today the well-tried tetanus serum should never be dis-
 pensed with unless this is necessary for some special reason.
    Sulphonamides will also come into general use in peace-time surgery.
 This is clear from the first publications of Konjetzny, Haferland, Kloster-
 meyer, and others. W. Fischer of Kiel has reported that he used to have 13-
 14% fatal cases following operations for perforated appendix, but that since
 he has been using MPE powder, and with the same operating technique, the
 figure has fallen to 1%. Similarly favourable results have also been obtained
 by Lezius and Kramer, among others.
    Marbadal-the Marfanil salt of sulphathiourea




for the synthesis of which we are also indebted to Klarer (Deut. Med.


508                            1939 G.DOMAGK

Wochschr., No. 45-46 (1947) 670) - has an effect similar to that of Marfanil,
but superior in the case of staphylococci.
   In the case of Clostridium septicum, for instance, it has the following inhibi-
ting values compared with other sulphonamides:




   In experiments on animals, too, Marbadal was at least as effective as Mar-
 fanil with anaerobes. *
   Experiment 22.2.1946. Mice infected by intramuscular injections in the
 thigh with 0.3 cc of a 24-hour Clostridium septicum culture in liver broth
 diluted at the rate of 1 : 15 in a physiological solution of common salt. Doses,
-administered to 2 animals in each case: 6% 0.2; 0.3 ; 0.5 ; 0.8 ; and 1.0 cc. A
 single-dose 1 hour after infection.




   According to Lezius Marbadal is of outstanding value in the treatment of
intestinal gangrene, also known as jejunitis necroticans, which has recently
been claiming a great many victims in northern Germany. Schutz and Lezius
were the first to establish that this disease is caused by pathogenic anaerobic
bacteria. Whereas with surgical treatment 40-50% of patients died, Lezius

* Zeissler reports that Marbadal shows the same specific superiority over all other
sulphonamides - even penicillin - when tested with Bacillus enterotoxicus, which over
he considers to be the sole agent responsible for intestinal gangrene.


           CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                           509
succeeded, by administering large doses of Marbadal by mouth, in saving
the great majority of patients without operating.
   Sulphonamides were first used for puerperal infections by Klee and his co-
workers. Then in large-scale experiments British authors - first and foremost
Colebrook and his co-workers - established for certain that Prontosil has a
satisfactory action with puerperal infections. However, it was not only at a
few very well-run clinics that convincing results were obtained; good results
also gradually began to appear in the statistics from entire countries, such as
Germany and Britain.
   Further investigations conducted by us on puerperal infections, and es-
pecially in cases of septic abortion, showed that in a considerable percentage
of cases anaerobic gas gangrene microorganisms were present, especially
Clostridium perfringens, and sometimes also Clostridium septicum, Clostridium
novyi, etc. According to Bernhard, Anselmino and others, the combination
of Methyldebenal with Marbadal (De-Ma or Supronal), which our experi-
mental investigations showed to be particularly advantageous and on which
I reported in the Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1947, Nos. 1-8, has also
proved effective in these most serious forms of puerperal infections.
   De-Ma and other sulphonamide combinations are better tolerated as well
as being more effective. They result much less often in renal complications
than do the pure sulphapyrimidines (cf. A. R. Frisk, G. Hagerman, S. Heland-
er, B. Sjögren "Sulpha-Combination, a new chemotherapeutic principle",
Brit. Med. J., (1947) 7).
   Martin and Lezius, among others, consider that with the protection of
Supronal (= De-Ma) operations which used to be impossible can now be
performed. Martin has reported cases of patients with fever due to a septic
condition on whom a caesarean section was successfully performed with the
use of De-Ma (Supronal).
   Heilmeyer has reported on the successful treatment of very serious septic
conditions with De-Ma in non-surgical medicine. Cholangitis also yielded to
treatment. Even endocarditis lenta was cured in a few cases, one patient
having suffered from the disease for 5 months. Hitherto only a temporary
improvement could be brought about in patients with endocarditis lenta of
longer standing. The failures are due not only to the anatomical reasons ex-
plained in earlier communications, but to some extent to the different strains
of streptococcus responsible for the disease. Investigations conducted at the
Heilmeyer Clinic have shown that strains classified as enterococci are par-
ticularly resistant. In our experiments on rabbits we found that some of these


510                             1939 G.DOMAGK




                       70-

                       60-

                       50-

                       40-



Fig. 1. Deaths from puerperal fever 1932-1939 following birth(......) per 100,000 live
and still births, and following miscarriages (--) per 1,000,000 of the average female
                    population aged from 18 to less than 40 years.


strains caused very severe acute symptoms of the joints with swelling of the
capsules and pericapsular haemorrhages. Some of them responded fairly well
to Marbadal in infected mice. Still more effective sulphonamides will prob-
ably be found for these strains.
   Mice infected by intraperitoneal injection of 0.3 cc of a 24-hour serum-
broth culture diluted 1 : 8. Treatment 1, 6, 24, 48 and 72 hours after infection.
Dose, administered to 2 animals in each case: 0.5% 0.5; 1.0 cc; 5% 0.2; 0.5;
1.0 cc per 20 g body weight by subcutaneous injection.
   Penicillin 1 cc = 50 U. 0.5; 1.0 cc
              I cc = 500 u. 0.2; 0.5; 1.0 cc

Some of the strains isolated in cases of endocarditis lenta also proved to be
completely resistant to penicillin. Christie reported very considerable suc-
cesses with some patients suffering from endocarditis lenta who were given
large doses of penicillin. A combination of the two best drugs at present
available against streptococcal infections - penicillin and the sulphapyrimi-
dine compounds or De-Ma - may perhaps give even rather better results
than those which have hitherto been possible under the most favourable con-
ditions.


            CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                             511




With less serious streptococcal infections, such as erysipelas, quinsy, tonsil-
litis, etc., the older sulphonamides are reliable and effective. We now know
for certain that the sulphonamides are of decisive value in the treatment of
erysipelas, especially as even erysipelas in infants, where the mortality used
to be almost 100%, can now be cured by means of sulphonamides in the vast
majority of cases. The ordinary sulphonamides are also still being used for
the treatment of severe quinsy and tonsillitis, the most efficient method being
to allow the tablets to dissolve very slowly in the mouth so that they act for
the maximum length of time and with the maximum intensity directly upon
the focus of infection. W. Schmidt therefore even went so far as to recom-
mend that sulphonamides should be applied only locally for quinsy and
tonsillitis; he dusted several times a day with MP powder and obtained very
good results. Moreover, local application of Marfanil together with serum
should also be used in every serious case of diphtheria since, of all the sul-
phonamides, Marfanil develops the most powerful inhibiting effect on diph-
theria bacilli, thereby limiting further toxin production and at the same time
fighting infection by associated bacteria.
   In severe cases of streptococcal meningitis Unterberger reduced the 80%
mortality at first to 50%, later - with Tibatin - to 25% and finally to as little
as 11%.
   In the treatment of lobar pneumonia little has changed since the introduc-
tion of sulphapyridine. It may be possible to improve slightly on the results
so far achieved with sulphapyridine and sulphathiazole by using the newer
sulphonamides, especially sulphapyrimidines and Supronal. British authors,
with their greater experience of penicillin, consider that in cases of lobar
pneumonia the results achieved with the sulphonamides are so good that the


512                            1939 G.DOMAGK

question ofpenicillin scarcely arises. Here again, as far as the use of both these
drugs is concerned, everything depends on when they are applied. According
to Bunn and co-workers (J. Am. Med. Assoc., 129, No. 5 (1945)), if penicillin is
to be administered by mouth for the treatment of pneumonia the dose must
be 4-5 times greater than with intramuscular injection, or 750,000 units on
the first day and 400,000-500,000 U. on the following days. Treatment
should be considered for at least 7 days following return to normal tempera-
ture. It appears that penicillin is more effective than the sulphonamides
against other pneumococcal infections.
   Results with bronchopneumonia are still not as good as with lobar pneu-
monia. This is undoubtedly due in part to the fact that bronchopneumonia
begins less dramatically than lobar pneumonia and is therefore never treated
so intensively. Apart from this, it appears that in some areas there are forms
of pneumonia, caused by enterococci, which when treated with sulphonam-
ides have a non-typical course. Non-typical virus pneumonia has so far not
been reliably identified in Germany to any extent worth mentioning.
   Among the sulphonamides the most effective against staphylococcal infec-
tions are sulphathiazole (Eleudron, Cibazol), Globucid, and Marbadal. Ex-
ternal application of MPE powders, where possible as an embrocation with
glycerin or in the form of a lotion consisting of:




has proved particularly successful.
   This treatment has been found practical, and economical with regard to
dressings.
   One would expect penicillin to give better results than the sulphonamides
against staphylococci in practice, as it is so very effective in vitro.
   One of the most brilliant successes with sulphonamides has been against
meningitis epidemica - a disease which formerly resulted in a high percentage
of deaths. In some epidemics the death rate used to be 80-90%, and even ap-
prox. 50% after the use of serum. Now, results published in the literature
throughout the world show that 90-95% of patients suffering from menin-
gitis epidemica are saved by oral administration of sulphonamides alone. In a
recent communication Gehrt states that he has even been able to reduce the
mortality among babies and small children, who are least able to withstand


           CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                             513
this disease, to 4.8%. In the U.S. army the number of fatal cases among sol-
diers suffering from meningitis epidemica fell from 39.2% in World War I
to 3% in World War II thanks to the use of sulphonamides. Even according
to reports dating from some time back the lives of more than 10,000 persons
suffering from meningitis epidemica had already been saved by sulphonam-
ides in Britain alone.
   In bacillary dysentery and related infections sulphanilamide (Prontalbin),
sulphathiazole (Eleudron, Cibazol), sulphapyrimidine (Debenal, Pyrimal,
Sulphadiazine), and sulphaguanidine are of particular value. According to
Max Bürger the sulphonamides have not only removed the danger of dysen-
tery as far as the individual is concerned but have also removed the danger of
dysentery as an epidemic disease. Penicillin is ineffective against dysentery
bacilli. American authors report that the sulphapyrimidine compounds are
most effective here.
   Results with the sulphonamides in typhoid and paratyphoid fever have so
far been unsatisfactory. According to experimental results (given below) ob-
tained with sulphapyrimidine compounds (Debenal, Debenal M) in para-
typhoid B infections we can perhaps also look for some success in practice.
   The effects of sulphonamides on paratyphoid B infection are illustrated by
the following experiments:
   Mice infected by intraperitoneal injection with 0.5 cc of a 24-hour broth
culture diluted 1 : 50. One subcutaneous or intramuscular injection 1 hour
after infection, 2 animals in each case, all preparations 2% 0.2; 0.3; 0.5; 0.8;
and 1.0 cc.




With still more. intense infection and 3 corresponding injections after 1, 6,
and 24 hours the following result was obtained.


514                           1939 G.DOMAGK




  De-Ma in solution was to some extent even more effective.
  Experiment 2.3.1947. Mice infected intraperitoneally with 0.5 cc of a 24-
hour broth culture diluted 1 : 20. Animals, 2 in each case, treated 3 times with
2% 0.1; 0.2; 0.3; 0.4; 0.5; by intravenous injection; and 0.2; 0.3; 0.5; 0.8;
1.0; by subcutaneous injection and by mouth.




With coli infections it is much more difficult to arrive at a definite assess-
ment of the effect; this is because, even with the controls, the course of the
infection is often irregular. Nevertheless, such an assessment can be made if
experiments are constantly repeated with different culture dilutions. The
following experiment, in which culture dilutions of 1 : 3 and 1 : 5 were used
for infecting the animals, gives some information on the effectiveness of
Debenal and De-Ma. Dose 5%, 2 animals in each case, subcutaneous injec-
tion and by mouth 0.2; 0.5; 1.0 cc.


           CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                            515




   In this context it is not possible to go into any great detail on the use of
sulphonamides against many other infections, such as undulant fever, ac-
tinomycosis, etc.
   With undulant fever definite results are obtained only after prolonged
treatment.
    Rats infected by intraperitoneal injection with 0.5 cc of a 48-hour agar-
broth slope. One injection 1 hour after infection, then daily for 14 days, 2
animals in each case, 5% 0.2; 0.5; 1.0; 2.0 cc.


516                            1939 G.DOMAGK

   I should also like to draw attention to a recent report by Klee that Tibatin
has proved particularly satisfactory in the treatment of lung gangrene.
   Information on the use of sulphonamides in relatively rare diseases is given
in Domagk-Hegler: Chemotherapie bakterieller Infektionen (Chemotherapy of
bacterial infections), 3rd ed., Hirzel, Leipzig, 1944, and Domagk: Patholo-
gische Anatomic und Chemotherapie bakterieller Infektionen (Pathological ana-
tomy and chemotherapy of bacterial infections), Thieme, Stuttgart. Infor-
mation on the innumerable other sulphonamides which have been tested and
used is given in Mietzsch’s survey: "Therapeutisch verwendbare Sulfon-
amid- und Sulfonverbindungen" (Therapeutically useful sulphonamide and
sulphone compounds), Suppl. 54 (1945) to "Chemiea", Z. Ver. Deut. Chemi-
ker.
   A fourth phase in chemotherapy of bacterial infections seems to be open-
ing up in view of the fact that the sulphathiazole and sulphathiodiazole
compounds have had such a specific action against tubercle bacilli that fur-
ther progress at last seems possible in this direction too. In 1940 I reported the
observation that sulphathiazole in concentrations of 1 : 5000 has a specific in-
hibiting action on tubercle bacilli, whilst other sulphonamides and sulphones,
as well as Diasone and Promin (which are frequently referred to in the litera-
ture), do not. Only the thiazole and thiodiazole derivatives have this effect.
Further experiments showed that these sulphonamides have this specific ef-
fect against the human as well as the bovine and avian types - temporarily in
concentrations as low as 1 : 50,000 or even 1 : 100,000, i.e. sulphonamide con-
centrations which can easily be achieved in the human organism, and with
very small doses at that.
   Even at that time I suggested that sulphathiazole and its derivatives might
be effective against human disease, but since then further results have shown
me that an effect can be achieved with even smaller doses than were then
being recommended, provided that these small doses are given for weeks
and perhaps months on end. Experiments have shown that it is best to begin
treatment with small doses, especially where many bacilli are present and
where treatment is to be continued for a considerable period. Otherwise, as
a result of the damage suffered by the tubercle bacilli and of their accelerated
decomposition, too many toxins are liberated and in consequence undesir-
able abscess formations and sequestrations as well as general detrimental
effects are liable to occur, as after the administration of tuberculin. It was in
 fact found from long-term experiments on animals that the largest doses were
by no means always the most effective. In critical cases in man the risk at-


            CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                                   517
tendant upon very high doses would of course have to be accepted. In cases
of meningitis tuberculosa there should probably be no hesitation in giving
high doses. Where the patient’s life is not in danger, however, minimal doses,
1 x 0.25 g or 2 x 0.25 g daily, should be administered at first; then, after 2-3
weeks, 3 x 0.25 or 4 x 0.25 g daily, but the doses should never be increased
until the patient feels better.
   My colleagues in chemistry Dr. Behnisch, Prof. Schmidt and Dr. Mietzsch
and I finally arrived at still more effective compounds which were no longer
sulphonamides at all - for, as I have shown, the specific effect had up to that
time been detectable only with the sulphonamide compounds of the thiazole
and thiodiazole series. It was Behnisch who made available to me for chemo-




Fig. 2. Inhibiting effect of sulphathiazole on human-type tubercle bacilli from sputum
                                          Fr. Di.
                  Tube 1 (control with good growth, 6 weeks after inoculation)
                  Tube 2 contains I : 5,000 sulphathiazole
                  Tube 3 contains I : 10,000 sulphathiazole
                  Tube 4 contains I : 25,000 sulphathiazole
                  Tube 5 contains I : 50,000 sulphathiazole
                  Tube 6 contains I : 100,000 sulphathiazole
In this experiment no cultures of tubercle bacilli were visible in any of the tubes con-
                   taining sulphathiazole, 6 weeks after inoculation.


518                          1939 G.DOMAGK

therapeutical trials the first thiosemicarbazones of cyclic aldehydes, which
he was using as initial products in the manufacture of sulphathiodiazoles and
which represent the open-ring preliminary stage in the 2-aminothiodiazoles
necessary for this. The thiosemicarbazones of cyclic aldehydes and ketones
showed a powerful inhibiting action on tubercle bacilli. In this way a new
chemotherapeutical principle, which is not dependent on the presence of the
sulphonamide group, was extracted from the principle of the sulphathiazoles
and sulphathiodiazoles. In the light of experiments the thiosemicarbazones
even appear in some respects to have advantages over the sulphathiazoles and
sulphathiodiazoles. Thus, their effectiveness against the various types of
tubercle bacillus is not reduced by para-aminobenzoic acid, protein break-
down products, Campolon or other substances which, as already shown, can
considerably impair the effectiveness of sulphathiazole and of the sulphathio-
diazoles. Tuberculin is not one of the substances which impair the effective-
ness against tubercle bacilli of those sulphonamides which in themselves are
effective. In animal experiments the effectiveness of compounds containing
no sulphonamides was for the most part even clearer than with the above-
mentioned active sulphonamides of the thiazole and thiodiazole series. This
new class of active substances was first reported in a joint publication by
R. Behnisch, F. Mietzsch, H. Schmidt and myself in Naturwiss., 33, No. 10
(1946). The following compounds proved to be very effective :




whereas Tb IV is a thiodiazole compound which is sensitive to p-aminoben-
zoic acid.
   Experiment with human type, inoculation on 24th April; first collection
(I) on 8th May, 1947; second collection (II) on 14th May.


CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS   519


520                       1939 G.DOMAGK

Experiment with bovine type.


            CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                              521
   Like p-aminobenzoic acid, liver extracts, e.g. Campolon, and other pro-
teolytic products develop an antisulphonamide action with regard to tu-
bercle bacilli. Koch’s original old tuberculin did not show this effect in the
concentrations tested (1:100).
   In some cases in experimental animals which had only received 1 local ap-
plication it was possible to detect some effect from the drugs and to differ-
entiate between them.
   Guinea-pigs were infected in the back with an intramuscular injection of
3 mg of a human type culture. After 3 days the infection site was incised and
0.5 g of the preparation was applied locally. In the controls extensive case-
ating foci had already appeared after 4 weeks in the area of the injection site
on the back. In the internal organs - mainly lung, liver, spleen - nodules and
sometimes necrotic areas could be seen under the microscope and usually
with the naked eye. Eight weeks after being infected none of the control ani-
mals was alive. In the case of the animals which were treated locally with Tb
1, after 4 weeks small fusion foci only, with increased reaction of the connec-
tive tissue in the surrounding area, were apparent in the musculature; in ad-
dition, in the area round these foci the experimental animals, in contrast to
the controls, showed only isolated and non-typical epitheloid nodules. In
some of the animals which were treated locally with Tb I/698 there was no
fusion whatever at the infection focus but only a proliferation of connective
tissue with individual histocytes, though without epitheloid nodules. Another




  Fig. 3. Guinea-pigs infected intraperitoneally with human type tubercle bacillus
             (Above): Controls. Large tuberculous foci in the omentum.
(Below): The same infection as above with animals treated with Tb I/698. Small
                                tuberculous foci only.


522                           1939 G.DOMAGK

striking fact was that only very isolated small nodules could be found in
the lung, liver or spleen, whereas in the untreated controls there were com-
paratively extensive tuberculous changes. Evidence of inhibition of tuber-
culous tissue changes was also to be found in the animals treated with Tb II
and Tb III, but was not so pronounced as with Tb I. In the animals treated
with Tb IV the disintegrated reticular epitheloid nodules around the local
necrotic areas of the primary focus were very noticeable. In the animals
which received one local treatment with Eleudron the effect was still less
than with Tb IV. All the animals showed numerous epitheloid nodules in
lungs, liver and spleen, although in some cases with non-typical disintegra-
tion.
    With animals infected by intraperitoneal injections of large doses of tu-
bercle bacilli the caseation processes appeared mainly in the omentum, but
subsequently also in the spleen, liver and lung. These latter organs showed
caseation as well as productive foci, depending on the quantities of tubercle
bacilli injected. In the treated animals the caseated foci remained smaller, and
in some cases processes (mainly productive) appeared which, if treatment
was continued for a sufficiently long period, changed into unspecific granula-
tion scar tissue.
    In the treatment of experimental animals substances of this kind with a
highly effective specific action against tubercle bacilli gave the following
results :
 1. A local effect with powder applied locally.
2. When administrered by mouth and by subcutaneous injection, in cases of
    intraperitoneal infection in the omentum and elsewhere a general effect
    on tuberculous processes at some distance from the site of application.
 3. Absence or delay of generalization.
    Histologically the treated animals-unlike the heavily infected untreated
     controls, in which caseation was present - showed:
 1. Leucocytic inflammation. Caseous disintegration of the leucocytes clearly
    retarded.
 2. Considerable numbers of histocytes with accumulation of Indian ink,
    where Indian ink had been added to the tubercle bacilli at the time of
     infection.
 3. Non-typical nodules.
 4. Non-typical giant cells.
 5. Completely unspecific granulation tissue.
    The nature of the histological tissue reaction appears to be entirely inde-


           CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                             523
pendent of the immunity or resistance, and to be dependent only on the num-
ber of bacilli capable of developing when exposed to the effects of the drug.
Thus, depending on the degree of success, we see relatively slight caseation
in the treated animals, more proliferative processes with occurrence of non-
typical cells, and finally unspecific granulation tissue formation. In experi-
ments where only few bacilli are used for infection and where primary case-
ating processes do not occur, the specific productive foci appearing in the
controls sometimes turn into wholly non-typical histocytic foci and finally
into completely unspecific granulation and scar tissue. In the animals treated
with the optimum doses no tuberculous foci whatever develop in the other
organs, whilst with sub-optimum doses the development of these foci is in-
hibited. Unlike the controls, the animals in which the seat of the primary in-
fection was the vestibule of the eye showed caseous-fusion. Even when, in
heavily infected animals, destruction occurred owing to the effect of the
toxin, unspecific granulation tissue foci covered with epithelium also devel-
oped here at a later stage in the treated animals. In contrast to the untreated
controls, in which numerous epithelial nodules appeared in the spleen, liver
and lung, the treated animals showed no tuberculous foci in these organs,
either upon visual inspection or under the microscope. With rabbits, among
which the controls showed tuberculous changes in the lungs, kidneys and
other organs, it was likewise possible to prevent the development of tuber-
culous processes by means of long-term treatment with the active substances.
It remains to be seen whether or not the substances which were found to be
effective against tuberculosis in the experiment will be sufficiently effective
in clinical practice.
   The effectiveness of the substance Tb I/698 in the case of tuberculosis of
the skin in man has been confirmed. Moncorps and Kalkoff have reported
on this. The successes with lupus of the skin reported by Moncorps and Kal-
koff for the first time at the 1947 Rhine-Westphalian Dermatology Confer-
ence have since been corroborated by Grütz, P. Schmidt, Koch, Hartung
and others. Eickhoff of the Loebell Clinic for Ear, Nose and Throat Diseases
in Münster, Westphalia, reported on the effectiveness of the preparation Tb
I/698 in cases of lupus of the mucous membranes at the Congress of Ear,
 Nose and Throat Specialists in Hamburg on 7th and 8th November, 1947.
He described clinical and histological cures of patients who had been treated
for years in hospital without success. Average length of treatment to-date:
 110 days with a dose of 1 g per day.
   In the light of results of resistance tests on tubercle bacilli from sputum I


524                            1939 G.DOMAGK

have reason to assume that there are also tubercle bacilli with differing de-
grees of resistance to sulphathiazole and other substances which appear suit-
ed to chemotherapy of tuberculosis. However, if we were able to devise a
method of chemotherapy of tuberculosis in man on the basis of the experi-
mental findings so far available, even this measure might result in failure
unless from the outset we took the utmost care to ensure that patients with
overt tuberculosis who were spreading the bacilli were isolated until com-
pletely cured. Otherwise, even with the very best drugs against tuberculosis
we should perhaps see the same result as we are now beginning to see in the
treatment of gonorrhoea with sulphonamides and penicillin - drugs with
which, if the correct procedure had been adopted, gonorrhoea could no
doubt have been eradicated.
   By far the greatest danger threatening us at the present time is pulmonary
tuberculosis, especially where large parts of Europe have been turned into
famine areas, for this disease will not stop at the boundaries of the stricken
areas of central Europe. Whether chemotherapy of tuberculosis, which is
only in its infancy, has yet reached the stage of being really effective here is a
 question which cannot be answered until further investigations have been
carried out by many experienced clinicians on the strictest scientific lines. At
a meeting of the Flensburg Medical Association in November 1949 F. Kuhl-
mann reported for the first time favourable results in patients seriously ill
with pulmonary tuberculosis. The successes took the form of disappearance
of the fever (some of the patients having suffered from very prolonged high
fever), diminution of sputum and sometimes disappearance of bacilli from
the sputum, a return to normal in blood sedimentation and gains in weight.
Kuhlmann reported that the patients themselves asked for the treatment and
that the mortality rate in the department for patients seriously ill with pul-
monary tuberculosis fell from 7-8% to 1-2% per month with approx. 160
beds occupied. He pointed out that with the fall in the mortality curve the
type of case accommodated in the department changed somewhat because
sanatorium patients were temporarily admitted (60), but that only patients
selected for the seriousness of their condition were transferred there. He also
allowed for the fact that the hot dry summer might have had a beneficial
effect, but considered that the possibility that hospitalization itself had some
effect could be ruled out in the case of the large majority of patients. X-ray
 photographs showed that in many of the patients who had received treat-
 ment there was extensive resorption of the exudative changes. Ausculation
 lagged behind radiography in detecting a decrease in the infection. Accord-


            CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                                   525
ing to Kuhlmann, in the patients who received treatment there was a sur-
prising change in the course of the disease. Nevertheless, it would be too
early to speak of a cure, although Kuhlmann said that in some cases the word
"cure" suggested itself. We shall therefore have to wait and see whether in
these cases the cure is definite and whether the successes reported by Kuhl-
 mann can be regularly repeated with the same treatment. However, it would
appear that for the first time we are in possession of substances which bring
chemotherapy of pulmonary tuberculosis within striking distance. Many
lines of inquiry were pursued before we reached this goal. The least hint
that a substance might be effective was recorded and followed up by the
 chemists who, on the strength of it, made innumerable syntheses. And how
often in vain! Chemotherapy of tuberculosis in its present state is also a late
fruit of sulphonamide research, for which the foundations were laid in my
joint work with Klarer and Mietzsch. Which cases of tuberculosis should
receive chemotherapeutic treatment, is a question which is constantly being
 asked, and in reply I would refer to an axiom which I often quote: I consider
 it my first duty in the development of chemotherapy to cure those diseases
 which have hitherto been incurable, so that in the first place those patients
 are helped who can be helped in no other way.




Anselmino, "Die Sulfonamidbehandlung der fieberhaften Fehlgeburt." (Sulphonamide
  treatment in septic abortion.), Deut. Med. Wochschr., (1947) 63.
Bernhard, "Die De-Ma Therapie puerperaler Infektionen." (De-Ma therapy in puer-
  peral infections.), Deut. Med. Wocksckr., (1947) 66.
Bernhard, "Die Sulfonamidbehandlung der Gonorrhoe der Frau." (Sulphonamide
  treatment of gonorrhoea in women.), Deut. Med. Wochschr, (1947).
Boas and Marcussen, Ugeskrift Lager, 106 (1944) 16.
Bunn et al., J. Am. Med. Assoc., 129 (1945).
Bunn et al., "Beitrag zur Penicillinbehandlung chirurgischer Infektionen." (On peni-
  cillin treatment of surgical infections.), Deut. Med. Wochschr., (1946) 291.
Bürger, "Klinik und Sulfonamidtherapie der in Leipzig gehäuft auftretenden ruhr-
  artigen Darmerkrankungen." (Clinical treatment and sulphonamide therapy of the
  dysentery-like intestinal disorders occurring frequently in Leipzig.), Med. Welt,
  (1943) 301.
Clarke, "Penicillin: help or hindrance in venereal disease control?", J Soc. Hyg., No. 9
  (1945).
Christie, "Subakute bakterielle Endocarditis, die offensichtlich durch Sulfanilamid-
  behandlung geheilt wurde." (Subacute bacterial endocarditis obviously cured by
  sulphonamide treatment.), J. Am. Med. Soc., 115 (1940) 1357.


526                              1939 G.DOMAGK

Christie, "Penicillin in subacute bacterial endocarditis.", Brit. Med. J., (1946) 381.
Colebrook and Purdie, "Treatment of 106 cases of puerperal fever by sulphanilamide
  (Streptocide).", Lancet, (1937) 1237, 1291.
Colebrook, "Chemotherapy in relation to war wounds.", Brit. Med. J., (1940) 448.
Colebrook, "Sulphonamides locally.", Lancet, ( 1944) 22.
Domagk, "Ein Beitrag zur Chemotherapie der bakteriellen Infektionen." (On chemo-
  therapy of bacterial infections.), Deut. Med. Wochschr., (1935) 250.
Domagk, Chemotherapie bakterieller Infektionen. (Chemotherapy of bacterial infections.),
  Monograpbie, 3rd ed., Hirzel, Leipzig, 1944.
Domagk, Pathologische Anatomic und Chemotherapie bakterieller Infektionen. (Pathological
  anatomy and chemotherapy of bacterial infections.), Thieme, Stuttgart, 1947.
Domagk, "Neuere Erfahrungen bei experimentallen Infektionen." (Recent experiences
  with experimental infection.), Z. Haut-Gesckleckfskrankh., 3 (1947) 357.
Domagk, "Der derzeitige Stand der Chemotherapie bakterieller Infektionen mit den
  Sulfonamiden." (The present situation with regard to chemotherapy of bacterial
  infections with sulphonamides.), Deut. Med. Wochschr., (1947) 6.
Domagk, Behnisch, Schmidt, and Mietzsch, "Üjber eine neue, gegen Tuberkelbazillen
  in vitro wirksame Verbindungsklasse." (On a new class of compounds effective in
   vitro against tubercle bacilli.), Naturwiss., 33 [10] (1946) 315.
Domagk, "Chemotherapie der Tuberkulose.", (Chemotherapy of tuberculosis.) Rhine-
   Westphalian Dermatology Conferences, May and September, 1947).( See also: Beitr. Klin.
   Tuberk., 101 (1948) 3 65).
Eickhoff, Ear, Nose, 2nd Throat Congress., 7-8th November, 1947, Hamburg.
Felke, "Die Chemotherapie der Gonorrhoe mit Sulfonamidverbindungen." (Chemo-
   therapy of gonorrhoea with sulphonamide compounds.), Arch. Dermatol., 178
   (1938) 45.
Felke, "Über den Wirkungsmechanismus der antibakteriellen Chemotherapie bei der
   Gonorrhoe." (On the operative mechanism of antibacterial chemotherapy in
   gonorrhoea.), Arch. Dermatol., 178 (1938), 152.
Fischer, "Die Sulfonamide in der Chirurgie." (The sulphonamides in surgery.),MeA.
   Klin., (1944) 418.
Frisk, Hagerman, Helander, and Sjogren, "Sulpha-Combination, a new chemothera-
   peutic principle.", Brit. Med. J., (1947) 7-10.
 Gehrt, "Behandlung der Meningitis epidemica mit Uliron." (Treatment of meningitis
   epidemica with Uliron.), Deut. Med. Wochschr., (1938) 409.
 Grütz and Krömer, "Überblick über den gegenwärtigen Stand der Chemotherapie der
   Gonorrhoe." (Survey of the present situation with regard to chemotherapy of
   gonorrhoea.), Jahrkurse. Ärztl Forfbild., [4] (1939) 37.
 Haferland, "Zur Behandlung infizierter und infektionsgefährdeter Wunden mit dem
    Sulfonamidgemisch Marfanil-Prontalbin." (On treatment of infected wounds and
   wounds threatened by infection with the sulphonamide combination Marfanil-
    Prontalbin.), Arch. Klin. Chir., 202 (1941) 580.
 Haferland, "Die Sulfonamidbehandlung in der Chirurgie." (Sulphonamide treatment
    in surgery.), Med. Welt., (1942) 380.
 Hagerman, "Studien zur Chemoresistenz der Gonokokken mittels einer neuen Me-


              CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                               527
  thode zur Bestimmung der Chemoresistenz in vitro." (Studies on the chemoresist-
  ante of gonococci by means of a new method for the determination of chemoresist-
  ance in vitro.), Acta Pathol. Microbial. Scand., Suppl. 46 (1942) 180 pp. Ref. Med.
  Klin., (1943) 594.
Hartung, Dermatology Conference, Hannover, 1947.
Heilmeyer and Keiderling, "Klinische Wirkungen einer Sulfonamidkombination mit
  verschiedenem Angriffspunkt (De-Ma) auf den Ablauf sulfonamidresistenter sep-
  tischer Krankheitsbilder und ihre Erklärung durch die Theorie einer mehrfachen
  Fermentkettenblockierung." (Clinical effects of a combination of sulphonamides
  with different points of attack (De-Ma) on the development of sulphonamide-
  resistant septic conditions and their explanation by the theory of multiple ferment
  chain blocking.), Deut. Med. Wochschr., (1947) 13.
Henrich and Winkelstrater, Winkelsträter’s thesis, Univ. Münster, 1946.
Hopf, "Die Feststellung der endgültigen Heilung der männlichen Go." (Confirming a
  final cure in cases of gonorrhoe in men.), Münch. Med. Wocschr., (1943) 284.
Huriez and Dessurmont, Presse Med., 55 [2] (1947), Ref. Z. Haut-Geschlechtskratkh., 2
  (1947) 217.
Kakoff, "Chemotherapie des Lupus vulgaris.", (Chemotherapy of lupus vulgaris.),
  Z. Haut-Gescklechtskrankh., 3 (1947) 280.
Klarer, "Über die chemische Konstitution des Marfanil (Mesudin)." (On the chemical
  constitution of Marfanil (Mesudin).), Klin. Wochschr., 20 (1941) 1250.
Klarer, "Entwickhrng der Sulfonamidtherapie." (Development of sulphonamide ther-
apy.), Chemie, 56 (1943) 10.
Klee and Römer, "Prontosil bei Streptokokkenerkrankungen." (Prontosil in strepto-
   coccal infections.), Deut. Med. Wochschr., (1935) 250.
Koch, Dermatology Conference, Münster 1947 and Hamburg.
Konjetzny, Zentr. Chir., 137 (1940) 2745.
Konjetzny, "Gäsodemerkrankungen und ihre Behandlung." (Gas gangrene infections
   and their treatment.), Med. Welt, Nr. 40 (1940).
Konjetzny, "Operative Wundversorgung." (Operative wound treatment.), Med. Welt,
   (1941) 409.
Konjetzny, "Die Behandlung von Phosphorschädigungen der Korperoberfläche, von
   Verbrennungen, Verbrühungen und Verztzungen." (Treatment of phosphorus dam-
   age to the body surface, of burns, scalds and erosions.), Med. Welt, (1944) 69.
Klostermeyer, "Fortschritte in der örtlichen Behandlung schwer vereiterter schuss-
   verletzter Kniegelenke." (Advances in the local treatment of severely suppurated
   shot wounds in the knee joint.), Zentr. Chir., (1944) 1253.
Kramer, "Fortschritte auf dem Wege zu einer Chirurgie ohne Eiter." (Advances to
   wards surgery without suppuration.), Deut. Med. Wochschr., (1947).
Krueger, "Sulfonamide an der Front." (Sulphonamides at the front.), Deut. Med.
   Wochschr., (1943) 417.
Kuhlmann, Flensburg Medical Conference, November, 1947; and Med. Monatsschr., (1948)
   297.
Lezius, Conference of North-West German Surgeons, Lübeck.
Long, "Medizinischer Fortschritt und medizinische Erziehung während des Krieges."


528                              1939 G.DOMAGK

  (Medical progress and medical training during the war.), J Am. Med. Assoc., 130
  (1946) 983.
Martin, "Die Bedeutung der Sulfonamide für die Geburtshilfe und die Frauenheil-
  kunde." (The importance of sulphonamides in obstetrics and gynaecology.), Ärztl.
  Wochschr., (1947) 489.
Mietzsch, "Zur Chemotherapie der bakteriellen Infektionskrankheiten." (On chemo-
  therapy ininfectious bacterial diseases,), Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges., 71 A (1938) 15.
Mietzsch-Klarer, Med. Chem., 4 (1943) 73.
Mietzsch, "Therapeutisch verwendbare Sulfonamid- und Sulfonverbindungen.", (Sul-
  phonamide and sulphone compounds suitable for therapeutical use,). Suppl. Z. Ver.
  Deut. Chemiker, (1945).
Moncorps and Kahcoff, "Vorläufige Ergebnisse einer Chemotherapie der Hauttuber-
  kulose," (Provisional results of chemotherapy of tuberculosis of the skin,), Z. Haut-
   Gescklechtskrankh., 3 (1947) 358. Orig. Med. Klin., (1947) 812.
Schmidt, P., Dermatology Conference, Hamburg.
Schmidt, P., "Tuberkulose." (Tuberculosis.), Ärztl. Wochschr., 39-40 (1947) 633.
Schmidt, W., "Die Sulfonamidbehandlung der Angina lacunaris unter besonderer Be-
   rucksichtigung der lokalen Behandlung." (Treatment of follicular tonsillitis with
   sulphonamides, with special reference to local treatment.), Therap. Gegenwart, [1-2]
   (1944) 21.
Schreus, "Felderfahrungen über die Chemotherapie der Anaerobenwundinfektion ins-
     besondere mit Globucid nebst Bemerkungen über Chemoprophylaxe." (War ex-
    perience of chemotherapy of anaerobic wound infection, in particular with Glo-
     bucide, together with observations on chemoprophylaxis.)
Schmith, Studies on the effect of sulphapyridine on pneumococci and gonococci, Munksgaard,
     Copenhagen, 1941.
Schütz, Conference of North-West German Surgeons, Lübeck.
Tönnis, "Die Behandlung der Himverletzungen auf Grund der Erfahrungen im Feld-
   zug gegen Polen." (Treatment of brain injuries in the light of experience gamed
   during the Polish campaign.), Deat. Med. Wochschr., (1940) 57.
Tréfouel, Tréfouel, Nitti, and Bovet, "Activité du p-aminophenylsulfonamide sur les
   infections streptococciques exptrimentales de la souris et du lapin." (Activity of
   p-aminophenylsulphonamide against experimental streptococcal Infections in the
   mouse and rabbit.), Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., 120 (1935) 756.
Unterberger, "Fortschritte und Ergehnisse mit der Sulfonamid-Behandlung der oto-
   genen Meningitis und anderer intrakranieller Verwicklungen." (Progress in and
    results from sulphonamide treatment of otogenous meningitis and other intra-
    cranial complications, Wien. Med. Wochschr., 92 (1942) 133.
 Unterberger, "Über klinische und pathologisch-anatomische Beobachtungen der oto-
    genen Meningitis bei der Sulfonamidtherapie." (Clinical and pathological-ana-
    tomical observations on otogenous meningitis with sulphonamide therapy.), Med.
    Klin., 39 (I943) 599.
 Veltman, "Über die Klinik der Sulfonamidschäden." (On the clinical treatment of ill-
    effects from sulphonamides.), Med. Klin., (1946) 607.
 Veltman, Z. Haut- Geschlechtskrankh., 2 (1947) 203.


               CHEMOTHERAPY OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS                               529
Whitby, "An experimental assessment of the therapeutic efficacy of amino-compounds
  with special reference to p-benzylamino-benzenesulphonamide.", Lancet, 232 (1937)
  1517.
Whitby, Camb, and Land, "Chemotherapy of pneumococcal and other infections with
  2-(p-aminobenzenesulphonamido) pyridine.", Lancet, 234 (1938) 1210.
Zeissler, "Welche Voraussetzungen muss die Technik von Kulturversuchen zur Be-
  stimmung der bakteriostatischen Wirkung der Sulfonamide erfüllen?" (What are
  the conditions which must be fulfiied by a cultural test technique for determination
  of the bacteriostatic action of sulphonamides?).
Zeissler, "Beitrag zur Ätiologie der Gasödeme des Menschen. Die hakteriologische
  Emte zweier Weltkriege." (On the aetiology of gas gangrene in man. The bacteriol-
  ogical aftermath of two world wars.), Deut. Med. Wochschr., (1946) 171.

For further bibliography, see:
Domagk, Pathologiscke Anatomie und Chemotherapie der Infektiontskrankheiten. (Patholog-
  ical anatomy and chemotherapy of infectious diseases.), Thieme, Stuttgart, 1948, and
  Beitr. Klin. Tuberk., 101 (1948) 365.
