244

PROTEIN TARGETING

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1999 by
HUNTER  BLO6EI.

Laboratory of Cell Biology, Howard  Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefel- ler University,  1230 
York Avenue, New York, NY  10021, USA.


PROLOGUE
I began  research  in  the 60ties, first as a graduate student  in  the laboratory of Van  R.  
Potter  (Fig.1)  at  the  McArdle  Institute  for  Cancer  Research  of  the University  of  
Wisconsin  in Madison.  I  continued  as a postdoctoral  fellow  in the laboratory  of  George  E.  
Palade  (Fig.  2)  at The Rockefeller  University  in New York  Gity.  At  that  time,  the 
intracellular  pathway  of  secretory  proteins, from  their synthesis  to  their extrusion  from  
the cell,  the so-called  ‘secretory pathway’,  had already  been worked out by George Palade and 
his coworkers,
primarily Philip Siekevitz,J'     Jamieson and Lucien Caro (for review see 1974 Nobel lecture by 
George Palade  [I]  ).  Using pulse-chase  labeling with  radio-
active  amino acids  in  tissue  slices in conjunction  with  cell fractionation  and 
autoradiography,  Palade  and  coworkers  established  that,  during  or  shortly




















Figure 1. Van R. Potter, 1964. Mc Ardle Laboratory, University  of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin.

245


























Figure 2. George E. Palade, 1970. The Rockefeller University, Netv York.


after  their synthesis,  secretory  proteins crou  the rough  (ribosommtudded) endoplasmic  
reticulum  (ER)  membrane.  It was proposed  that  translocation across the ER yields segregation 
of secretory proteins from cytosolic proteins. From  the ER,  secretory proteins are transported 
via vesicular carriers through the cisternae of  the Golgi apparatus. Finally, vehicular  carriers 
budding from the  trans-cisternae  of  the  Golgi  complex  were  observed   to  fuse  with  the 
plasma membrane, yielding externalization or exocytosis of  the secretory pro- teins  (Fig.  3).  
The  biochemical  mechanisms  underlying  this  pathway  were unknown at that time.
Several reports in  the mid-sixties suggested  that mRNAs for secretory  pro-
teins are sequestered  in rough  microsomes  that represent  the vesicular  rem- nants  of  the  
fractured  rough  ER.  However,  it  was  not  clear  how  the  se- questration  of  these  mRNAs  
was  accomplished.  One   possibility  was  that  an uo1r‹snsñted region  that might be common  to 
all mRNAs coding for secretory proteins mediated their attachment  to the ER  membrane. Other such 
distinct untranslated  regions of  other  mRNAs might  mediate  attachment  to other or- ganelles.  
Once  attached  to  their  ’cognate’  organelles,  the  translation  pro- ducts  might  then  be  
vectorially  transported  into  these  organelles  (2).  An- other idea was that free and 
organelle-bound ribosomes might differ in their composition.  The  distinct  organelle-bound  
ribosomes  might  function  to se- lect  ‘cognate'  mRNAs  to  the  organelles,  again  via  
cognate  utitremf   ed  re- gions. These and other ideas were frequently discussed in the Palade 
labora- tory in the late 60ties.

246                                              Physiology  or Mediciru'.  1999

















ER
ribosomes

Plasma membrane

Figure  3. The  secretor}'  pal.hivav.  Secretory  proteins  (inrlicated  in  red)  arc  syn tl 
iesiy.ccl  ‹in  i ili‹ senses  l4r›iinrl  tr,  the  eii‹It›klasin ie  rctictilurn  (ER) .  They' 
are  then  transported  in‹i   csicular  car- riers  through  the C'olgi complex and are finall)' 
cxocytosed.
This simple cartoon  does not show' important  lii anches:
1. The lirancla  for 1ys‹›sc*inal  r°oteins from  the distal Ciolgi  cister-nae  and  tlic  branch  
for {Jt-roxi- soinal membrane  proteins from  the ER.
2. The retrograde recycling  branches of this path»'a),  including  endoc) tosis.
**••s*  i'   r••tant1y,essentially  all  integral  membrane  proteins  (exec pt  for  those  of  
mitocli‹›n- dria ai\4 clz1oroplasts  share  this pachv'a}'


THE   FIRST VERSION OF THE SIGNAL HYPOTHESIS
David  Salaatini  (Fig.  4)  and  I  tested  one  of  these  ideas,  namely  whether  lrec and  
ER-bound  ribosomes  differ  in  their  protein  composition.  We  used  one- dimensiunal  sodium  
dodecyl  sulfate  (SDS)  polyacrylamide gel electrophore- sis  (PAGE) . Although  this method  did  
not resolve  all ribosomal  proteins,  we could not detect significant  differences  in  the 
protein  pattern  bctwee n  these two  ribosome  p   relations. Therefore,  we dislâvored  the  
idea that sequestra-
tion  to  the  ER  of  mRNAs  coding  for  secretory  protcins  occmrs  via  distinct
features of ER-bound  ribosomes.
Instead, we  hypothesized  in  1971,  that selection  of  mRNA  to  the ER  mem- brane is not via 
direct binding of the mRNA itself, but rather via binding Of  its nascent  translation  product  
(3).  We  postulated  that all  mRNAs for secretory proteins  code  for  a  signatory  
amino-terminal  sequence  elemen t  that  is  re- cognized  by  a soluble  factor  that,  in  turn, 
 bInds  the nascent  chain-ribosome complex  to  the  ER  membrane   (Fig.  5).  We  also  
postulated  that  i ibosoine.s,

Gtinter  Blobel                                                  24Y


























Figure 4. David D.  Sabatini, 1970. The  Rockefeller Uliivci‘sity, New Yoi k.



free  or ER-bound,  are  indistinguishable and  that  they  cycle  beoveen  an  OR- bound and a 
cytosolic  pool. At this point,  there were only  a few sequences of secretory  proteins 
established  and  there was no  evidence  that  these  pi oteins share  a common  amino-terminal 
sequence  element. However,  it occurred  to us  that such  an aminmterminal  sequence  tag  might 
be a  transient  and  not  a permanent   feature  of   nascent   secretory   proteins.   Therefore, 
  we   had  no hesitation  to  publish  this  idea  (3).  Nevertheless,  our  proposals  at  this 
point were pure speculation  without any supporting evidence.
To  experimentally  test  the  predictions  of   this  hypothesis,  we  sought   to develop  a 
cell-free  system,  in which  protein  translation  and  protein  translo- cation across microsomal 
 membrane  vesicles was faithfully  recapitulated. We hoped  to  reconstitute  such  an  i,n rifro 
system  from  dehned  components.  To accomplish  this,  we  began  with  a series  of  
deconstruction  experiments.  We started with  polysomes.  Using puromycin  and high concentrations 
of salt, we isolated  functional   ribosomal  subunits   (4)  artd  mRNA  still  attached  to  its 
binding  proteins  (5,  6,  7).  Using  the  same  methods,  we  succeeded  in  disas- sembling  
rough  microsomes.  This yielded  a  virtually  mRNA-  and  ribosome- free  membrane  fraction  (8) 
.  We  also  isolated  ‘native’  small  ribosomal  sub- units  that  contained   translation   
initiation   factors.  These  initiation   factors could  be dissociated  as multi-subunit  
complexes  (9,  10) .  With  these  compo- nents in hand, we then attempted  to reconstruct a 
functional protein  transla- tion/translocation system from defined components.

248                                             PhysioAffff   or Medicitte  1999














Figure S. The signal  hypothesis  in its first version  (1971).  We  announced  diis idea iii a 
sympo- sium on Biomembranes in 1971  (3) and published it in the proceedings of this symposium. To 
us the idea was very appealing,  even  though  there was essentially  no evidence  for it. The 
signal se- quence  is indicated  by an  x and was predicted  to be  recognized  by a “binding  
factor”  that  me- diates  binding  to  the  ER  membrane.  The  signal sequence  was  not  
incticated  to  be  a  transient feature of the nascent protein, although it occurred  to us that 
it may no longer be present in  the mature secreted protein.  After compleuon of translocation  the 
ribosome was predicted  to be dis• sociated into subunits that would join a cytoplasmic pool. No 
specific proposals were yet made as to how the chain crosses the membrane. From Blobel  and 
Sabatini  (3) , with permission.





While  these deconstruction experiments were going on,  two important pa- pers  appeared  in  1972  
from  the  laboratories  of  Philip  Leder  (11)  and  of Cesar  Milstein  (12) .  These  
investigators  studied  translation  of  poly(A)  con- taining mRNAs from myeloma cells (containing 
primarily mRNA for the light chain of IgG) in a cell-free system  that lacked microsomal  vesicles. 
The   trans- lation  yielded  one  major product  that was larger  by  about 2—3  kDalton  than the 
mature  light chain of IgG  which was secreted from  the myeloma cells. By peptide  mapping  of  
the radioactively  labeled  translation  product  they could sh riw  that  it contained  an 
extension  located at the amino  terminus.  A  partial sequence  of  this  amino-terminal  
extension  was  subsequently  established  by Schechter  and colleagues  (13)  and  revealed  a  
preponderance  of  hydropho- bic residues.
Could  this additional  peptide function  as the determinant  for attachment to the ER  and 
subsequent  translocation  across the ER,  as we had postulated in 1971? Or  was  the larger form 
the result of  an itt vitro translation artifact, e.g., perhaps the consequence  of  an erroneous  
upstream  initiation?  Interestingly, irt  vitro completion  of nascent chains in isolated rough 
microsomes of myelo- ma cells yielded  the  mature light chain  and not  the larger form  (12) . 
There- fore,  it was suggested  that  the microsomal  rneinbiancs  might contain  a pro- tease  
that converts  the larger form into the mature form of  the light chain of IgG  by removing  its 
amino-terminal extension  (l2).

Printer  Blobel                                                         249





















Figure 6. Bernhard Dobber- stein, 1975. The Rockefeller University, New York.


SIGNAL PEPTIDASE
Together with Bernhard Dobberstein  (Fig. 6), we succeeded  in reproducing
(14)  the results of  Leder's and Milstein's laboratories.  We translated poly(A) containing  mRNA  
from  myeloma  cells  in  a  cell-free  translation  system  that was reconstructed  from 
heterologous components.  We obtained  a major  po- lypeptide  (Fig.  7,  lane  1)  that  was  
larger  by  about  three  kDalton  than  the mature  form  of  the  light  chain  that  was 
secreted  from  these  myeloma  cells (Fig. 7, lane 2).










Figure 7. Synthesis of the large  (pLi)  and mature  (mLi) form of  the light chain of IgG. °^S-me- 
ihionine-labeled proteins were separated by SDKPAGE and visualized by autoradiography. Lane 1, 
translation  products of polet^) containing mRNAs isglatcd from myeloma cells; lane 2, matu- re 
light chains secreted from myeloma cells; lane 3, in vitro readout of polysomes  (“detached po- 
lysomes”) prepared by detergent from isolated rough microsomes of myeloma cells. From Blobel and 
Dobberstein  tie) with permission.

250                                             Physiology or Mr.dicine  1999

To address  the question  of  whether  the  larger  form  of  the Igl    light chain
= w‹is     rhysiologica    rrecursor  of’ the  mature  chain  or  an  tit  vitro ai tifact,  we
were  guided by  three conjectures.  First,  the  processing  enzyme  (subsequent- ly  ter incd  
signal  peptidase)  is a  membrane-associated rrotcase,  as  liacl  been postulated  by Milstein  
and co-workers  ( 12). Therefore,  this enzyme might  be
s‹›luliilizcd  when  isolated  rough  microsomes  arc  treated  with  detergent;  the ‘detached’  
polysomes  that could  subsequently  be  sedimented  by  ccntrifug•a- tion  might  therefore  be  
fi ee  of   signal  peptidase.  Second,  as  the  .signal  .se- qucncc  was presumed  to mediate  
the attachment  of  the ribosome  to  the cis- side  of  the  membrane  (see  Fig.  .5) ,  the  
signal  rer•'^ase  activity  is  likely  as-
sociated  with  the  trans-side  of  the microsomal  membranc.  This would  assure
that  signal  sequence  removal  occurs  only  after signal  sequence-mediatecl  at- tachment  on  
the cis-side  of  the  membrane.  Third,  alter signal  sequence-me- diated  attachment   to  the  
membrane   the  signal  sequence  would  be  ti ans- 1c›cated  across  the  membrane  and  thereby  
gain  access  to its  trans-side.  "J“licre it would  be cleaved  ‘co-trans1ationally’ and  
‘co-translocationally’, i.e., during Hut  n‹it  after  translation  and   translocation  were  
c‹xnpleted.  1-Ience,  in  ‘tlc- tached  polysomes’,  the  ribosomes  near  the  S’  end  of  the  
mRNA  might  con- tain  nascent  chains  with  a  signal  sequence.  In  ct›ntrast,   i ibosomes  
lticatecl
near  the t3’ end    of   the mRNA should contain  nascent chains that already  had their signa   
reptile removed  (see  model  in Fig. 8).
In agrccment  with these assumptions,  we observed  ( l4)   that nascent chains
present in detached polysomes can be completed  in a cell-free  translation  sys- tem   (iii  the  
presence  of  ate  initiation   ilihibitor   to  prevent  re-initiation)  tc› yield  both  the 
larger and  the mature forms of  the light chain  (Fig. 7, lane 3). Moreover,  in a time coui se 
experiment, we observed  that nascent chains lack-












Figure  8.  The   l97ii  version  o(’ the  signal  hypothesis.  Signal  pepticlasc,  not  
inrlicated  here  w:i.s postulated  to  be  associated  widi  t)ie  trans  side  of  the  
microsomal  membrane.  When  the  mem- brane  is solubiliZed  by detergent,  signal  peptidase  
would  be absent in isolated  detached  polyso- mt•s. ‘f'hc  det;iclirrl  polysomes sfi‹›iiltl  
txirit:tin  lwr› kiri‹ls uf  chains:  i hu.se still r‹›iilaitiing  tlit•ir .sig- ial   pcptidc at  
the N-terminus and those with  their signal peptide cleaved off  by signal peptidase. If’ sign.il  
peptide  cleavage  occrtrs  during  translocation  then  thosc  ribosomes  ncar  the 3’  end  of‘ 
rrlRh'A slioiilrl  t:ontain  chains without  signal per"cle and  those  near  the .’   encl of’ 
rnRNA slioiilrl
still t:uiitaiii  their signal pcpti‹le. lii  a time course: of  ti’an.station  onc  should  
thci‘cfoi‘c  fii'st sec  the
completion  of’ chains that  huve  lo.st  their  signal  peptide and  then  the completion  or’ 
chains  thut
.still  c‹intnin  their’ signal  PePtidc.

251

ing  a  signal  peptide  were  completed  first,  followed  by  the  completion  of chains still 
containing  their signal  peptide  (Fig. 9).  These  results  supported the  notion  that  
microsomal  ribosomes  near  the  3’end  of  mRNA  contained nascent  chains  from  which  the  
signal  sequence  had  already  been  removed, co-trans1ationally  and  co-translocationally.  In  
contrast,  ribosomes  near  the 5’end  still  contained  their  signal  sequence.  This  signal  
sequence  could  no longer be cleaved as the signal  peptidase  had  been removed during  the pre- 
paration  of  the  ‘detached  polysomes’.  These  ‘readout’  data  with  ‘detached polys‹iines’  
suggested  that a completed larger form of  the light chain of IgG  is indeed an  tn witro 
artifact. Zn vivo, the signal peptide is cleaved off  the nascent chain  but  cannot  be  cleaved  
off   the  completed  chain.  Hence,  the  complete.d larger  form  is not a physiological  
precursor  of  the  mature  form  of  the light chain.

RECONSTITUTION OF CO-TRANSNATIONAL TRANSLOCATION
The  data on signal  sequence  removal  provided  us with  important  clues for our  subsequent  
attempts  to reconstitute  translation  and  translocation  of  the light chain of IgG. In view of  
the signal hypothesis,  it appeared unlikely  that the larger form would be  
translocation-competent. That is, cell free synthesis of  the comrleted larger form in the absence 
of  membranes followed by post-
translational  incubation  of  the reaction  with  microsomal  membrane  vesicles
was  unlikely  to  yield  translocation  and  conversion  of  the  larger  form  to  the mature 
form. Indeed, we found that the post-translational addition of micro- somal vesicles to the in 
ri/ro translation reaction containing  the larger li›rm of’ the light chain of IgG  did not yield 
conversion  to the mature form.
At this point, we experienced an extremely frustrating period in our efforts to reconstitute 
co-translational translocation. All microsomal vesicle  prepara- tions  that  we  prepared  from  
several  tissues  of   the  usual  laboratory  animals (mice, rats, chicken, guinea pigs, pigeons 
and rabbits)  severely  inhibited  the synthesis  of  the light chain of IgG  in  the  translation  
reaction.  As  translation









Figure 9. Time course of readout of  “detnched polysomes”  (see Figs 7 and fi) from myeloma cells 
in  a  cell-free  translation  system.  *°S-methionine-labeled  proteins were  separated  by  
SDS-PAGE and vistialixed  by radioautography. Lane  1, major  in vitro translation  pi’‹idiicLs of  
poly(A)  contai- ning  mRNAs  from  myeloma  cells;  lane  2,  light  chains   serretr•rl   from  
myeloma  relI.s;  lanes   I , 6,9,18,  reaclout  products from  detached  polysomes  after  1, 6,  
9  and  18 min  of  incubation  in  a translation  system  in  the  rresence  of  an  inhibitor  of 
 initiation.  From  Blobel  and  Dobberstein
(14), with permission.

252                                             Physiology  or Medline  1999

was completely  inhibited  by the added microsomal  membranes,  we were  not able to detect  
translation-coupled translocation  across these membranes.
A way out of this dilemma came in December of 1974. The  chance arose to prepare  and  to  test yet 
another  rough  microsome  preparation  from  yet  an- other source: canine  pancreas.  
Surprisingly,  addition  of  canine  pancreas  mi- crosomal  membranes  to the translation  
reaction  did not inhibit translation!! And, indeed, analysis of  the translation products by 
SDS-PAGE showed  that in the co-translationaI  presence  of  microsomal  vehicles  most of  the  
light chain was  synthesized  in  its mature  form  (Fig.1fi,  lane  3)  (15).  This strongly  sug- 
gested  that  the  signal  sequence  of  the  nascent  chain  engaged  the  translo- cation 
machinery of  the membrane and gained access to signal peptidase on the tran+side of  the membrane. 
The  mature chain co-sedimented with the ve- sicles, suggesting  that it was segregated within  the 
vesicle lumen.





















Figure  10. Reconstitution of  translocation. Poly(A)  containing  mRNA  form rabbit  reticulocytes 
(coding  primarily  for  the  two globin chains)  and from  myeloma cells (coding  primarily  for  
the pre-light  chain  if  IgG)  were  translated  in  the  absence  or  presence  of  canine  
pancreas  rough microsomes.  Aliquots were post-translationally incubated  in the absence or 
presence of protease. '⁵S-methionine-labeled  translation  products were separated  by SDS-PAGE  
and  visualized  by  ra- dioautography. Note  that  the mature  light chain  is synthesized  only  
in the co-translational pre- sence  of  microsomes  and is protected  from  protease.  From  Blobel 
 and  I3obberstein  (l5), with permission.

As a control, we also translated  rabbit reticulocyte mRNA (15). Translation of  this mRNA yielded  
primarily  the  two globin chains  (Fig. 10, lane  I).  The two globin  chains are cytosolic  
proteins and  therefore  should  not  contain  a

iSMnter  Blobel                                                 253

signal sequence for translocation into the ER  lumen. Moreover,  there should not  be any 
shortening of the  two globin chains as a result of signal peptidase cleavage  in  the  
co-translational  presence  of  pancreas  microsomal  vesicles. Indeed,  we  did  not  observe  
conversion  to  smaller  forms  of  the  two  globin chains  in  the  co-trans1ationa1 presence  of 
 microsomal  membranes  (Fig 10, lane 3). Unexpectedly, however, the  two globin chains 
co-sedimented with the microsomal  vesicles.  Could  co-sedimentation   result  from  
co-translationa1 segregation  of  the  two globin  chains  into  the  lumen  of  the  ER?  Or  was 
co- sedimentation of the two globin chains with the  microsomal vesicles the con- sequence  of  
non-specific  binding  of  the  newly synthesized  globin  chains  to the cis-side of the vesicle 
membrane rather than of translocation  to the trans- side of  the  vesicle  membrane,  i.e., into 
the vesicle lumen. To distinguish  be- tween  these  possibilities,  we  carried  out  
post-translational  incubation  with proteolytic enzymes. We had  shown earlier  (16)  that 
membranes of microso- mal vesicles  are sealed  in such  a way  that  they  protect  the content  
proteins from attack by externally added proteolytic enzymes while allowing proteoly- sis  of  
surface-bound  proteins  and  even  detachment  of  ribosomes.  Hence, post-translational 
incubation with proteolytic enzymes should distinguish  be- tween  proteins bound  to the surface  
of microsomal vesicles and  those segre- gated in the vesicle lumen. We found that the two globin 
chains were largely degraded by post-translationally added proteases, regardless of whether trans- 
lation was carried out in the absence of vesicles  (Fig. 10, lane 2) or  in the pre- sence of 
vesicles  (Fig. 10, lane 4).
Most importantly,  post-translational proteolysis  of  the  translation  reaction
that was carried  out in  the presence of microsomal  vesicles yielded degrada- tion of the  larger 
form of the light chain but not the mature form of the light chain  (Fig. 10, lane 4). These  
results suggested  that even  in  the  presence of microsomal  membranes  some  of  the  nascent  
chains  failed  to  engage  the translocation   machinery  of  the  membrane,  never  gained  
access  to  signal peptidase  on  the  trans-side  of  the  vesicles and  therefore  were  
completed  in the  translation  reaction  as larger  forms.  Having  not  been  translocated,  the 
larger forms were degraded  by added proteolytic enzymes.
Together, these data strongly suggested  that we had succeeded in recapitu- lating  the  initial  
events  in  the  secretory  pathway  in  an  in  vitro system.  This opened  the way for  
biochemical  analysis of  protein  translocation  across  the ER.  These  experiments  marked  the  
beginning  of  molecular  cell  biology. Successful  to vitro reconstitution  was subsequently  
achieved  for  many other membrane-coupled reactions.

AN EXPANDED SIGNAL HWOTHESIS
The   results  of  the  reconstitution  experiments  encouraged   us  to  further elaborate  the 
simple model of 1971  (Fig. 5).  The  most significant additional postulate  was  that  protein  
transport  across  the  microsomal  membrane  pro- ceeds through a protein-conducting channel  
(Fig. 11)  (14). The  protein-con- ducting channel was envisaged to consist of intergral membrane  
protein sub-

PhysiokgJ  or ñfvdicine  1999




























Figure 11. Signal hypolesis 19¥5. Proposal  of a proRin<onducting channel  (PCC). The PCC wn 
envisaged to be assembled fom   integral membrane proteins The signal sequence,coopera- tively wit  
  the ribosome, waa proposed to gate open the channel, with the ribosome attaching to the channel. 
This arrangement provided for an alignment of a protein<onducting tunnel in the large ribosomal 
subunit with the protein-conducting channel in the membmne, allowing  trans• lation<oupled  
(c‹>translational)  aanslocation  of  the chain  across  ie     membrane  (see  below (Fig. 46) 
showing  relevnt data obtained mentp<wo years later). This proposal became one of the most 
controversial aspects of the signal hypotheés. Other proposals suggested a direct trans- fer of the 
nanent protein acroa the lipid bilayer. From Blobel and Dobbemtein  (14), with per-

unio. The signal sequence and the ribosome were proposed to bind to these subunit  and  to assemble 
 them  into  an  aqueous  channel   (Fig.  11)  allowing transport of Ie    chain in an aqueous 
conduit acrom the membrane. The con- cept of a protein-conducting channel remained controversial 
for many yearn until  definitive  evidence  for it was provided  by  electrophyaiological experi- 
ment in 1991  (17). In  ie    intervening  15 years, alRrnative hypotheses  that proposed   
transfer   of   secretory   proteins   acrov   ie     membrane   direc£y through   the  lipid  
bilayer,  unassisted  by  proRins,  flourished  and  became widely accepted.

ClMnter  Blobel                                                255

We also suggested  that integral membrane  proteins that experience a par- tial  translocation  of  
a segment  of  the  nascent  chain  to  the  trans-side  of  the membrane might use a signal 
sequence  to initiate translocation.
Finally, we predicted that the translocation of proteins across other cellular membranes,  e.g.,  
import  of  cytoplasmically synthesized  proteins  into  mito- chondria, is mediated by a signal 
sequence that would be distinct from that of a secretory protein.


MEMBRANE  PROTEIN ASSEMBLY
To  test whether  an integral  membrane  protein  does,  in fact,  use  a signal  se- quence  to  
translocate  a domain  to  the  trans-side  of  the  ER, we  studied  the glycoprotein of the 
vesicular stomatitis virus (G protein of VSV)  (18, 19). This protein  is  part  of  the  viral  
membrane  and  contains  an  amino-terminal do- main exposed on  the surface of the viral membrane, 
a single transmembrane segment and  a carboxy-terminal domain  that interacts with  the  viral 
capsid. To achieve this topology in the viral membrane, the amino — terminal domain of the G 
protein must be translocated  to the trans-side of the ER, whereas the carboxy-terminal domain  
needs  to  remain  untranslocated on  the  cis-side  of the ER.
To  accomplish  this  asymmetric  integration  into  the  ER  membrane,  we reasoned  that  a  
signal  sequence,  indistinguishable from  those  of  secretory proteins, might initiate the 
translocation  process in the ER. An additional se- quence,  that we  termed  ‘stop-transfer’ 
sequence,  would  then  terminate  the translocation  process.  We speculated  that  the 
stop-transfer  sequence  would open the channel laterally,  thereby allowing displacement of the 
stop-transfer sequence from  the aqueous protein-conducting channel  to the  lipid bilayer. The  
stop-transfer sequence would then become the tran+membrane segment that is embedded in the lipid 
bilayer. The  carboxy-terminal remainder of the protein  would  not  be  translocated,  and  would  
remain  on  the cis-side  of  the membrane  (see Fig. 12).
It  should  be  remembered   that  in  those  days  there  were  still  no   pure mRNAs available  
that could be readily obtained by in  vitro transcription from recombinant DNA. All we could do was 
to isolate total mRNA from cells or  tis- sues that contained major species of mRNA whose 
translation would give rise to  major  and  readily detectable  translation  products.  The  
VSV-infected  cell was a good model system as most of the  total mRNA from these infected cells 
coded for VSV proteins.  Of  these,  the  G protein  is the  largest  and  is readily identifiable  
on  the  basis of  its  migration  in  SDS-PAGE.  These  experiments were done in collaboration  
with Harvey Lodish's laboratory at MIT, particu- larly his graduate student Flora Katz, and by a 
graduate student in our labo- ratory, Vishwanath  (‘Vishu’)  Lingappa  (Fig. 13).
As expected,  translation  of  mRNA from  VSV-infected  cells yielded  the  G protein  and  other  
VSV  proteins  (Fig.  14,  lane  1,  arrow  pointing  to  G  ). However, contrary to our 
expectation, in the co-translational presence of the

256                                 Ph sioto     or Media  1999













Figure 12. Model for catalysed  integration into the lipid bilayer of integral membrane proteins. 
The  proposal  that  the  initial  steps  in  the  integration  of  membrane  proteins are  the  
same  as those for the translocation of secretory  proteins was made already in the 1975 version of 
the sig- nal hypothesis  Translocation  across the protein-conducting channel  (PC.C) was envisaged 
 to be initiated  by a signal sequence, as in  the case o£secretory proteins. A stop-transfer 
sequence,  cor- responding  to the trans-membrane segment of the translocating chain would  be 
recognized  by the PCC and open  it laterally. The trans-membrane segment  would  8ien  be 
displaced  from  the aqueous PCC,  to the lipid bilayer, resulting in  the closure of  the PCC  and 
the integration  of  the nascent chain into the lipid bilayer.

microsomal  vesicles,  at least half oGf  the      protein molecules appeared  to be
synthesized  as a  Jager form  (Fig.  14,  lane  3,  arrow  pointing  to GJ).  Rather than having 
cleaved off a putative signal sequence,  the membranes appeared
to have added something tGo the     protein. We were very puzzled by this result
until it occurred  to us that the canine microsomal  vesicles might contain  ac-
















Figure  l3.  Vishwanath  (Vishu) Lingappa, 1979. The  Rocke- feller University, New Vork.

sprinter  Blobel


Si                                               TMS
257
















Figure  14.  Membrane  assembly  ix its     Poly(A)  containing  mRNA from VSV-infected  cells was 
ti'anslated in the absence or presence oTcaninc pancreas microsomal membranes. Equal aliquots were 
post-translationally incubated in the absence or presence of protease. The '*’S-methionine- labeled 
translation  products were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by radioautography. Gg, triislaiion 
 product  in  the absence of membranes; it still contains  the aininmterininal signal se- quence; 
G„   translation  product  in  the  presence  of microsomes;  it is core-glycosylated and has 1o5t 
its signal sequence; GjAC, a form of G,  that has lost its vesicle-exposed carboxy-terminal tuil 
during  post-translational proteolysis.  From Katz,  zt aL  (18)  and Lingappa,  •t ct   (19), with 
 per-




meated oligosaccharides and oligosaccharidyl transferase to carry out co-trans- locational  
core-glycosylation of  the G  protein. The added  core sugars might more than compensate in mass 
for the loss of  a signal sequence and therefore result  in  a  slower  migration  in  SDS-PAGE.  
Biochemical  characterization  of both   the  G„   and  the  G,    species  indeed  confirmed   
that  G     contained   an amino-terminal signal sequence that was structurally and functionally 
equiva- lent to those of secretory  proteins  (18, 19). The GJ  species had lost its signal 
sequence and had acquired core sugars. Moreover,  post-translational proteo- lysis experiments 
showed complete digestion of  G   whereas GJ  was converted to a slightly smaller form  (Fig. 14, 
lane 4). This smaller form represented G, that  had  lost  its  carboxy-terminal  tail.  These  
post-translational  proteolysis
data  suggested   thatGthe        protein  had  been  correctly  integrated  into  the
microsomal  vesicles!! As iti two, the bulky amino-terminal domain was trans- located  to the  
trans-side  of  the membrane,  whereas  the smaller  carboxy-ter- minal domain of about 40 amino 
acid residues  remained  untraiislocated on the ciwide of the membrane.
Microsomal  vesicles  were  not  only  able  to  translocate  secretory  proteins. They  were  also 
 competent  to  asymmetrically  integrate  membrane  proteins and to core glycosylate  them! These 
results demonstrated  that the asymmetric integration of membrane proteins is not a spontaneous 
event but is catalyzed in the ER, presumably by the same machinery that mediates the translocation 
of secretory proteins.

258                               PAy*ofody  or Medicim  1999

THE  SIGNAL RECOGNITION  PARTICLE
Our  next  goal  now  was  to  deconstruct  the  translocation  machinery  of  the microsomes into 
liinctional components.  It had been shown  that a salt wash of microsomal vesicles removes an 
activity that is required for translocation of secretory  proteins.  Such  salt  washed  microsomal 
 vesicles  were  incapable  of co-translational translocation  of secretory proteins that were 
synthesized  in a wheat  germ  cell-free  translation  system.  Addition  of  the salt  wash  to  
the  in vitro translocation system containing salt-washed microsomal vesicles restored their  
translocation  activity  (20).  These  data  suggested  that  salt  extracted  a 
membrane-associated activity that is required for protein translocation. Peter Walter (shown in an 
Einsteinian pose in Fig. 15), a graduate student in the la- boratory, discovered that the activity 
of the salt wash vanished after only a few hours of storage at 0”G. This frustrated  all his 
attempts  to purify  this activity until  he  made  the  impormnt  discovery  that  minute  
concentrations  of  the non-ionic  detergent  Nikkol  stabilized  the  activity.  We  reasoned  
that Nikkol protected  a hydrophobic site of the activity,  perhaps  the binding site for  the 
hydrophobic  signal  sequence.  Incorporating  the  hydrophobic-site-idea into his purification  
protocol, he was able to rapidly purify the activity. The activi- ty sedimented  at about  lls   
and by SDS-PAGE consisted of six proteins  (21). Based on an entensive analysis of its function  
(22, 23, 24) we termed  the pro- tein complex  “signal recognition protein” (SRP) .



















Figure IN. Peter Walter, 1980. The Rockefeller  University, Ne\v York. Obviously inspired here by 
the famous photo of Einstein.

259

It  took  us another  two  years  before  we  realized  that  the  purified  activity also 
contained a 7S RNA (25)! We then changed  the name to signal recogni- tion particle, leaving the 
acronym SRP intact. A considerable amount of work in  both  Peter walter's  arid  Bernhard  
Dobberstein's  laboratory  has led  to a functional  and  structural  model  for  the SRP and  to  
the discovery of  an  in- teresting homolog in bacteria (Fig. 16)  (26) .
Functional  analyses (22, 23, 24) revealed  that canine pancreas SRP bound with low affinity to 
wheat germ ribosomes. However, SRP bound with high af- finity,  when wheat germ  ribosomes wete 
programmed  with  a mRNA  coding for a secretory protein  (bovine preprolactin), not when 
programmed  with a mRNA coding for cytosolic  proteins, such as the globin chains. Also, it’ trans- 
lation  was carried out in  the presence  of hydroxy-leucine instead of leucine, there was greatly 
reduced binding of SRP. As the signal sequence for prepro- lactin is rich in leucine, this result 
suggested that SRP interacted directly with the signal sequence. Moreover, the interaction of SRP 
caused a translation ar-


























Figure 10. Signal Reciignitirin  Partic*• t*m) in mammalian cells and in bacteria. Both SRPs con- 
tain  an  RNA and proteins.  The mammalian  SRP contains  s'tx  proteins of  indicated  in‹›Lwe  in 
kDaTu»tr. THe bacteria! SRI' contain a d\ortcr RNA and a single protein  (ffh, fif    
f‹›ur-hnmnIng). FrwmWaceranrQohnnon(26).wiipxmiAon.

260                                             Phjsiolo      or  ñfedtcirm  1.999

rt:st when  ribosomes were  programmed with a mRNA for a se‹‘r‹•tt›ry  pi‘Otein, but not when  
programmed  with mR    A for cytos‹ilic [ir‹›tcins. The  size of  the arrested  nascen t  secretory 
 protein  ctii’resp‹xiiIctl  tO about  70 amino  acid  re- sidues,  suggesting  that  binding  of  
the signal sequence  occurred  after  the sig- nal sequence Eva.s fully expo.scd  ftillt›wing  exit 
from  the tunnel  in  the large  ri- bosomal  subunit  (Fit;.  17) .  When  microsomal  membranes 
were added,  tht rt• was  relcast•  r›f  the  ti anslation  arrest,  suggesting  that  the  ER  
membrane  ct›n- tains an SRP rcccpt‹›r  that is capable of  releasing SRP-mediated  transIatit›n  
ar- rt•st.
We found  that the  izi  tiiiro assembled  polys‹wnes  syntlicsixing  secretor y pro- teins,  but  
not  those  synthesizing  cytosolic  proteins,  found  to  SRP-depleted (saJ t-washed)  microsomes, 
 but on ly  in  the presence of  SRP.  Binding was abo- lished when  SRP  was pretrt•atetl  with 
N-ethyl  maleimide.
These data str‹›ngly supported  the notion  that  protein  translocation  arr‹iss the ER  is a 
rcrt:pt‹›i -iiiciliatcd event and ruled out proposals  that chain  trans- location  r›ccurs 
spontaneously  and  unassisted  by proteins.
The   discox'ery  of   the  signal  recognition   particle  was  an  iinptir0int  mile- stone  in  
the  molecular  analysis  of  protein  traiislot-atit›ii  across  the  ER  mem- brane.  I is  
function  corresponded   to  that  r›f  the  “bin‹1ing  factor’  whose  ex- istence  had been  
predicted  in  1971  (s‹:t  Fib. Ja). It was  the first component  of any  of   thc  cellii lar  
membrane    tFñIislucation  systems   that  was  isolated   and charactcriz.ed. It pr‹›viitt•d  
str‹nig  stupor t for the predictions made in  the sig- nal  hypt›thesis.















SRP


£igurc  17.  Recogri iu‹›n  of  the sign:il sequence  by  the Signal  Recogu iuon  Particle  (SRP). 
SRP 'ill is :i CTPase  and  is  therefore  marked  Ci.  As s‹ion  as  the  signal  scquen ee  h*s 
einei yt•d  from  ihe large  rilxisom ml  subunit, SRP can  bind  to it.

G  nter  Blabel                                                   261



















Figure 18. Reid Gilmore, 1585. The Rockefeller University, New York.


SRPRECEPTOR
Reid Gilmore, a postdoctoral  fellow in our laboratory  (Fig. 18)  used  the abi- lity  of   
salt-washed   microsomal   membranes   to  release   the  SRP-mediated elongation  arrest  of  the  
synthesis of  secretory  proteins  as an  assay  to follow







cytosol



lumen



Figure  19. The SRP receptor  is a heterodimer  of  two GTPases;  the  beta .subunit  is an  
integral membrane  protein and the alpha subunit a peripheral membrane protein.

262                                           Physiolo      or  Medicine  1 g99

the  purification  of  this  activity.  Together  with  the  membrane's  signal  pep- tidase  (see  
below),  the arrest-releasing activity  could  be solubilized  by  treat- ment  of  the  
salt-washed  microsomal  membranes  with  non-ionic  detergent and  moderate  salt  concentrations. 
 The  purified  SRP  receptor  consisted  of two  subunits,  a  larger  subunit  and  a  smaller  
subunit   (27—31).  The  larger subunit  is a  peripheral membrane protein  whereas  the smaller 
subunit  is an integral membrane protein with one transmembrane  segment. Both proteins were shown  
to be GTP  binding  proteins  (30,  31)  (Fig.  19). SRP and SRP re- ceptor interact with each 
other (32)  (Fig. 20). The  SRP  receptor is located ex- clusively  to  the ER  (including  the  
outer  nuclear  envelope)  and is present  in the  ER  in  sub-stoichiometric  quantities  relative 
 to  membrane-bound  ribo- somes (27) . This suggested that the SRP-SRP receptor interaction  is 
transient in  nature. It serves in  the targeting but not in the subsequent  translocation  of the 
chain.
With  the  discovery  of  the  SRP  and  its  cognate  SRP receptor,  the  compo-
nents  involved  in  signal  sequence  recognition  and  targeting  to  the  ER  had been  
isolated.















SRP

SRP receptor






cytosol


lumen




Figure 20. The  ribosome/nascent chain/SRP complex  binds to the SRP  receptor in the ER.

Enter Blobel

SIGNAL PEPTIDASE
The signal peptidase  cleavage site of nascent  secretory  proteins is accessible to  signal  
peptidase  only  on  the  trans-side  of  the  membrane  (see  above). Therefore,  signal  sequence 
 cleavage  is dependent  on  translocation. Robert jackson  in  our  laboratory  developed  a  
translocation-independent assay  for signal  peptide  cleavage.  He  solubilized  the  microsomal  
signal  peptidase  by detergent. Using an in vitro synthesized presecretory protein as a substrate 
he demonstrated correct endoproteolytic removal of  the signal sequence  by the detergent form of 
the enzyme  (33) .
The solubilized microsomal signal peptidase was purified by Emily Evans, a graduate student in our 
laboratory  (Fig. 21). The purification  of this enzyme was a major challenge as its activity 
required the presence or lipids and deter- gents throughout all purificauon procedures. Omission of 
lipids led to rapid inactivation  of the enzyme. Surprisingly,  the purified microsomal  signal 
pep- tidase  turned  out  to  be  a complex  of five  non-identical  subunits  (34)  (Fig. 22), all 
of which are integral membrane proteins (35, 36, 37).
With the SRP receptor and signal peptidase, two components of the micro- somal  membrane  that 
could  be solubilized  by detergents  and assayed  inde- pendently of intact vesicles and of 
translocation, had been purified. Our next goal  was  to  purify  the  putative  protein-conducting 
 channel.  The  proteins making up such a channel were likely  to be integral membrane  proteins. 
To purify  them  from  other  membrane  proteins  required  detergent  solubiliza- tion.  However,  
unlike  SRP receptor  and  signal  peptidase,  channel  proteins require reconstitution into 
proteoliposomes to unambiguously  assay their ac-

















Figure 21. Emily Evans, 1986. The Rockefeller University, New York.

264                                             Physiology  or  Medicine  1999






























Figure 22. Purification  of  mammalian  signal  peptidase,  a pentamcric  complex  of integral  
mem- brane  proteins. Band 2 represen u  the glycosylated  and non-glycosylated form of  the same  
poly- pepude. From Evans, et nf.  (34), with permission.


RECONSTITUTION OF TRANSLOCATION-ACTIVE PROTEOLIPOSOMES
The  reconstitution of  translocauon-active  proteoliposomes had  been  a high priority on our 
agenda for quite some  time before Christopher Nicchitta  (Fig. 23) joined our laboratory as a 
postdoctoral fellow. However,  many attempts by the most talented people in our laboratory had 
failed  to achieve  this goal. We had  arriYed  at  the  conclusion   that  reconstitution,  if  at 
 all  possible,  would probably  occur with very low ef£ciency.  Presumably,  after detergent 
solubili- zauon  and  removal  of  the  detergent  to  form  proteoliposomes,  the  compo- nents  
that are required  for co-translationa1  translocation  are not  necessarily reconstituted   in  
the  asymmetric   orientation   and  in  the  stoichiometry   in which  they  exist  in  the  
microsomal  vesicles.  Instead,  reconstituted  proteoli-

Printer  Blobel
265




















Figure 23. Christopher Nicchitta, 1989. The  Rocke- feller University,  New York.


posomes may contain  these proteins in a scrambled  fashion  and in non-stoi- chiometric amounts  
rendering  them  inefficient  or inactive  in  translocation. The  SRP  receptor,  the  signal  
peptidase  complex,  or  the constituents  of  the protein-conducting channel  and perhaps other 
components  that participate in  protein  translocation  may  not regain  their  asymmetric  
orientation  in  the reconstituted proteoliposome vesicles. Signal peptidase and the SRP receptor, 
for example,  exhibit  their  active  sites in opposite  orientations,  on  the  trans- side and on 
the cis-side of  the vesicles,  respectively.
Through  careful choice of detergents  and of other conditions  (pH  as well as salt- and detergent 
 concentrations)  we  were  able  to obtain  translocation- competent  proteoliposomes (38)  (Fig. 
24).
These experiments  were  seminal.  They  showed  that after complete  deter- gent  solubilization  
of  microsomal   membranes,   the  detergent  forms  of  in- tegral  membrane  proteins  required  
for  protein  translocation,  including  a putative  protein-conducting  channel,  could  be  
reconstituted   in  an  active form, This paved the way for the isolation of the protein-conducting 
channel. It also allowed the subsequent  reconstitution of  translocation-active proteoli- posomes 
from purified components.

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL DETECTION OF THE PROTEIN-
CONDUCTING CHANNEL
We first proposed  the concept of a protein-conducting channel  (PCC)  made up of integral membrane 
proteins in 1975 (14). However, it remained a high- ly  controversial   idea,  particularly   as  
there  was  no  direct  evidence   for  it. Alternative  models of protein  translocation  directly 
 through  the lipid bilayer

266                                        Physiolo      or Media:inc  1999


Microsomes            *PioteoliposomeN



pPL
PL

Vesicles PRCIT. K TX-t00


Figure  24. Rcconstitution of protein  translocation  activity  into pruteoliposoines. Comparison  
of protein  translocation  activity  of  microsomes  and  reconstituted  proteolipusomen.  pPL,  
preprn- lactin; PL,  prolactin; Prot. K, proteinase R   TX-100,  the non-ionic detergent Triton  
X-100.  From Nicchitta and Blobel  (38) , with rermission.

flourished  (39,  40) . In  1985, we showed  (41)  that nasccnt  chains in  the pru- cess of  
translocatirin  are  accessible  to  aqueous  perturbants.  Although  these data were  consistent  
with  an  aqueous  PCC,  they  could  not  rule  out  that  an aqueous environment was creatcd 
transiently  by the hydrophilic  head groups of the lipids rather  than proteins forming such an 
aqueous channel.
Although  electrophysiology  was  a  standard  approach  for  identifying  and
characterizing ion-conducting channels, it had never been applied  to the de- tection  and 
characterization of  any protein-conducting chanricls. It was diffi- cult  to  predict  how  such  
channels  would  behavc  electrtiphysiologically.  We had postulated  that they would be ripened 
and closed for  each  protein  trans- location event (14). Moreover, we reasoned that the 
conductance  of a protein across  the channel  is unlikely  to be accompanied  by a significant  
co-conduc- tance of ions or small molecules. If  this were the case, it would  be difficult  to 
maintain  the  distinct  composition  of  ions  (particularly  calcium)  and  small molecules  in  
the ER  lumen,  the  ‘reticuloplasm’, as compared  to  that  in  the cytoplasm. PCCs are likely  to 
be closed when  they are not conducting  a poly- peptide chain. Moreover,  they are most likely 
designed  to prevent  the ct›-con- ductir›n  c›f ions when  they are  upened for and during  
translocation  of  a pro- tein.  Therefore,  it  was  not  clear  whether  PCCs  could  be  
revealed  at  all  by electrophysiological  measurements.   With   these  caveats  in  mind,  
Sanford Simon  (Fig.  25),  a  post-doctoral  fellow  in our  laboratory,  set out  on  a  most 
remarkble  and  exciting journey  into completely  uncharted  territory:  to ex- plore  PCCs  by  
electrophysiological  approaches.   These  experiments   were begun  in collaboration  wi^  J    
shua Zimmerberg  at NIH   (42).
Because  rough  microsomes  were  too  small  for  riatrh-rlamn  exrieriments.

Gn“inter  Blobel                                                         267














Figure 25. Sanford M. Simon, 1991. The Rockefeller University,  New York.


we decided  to use the planar lipid bilayer system developed  by Mueller ei al, in 1962  (43) . In  
this system,  vesicles are fused to a planar bilayer  that  is formed in a hole of a partition 
separating  two chambers  (Fig. 26) . Addition of micro- somes to the cis-chamber yielded 
occasionally fusion of  a single rough  micro- somal vesicle as evidenced by an increase in 
conductance. Some preparations yielded  unitary  coriductanccs  of  20,  S.5, 80 and  115  pico 
Siemens  (pS)  iri  45 mM  potassium  glutamate   (42)  (Fig.  27).  By  electi on  microscopy  it  
can  be estimated   that   each   of   the   rough   microsomal   vesicles   contains   about   a 
hundred  membrane-bound ribosomes  (Fig.  28) .  Many  of  these  membrane- bound ribosomes are 
potentially in  the process of  conducting  a chain across the membrane.  Therefore,‘it  was 
unlikely  that  the few  unitary  conductances that  we  observed  were  related  to PCCs.  
Nevertheless,  the  fact  that we  could







•p§i•  -RM



Figure 26. Schematic  representation of  the bilayer systcrri. The   cis chamber is separated 
froiii  the trans chamber  by a  plastic  division  (thick  line)  with  a .small  circular  hole  
that  con tains a  planar lipid  bilayer.  Left, rough microsomes (RM) arc added  to the ’cis’ 
chamber. Kight, a single i ough microsomc  ha.s fused Cth    the  planar bilayer.  Frt›m Simon  and 
Blobel  ( l7)   , with  permission.

268                                              Physiology or  Medtcine  1999




























Figure 27. Channels in rough microsomes.  (A) Fusion of a single rough  microsome vesicle to the 
planar bilayer.  After 45 sec  there was a substantial increase in the fluctuations of the current 
(B). A segment  of the record of A from  600 to 800 sec is shown  in an expanded  time scale.  Four 
 di- stinct channel sizes can  be distinguished: 20 pS, 50 pS, 80 pS and  11 re pS. The function  
of these channels remains to be determined.  From Simon, ct a/.  (42), with permission.



detect  conductances  at  all  suggested  that  fusion  of  a  rough  microsomal  ve- sicle with  
the planar  bilayer  had  taken place.
If  the PCCs are indeed either closed or electrically silent when occupied  by nascent chains, 
would  it be possible  to reveal  these channels  by releasing  the nascent  chain  without  
closing  them?  Could  puromycin,  an  analog  of  amino acyl  tRNA  (Fig.  29)  achieve  this?  
The   peptidyl  transfcrase  activity  of   ribo- somes couples  puromycin  to  the 
carboxy-terminal end of  the  nascent chain. This  causes  chain  release  from  the  ribosome.  In 
  the  case  of  rough  micro- somes,  it  had  been  established  some  time  ago  that  the  
chain  is  vectorially discharged  into the lumen of  the vesicle  (S). When  the puromycin  
reaction is carried  out  at  low  salt  concentrations  the chains  are  vectorially  discharged,

Ciinte,r  Blohel






















Figure 2S. Electron  m icrogi   ph  of isolated canine pancreas rough  microsomes,
269









H .C
NHS


CU                              CH
H C

HOCH,  D







CH                     ocH ,





Figure Oil. Purumyciri  is an analog  of aminoacyl-tRNA.

270                                     Phjsiologf   or  Medicine  1999














Figure $0. Schematic representation of puromycin-induced vectorial release of the nascent poly- 
peptide chain and subsequent disassembly of rough  microsomes  by high concentrations Of salt. 
Froin Simon and Blobel  (I 7), with  permission.

but the ribosomes remain attached  to the membrane  (S). Could the attached ribosome keep a cleared 
PCC  in an open configuration  (Fig. 30)? And could subsequent  treatment  with  high salt release  
the ribosome  and close  the PCC (Fig. 30)  (8)?
Based  on  these  considerations we added puromycin  to  the cis-chamber  of the bilayer  that 
contained  a fused  rough microsome vesicle  (Fig. 26) . We ob- served a huge increase in 
conductance  (17)  (Fig. 31). This effect was specific


















Figure 31. Puromycin-induced clearance  of  protein    onducting  channels in rough  microsomes. A 
sharp increase  in conductance  occurred  within  4.5 .sec  of addition  of  puromycin  (100 JM)    
to the cis side of  the micro.somal  membrane.  From Simon and Blobel  (17) , svitli  permission.

Printer  Bfobel                                                    271

as  it  was observed  only  when  puromycin  was  added  to  the  cis-chamber,  not when  it was 
added  to  the  trans-chamber  (17) .  The   ci+charnber,  brit  not  the trans chamber,  contained 
 the  exposed  ribosomes  of  the fused  rough  micro- somal  membrane  (see  Fig.  26).  
Puromycin,  when  added  to  the  trans-cham- ber, could not access the ribosomes and  be coupled  
to the nascent chain. But when subsequently  added  to the cis-chamber,  it again caused a huge 
increase in conductance  (Fig. 32). These side-specific  data strongly  suggested  that pu- romycin 
  indeed  cleared   the  nascent  chain  and  that  at  low  salt   the  PCCs stayed  in an open 
configuration  and were able to conduct ions.
How  many  PCCs were  cleared  by  the  addition  of  puromycin?  Could  very low  concentrations  
of  puromycin  make  it  possible   to  demonstrate  a  time- resolved  clearance  of individual  
PCCs? Indeed, when  much  lower  concentra- tions  of  puromycin  were  added  to  the  
cis-chamber,  we  observed  clearance, one  at  a  time,  of  indii5dual  PCCs  ( 17)  of  220 pS  
(Fig.  33).  Hence,  the PGC contains  a very  large  aqueous pore  that conducts  about  ten  
times more ions than an ordinary ion-conducting channel  (17) .
Could one close  the puromycin-revealed PCC   by dissociating  the ribosome by high salt 
concentrations? Indeed, when a single PLC   (Fig. 34) was revealed at  low concentrations of  
puromycin  and  at low  salt,  it was closed  by  a  subse- quent increase  in salt concentration  
(Fig. 35). This result was consistent with























Figure  32.  Specificity  of ptiromycin  action.  At the  first arrow puromycin  was added  to  the 
 trans chamber  (lumenal  side of  the  microsomal  membrane).  After 10 min, puromycin  was added  
to the cis chamber  (ribosomal  side of  the  microsomal  membrane).  A substantial  increase  in 
con- ductance was observed.  From Simon  and Dlobel (17), with permission.

2‘72                                           Physiolo     or Medicim 1999
















Figure 8.8. Pringle puromycin-revealed channels. Puromycin  (0.3 pM) was added to the ribosomal 
side of the microsomal membrane. Discrete consecutive jumps in the conductance of 220 pS, 440 pS 
and 220 pS were observed  (at asterisks).  At faster time resolution,  the 440 pS jump resolved 
into two discrete 220 pS steps. From Simon and Blobel (l7), with permission.

the idea  that  the  puromycin-revealed PCCs are kept open  by attached  ribo- somes but are closed 
when ribosomes are dissociated  (see model Fig. 30).
Can  PCGs  be  demonstrated  also  in  other  membranes  and  by  methods other  than  
puromycin-induced clearance  of  translocating  chains?  Does  the signal  sequence  serve as a 
ligand to open  (or assemble)  the PCC  as was pos- tulated in the signal hypothesis (14)7 To 
answer these questions we turned to the  prokaryotic  plasma  membrane.  It had been suggested  
that in evolution















Figure 34, A single puromycin-revealed channel. Puromycin  was added  to the ribosomal side of the 
microsomal membrane and then removed. Small chloride channels are marked  by asterisks.

Printer Blobel                                                273














Figure 36. Closure of puromycin-revealed channel. Addition of t50 mil  KCI closed a single puro-
mycin-revealed channel. From Simon and Blobel  (I 7), with permission.
























’} n J       ñ+›w ss‹n
\        Ena ¥•«ni.




Figure 36. Evolution of eukaryotic  intracellular  membranes.  Left, invagination  of the prokaryo- 
tic plasma membrane with indicated ribosome and DNA binding sites yields the endoplasmic  re- 
ticulum  and  the  nuclear  envelope.  Right,  uptake  of a  prokaryoiic  progenitor  cell  yields  
mito- chondria and chloroplasts.  From Blobel  (44), with permission.

2'74                                      Physiology  or Medicine  1999

the eukaryotic ER arose by imagination  of the prokaryotic plasma membrane (Fig. 36)  (44). In 
fact, signal sequences for bacterial secreto•r Proteins  func- tion  in  translocation  across the 
ER of  eukaryotic  cells and, vice versa, signal sequences  addressed  to  the  cukaryotic  ER 
function  in  translocation  across the prokar yotic plasma membrane. It was therefore conceivable 
that the PCC of the prokaryotic plasma membrane resembles that of the eukaryotic ER.
When  protoplasts of Escherittia  coli  (Fig.  37)  are fused  from  the cis-cham- ber  to a planar 
bilayer,  the  putauve signal sequence-binding site of  the PCC will be exposed on  the  
trans-chamber  (Fig. 35). The addition  of low concen- trations of synthetic signal peptide of the  
bacterial LamB protein  (Fig. 39)  to the  trans-chamber,  but not  to the cis-chamber,  caused  a 
stepwise  increase  in conductance  (Fig.  40). The  Stepwise  increase  in  conductance  was 
observed only in  the presence  of high salt. Each step is likely to represent  the binding of one  
signal peptide to one signal peptide binding site of the PCC. High salt would reinforce  the 
largely hydrophobic interactions between  the hydropho- bic signal peptide and the PCC and thus 
keep the PCC in an open configura- tion for  long  periods  of  time  (45) . The  conductance  
properties  of  the  pro- karyotic plama membrane PCC were found to be similar to those of the PCC




Bacterial Protoplast




Sional Sequence
ng Site






Figure  37. Schematic  drawing  of a bacterial  protoplast  with  protein-conducting channels and 
their signal sequence binding sites.

Printer  Blobel












trans          cis                 trans            cis

Electrode                        Bacterial Protoplast
275




Figure 3P. Schematic drawing  of a bacterial protoplast added to the cis chamber and fused to the 
planar bilayer. Note  that  the cis side of the bacterial plasma membrane  with  the signal 
sequence binding sites of the protein-conducting channels is exposed  to the  trans chamber.

in  the ER,  in  support  of  the  notion  that  the  two  channels  share  a common history and 
are conserved.
Taken  together,  these  data  strongly  supported   the  existence  of  aqueous protein-conducting 
 channels  that,  like  ion-conducting channels,  were  com- posed of  proteins  and  that  the  
signal  sequence  indeed  served  as one of  the ligands to open  the channel. These results led to 
a paradigm shift in cell bio- logy and strongly argued  against  models  that had reigned supreme 
for many years and that had proposed  transfer  of proteins directly  through  the hydro- phobic  
core of the lipid bilayer.

VISUALIZATION  OF THE PROTEIN-CONDUCTING CHANNEL
By genetic approaches,  Schekman  and co-workers  (46)  had idenufied Sec6l as a candidate for the 
protein-conducting channel in yeast. Rapoport  and co- workers, used subfractionation and 
reconstitution into proteoliposomes (see







Figure 39. Syntheuc signal  pepude of  the preLamB protein of  E.  coli.

276              Physiology  or    fedtcim  1999






















Figure 40. Signal peptide-gated  channel remains open in high salt. ñ.  i:cm protoplasts were fused 
to  the  planar  bilayer.  Synthetic  preLamB  signal  peptide  was  addcd  to  the  trans  chamber 
 (see Figure  38)  in a final concentrauon  of 0.2 nM and in  the presence  of 700 mM KCl. Single 
chan- nels of 220 pS remained open in high salt. Presumably,  the high concentrauon  of salt 
reinforced the h)'drophobic  interactions of the signal peptide with the signal peptide binding 
site of the pro- tein-conducting channels, lea\nng  them in an open configuration. From Simon and 
Blobel  (43), with  permission.
above)   to  isolate  the  mammalian  counterparts  of   the  yeast  PCG    (47,  48) . Their work 
established  that  the PCC   consisted of  a heterotrimer,  termed  the alpha, beta and gamma 
subunits of Sec6l  (Fig. 41) .










52.9 k0a                                        8.7 kDa


Figure 41. Topology  of the Sec6l  heterotrimer  in the endoplasmic  reticulum  membrane.

Gdnter Blobel                                                  2?7














Figure 42. Roland Beckmann, 1999. The Rockefeller University, New York.

To visualize  the PCC   attached  to the ribosome,  Roland Beckmann,  a post- doctoral fellow in 
our laboratory  (Fig. 42), was able to isolate  the Sec6l com- plex  by detergent  solubilization 
of yeast microsomes  (Fig. 43)  and  to bind  it to isolated yeast  monomeric  ribosomes  (48) . 
Binding was saturable  and sug-





67 -

’*"--      Sec61o



1’          - Sec61g,y

Figure 43. The purified Sec6l  heterotrimer.  The proteins of  the  purified  yeast Sec6l  
heterotri- mer were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie Blue staining. From Beckmann, 
ct
«f. (49), with permission.

278                                        Physiology  or  Medicine  1999


















Figure 44. binding of purified Secfil  to purified  yeast ribosomes.  Binding is saturable  at an 
esti- mated binding of n*o SecG1  heterotrimers  per ribosome. From Beckmann,  ct o/.  (49) , with 
per- mission.

gested  that  two Sec6l  trimers  bound  per  ribosome  (Fig.  44).  Gryo-electron- microscopy  of  
these  complexes  (Fig.  45)  and  three-dimensional  image  re- construction  (Fig. 46, left 
panel), done in collaboration  with Joachim Frank's laboratory,  revealed  that  the  Sec6l  trimer 
 bound  to  a  region  of  the  large















Figure  45. Cryo-electron  micrograph  of ribosome/Sec6l  complexes.  Arrowhead  points  to the 
Sec6l  complex  visible  as a mass lying  parallel  to  the  ribosome  surface.  From  Beckmann,  
ct  ‹if. (49), with permission.

Enter  Blobel                                                2‘79













Pigure 4S. Three dimensional  reconstruction of the ribosome/Sec6l  complex. Small  ribosomal 
subunit  in yellow;  large  ribosomal  subunit  in  blue; and Src Oil  complex  in red. Left, note 
single attnchment  site of Scc6l  to the large ribosomal subunit.  Right, samv  orientation  a.s 
lefk, but cut along a plane  thiit sections  the PCC  of Hie Sec6l  and  the ribosome  tunnel.  The 
space  l›etween the  two ribosomal  subunits  is indicated  by an asterisk. The ribosomal  tunnel 
and its alignment with  the Sec6l  PCt  is indicated  by a broken  red  line.  Hence  die conduit 
of‘ the  nascent  ]3Ol\-
peptide  chain  in  die  large  ribosomal  subunit  tunnel  and  the  Secfil   PLC  is  aligned.  
rrom
Beckmann, éf rii. (49), with permission.



ribosomal  subunit  that was  near  to  the  previously  identified  exit site of  the nascent 
chain. The Sec6l  complex formed a funnel-shaped  structure with  a diameter of about 35      
gstrom at the side facing the ribosome and  a diame- ter of 15-20      gstrom  at  the  side facing 
 the  ER lumen. The  Sec6l  complex was attached  to the  large ribosomal subunit at one site. Most 
interestingly, a section across the  center of the ribosome  (Fig. 46, right panel)  revealed  that 
a tunnel  in the  large ribosomal subunit aligned with  the Sec6l channel. This arrangement 
suggests a likely conduit of the nascent chain within the large ri- bosomal subunit and across the 
Sec6l  channel into the lumen of the  ER.
The  visualization  of the  PCB attached  to the large ribosome and  the align- ment of  the  large 
 ribosomal  subunit  tunnel  with  the  PCC was an exti emely gratifying confirmation  of the  
predictions  that had  been  made  in  lfi7.5  (sec Fig. 11)  (14).
We are  presently repeating these experiments with ribosomes  that contain nascent secretory  
proteins in order  to visualize  the  PCC in  its active  (open) form. For these experiments  the 
ribosomes are  programmed with  truncated mRNA whose translation yields nascent chains long enough 
for the signal se- quence  to be exposed  on  the surface of the  large ribosomal  subunit. These 
nascent chain-ribosome complexes can  then  be used  to engage SRP, SRP re- ceptor and Sec6l. These 
experiments should sublocalize SRP and SRP recep- tor on  the  acñve  ribosome  and  should  reveal 
 the  PCC  in  an  active  (open) configuration.
Likewise, truncated mRNAs coding for integral membrane proteins can be translated on  ribosomes to 
investigate  the  PCC morphology  that is accompa- nied by the proposed lateral opening of the  PGC 
to the lipid bilayer. Attempts

280                                           Physiology  or Med.icine  1999

will  also  be  made  to  crystallize   the  Sec6l   complex.  Moreover,   the  signal peptidase  
complex  and  the  oligosaccharidyl  transferase  complex  associate with the PCC  to allow 
co-translational cleavage of  the signal sequence and co- translational  addition  of  core  sugars 
 to  the  translocating  chain   (Fig.  47). These  enzymes will  be isolated  and  bound  to  the 
nascent  chain/ribosome/ Sec6l  complex  and  will  then  be  visualized  by  
cryo-electronmicroscopy  and three-dimensional image reconstrucuon.
The  PCC  is clearly one of the marvels of  nature. Unlike an ion-conducting channel  that  opens  
and  closes  in  only  one  dimension,  the  PCC   opens  and closes in  two dimensions,  across  
the lipid  bilayer  and in  the  plane of  the  bi- layer. The   PCC   is not  merely a passive 
conduit but  it scans  the unfolded  nas- cent chain as it passes across it, responding  to a 
passing stop-transfer sequen- ce by lateral opening.  Moreover,  the PCC   is constructed  in such  
a way  that it does not leak significant  amounts of  small  molecules.  Store recently,  eviden- 
ce has accumulated for reverse  translocation and disintegrauon of  membrane proteins.  In order to 
allow degradation  of  secretory and integral  membrane proteins by the cytoplasmic  proteasomes,  
proteins can be reverse-translocated from the lumen of the ER or disintegrated  (membrane proteins) 
 from the ER membrane.  Reverse  translocation  and  disintegration  are  likely  to  occur  by 
opening  the channel  from  the  trans-side of  the membrane  (for  translocated proteins)  and by 
addiñonal lateral opening of  the PCC   from  the bilayer (for integral  membrane  proteins).
The  demonstrauon  that  the PCC   consists  of  integral  membrane  proteins confirmed a 
prediction  made in 1980 (44) . Virchow's dictum on cells: ‘omnis cellula e cellula’  (each  cell 
comes from  a pre-existing  cell)  was extended  to membranes: ‘omnis membrana e membrana’  (each  
membrane comes from a pre-existing  membrane).  Membranes  and compartments  are  not created  de









SPO

OST




Figure 47. Rccruitmcnt  of tic  signal peptidase complex  (SPC) and the oligosaccharidyl transfc• 
rase complex  (OST)  to the ribosome/nascent chain/Sec6l  complex  in  the endoplasmic  reticu- lum 
 membrane.  SPD endoproteolyticaily removes  the signal  peptide. OST  attaches core oligo- 
saccliarides to the translocaung  nascent chain.

Printer  Blobel                                                            28J

nono,  but   recreate  themselves.  The  asymmetric  integration  of  the  integral membrane  
proteins of the Sec6l complex requires the pre-existence of asym- metrically  integrated  Sec6l   
complex.  The  asymmetrically  oriented  Sec6l complex  catalyzes  asymmetric  integration  of  all 
 other  integral  membrane proteins  of  the  exocytotic  and  endocytotic  membranes  as specified 
 by  their intrinsic sequence elements (signal- and  s/Q  fratiifer sequences)  (50). This as- 
sures that the asymmetric  integration  of a membrane  protein  proceeds with high fidelity which 
is absolutely crucial for the membrane  protein's function. In  contrast,  reconstitution  of  
proteoliposomes by  mixing  lipids,  detergents and proteins usually does not result in a high 
fidelity asymmetric  topology of membrane  proteins. It should be noted, however,  that some 
proteins are de- signed to insert “spontaneously” into lipid bilayers  (e.g., certain  toxins). The 
asymmetric integration  of most membrane  proteins,  however, is catalyzed  by PCCs of  the ER or  
by PCCs of mitochondrial  or chloroplast  membranes  (see below).

POST-TRANSLATIONAL TRANSLOCATION  ACROSS THE ER
Protein  translocation  across  the  ER can  also occur  post-translationally. This was first 
discovered in yeast (51, 52). Instead of SRP and  SRP receptor this sys- tem  uses other factors, 
primarily heat shock proteins,  to keep the protein  in an unfolded  and  translocation-competent 
configuration  (53, 54). Moreover, additional  membrane  proteins  interacting  with  the  Sec6l  
complex  are  re- quired  to facilitate presentation of the signal sequence for opening the Sec6l 
PCC.

OTHER PROTEIN TRANSLOCATION  SYSTEMS
Work on  the protein translocation system of the ER established the basic prin- ciples.  The  other 
 systems  for  protein  translocation  across  distinct  cellular membranes  (Fig. 48)  were 
subsequently shown  to work on similar principles. Entry of a protein  into any of  these other  
“public”  translocation  systems  re- quires  a  cognate  signal  sequence.  As  in  the  case  of  
a  signal  sequence  ad- dressed  to the  ER, each signal sequence is recognized  by a cognate 
signal re- cognition  factor  that,  in  turn,  targets  the  complex  to  a  cognate  receptor. 
These  receptors  are  restricted  in  their localization  to distinct cellular  mem- branes  (Fig. 
 48). Translocation  then  occurs  through  channels  to  the  other side  of  the  membrane.  
There  are fascinating  similarities  and  differences  in the  construction  of  these various 
translocation  systems.
The   translocation  system  of  the  ER  has  evolved  from  the  major  protein translocation  
system  in  the  plasma  membrane  of  prokaryotes.  Most  of  the eukaryotic cellular  membranes 
arose by invagination of the  prokaryotic  plas- ma membrane  and  by relegation  of specific 
membrane  protein functions of the prokaryotic plasma membrane to these intracellular membranes  
(Fig. 36) (44).  The  signal  sequence  of  the  ER  is  related  to  the  signal  sequence  ad- 
dressed  to  the  major  prokaryotic  plasma  membrane  translocation  system.

282                                           Physioloyff   or  Mediator  1999

Endaplasmlc  Retlculum











Pigure  48.  “Ptiblir" pr‹›tein  translocation  systems  in  the cell.  Bokl  blue  arrow  
indicates  protein translocation  system  in  the  ER;  slim  blue  arrows  indicate  the  related  
.systems  within  the  mito- chondrial  matrix  anal  the cliloroplast  stroma.  Bold  and xlim  
retl and  green  arrows indicate  pr‹» leiii  ti ansI‹ication  systems  li›r  import  across  the  
outer  and  inner  mitochondrial  or chloroplast membrane,  respectively.  VNi  ie and  black  
arr‹›ws  indicate  transport  inti› anrl ‹›ut t›I  the  nucleus across the nuclear pore complex.


Moreover,  homologs of SRP (see above)  and SRP receptor  exist in prokaryo- tes and the SecY 
complex  of  bacteria is the homolog Gif the Sec6l  complex of the ER. Hence, protein  
translocation  across membranes and protein  integra- trotinto membranes are x!er   ancient and 
highly conserved  membrane  func- tions. Related systems exist for protein  translocation  from  
the mitochondrial matrix  or  the chloroplast  stroma across  the innei  mitochondrial  memlirane 
or the  thylakoid  membranes of chloroplasts,  respectively  (Fig. 48).
Although  the  protein  import  system  into  mitochondria  and  chloroplasts are not related  to 
those of  the ER,  the principles by which  they operate are si- milar: distinct  signal  
sequences,  cognate  signal  recognition  factors,  cognate receptors  and  pi otein  conducting  
channels.  Like  the  PCCs  in  the  FiR,  the PCCs in  the outer and inner membrane of  these 
organelles can also open  la- terally  to  achieve  integration  of  membrane  proteins.  Proteins  
that  are  tar- gete‹l to the matrix contain  two signal sequences, one for translocation  aero.+s 
the outer  membrane  and one for  translocation  across  the inner  membrane. The two PCCs in the 
outer and inner membrane can transiently interact  with each  other  forming  a  continuous  
conduit  for  the  unfolded  nascent  chain from  the cytosol  into  the  matrix. Protein  
translocation  can occur  post-trans lationally.  Hence,  in addition  to signal  recognition  
factors  there are  additio- nal  proteins  required  that  keep  the  completed  chain  in  an  
unfolded  and translocation-competent configuration.
The protein  import system  into peroxisomes operates with  at least  two dis-
tinct signal sequences  and cugnate  signal  recognition  factors and  rcccptors. However,  it  
appears  that  ttifegref  Matte @oieim of  the  peroxisomal  mem-

Printer  Blobel                                                  283

brane are integrated using  the ER  translocation  system and are then sorted to the  peroxisomal  
membrane,  as  was  first  suggested  in  1978  (55) .  It  appears that  peroxisomal  content  
proteins  can  be  transported  across  the  peroxisomal membrane  post-translationally and in  a 
folded  and even  oligomeric  form.  A putative peroxisomal  membrane pore may not be able to open 
laterally  to the lipid  bilayer  and,   therefore,  may  not  be  competent  for  the  integration 
  of membrane  proteins.  This would  explain why  integral  membrane  proteins of‘ the  
peroxisomal  membrane  need  to  be  integrated  by  another  translocation system,  namely,  that 
of  the ER.
Import and export of macromolecules into and from  the nucleus is not re- stricted  to  proteins  
but  includes  ribonucleoproteins  and  deoxyribonucleo- proteins  (viruses) . The  nuclear pore 
complex  (NPC)  is the common  conduit for  both  import  and export of all  these molecules and 
molecular  complexes. It is a huge organelle,  at least 20 times the mass of  the ribosome with a 
central pore  of  about  ?5nm  diameter.  Again,  protein  import  and  export  are  me- diated by 
distinct signal sequences.  These signal sequences  are recognized  by cognate  signal recognition  
factors  (karyopherins  or kaps)  that ferry between the  nucleus  and  the  cytoplasm.  The  kaps  
target  the  import  and  export  sub- strates  to receptors  that are represented  by a subset of  
nuclear pore complex proteins  (collectively  termed  nucleoporins  or  nups) .  The  NPC   is 
connected on  the  nuclear  side  to  tubes  that  extend  all  the way  to  the  nucleolus.  These 
tubes form  a chromatin-free zone  and are likely  to facilitate  intranuclear  dif- fusicin of  
macromolecules. Nuclear import and export,  the nuclear pore com- plex  and  intranuclear  traffic  
in  these  tubes  are  at  present  intensely  investi- gatecl by many laboratories.  The  next 
years will bring considerable  progress in the detailed understanding  of  these important  
cellular  activities.


OTHER TOPOGENIC SEQUENCES
It  is  clear  that  szgna/ sequences  for  protein  translocation  across  distinct  cel- lular 
membranes  and a combination  of  signal- and  stop-transfer sequences  for the asymmetric  
integration  of  proteins into membranes  are not  the only  “to- pogenic” sequences  that  serve  
as determinants  for protein  localization  (44) . Following  translocation  across  or  asymmetric 
 integration  into  membranes, many proteins undergo further  traffic. For example,  lysosomal  
proteins con- tain signal sequences indistinguishable from those of  secretory  proteins)  (56, ñ7) 
 and like secretory  proteins,  they are first segregated within  the  lumen  of the  ER.   
Subsequently,   they  have  to  be  sorted  to  the  lysosomes.   Sorting  se- quence elements are 
required  to achieve  sorting  to the lysosome.
Another example is the polyIg receptor. It is asymmetrically integrated into the  ER  using  a  
signal  sequence  and  a  stop-transfer  sequence  (58,  59) .  It  is then directed  to the 
basolateral  plasma membrane where it binds IgA  or IgM. The ligand receptor complex  is then  
transcytosed  to the apical  plasma mem- brane where  the ligand-binding domain of  the polyIg 
receptor is cleaved and shed  as  the  so  called  ‘secretory  component’  of  secreted  IgA  or  
IgM.  Dorling

284                                         Physiology  or  Medicine  1999

sequences direct this transcytotic pathway. The existence of sorting sequences has been  postulated 
 in 1980  (44) , long before such sequences were actually identified. Like signal and stop-transfer 
sequences, sorting sequences need to be  recognized  and  various  effectors  are  required  to  
decode  them  and  to direct them into the various pathways they specify.


EPILOGUE
What  began  as  an  inquiry  about  how  secretory  proteins  are  translocated across the ER 
proceeded into an exciting voyage that revealed  the principles by  which  cells  organize  
themselves  into  distinct  membranes  and  compart- ments. Most cellular proteins, including 
integral membrane proteins, contain intrinsic sequence  elements. These sequence  elements are 
decoded  by cog- nate recognition factors. Cognate receptors and effectors localize the protein to 
their proper location.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Foremost,  I  want  to  thank  my  two  mentors,  Van  R.  Potter  and  George  E. Palade.  David  
Sabatini  was  a  particularly  inspiring  and  forming  influence, especially in the early stages 
of my career. David Luck's critical input was ex- tremely  valuable,  steering  me  away  from   
the  ancillary  and  keeping  me focused on the major questions.
I was fortunate  to have extremely talented graduate students and postdoc- toral fellows working 
with me. Those who made seminal contributions on the ER  translocation  system were mentioned  in  
the  text. Other  major contribu- tors in  this area were: Mark Adelman,  Nica Borgese,  Christoph  
Freienstein, Anne Devillers-Thiery, Dennis Shields, Stefano  Bonatti, Ann Erickson,  Mike McCune, 
Keith Mostov, David Anderson, Ibrahim Ibrahimi, Gregory Conner, Martin  Friedlander,  Gerald  
Waters,  Yves  Audigier,  William  Chirico,  Sanjay Nigam, Gregory Shelness, Yashpal Kanwar, 
Jacques YaDeau, Gary Greenburg, and Giovanni Migliaccio. Our work on the bacterial translocation  
system was carried out by: Chung Nan Chang, Matthias Miiller, Irene Fecycz and Makoto Watanabe.  
Major contributors  to the work on mitochondrial  protein  import were: Maria-Luisa Macchecchini, 
Katsuyoshi Mihara, Sherry Goltz, Jim Kaput, Debkumar Pain, Norbert Schuelke, and Hiroshi Murakami. 
Our work on pro- tein  import  into  chloroplasts  was  carried  out  by:  Debkumar  Pain,  Danny 
Schnell and Felix Kessler. Work on peroxisomal  protein import was done by: Barbara  Goldman  and  
Ralf  Erdmann.  The  work  on  nuclear  structure  and nuclear  import  was  carried  out  by:  
Ariane  Monneron,  Robert  Aaronson, Nancy Dwyer, Larry Gerace, Paul Fisher, Miguel Berrios, David 
Fisher, Daniel Fisher,  Nilabh  Chaudhary, Laura Davis, Spyros Georgatos,  Richard Wozniak, John 
Aris, Howard Worman, Jeffrey Yuan, Eckart Bartnik, Ruben Henriquez, Jerome Appelbaum  Jean-Claude  
Courvalin, Thomas Meier, Karima Djabali,

Enter  Blobel                                                285

Mary  Shannon  Moore,  Susan  Wente,  Michael  Rout, Jun   Sukegawa,  Susan Smith,  Aurelian   
Radu,  Einar  Hallberg,  Doris  Kraemer,  Lucy  Pemberton, Junona   Moroianu,  Jian   Wu,   Michael 
  Matunis,   Elias   Coutavas,   Makoto Hijikata,  Cordula  Enenkel,  Michael  Rexach,  Caterina  
Strambio-de  Castillia, Michael   Hurwitz,  John  Aitchison,   Monique  Floer,  Ulf  Nehrbass,   
Nabeel
Yaseen,    Neris   Bonifaci,   Erica   Johnson,   J   nathan   Rosenblum,    Markus Albertini,  
Beatriz  Fontoura,  Yuh  Min  Chook,  Anton  Titov  and   Kimihasa
Yoshida.
Absolutely  essential were  the office  and  technical  support. I would  like  to mention  Peggy  
Beaudet-Fisher,  Gisele  Nimic,  Nancy  Dwyer,  Parkash  Cash- more, Evette Ellison  and  Sean 
Campbell. Special  thanks are due  to Lourdes
R. Quirolgico, who has managed  the laboratory and office for over 14 years in a flawless and  
highly efficient manner.
Our  research  was supported  by fellowships  and  grants from  the  National Institutes  of  
Health,  the  American  Cancer  Society,  The   Damon  Runyon- Walter  Winchell  Cancer  Fund,  The 
 Helen  Hay  Whitney  Foundation,  The Jane Coffins Child Foundation,  The  Leukemia Society of 
America, The  Life Sciences   Research   Foundation,   Boehringer   Fond,   Deutsche   Forschungs- 
gemeinschaft,  EMBO  Fund,  Humboldt  Stiftung,  Thyssen  Stiftung,  Human Frontier Science 
Program,  NATO, and  Canadian, French, Japanese, Swedish and Swiss research organizations.
Most  importantly,   however,   was   the  steady  support  from   the  Howard Hughes  Medical  
Institute.  Without  the  encouragement  and support of  Pur- nell  Choppin,  Max  Cowan,  Claire  
Winestock,  Dinah  Singer  and  Carolyn McGinnis and  their staff we would  not  have been  able  
to initiate or execute many of the risky and  exciting experiments of the  past 14 years.
I thank the Geschwister Scholl Gymnasium in Freiberg/Saxony where I re- ceived   a  very  
gratifying   education;   the   Universities   of   Frankfurt/ Main, Munchen, Kiel and  Tubingen, 
where I trained  for my M.D.;  the hospitals in Neuenbiirg,  Obergunzburg  and Wolfratshausen, 
where I did my internship; and  the  University  of  Wisconsin  in  Madison,  where  I  was  
generously  sup- ported  by a fellowship and  where I received a Ph.D.
Special thanks go to Rockefeller  University where I spent the past 33 years of my life. It is an  
extraordinarily beautiful,  congenial  and  inspiring place to work.   The    administrations   of  
 Detlev   Bronk,    Frederick   Seitz,   Joshua Lederberg,  David  Baltimore,  Torsten  Wiesel  and 
 Arnold  Levine  have  been supportive and  encouraging at every point in my career. David 
Rockefeller, in particular,  has been an inspiring  presence  throughout  my entire career here at 
Rockefeller  University.
My parents, Margarete  and  Dr. Bruno Blobel; my sisters Ruth, Siegrid  and Ingeborg;  my  brothers 
 Hans,  Reiner,  Karl,  and  Albrecht  and  their families; and  especially  my wife,  Laura  
Maioglio,  were  the  pillars  of  my life.  I  thank them from  the bottom of my heart.
This lecture  is dedicated  to  the memory of  my beloved  oldest sister, Ruth Blobel, who died at 
age 19, on April 10, 1945, during a bomb attack on a train near Schwandorf, Bavaria.

286                                     Physiolo     or Medicine  1999

ABBREVIATIONS
EMBO              European  Molecular Biology Organization ER                     endoplasmic  
reticulum
IgA                    immunoglobulin A
IgG                   immunoglobulin G
IgM                   immunoglobulin M
Kap                   karyopherin
mRNA              messenger  ribonucleic acid
NATO               North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NIH                  National Institutes of Health
NPC                  nuclear pore complex
Nup                  nucleoporin
PCC                  Protein conducting channel
pS                     pico Siemens rough microsome

SDS—PAGE SRP
VSv
sodium dodecylsulfate Rolyacrylamide  gel electrophoresis
signal recognition  particle vesicular stomatitis virus


REFERENCES
Palade, G.E.  Science 189:347-358,  1975.
Redman, C.M. and  Sabatini, D.D. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 56:608—615,  1966.

3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
S.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
1'7.
18.

19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
as.
Blobel,  G.  and  Sabatini.  D.D.  In  Biomembranes,  ed.  by  L.A.  Manson,  pp.  193—195, Plenum 
Publishing Corporation,  New York, USA, 1971.
Blobel, G. and  Sabatini, D.D. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 68: 390—394, 1971. Blobel, G. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 68:832—835, 1971.
Blobel, G. Biochem.  Biephys. Res. Comm. 47:88—95, 1972. Blobel, G. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
70:924—928, 1973.
Adelman, M., Sabatini, D.D. and  Blobel, G.J. Cell Biol. 56:206—2?9, 1973. Freienstein,  C. and  
Blobel, G. Proc.  Natt. Acad. Sci. USA. 71: 3435—3449, 1974. Freienstein, C. and  Blobel, G. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 72:3392—3396, 1975. Swan, D., Aviv, H., and  Leder, P. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 69:1967—1971,  1972.
Milstein,  C.,  Brownlee,  G.G.,  Harrison,  T.M.,  and   Mathews,  M.B.  Nature  New  Biology
239:117—120,  1972.
Schechter, I., McKean, D.J., Guyer, R., and  Terry, W.  Science 188:160—162, 1975. Blobel, G. and  
Dobberstein, B. /.  Cell Biol. 67:835—85l, 1975.
Blobel, G. and  Dobberstein,  B. /.  Cell Biol. 6'7:852—862, 1975. Sabatini, D.D. and  Blobel, G. 
/.  Cell Biol. 45: 146-157, 1970.
Simon, S.M. and  Blobel, G. Cell  65: 371—380, 1991.
Katz, F.N., Rothman, J. E., Lingappa, V.R., Blobel, G. and  Lodish, H.F. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 74: 3278—3282, 1977.
Lingappa, V.R.,  Katz, F.N.,  Lodish, H.F. and  Blobel,  G.J.  Biol. Chem. 253: 8667—8670, 1978.
Warren, G. and  Dobberstein, B. Nature  273:569-571, 1978.
Walter, P. and   Blobel, G. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 'f7:7ll2—7116, 1080. Walter, P., Ibrahimi, 
I. and  Blobel, G. /.  Cell BioL 91:545—550, 1981.
Walter,  P. and   B1obe1,  G./.  Crl1Biol. 91:551—556,  1981. Walter,  P. and   Blobel, G. /.  Cell 
BioL 91:557-561, 1981.
Walter, P. and   Blobel, G. Nature (London) 299: 691—698, 1982.

Enter  Blobel                                                  287

26.     Walter, P. and Johnson, A.E.  Annu. Reu.  Cell Biol. 10:87—119,  1994.
27.     Gilmore, R.,  Walter, P. and Blobel, G.J.  Cell Biol. 95:470-477, 1982.
28.     Meyer, D.I., Krause, E.,  and Dobberstein,  B.  Nature 297:503-506,  1982.
29.     Tajima,  S.,  Lauffer, L.,  Rath, V.L., and Walter, P. /.  Cell Biol. 103:1167—1178,  1986.
30.    Connolly, T. and Gilmore, R.  Cell 57:599—610,  1989.
31.     Miller. J  D.,  Tajima,  S.,  Lauffer, L.,  and Walter, P.J.  Cell Biol.  128:273—282,  
1995.
32.     Gilmore, R.  and Blobel, G.  Cell 35:677—685,  1983.
33.    Jackson, R.C. and Blobel, G.  Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA. 74:5598—5602,  1977.
34.     Evans, E.,  Gilmore, R.  and Blobel, G.  Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA. 83:581—585,  1986.
35.     Shelness,  G.S., Kanwar,  Y.S. and Blobel, G.J. Biol.  Chem. 263:1706   -17070,  1988.
36.     Greenburg,  G.,  Shelness, G.  and Blobel, G. /. Biol.  Chem•  264:15762—l5765, 1989.
37.     Shelness,  G.S. and Blobel, G.J. Biol.  Chem. 265:95l2—95l9, 1990.
38.    Nicchitta,  C.  V. and Blobel, G.  Cell b0:259-269,  1990.
39.     von Heijne, G.  and Blomberg,  C.  Eur.]. Biochem. 97:175—181,  1979.
40.     Engelman, D.M., and Steitz, T.A.  Cell 23:411-422,  1981. 41.     Gilmore, R.  and B1obe1,  
G.   Crf/ 42: 497—505,  1985.
42.    Simon,  S.,  Blobel,  G.   and  Zimmerberg,  J.   f'roc.  Natl.  Acad.   Sci.USA.  
86:617fi—6l80, 1989.
43.     Mueller, P., Rudin, D.O., Ti Tien, H,  and Wescott, W.C.  Nature 194:979—980,  1962.
44.    Blobel,  G.  Proc. NatL  Acad.  Sci.  USA. 7'7:l4Sfi—1500, 1580.
45      Simon,  S.M. and Blobel, G.  Cell 69:677—684,  1992.
46      Stirling,  C.J., Rothblatt, J.,   Hosobuchi,  M.,  Deshaies, R.,  and  Schekman,  R.  Mol.  
Biol. Cell 3:129—142,  1992.
47.     Goerlich,   D.,    Prehn,   S.,   Hartmann,    E.,    Kalies,   KU.,   and   Rapoport,   
T.A.    Cr// '71:489-503,  1992.
48.    Goerlich, D.,  and Rapoport, T,A.  Cell 75: 615—630,  1993.
49.     Beckmann,  R.,  Bubeck,  D.,  Grassucci,  R.,  Penczek,  P.,  Verschoor,  A.,  Blobel,  G.  
and Frank, J.  Sñmm 278:212M2126,  1997.
50.    Friedlander,  M.  and Blobel, G.  Nature (London) 318:338—344,  1985.
51.     Waters, M.G. and Blobel, G. /.  Cell Biol. 102:1543—1550, 1986.
52.     Hansen, W., Garcia, P.D., and Walter, P.  Cell 45: 397—406,  1986.
53.     Chirico, W.J., Waters, M.G. and Blobel, G.  Nature (London) 332:80a10, 1988.
54.     Deshaies,  R.,  Koch, B.D., Werner-Washburne, M.,  Craig, E.,  and Schekman, R.  Nature
332: 800—805,  1988.
ññ.    Goldman, B. and  Blobel, G. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. '75:5066—5070, 1975.
56.    Erickson, A.H. and  Blobel, G.     Biol. Chem. 254:II77I—11774, 1979.
57.    Erickson, A.H., Conner, G. and  Blobel, G. /.  Biol. Chem. 256:11224-11231, 1981. US.    
Mostov, K.E. and  Blobel, G.J. Biol. Chem. 252:ll81h-11821, 1982.
5S.    Mostov, K.E., Friedlander, M., and  Blobel, G. Nature (London) 308:37-43, 1984
