WORMS, LIFE AND DEATH
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2002
by
H. ROBERT HORVITZ
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachus-
etts Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139, U.S.A.




I never expected to spend most of my life studying worms. However, when it
came time for me to choose an area for my postdoctoral research, I was in-
trigued both with the problems of neurobiology and with the approaches of
genetics. Having heard that a new “genetic organism” with a remarkably sim-
ple nervous system was being explored by Sydney Brenner – the microscopic
soil nematode Caenorhabditis elegans – I decided to join Sydney in his efforts.


THE CELL LINEAGE
After arriving at the Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular
Biology (the “LMB”) in Cambridge, England, in November, 1974, I began my
studies of C. elegans (Figure 1) as a collaboration with John Sulston. John,




Figure 1. Caenorhabditis elegans adults. Hermaphrodite above, male below. John Sulston took
these photographs, and I drew the diagrams. Bar, 20 microns. From (2).

320


                                          Figur 2. John White.




trained as an organic chemist, had become a Staff Scientist in Sydney’s group
five years earlier. John’s aim was to use his chemistry background to analyze
the neurochemistry of the nematode. By the time I arrived, John had turned
his attention to the problem of cell lineage, the pattern of cell divisions and
cell fates that occurs as a fertilized egg generates a complex multicellular or-
ganism. John could place a newly hatched C. elegans larva on a glass micro-
scope slide dabbed with a sample of the bacterium Escherichia coli (nematode
food) and, using Nomarski differential interference contrast optics, observe
individual cells within the living animal. In this way, he could follow cells as
they migrated, divided and, in certain cases, died. That cells died as a normal
aspect of animal development had been known by developmental biologists
and neurobiologists for many years, and in 1964 Richard Lockshin and
Carroll Williams had published a paper (1) in which they referred to such
naturally-occurring cell death as “programmed cell death.” The study of this
phenomenon was later to engage a substantial proportion of my scientific ef-
forts.
   John’s initial analyses of the C. elegans cell lineage were focused on the de-
veloping larval ventral nervous system. I found his discoveries about the rela-
tionship between cell lineage and nerve cell fate very exciting: 12 neuronal
precursor cells underwent the same pattern of cell division, and descendant
cells with equivalent cell lineage histories in general differentiated into the
same nerve cell type. For example, the anterior daughter of the posterior
daughter of each of 12 neuroblasts became motor neurons of a class called
“AS” by John White (Figure 2), who with Sydney was then defining the com-
plete anatomy and connectivity of the C. elegans nervous system. I asked John
Sulston if I could join him in the examination of other aspects of the C. ele-
gans cell lineage, and to my delight, he said “Yes.”

                                                                             321


   John and I decided that it should be possible to track every cell division
that occurred during larval development. With the added efforts of Judith
Kimble, who as a graduate student with David Hirsh at the University of
Colorado in Boulder was interested in the development of the C. elegans go-
nad, we did just that. John and I published a description of the complete non-
gonadal larval cell lineages in 1977 (2). The authorship of that paper was a
topic of debate between John and me: we each insisted on being second au-
thor. John was rather unassuming and wanted to be second author to give me
more credit and visibility. I, knowing that John had done the vast majority of
the work, believed strongly that he should be first author. We were at a stand-
still until I had an idea. I knew that John hated writing manuscripts. I told
him that I would write the paper on the condition that he would be first au-
thor. We had a deal.
   Two years later, Judith Kimble and David Hirsh described the larval cell lin-
eages of the gonad (3). John then completed the picture by tracking the pat-
tern of cell divisions between the single-celled fertilized egg and the newly
hatched larva. This achievement was far more difficult than what John, Judith
and I had done previously, in part because the process of embryonic mor-
phogenesis involves a major cellular rearrangement to generate a worm-
shaped larva from what was previously a ball of cells. A simple analogy is to
imagine that you are watching a bowl with hundreds of grapes, trying to keep
your eye on each grape as it and many others move. John succeeded in fol-
lowing all 558 nuclei, and this effort (with input from Einhard Schierenberg,
John White and Nichol Thomson) led to the description of the embryonic
cell lineage of C. elegans (4). Together, these studies defined the first, and to
date only, completely known cell lineage of an animal (Figure 3).
   The C. elegans cell lineage, which is essentially invariant among individuals,
presents many of the problems of developmental biology at the level of reso-
lution of single cells. The issue now was how to proceed from description to
mechanism. We discussed two general approaches. The first was based upon




Figure 3. The complete cell lineage of C. elegans.

322


the classical methods of experimental embryology, involving the removal
and/or transplantation of particular bits of developing animals. With this di-
rection in mind, John White began pursuing a modern approach to cell re-
moval: laser microsurgery. By focusing a laser beam though a microscope
equipped for Nomarski optics, he could visualize and kill single cells. In this
way, it would be possible to determine the functions of individual cells. Killing
a cell in the developing embryo or larva should reveal if that cell influenced
the developmental fate of another cell. The two Johns and Judith Kimble ap-
plied this technology to eliminate specific cells and analyze development (5,
6). They discovered that cell interactions play a substantial role in C. elegans
development and that the invariance of the C. elegans cell lineage reflects in
part the invariance of cell interactions.


CELL LINEAGE GENETICS
The second approach we considered for the analysis of the mechanisms re-
sponsible for the C. elegans cell lineage was genetics. Sydney had established
C. elegans as a genetic system (7). However, we had no idea if there existed
genes that had specific roles in controlling cell lineage or that controlled spe-
cific cell lineages. It was possible that mutating any gene that affected one cell
division would also affect so many other divisions as to lead to an uninter-
pretable lethality. Even mutations that affected a single cell division could
well prove to be leaky alleles of genes that act more broadly, e.g., a weak mu-
tation in any gene involved in cell division presumably would cause a defect
in the divisions of those cells most sensitive to decreases in the activity of that
gene. I expressed this concern more optimistically on March 19, 1976, in my
first presentation of the idea of using genetics to study the worm cell lineage,
at a combined worm-fly group meeting (“Tea Talk”) at the LMB (Figure 4). I




Figure 4. My notes for the beginning of a “Tea Talk” I presented on March 19, 1976, to an in-
formal weekly gathering of the C. elegans and Drosophila researchers at the Cell Biology
Division of the Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge,
England.


                                                                                        323


suggested that mutants with abnormal lineages could prove useful in two
ways: first, they would provide a means of eliminating specific cells or sets of
cells, thus “complement{ing the} laser system”; second, they could reveal as-
pects of the logic of development, “perhaps.”
   My studies of worm cell-lineage genetics began as another collaboration
with John Sulston. We looked for mutant animals abnormal in specific aspects
of behavior and/or morphology and then examined those mutant animals at
the single-cell level for defects in cellular anatomy. If the number of cells was
abnormal, we reasoned, an abnormality in the cell lineage might well be re-
sponsible. We then directly examined cell lineages in such mutants, using the
same techniques we had used to define the cell lineage of the wild-type ani-
mal. Because John and I first determined larval as opposed to embryonic cell
lineages, we began by seeking mutants defective in the larval cell lineages. To
do so, we considered what biological features the larval cell lineages add to
the newly hatched animal. A young worm and an adult worm are in general
very similar. Most of the larval cell lineages are involved in sexual maturation,
i.e., with the development of the gonad and of the neurons, muscles and vul-
val cells used for egg laying. For this reason, one approach we took was to
seek mutants defective in egg laying and ask if these mutants were defective in
cell lineage.
   In our initial study (8, 9), John and I characterized a set of 24 cell-lineage
mutants. Five of these mutants had been isolated some years earlier by Sydney
Brenner in his pioneering screens for mutant worms of any sort. Over the
years, my laboratory has isolated over 4,000 mutants, many of which are cell
lineage mutants. In many cases the genes defined by such mutants have
proved to have specific and interesting effects on the worm cell lineage.

Heterochronic mutants and the control of developmental timing
Some C. elegans cell lineage mutants perturb the developmental timing of spe-
cific aspects of the cell lineage. We called such mutants “heterochronic” and
regard them as temporal counterparts of spatial homeotic mutants, since they
transform cell fates in time rather than in space (10). The first heterochron-
ic mutant, which defined the gene lin-4 (lin, cell lineage abnormal), was iso-
lated in Sydney Brenner’s laboratory as a morphologically abnormal animal
by P. Babu (personal communication). lin-4 was characterized collaboratively
by Marty Chalfie, John Sulston and me (11). (I knew Marty in high school,
and after a chance encounter in which I told him about C. elegans, he, too,
joined Sydney’s laboratory as a postdoctoral researcher. Marty has focused his
continuing studies of C. elegans on the animal’s nervous system and intro-
duced the jellyfish green fluorescent protein (GFP) as a reporter for gene ex-
pression and protein localization; GFP is now widely used in many fields of bi-
ology (12).) More detailed analyses of heterochronic genes have been
performed by Victor Ambros and Gary Ruvkun, first as postdoctoral fellows
in my laboratory (10, 13, 14) and later as independent researchers.
Heterochronic mutations are generally of two classes, as exemplified by their
effects on cell lineage: retarded mutations cause early developmental events

324


to occur at late developmental times, and precocious mutations cause late de-
velopmental events to occur at early developmental times (Figure 5). The
heterochronic genes are major regulators of developmental timing.
   The Ambros and Ruvkun laboratories discovered that two of the hetero-
chronic genes, lin-4 and let-7, do not encode protein products but rather en-
code small (21–22 nt) RNAs (15, 16). These RNAs are the founding members
of a family of RNAs, now called microRNAs, which have proved to be wide-
spread in biology, with large families not only in C. elegans but also in insects,
plants and mammals (17–21). MicroRNAs are currently the subject of inten-
sive study in a rapidly growing and very exciting field.

Genes that control the generation of cell diversity
Other cell lineage mutants blocked the generation of cell diversity at specific
cell divisions. For example, although the cell lineage diagram (Figure 6)
looks very complicated, the logical decisions that occur in this lineage can be
depicted much more simply (Figure 6A). In short, we can regard every cell in
the cell lineage as having a fate. That fate may be to differentiate into a spe-
cific cell type or to divide in a specific pattern to generate a specific comple-
ment of descendant cells. At each cell division, a cell with one fate A can be
said to divide to produce two daughter cells with fates B and C, where in gen-
eral B and C differ both from each other and also from A. Some of the cell
lineage mutants we found cause sister cells to be identical instead of different
or daughter cells to be like their mothers instead of acquiring new fates
(Figure 6B). If the mutation involved eliminated the activity of a gene, we
could conclude that the gene is necessary to make sister cells different from
each other or to make daughter cells different from mother cells, i.e., that the
gene functions to generate cell diversity during development.
   We have characterized a variety of such cell lineage genes genetically, de-
velopmentally and molecularly (reviewed in (22, 23)). One of the most inter-




Figure 5. Heterochronic mutations cause perturbations in the timing of specific develop-
mental events. 1, 2, 3, and 4 at the left indicate the first through fourth larval stages (L1-L4)
of C. elegans development, respectively. S1, S2, S3 and S4 indicate stage-specific lineage pat-
terns normally expressed at the L1-L4 stages, respectively. In retarded mutants, early events
occur late, e.g., an S1 pattern can be seen at the L2 stage. Conversely, in precocious mu-
tants, late events occur early, e.g,. an S2 pattern can be seen at the L1 stage. From (13).

                                                                                            325


Figure 6. Every cell can be considered to have a fate, where that fate is either to express a
particular differentiated state (programmed cell death can be regarded as one such fate)
or to divide in a particular pattern and generate a particular complement of descendant
cells. (A) Every cell that divides can be said to have a fate, A, which is to divide to generate
two daughter cells that have fates B and C, which in general differ from each other and
from A. (B) In certain cell lineage mutants, mother cells of fate A instead of generating
daughters with fates B and C generate daughters with fates B and B or fates B and A. Such
mutants can define genes that function in the generation of cell diversity.




esting and, I think, most significant findings to emerge from these and our
other studies of the genetics of the C. elegans cell lineage is that most of these
genes have counterparts in other organisms, including humans. For example,
among the worm cell lineage genes we identified to be involved in the gener-
ation of cell diversity are founding members of the now well known and well
studied POU (24) and LIM (25) families of transcription factors.

IDCGs, lin-12 and lin-14
As we were beginning our studies of genes that affect cell lineage, one issue
that we faced was how to distinguish genes with direct as opposed to indirect
roles in controlling a specific cell division or cell fate. In other words, our goal
was to analyze “important developmental control genes,” which we referred
to (with amusement) as “IDCGs.” How might we identify genes that directly
control specific cell fates? We knew that in certain cases these cell fates were
regulated by cell interactions, i.e. whether a particular cell expressed fate A or
fate B was determined by the presence or absence, respectively, of a signal
from another cell. In such cases, any gene needed for the generation, differ-
entiation or functioning of the signaling cell would be required for the ex-
pression of fate A, but could be controlling that cell fate only indirectly.
   To address this issue, we decided (e.g., see a subsequent discussion by grad-
uate student Paul Sternberg and me (26)) that one appropriate focus would
be genes for which opposite classes of mutations – those that eliminate gene
activity and those that elevate gene activity – have opposite developmental ef-
fects. The paradigm indicating that genes with such characteristics are bona
fide developmental genes had been established by Ed Lewis in his pioneering
studies of the Drosophila Bithorax gene complex (27, 28). Thus, for the case

326


noted above, we would be particularly interested in genes for which too little
gene activity caused a cell that normally expresses fate A instead to express
fate B, while too much gene activity caused a cell that normally expresses fate
B instead to express fate A. Such genes could not simply be needed for some
aspect of a process upstream of the cell-fate decision of interest. Rather, such
genes could be considered to be not only necessary but also sufficient (in cer-
tain cellular contexts) for the expression of a particular cell fate.
   The first two genes we studied that satisfied this IDCG criterion and, in
fact, led us to this way of thinking were lin-12 and lin-14. The lin-12 gene was
analyzed by graduate students Iva Greenwald, Paul Sternberg and Chip
Ferguson (29–31). Opposite classes of lin-12 mutations result in opposite
homeotic transformations in cell fates precisely as outlined above. lin-12 in-
deed proved to be an important developmental control gene. Molecularly
characterized by Iva Greenwald after she left my laboratory (32), lin-12 was a
founding member of the LIN-12/Notch family, since shown to control inter-
cellular signaling in many organisms and to be involved in human cancer
(33–35). The LIN-12 protein showed regions of sequence similarity to the
then recently characterized mammalian EGF protein. This finding was one of
the first indicating that developmental genes from simple animals were strik-
ingly conserved with human genes. In addition, continuing studies from Iva’s
laboratory established general principles of LIN-12/Notch signaling (36–38)
and revealed that this family of proteins interacts with presenilins, making the
LIN-12/Notch family of substantial interest to investigators studying Alz-
heimer’s Disease (39).
   lin-14, which was the second heterochronic gene we identified and which
was characterized at about the same time as lin-12, also fulfilled our IDCG cri-
terion of having opposite classes of mutations cause opposite biological con-
sequences: mutations that reduce lin-14 activity lead to precocious develop-
ment, whereas mutations that elevate lin-14 activity lead to retarded
development (10). lin-14 proved to play a pivotal role in the control of devel-
opmental timing (13). All of the other genes we have studied that fulfill our
IDCG criterion also have proved to be interesting. For example, let-60 en-
codes a Ras protein and acts as a binary switch in a signal transduction path-
way of vulval development (40, 41)(see below); egl-10 was a founding member
of a key class of G protein regulators known as RGS proteins (42); and ced-9
plays a crucial regulatory role in programmed cell death (43)(see below).
   With hindsight, I think our rationale for choosing candidate IDCGs was
perfectly reasonable. However, we know now (and suspected then) that many
genes that do not fulfill this particular IDCG criterion also are of interest and
importance. It may well be that the detailed and analytic study of most genes
that affect development in specific ways will be instructive.

A genetic pathway for organ development
By studying groups of genes with related effects on the same aspect of the
worm cell lineage, we have been able to define not only single genes involved
in specific developmental steps but also extensive gene pathways. For exam-

                                                                             327


ple, we have studied a set of genes involved in organ development – specifi-
cally in the development of the vulva of the C. elegans hermaphrodite. The
vulva defines the opening between the uterus and the external environment
and is needed for egg laying and for mating with males. Mutants abnormal in
vulval development were first isolated by Sydney Brenner, and the genes de-
fined by these and similar mutants were initially characterized collaboratively
by John Sulston and me. Vulval developmental mutants are of two basic class-
es (Figure 7) (8, 9). Some mutants lack a vulva, and are called “vulvaless.”
Because C. elegans is an internally self-fertilizing hermaphrodite, a vulvaless
mutant generates fertilized eggs but these eggs develop and hatch in utero, af-
ter which the progeny devour the animal that was both mother and father to
them. The young larvae are released into the environment, so vulvaless mu-
tations are not lethal, at least in the genetic sense of causing the inviability of
a strain. Animals in the second class of vulval developmental mutants have
multiple ectopic vulva-like structures. Such mutants are called “multivulva.”
   Many of the genes defined by vulvaless and multivulva mutants proved to
be involved in the cell interactions that specify worm vulval development
(e.g., (29, 44)). Studies of these genes by our laboratory and by other labora-
tories, particularly that of my ex-graduate student Paul Sternberg, not only es-
tablished the molecular genetic basis of vulva development but also helped
elucidate the Ras pathway for signal transduction (40, 41, 45)(reviewed in




Figure 7. Mutants abnormal in vulva development define two basic classes. (A) Wild type.
(B) A vulvaless mutant. (C) A multivulva mutant. Arrowhead indicates position of the vul-
va. Arrows indicate extra vulva-like structures.


328


(46)). Ras had been discovered as a human proto-oncogene (47), and an un-
derstanding of the normal function of Ras genes as well as of the pathway in
which Ras genes act has proved fundamental to the fields of developmental
biology and oncology. Our more recent studies of genes involved in vulval de-
velopment (48, 49) are revealing how a Retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppres-
sor gene (50) pathway acts to antagonize this Ras oncogene pathway.


PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH
As I and members of my new laboratory at MIT were beginning genetic stud-
ies of the C. elegans cell lineage, one aspect of the cell lineage particularly
caught my attention: in addition to the 959 cells generated during worm de-
velopment and found in the adult, another 131 cells are generated but are
not present in the adult (2, 4). These cells are absent because they undergo
programmed cell death. This phenomenon of naturally-occurring cell death
had long been observed as a feature of animal development (e.g., (1, 51, 52))
and seemed a fundamental but essentially unexplored area of developmental
biology. Furthermore, programmed cell death is a striking feature of nervous
system development (e.g., 105 of the 131 programmed cell deaths in C.
elegans are in the nervous system), and it was neurobiology that had first at-
tracted me to C. elegans. In addition, Kerr, Wyllie and Curie in 1972 (53) had
suggested, based upon ultrastructural studies of dying cells, that the mecha-
nisms responsible for naturally-occurring developmental cell death might also
be involved in the cell deaths seen during tissue homeostasis as well as in
untreated malignant neoplasms and in some cases of therapeutically-induced
tumor regression. They noted that the process of cell death in all of these
cases is characterized by a series of specific structural changes, and they
named this process “apoptosis,” a term that has become widely used and is
often considered to be synonymous with programmed cell death.
   It seemed likely that we could apply the approaches we were taking to study
the C. elegans cell lineage to analyze programmed cell death. In particular,
from the cell lineage we knew that specific cells with diverse developmental
origins undergo programmed cell death at specific times during develop-
ment and that programmed cell death is characterized by a series of specific
morphological changes. Thus, we could think of programmed cell death as a
cell fate, much like other cell fates, such as differentiating into a muscle cell
or a serotonergic neuron. If so, we reasoned, there should be genes that con-
trol both the decision to express that fate and the execution (so to speak) of
the fate itself.

The first cell-death gene, nuc-1
The first gene to be identified that affects C. elegans programmed cell death
was discovered by John Sulston in his initial search for mutants defective in
the cell lineages of the ventral nervous system, the first cell lineages he stud-
ied (54). John was screening for animals abnormal in the number of cells in
the ventral nervous system. To visualize these cells, he used Feulgen DNA

                                                                             329


staining. John observed that in one mutant individual DNA-positive pycnotic
bodies were located precisely in positions where there should have been
prior programmed cell deaths. He showed that this mutant is defective in the
degradation of DNA in cells undergoing programmed cell death and named
the gene defined by this mutant nuc-1 (nuclease abnormal), because it con-
trols the activity of a DNA endonuclease.

ced-1 and ced-2, two genes needed for the engulfment of cell corpses during
programmed cell death
Next, Ed Hedgecock, then a postdoctoral researcher at the LMB, identified
two genes important for the engulfment of cell corpses by neighboring cells
during programmed cell death (55). This process of engulfment, or phago-
cytosis, normally removes dying cells from the body of the animal. Ed named
these two genes ced-1 and ced-2, for cell death abnormal.

The killer gene ced-3
In my laboratory, we were interested in identifying genes responsible either
for causing cells to die during programmed cell death or for deciding which
cells are to live and which are to die by programmed cell death. As an ap-
proach, we decided to seek mutants abnormal either in the presence or in
the pattern of programmed cell deaths. However, using Nomarski optics to vi-
sualize programmed cell deaths was problematic – dying cells are rapidly en-
gulfed, so that at any given developmental stage very few if any cell deaths can
be seen. Following by direct observation the process of cell death in living lar-
vae or embryos is too slow to allow for an efficient mutant hunt. Instead, be-
ginning soon after my 1978 arrival at MIT, we performed mutant hunts using
the nuc-1 mutant to allow the visualization of cell deaths. We obtained a vari-
ety of mutants with abnormalities in patterns of cells deaths, but in each case
the abnormalities proved to reflect more general defects in cell lineage. For
example, in lin-22 mutants five rather than one programmed cell death occur
along each side of the second stage larva; the sources of these extra cell
deaths proved to be the lateral blast cells V1, V2, V3 and V4, which normally
do not generate dying cells but in lin-22 mutants are all transformed to ex-
press the fate of V5, which normally generates one cell that undergoes pro-
grammed cell death (56). Thus, the fundamental role of lin-22 seemed to be
in specifying the fates of V1-4, not in determining which cells live and which
die. It is worth noting that this understanding of lin-22 would have been dif-
ficult to attain in the absence of the ability to study at single-cell resolution
the C. elegans cell lineage. No mutants specific for defects in programmed cell
death were isolated from our nuc-1 screens.
   The ced-1 and ced-2 mutants of Hedgecock et al. (55) offered us a more
powerful approach. In ced-1 and ced-2 mutants, dying cells initiate the process
of programmed cell death but are not engulfed, so that cell corpses persist in
an intermediate stage that is easily visualized in living individuals using
Nomarski optics. Visualizing programmed cell deaths in living individuals is
far more efficient for a genetic screen than examining fixed and DNA-stained

330


specimens, as we were doing in our screens with nuc-1 mutants. Specifically,
our nuc-1 screens required establishing lines of animals, so that if a fixed and
stained mutant animal of interest was identified the mutation responsible
could be recovered in a living sibling of the mutant animal. By contrast, if a
mutation were identified in a ced-1 mutant background using Nomarski optics
to visualize programmed cell deaths, the individual carrying that mutation
could be picked and used to establish a mutant strain. We could screen many
more ced-1 animals than nuc-1 clones of animals. Thus, our idea was to muta-
genize ced-1 animals and look for mutants with abnormalities in the presence
or in the pattern of programmed cell deaths as seen with Nomarski optics. In
this way, we hoped to be able to identify mutants in which the process of pro-
grammed cell death had not been initiated or in which the pattern of pro-
grammed cell deaths was altered. We were encouraged to suspect that such
mutants would exist based upon our prior success in isolating cell-lineage mu-
tants with highly specific defects.
   Hilary Ellis (Figure 8), a graduate student in the laboratory, undertook this
mutant hunt. Although ced-1 and ced-2 had not yet been described in any pub-
lication, Ed Hedgecock generously sent Hilary a ced-1 mutant to use in her
screen. Such an open sharing of both information (we knew all about Ed’s re-
sults prior to publication) and resources (he sent us his unpublished mutant)
has been a characteristic of the C. elegans field since its beginning and has, I
believe, allowed the field to blossom in a highly efficient, rapid and enjoyable
fashion. Hilary mutagenized ced-1 animals and found a mutant in which no
cell corpses could be seen (Figure 9). We named the gene defined by this mu-
tant ced- 3. In a series of experiments, Hilary demonstrated that if ced-3 activi-
ty is reduced or eliminated by mutation, essentially all 131 cells that normally
die instead survive (57, 58). Leon Avery, a postdoctoral researcher in my lab-
oratory, later introduced the term “undead” to refer to such surviving cells




                                          Figure 8. Hilary Ellis and her daughter
                                          Alina.

                                                                                    331


                                                        Figure 9. Programmed
                                                        cell death does not occur
                                                        in a ced-3 mutant. (A). A
                                                        ced-1 mutant, defective in
                                                        the engulfment of dying
                                                        cells, contains persisting
                                                        cell corpses (arrows). (B)
                                                        A ced-1 and ced-3
                                                        double mutant, in which
                                                        there is no programmed
                                                        cell death, does not con-
                                                        tain cell corpses. The tri-
                                                        angles indicate marker
                                                        cells present in both ani-
                                                        mals. Bar, 10 microns.
                                                        From (58).




and showed that at least one undead cell is sufficiently normal to be able to
function as a motor neuron and act in feeding behavior (59).
   These findings indicated that the activity of the gene ced-3 is required for
cells to die by programmed cell death. This discovery was key, as it demon-
strated that programmed cell death requires the function of a specific gene
and hence that programmed cell death is an active biological process, analo-
gous to other fundamental biological processes, such as cell division, cell mi-
gration and cell differentiation. Based upon our discovery of ced-3, we pro-
posed our first draft of a genetic pathway for programmed cell death: ced-3
acts to trigger programmed cell death upstream of ced-1 and ced-2, which con-
trol the engulfment of cell corpses and themselves act upstream of nuc-1,
which degrades the DNA in dying cells (57).

The second killer gene, ced-4
In what I thought to be a completely unrelated line of study, graduate student
Carol Trent (Figure 10A) in my laboratory was studying an aspect of C. elegans
behavior, egg-laying. (Our studies of the behavior of egg-laying were begun as
a consequence of my having isolated egg-laying defective mutants while seek-
ing cell lineage mutants and finding that some of the mutants were abnormal
in egg-laying despite being normal in cell lineage and having a normal com-
plement of the cells used for egg-laying.) Carol and technician Nancy Tsung
(Figure 10B) isolated and characterized a set of 145 mutants defective in
egg-laying and found that one of these mutants is egg-laying defective
because it lacks the HSN motor neurons, which innervate the vulval muscles
and drive egg-laying (60). We named the gene defined by this mutant egl-1,
for egg-laying abnormal.

332


Figure 10. (A) Carol Trend. (B) Nancy Tsung.




   Why are the HSN neurons missing in egl-1 mutants? We considered two pos-
sibilities. First, perhaps the HSN neurons are never generated. Second, per-
haps they are generated but once generated they die. This latter alternative
struck us as plausible, because in his studies of the C. elegans cell lineage John
Sulston had found that in males the cells homologous to the HSN neurons
undergo programmed cell death (4). We reasoned that if in fact HSN neurons
were dying by programmed cell death in egl-1 hermaphrodites, then a ced-3
mutation, which blocks programmed cell death, should block this HSN death
and restore both HSN neurons and egg laying to an egl-1 mutant. Hilary tested
this possibility by constructing a ced-3; egl-1 double mutant. She found that in-
deed a mutation in ced-3 suppresses the effects of the egl-1 mutation (Table 1).
Thus, the absence of HSN neurons in egl-1 mutant animals seemed likely to
reflect a defect in which the HSN neurons instead of surviving undergo pro-
grammed cell death. John Sulston directly confirmed that this was the case by
examining the embryonic cell lineage of egl-1 mutants.



Table 1. A ced-3 mutation, which prevents programmed cell death, suppresses the ef-
fects of an egl-1 (gain-of-function) mutation. Adapted from (58).

                                                             Egg-laying
                                     HSN present?            defective?

wild type                                  yes                   no
egl-1                                      no                    yes
ced-3; egl-1                               yes                   no


                                                                                333


  This observation proved very useful, as it suggested a very efficient ap-
proach for the isolation of more ced-3-like mutants: look for mutations that
suppress the egg-laying defect of egl-1 mutants. At least some such mutations
should act by preventing programmed cell death. Both Hilary Ellis and grad-
uate student Chand Desai (Figure 11) sought egl-1 suppressors. Chand’s goal
was different from Hilary’s, as Chand wanted mutations that allowed egg lay-
ing in the absence of HSN neurons and thus could define genes responsible
for aspects of neuronal wiring. Chand isolated a mutant that restored HSN
neurons and proved to be defective in a new gene with properties that Hilary
showed to be essentially identical to those of ced-3. We named this gene ced-4
and added it to the genetic pathway for programmed cell death (58).

Programmed cell death involves a process of cellular suicide
Graduate student Junying Yuan (Figure 12A) then asked whether the ced-3
and ced-4 killer genes act within the cells that die or elsewhere in the body of
the animal, for example to control humoral factors. To address this issue, she
performed genetic mosaic analyses, in which in single animals some cells are
mutant (e.g., lack ced-3 function) while others are wild-type (e.g., have ced-3
function), and asked whether the genetic identity of a cell that normally dies
(ced- 3(+) vs. ced-3(–)) determines its fate (programmed cell death vs. survival).
Junying’s observations suggested that both ced-3 and ced-4 act within the dying
cells themselves (61). These findings indicated that, to this extent at least,
programmed cell death is a process of cellular suicide.

Both CED-3 and CED-4 have human counterparts that function in programmed
cell death
Junying Yuan cloned the ced-4 gene and discovered that the CED-4 protein
was novel, i.e. in its sequence unlike any other protein known at the time. We




                                          Figure 11. Chand Desai.

334


Figure 12. (A) Junying Yuan. (B) Shai Shaham.




published a paper entitled “The Caenorhabditis elegans cell death gene ced-4 en-
codes a novel protein and is expressed during the period of extensive pro-
grammed cell death” (62). Some years later, in 1997, a protein similar to
CED-4 was identified. The laboratory of Xiaodong Wang had characterized
biochemically an in vitro system for cell death and identified a factor, which
they called Apaf-1 (apoptotic protease activating factor), with a domain with
significant similarity to CED-4 (63). Thus, Apaf-1 is a pro-apoptotic human
protein similar in both sequence and function to the C. elegans programmed
cell death killer gene CED-4.
   Just after cloning ced-4 and five years before Apaf-1 was identified, Junying
Yuan also cloned the ced-3 gene and characterized it molecularly in collabo-
ration with graduate student Shai Shaham (Figure 12B). ced-3, too, was novel,
not matching any sequence in the databases at that time. However, we could
not see publishing a paper with the title “Another C. elegans cell death gene
encodes a novel protein.” So we did not. Instead, we waited. Each day or two
for nearly two years, Shai searched the database, until finally there was a hit
(Figure 13)(64). The CED-3 protein is similar in sequence to an enzyme that
had been purified biochemically (65, 66) by two pharmaceutical companies
interested in human inflammatory disease. This enzyme is the protease in-
terleukin-1-beta converting enzyme, or ICE, which converts the pro-form of
the cytokine interleukin-1-beta into the active molecule. CED-3 and ICE
proved to be the founding members of a family of cysteine proteases now
known as caspases (67).
   Based upon this finding and upon additional observations (68) made by

                                                                            335


Figure 13. Printout from the database search done by Shai Shaham on April 27, 1992, re-
vealing that CED-3 is similar to the human protein interleukin-1-beta converting enzyme.
The search was done using the BLAST network service of the U.S. National Center for
Biotechnology Information.




Ding Xue, a postdoctoral researcher in our laboratory, we concluded that
CED-3 functions to kill cells during programmed cell death in C. elegans by
acting as a cysteine protease. We suggested that, given the existence of ICE,
ICE or some other CED-3/ICE-like cysteine proteases likely function in pro-
grammed cell death in mammals. Junying Yuan, in research performed in
her new independent laboratory at the Massachusetts General Hospital, pro-
vided support for this hypothesis in a paper (69) published back-to-back with
our joint paper reporting the similarity between CED-3 and ICE. Extensive
further support for the hypothesis that caspases act in programmed cell death
in mammals has been provided by studies from many laboratories, which
have identified at least 14 mammalian caspases and shown that many func-
tion in programmed cell death, e.g., (67, 70).

ced-9 protects cells against programmed cell death
To identify additional genes involved in C. elegans programmed cell death,
graduate student Ron Ellis (Figure 14A) focused on one particular cell that
undergoes programmed cell death, the sister of the serotonergic NSM neu-
ron in the pharynx, the feeding organ. Ron used Nomarski optics to seek mu-
tants in which the NSM sister cell survives. He obtained two classes of mu-
tants: (1) mutants in which the NSM sister survives but other dying cells still
die, and (2) mutants in which not only the NSM sisters but also all other dy-
ing cells survive. The former set of mutants helped us begin to analyze how
specific cells decide whether to live or die (71). Five of the six mutants in the
latter set were defective in ced-3 or ced-4. However, one mutant in which there

336


Figure 14. (A) Ron Ellis. (B) Michael Hengartner.




was no programmed cell death was different, and defined a new gene. We
named this gene ced-9 (43).
   Genetic studies of ced-9 by Ron Ellis and subsequently by Michael
Hengartner (Figure 14B), also a graduate student in my laboratory, revealed
that our original ced-9 mutation caused a gain rather than a loss of ced-9 func-
tion and, furthermore, that a loss of ced-9 function had the opposite effect
(43). Specifically, whereas a mutation that results in a gain of ced-9 function
causes cells that should die by programmed cell death instead to live, a muta-
tion that results in a loss of ced-9 function causes cells that should live to die by
programmed cell death. These studies indicated that ced-9 controls the deci-
sion between cell survival and programmed cell death (Figure 15) and estab-
lished that unlike ced-3 and ced-4, which promote programmed cell death, the
gene ced-9 protects cells against programmed cell death.
   Michael Hengartner cloned ced-9 and discovered (72) that it encodes a




                                              Figure 15. ced-9 controls the life vs. death
                                              decisions of cells in C. elegans.



                                                                                        337


protein with similarities to the product of the human proto-oncogene Bcl-2
(B cell lymphoma), the misexpression of which had been shown to cause fol-
licular lymphoma (73–75). Prior studies of Bcl-2 had indicated that Bcl-2
could protect cells in the mammalian immune system from undergoing apop-
tosis (e.g., (76, 77)). Thus, the molecularly similar genes ced-9 and Bcl-2 can
protect cells against programmed cell death and apoptosis, respectively, sup-
porting the idea that the morphological changes of apoptosis are effected by
the same mechanisms as those responsible for programmed cell death.
Subsequent studies have revealed a family of CED-9/Bcl-2-like proteins in-
volved in programmed cell death in mammals (e.g., (78, 79)).

The thrill of discovery and the path to scientific visibility
People sometimes ask, when does a scientist feel that “aha!” thrill of discov-
ery? In the case of our studies of programmed cell death, my biggest thrill was
probably on February 12, 1992 (Figure 16). That was the day that Michael
Hengartner obtained the CED-9 sequence, searched the database and found
Bcl-2 at the top of the similarity list. We immediately realized that the pathway
of cell-death genes we were studying in C. elegans was very likely to be similar
to the pathway that controls apoptosis/programmed cell death in humans.




Figure 16. Fax sent to me on February 12, 1992, by Michael Hengartner informing me that
the sequence of CED-9 is similar to that of the human proto-oncogene Bcl-2. Barbara
Osborne, a fellow cell-death researcher, was a visiting scientist in our laboratory on a sab-
batical leave.

338


   Publication dates can belie scientific history. We published the similarity
between CED-3 and ICE before we published the similarity between CED-9
and Bcl-2. Yet our discovery of the similarity between CED-3 and ICE was the
later discovery, made on April 27, 1992. After the discovery of the similarity
between CED-9 and Bcl-2, I immediately and very broadly discussed this find-
ing. Bcl-2 was already of great interest in the field of oncology. I believe that
the fact that Bcl-2 proved to look like a worm protein that antagonized pro-
grammed cell death helped convince researchers that the function of Bcl-2
was to antagonize the cell death process. I also believe that this similarity
made the worm cell-death pathway suddenly a topic of major interest in the
biomedical community, as this pathway was no longer simply an abstract for-
malism derived from complicated genetic studies of a microscopic soil-
dwelling roundworm but rather a framework for a process fundamental to
human biology and human disease.
   The back-to-back publication of the discoveries that CED-3 looks like a hu-
man protease (64) and that CED-3 expressed in mammalian cells could in-
duce those cells to undergo programmed cell death (69) revealed for the first
time a mechanistic basis of the process of programmed cell death. This work
also strongly suggested that mammalian cells contain the machinery for cel-
lular suicide. The day these two papers were published (November 19, 1993),
I received telephone calls from scientists at five pharmaceutical companies
wanting to know how these findings could best be used to help them develop
novel drugs. There was no question that the biomedical community had be-
come interested in C. elegans programmed cell death.

The core molecular genetic pathway for programmed cell death
At about the time that we found the similarity between CED-9 and Bcl-2,
David Vaux, working at Stanford University with Irv Weissman and Stuart
Kim, demonstrated that when expressed as a transgene in C. elegans human
Bcl-2 can protect against programmed cell death in worms (80). Michael
Hengartner in my laboratory confirmed this finding and further established
that human Bcl-2 can substitute for worm ced-9 in a ced-9 mutant (72). These
observations strongly indicated that ced-9 and Bcl-2 act to prevent pro-
grammed cell death by similar mechanisms and, furthermore, since Bcl-2 can
substitute for ced-9 in worms, that ced-9 and Bcl-2 act in similar molecular ge-
netic pathways.
   By analyzing the genetic interactions among ced-9, ced-3 and ced-4, Michael
Hengartner and Shai Shaham helped define the genetic pathway for the
core, killing step of programmed cell death in C. elegans: ced-3 kills; ced-4 kills
by promoting the killing activity of ced-3; and ced-9 protects by preventing ced-4
from promoting the killing activity of ced-3 (43, 81). This pathway raised the
question, what regulates ced-9 ? The answer proved to be the gene egl-1, which
I discussed above as the gene that can mutate to cause the HSN motor neu-
rons to undergo programmed cell death. In a series of genetic studies, post-
doctoral fellow Barbara Conradt (Figure 17) discovered that the normal func-
tion of egl-1 is not specific to the HSN neurons but rather is needed for

                                                                               339


                                              Figure 17. Barbara Conradt.



essentially all programmed cell deaths, like ced-3 and ced-4 (82). However,
whereas ced-3 and ced-4 act downstream of ced-9, the egl-1 gene acts upstream
of ced-9. These findings suggest a pathway in which egl-1 kills by preventing
ced-9 from preventing ced-4 from promoting the killing activity of ced-3.
Barbara cloned egl- 1, found that it encodes a small protein of 91 amino acids
with similarity to the so-called BH3-only members of the Bcl-2 family. She
showed that the EGL-1 and CED-9 proteins interact physically. A variety of
studies, mostly by others, indicated that the CED-9 and CED-4 proteins also
interact physically, as do the CED-4 and CED-3 proteins. Taken together,
these observations defined a molecular genetic pathway for programmed cell
death involving a cascade of protein interactions and a predicted conserva-
tion with mammals (Figure 18).

The overall molecular genetic pathway for programmed cell death in C. elegans
In further studies using similar approaches, we and others have analyzed
events both upstream and downstream of this core pathway. Our current pic-
ture of the overall molecular genetic pathway for programmed cell death in




Figure 18. Core molecular genetic pathway for programmed cell death in C. elegans and the
correspondence of the C. elegans gene products with mammalian counterparts. ➝, positive
interaction; –|, negative interaction.

340


Figure 19. The overall molecular genetic pathway for programmed cell death in C. elegans.




C. elegans is shown in Figure 19. First, every cell in the animal must decide
whether it is to live or die by programmed cell death. We identified two of the
three genes known to be involved in this decision in a mutant hunt related to
our studies of the behavior of egg laying. We knew that the neuromodulator
serotonin was involved in egg laying (83), and graduate student Carol Trent
and technician Nancy Tsung sought mutants abnormal in the only seroton-
ergic neurons we knew about at that time, the NSM neurons in the pharynx.
Carol and Nancy identified two mutants that appeared to have extra NSM
neurons, and graduate student Ron Ellis found that the extra NSM neurons
in these mutants were surviving NSM sister cells (71). These mutants defined
the genes ces-1 and ces-2. Ron Ellis found two additional ces-1 mutants in the
screen described above in which he looked directly for mutants defective in
the deaths of the NSM sister cells (71). ces-2 encodes a transcription factor
similar to the product of the human proto-oncogene HLF (hepatic leukemia
factor), which has been implicated in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (84). ces-2
directly represses the transcription of ces-1, which encodes a transcription fac-
tor of the zinc finger family (85). Based on our studies of ces-2 and ces-1, both
the oncogenic form of HLF and the human CES-1 counterpart, SLUG, have
been shown to regulate programmed cell death in mammalian cells, suggest-
ing that these proteins act in acute lymphoblastic leukemia through effects
on programmed cell death (86, 87).
   The third gene we have shown to regulate cell-type specific programmed
cell death in C. elegans is tra-1 (88). The tra-1 gene, like the ces-1 gene, encodes
a Zn finger transcription factor; the TRA-1 protein is similar to members of

                                                                                     341


the human GLI protein family (89), which has been implicated in glioblas-
toma (90) and also in the developmental disorder Grieg cephalopolysyn-
dactyly syndrome (91). tra-1 controls sexual identity in C. elegans; the activity
of tra-1 is regulated by the ratio of X chromosomes to autosomes, so that it is
active in hermaphrodites (XX) and inactive in males (X0) (e.g., (92)).
Barbara Conradt discovered that tra-1 regulates the sexually dimorphic pro-
grammed cell deaths of the HSN neurons (which survive in hermaphrodites
and die in males) by repressing the transcripton of the egl-1 BH3-only killer
gene (88). Her findings suggest that if egl-1 is expressed (as in males, which
have low TRA-1 repressor activity), the resulting EGL-1 protein binds to the
CED-9 protein, causing the activation of CED-4 and the subsequent activation
of CED-3, resulting in cell death. By contrast, if egl-1 is repressed by TRA-1 (as
in hermaphrodites), HSN neurons survive. Our original egl-1 mutations,
which result in a gain rather than a loss of egl-1 gene activity, disrupt the TRA-
1 binding site of egl-1, causing egl-1 to be inappropriately expressed and thus
the HSN neurons to die in hermaphrodites.
   Overall, our studies of the cell-type specific control of programmed cell
death indicate that the decision about whether a given cell is to live or die is
controlled by the actions of specific transcription factors. This finding is con-
sistent with our hypothesis from many years ago that programmed cell death
can be regarded as a cell fate, since the expression of many cell fates is speci-
fied by the actions of and interactions among particular transcription factors.
   The engulfment step of programmed cell death has proved to involve at
least seven genes that define two parallel and partially redundant signal trans-
duction pathways responsible for communication between the cell that will
die and the engulfing cell (Figure 20)(55, 93–99). These two pathways act not
only in the recognition by engulfing cells of cells that are to die and in con-
trolling the cytoarchitectural changes necessary for the process of phagocy-
tosis but also in the killing process itself (100).
   Finally, as shown by my graduate students Yi-Chun Wu and Gillian Stanfield
(101), the DNA in cells undergoing programmed cell death is degraded (in
part) by the direct protein product of the first cell-death gene ever identified,
nuc-1.
   As indicated in Figure 12, most and possibly all of the genes involved in
programmed cell death in C. elegans have human counterparts, most of which
have been implicated in programmed cell death in humans and some of
which have been implicated in human disease. This pathway is clearly incom-
plete. Unpublished studies by us and by others have identified a number of
additional genes with roles in programmed cell death, and there are many
aspects of the pathway that have not been explored fully. There is still much
to learn about both the genetic pathway and the molecular mechanisms of
programmed cell death in C. elegans.

Programmed cell death and human disease
As the understanding of programmed cell death in C. elegans and in other or-
ganisms has progressed, more and more human disorders have been shown

342


Figure 20. Model for the two signaling pathways that lead to cell-corpse engulfment. (A)
Genetic pathways. (B) Diagram of proposed molecular pathways. See text for references.




to be, or at least strongly suspected to be, caused by abnormalities in pro-
grammed cell death. The relationship between programmed cell death and
human disease has been reviewed numerous times (e.g., (102–105)), and
here I will note only that either too much or too little cell death can cause dis-
ease. For example, the neurodegenerative diseases – such as Alzheimer’s
Disease, Parkinson’s Disease, Huntington’s Disease and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis or ALS – all involve neuronal cell death. In each case, specific class-
es of nerve cells die, leading to the particular clinical features of each of these
neurologic disorders. One major hypothesis today is that the nerve cell
deaths in some of these disorders are essentially ectopic programmed cell
deaths, i.e., deaths that use the same mechanisms as those that occur during
normal development but that for some reason are caused to occur at the
wrong time, in the wrong place or affecting the wrong cell type. The evidence
supporting this hypothesis varies among the neurodegenerative disorders,
and at present is probably strongest for certain retinal degenerations (e.g.,
(106)). Other disorders characterized by too much cell death and that may
well involve ectopic programmed cell death include cerebral stroke, traumat-
ic brain injury, AIDS, myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, acute
liver injury and aplastic anemia.
   Conversely, some human disorders involve too little cell death. The num-
ber of cells in our bodies is defined by an equilibrium of opposing forces: mi-
tosis adds cells, while programmed cell death removes them. Just as too much
cell division can lead to a pathological increase in cell number, so can too litt-
le cell death. Certain cancers, including follicular lymphoma, which can be
caused by the misexpression in B cells of the CED-9-like proto-oncogene Bcl-2
(77, 107), are clearly a consequence of too little programmed cell death. It

                                                                                   343


may well be that most cancers involve a misregulation of programmed cell
death. Similarly, the clinical features of certain autoimmune diseases and viral
infections are consequences of too little programmed cell death.
   Because of the relationship between programmed cell death and human
disease, the identification of the genes and proteins that function in the
process of programmed cell death has provided new targets for possible in-
tervention in a broad diversity of disorders. My dream is that the pathway we
have identified for programmed cell death in C. elegans will help lead to bet-
ter diagnostics, treatments and cures for some of these diseases responsible
for so much human suffering.

The principle of biological universality
One point that emerges from the studies of programmed cell death in C. ele-
gans and other organisms is the striking similarity of genes and gene pathways
among organisms that are as superficially distinct as worms and humans.
Many studies over the past 10 or so years involving C. elegans, yeast, the fruit
fly Drosophila melanogaster and other simple organisms have repeatedly led to
analogous findings concerning evolutionary conservation and have estab-
lished one of the most striking themes of modern molecular biology. I like to
refer to this theme as “The principle of biological universality,” and it under-
lies my strong conviction that the rigorous, detailed and analytic study of the
biology of any organism is likely to lead to findings of importance in the un-
derstanding of other organisms, including ourselves.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First, I thank Sydney Brenner and John Sulston, who are my ex-colleagues, my
mentors and my good friends, and with whom I have had the enormous plea-
sure of sharing the 2002 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. I am grateful
to Jim Watson, Wally Gilbert and Klaus Weber, in whose combined laboratory
I worked as a graduate student and who taught me not only how but also why
to do science. I thank my colleagues at MIT, who have provided a spectacu-
larly supportive environment that fostered my growth as an independent sci-
entist. In particular, my department chairs – Boris Magasanik, Gene Brown,
Maury Fox, Richard Hynes, Phil Sharp, and Bob Sauer – all helped me in
many ways over the years. Amongst my many wonderful colleagues, Salva
Luria, David Baltimore and David Botstein particularly stimulated me to
think, to grow and to appreciate that it is important as a scientist to fulfill a re-
sponsibility to a greater community.
   I thank my family. My wife Martha Constantine Paton has given me love
and support, while ensuring that I maintain a perspective on what is impor-
tant. Martha’s two sons, Chris and Joe Paton, introduced me to the special
pleasures of family life. My daughter Alexandra Constantine Horvitz con-
stantly brings me amusement, wisdom and joy, as well as an appreciation for
biology that goes well beyond what I have ever observed through a micro-
scope looking at worms. My sister Carol Horvitz-Nutt and her husband Randy

344


Nutt have shared their love and support for many years. Most deeply, I thank
my parents, Mary and Oscar Horvitz, who raised me to ask “Why?” and
“How?” and who sustained a belief in me that gave me the confidence to do
science and more generally to explore all that life has to offer.
   I thank the members of and visitors to my laboratory at MIT, some of
whom were directly responsible for the research described above and all of
whom together generated the stimulating and enjoyable environment that
made such work possible. It is very much their efforts, their insights, and their
accomplishments that have been recognized. These researchers include
Namiko Abe, Gwen Acton, Mark Alkema, Ezequiel Alvarez-Saavedra, Victor
Ambros, Na An, Erik Andersen, Colleen Asbury, Leon Avery, Cori Bargmann,
Michael Basson, Greg Beitel, Andrew Bellinger, Ala Berdichevsky, Barbara
Biber, Kris Bieker- Brady, Laird Bloom, Ned Buttner, Scott Cameron, Gordon
Campbell, Beth Castor, Craig Ceol, Wendy Champness, Fangli Chen, Andrew
Chisholm, Chantal Christ, Scott Clark, Barbara Conradt, Brian Davies, Ewa
Davison, Lisa Delissio, Chand Desai, Elizabeth DeStasio, John Doll, Bob
Edgar, Mary Kaye Edwards, Hilary Ellis, Ron Ellis, Scott Federhen, Chip
Ferguson, Mike Finney, Bill Fixsen, Brendan Galvin, Gian Garriga, Elad Gil,
Dorit Ginsberg, Susie Glass, Iva Greenwald, Melissa Harrison, Erika Hartwieg,
Anna Heineman, Andrew Hellman, Michael Hengartner, Tory Herman,
Michael Herman, Brad Hersh, Emma Jean Hess, George Hess, Megan Hig-
ginbotham, Dennis Hom, Michael Huang, Brigitte Huber, Melissa Hunter-
Ensor, Mike Hurwitz, Ho-Yon Hwang, Yishi Jin, Carl Johnson, Erik Jorgensen,
Josh Kaplan, Sam Katz, Saechin Kim, Stuart Kim, Michael Koelle, Kerry
Kornfeld, Michel Labouesse, Eric Lander, Joshua Levin, Chris Li, Leslie
Lobel, David Lombard, Xiaowei Lu, Andras Madi, Steve McIntire, Marianne
McPherson, Mark Metzstein, Eric Miska, Mireya Nadal-Vicens, Dan Omura,
Barbara Osborne, Andrea Page, Joan Park, Dianne Parry, Erica Pascal, Igna-
cio Perez de la Cruz, Rajesh Ranganathan, Peter Reddien, Niels Ringstad,
Denise Roberts, Marsha Rosner, Richard Russell, Gary Ruvkun, Hitoshi Sawa,
Beth Sawin, Hillel Schwartz, Shai Shaham, Liz Speliotes, Gillian Stanfield,
Kristen Stephens, Michael Stern, Paul Sternberg, Jeff Thomas, Jim Thomas,
Carol Trent, Nancy Tsung, Nadine Urann, Sander Van den Heuvel, Clem
Wang, Eve Wolinsky, Yi-Chun Wu, Fang Xie, Ding Xue, Junying Yuan and
Zheng Zhou.
   I thank the members of the C. elegans research community for establishing
and maintaining a field that has been friendly, supportive, interactive and
open in the sharing of data, reagents, techniques and even ideas. In particu-
lar, Bob Edgar played a pivotal role by founding The Worm Breeder’s
Gazette, in which unpublished observations and methods have been broadly
distributed, sometimes long before publication.
   I thank the funding agencies that have supported my research. The
Muscular Dystrophy Association and the UK Medical Research Council fund-
ed my initial studies of C. elegans while I was a postdoctoral researcher in
Sydney Brenner’s laboratory in Cambridge, England. After my move to MIT
in 1978, my research was funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health

                                                                             345


and, beginning in 1988, by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. I am very
appreciative of this financial support, which I believe illustrates an important
point. These agencies funded me to do very basic research at a time where
neither the generality nor the application of our efforts was at all clear. C.
elegans was an obscure organism. Genetic studies are often highly abstract,
and there was no existing technology available to link genetic observations of
C. elegans with the molecular and biochemical findings being made in studies
of other organisms. My research did not target any disease, nor did I know if
the biology we uncovered would be relevant to any organism not closely re-
lated to C. elegans. Nonetheless, our studies established mechanisms that ap-
pear to be universal among animals, and our findings may help provide the
basis for new treatments for a broad variety of human diseases.
    Some important points emerge from these considerations. First, basic re-
search can lead in unexpected ways to insights of substantial practical impor-
tance. Time and time again, truly basic studies of simple experimental or-
ganisms have proved directly relevant to human biology and human disease.
An investment in such basic studies is an effective investment indeed.
However, this investment must be made outside of the private sector, by gov-
ernments and foundations, because only such organizations can act based on
the fact that discoveries from basic research have a high likelihood of bene-
fiting humanity, but in ways that cannot be predicted and hence cannot con-
stitute a robust “business plan.” I thank those responsible for my early support
who, either for these reasons or perhaps more simply because they believed
that the pursuit of knowledge is a vital aspect of human culture, saw fit to sup-
port our studies of the genetics of cell lineage and programmed cell death in
a microscopic worm.
    I dedicate this lecture to my mother, Mary Horvitz, and to the memory of
my father, Oscar Horvitz.


REFERENCES
 1. Lockshin, R. A., and Williams, C.M. 1964. Programmed cell death. II. Endocrine po-
    tentiation of the breakdown of the intersegmental muscles of silkmoths. J. Insect
    Physiol. 10: 643–649.
 2. Sulston, J. E. & Horvitz, H. R. 1977. Post-embryonic cell lineages of the nematode,
    Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. Biol. 56: 110–156.
 3. Kimble, J. & Hirsh, D. 1979. The postembryonic cell lineages of the hermaphrodite
    and male gonads in Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. Biol. 70: 396– 417.
 4. Sulston, J. E., Schierenberg, E., White, J. G. & Thomson, J. N. 1983. The embryonic
    cell lineage of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. Biol. 100: 64–119.
 5. Kimble, J., Sulston, J. & White, J. 1979 Regulative development in the postembryonic lineages
    of Caenorhabditis elegans, in Cell lineage, stem cells and cell determination, ed.
    LeDouarin, N. (Elsevier, New York), pp. 59–68.
 6. Sulston, J. E. & White, J. G. 1980. Regulation and cell autonomy during postembry-
    onic development of Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. Biol. 78: 577–597.
 7. Brenner, S. 1974. The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 77: 71–94.
 8. Horvitz, H. R. & Sulston, J. E. 1980. Isolation and genetic characterization of cell-lin-
    eage mutants of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 96: 435– 54.



346


 9. Sulston, J. E. & Horvitz, H. R. 1981. Abnormal cell lineages in mutants of the nema-
    tode Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. Biol. 82: 41–55.
10. Ambros, V. & Horvitz, H. R. 1984. Heterochronic mutants of the nematode
    Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 226: 409–16.
11. Chalfie, M., Horvitz, H. R. & Sulston, J. E. 1981. Mutations that lead to reiterations in
    the cell lineages of C. elegans. Cell 24: 59–69.
12. Chalfie, M., Tu, Y., Euskirchen, G., Ward, W. W. & Prasher, D. C. 1994. Green fluores-
    cent protein as a marker for gene expression. Science 263: 802–805.
13. Ambros, V. & Horvitz, H. R. 1987. The lin-14 locus of Caenorhabditis elegans controls
    the time of expression of specific postembryonic developmental events. Genes Dev 1:
    398–414.
14. Ruvkun, G., Ambros, V., Coulson, A., Waterston, R., Sulston, J. & Horvitz, H. R. 1989.
    Molecular genetics of the Caenorhabditis elegans heterochronic gene lin-14. Genetics 121:
    501–16.
15. Lee, R. C., Feinbaum, R. L. & Ambros, V. 1993. The C. elegans heterochronic gene lin-4
    encodes small RNAs with antisense complementarity to lin-14. Cell 75: 843–54.
16. Reinhart, B. J., Slack, F. J., Basson, M., Pasquinelli, A. E., Bettinger, J. C., Rougvie, A.
    E., Horvitz, H. R. & Ruvkun, G. 2000. The 21-nucleotide let-7 RNA regulates develop-
    mental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 403: 901–6.
17. Pasquinelli, A. E., Reinhart, B. J., Slack, F., Martindale, M. Q., Kuroda, M. I., Maller, B.,
    Hayward, D. C., Ball, E. E., Degnan, B., Muller, P., Spring, J., Srinivasan, A., Fishman,
    M., Finnerty, J., Corbo, J., Levine, M., Leahy, P., Davidson, E. & Ruvkun, G. 2000.
    Conservation of the sequence and temporal expression of let-7 heterochronic regula-
    tory RNA. Nature 408: 86–9.
18. Lee, R. C. & Ambros, V. 2001. An extensive class of small RNAs in Caenorhabditis ele-
    gans. Science 294: 862–4.
19. Lau, N. C., Lim, L. P., Weinstein, E. G. & Bartel, D. P. 2001. An abundant class of tiny
    RNAs with probable regulatory roles in Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 294: 858–62.
20. Lagos-Quintana, M., Rauhut, R., Lendeckel, W. & Tuschl, T. 2001. Identification of
    novel genes coding for small expressed RNAs. Science 294: 853–8.
21. Reinhart, B. J., Weinstein, E. G., Rhoades, M. W., Bartel, B. & Bartel, D. P. 2002.
    MicroRNAs in plants. Genes Dev 16: 1616–26.
22. Horvitz, H. R. 1990. Genetic control of Caenorhabditis elegans cell lineage, in The Harvey
    Lectures,Wiley-Liss, Inc., Vol. 84, pp. 65–77.
23. Horvitz, H. R. & Herskowitz, I. 1992. Mechanisms of asymmetric cell division: two Bs
    or not two Bs, that is the question. Cell 68: 237–55.
24. Finney, M., Ruvkun, G. & Horvitz, H. R. 1988. The C. elegans cell lineage and differ-
    entiation gene unc-86 encodes a protein with a homeodomain and extended similari-
    ty to transcription factors. Cell 55: 757–69.
25. Freyd, G., Kim, S. K. & Horvitz, H. R. 1990. Novel cysteine-rich motif and home-
    odomain in the product of the Caenorhabditis elegans cell lineage gene lin- 11. Nature
    344: 876–879.
26. Sternberg, P. W. & Horvitz, H. R. 1984. The genetic control of cell lineage during ne-
    matode development. Annu Rev Genet 18: 489–524.
27. Lewis, E. B. 1963. Genes and developmental pathways. Am. Zool. 3: 33–56.
28. Lewis, E. B. 1978. A gene complex controlling segmentation in Drosophila. Nature 276:
    565–70.
29. Greenwald, I. S., Sternberg, P. W. & Horvitz, H. R. 1983. The lin-12 locus specifies cell
    fates in Caenorhabditis elegans. Cell 34: 435–44.
30. Ferguson, E. L. & Horvitz, H. R. 1985. Identification and characterization of 22 genes
    that affect the vulval cell lineages of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 110:
    17–72.
31. Ferguson, E. L., Sternberg, P. W. & Horvitz, H. R. 1987. A genetic pathway for the
    specification of the vulval cell lineages of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 326: 259–67.



                                                                                            347


32. Greenwald, I. 1985. lin-12, a nematode homeotic gene, is homologous to a set of
    mammalian proteins that includes epidermal growth factor. Cell 43: 583–90.
33. Greenwald, I. 1998. LIN-12/Notch signaling: lessons from worms and flies. Genes Dev
    12: 1751–62.
34. Frisen, J. & Lendahl, U. 2001. Oh no, Notch again! Bioessays 23: 3–7.
35. Allenspach, E. J., Maillard, I., Aster, J. C. & Pear, W. S. 2002. Notch signaling in cancer.
    Cancer Biol Ther 1: 466–76.
36. Seydoux, G. & Greenwald, I. 1989. Cell autonomy of lin-12 function in a cell fate de-
    cision in C. elegans. Cell 57: 1237–45.
37. Wilkinson, H. A., Fitzgerald, K. & Greenwald, I. 1994. Reciprocal changes in expres-
    sion of the receptor lin-12 and its ligand lag-2 prior to commitment in a C. elegans cell
    fate decision. Cell 79: 1187–98.
38. Struhl, G., Fitzgerald, K. & Greenwald, I. 1993. Intrinsic activity of the Lin-12 and
    Notch intracellular domains in vivo. Cell 74: 331–45.
39. Levitan, D. & Greenwald, I. 1995. Facilitation of lin-12-mediated signalling by sel-12, a
    Caenorhabditis elegans S182 Alzheimer’s disease gene. Nature 377: 351–4.
40. Beitel, G. J., Clark, S. G. & Horvitz, H. R. 1990. Caenorhabditis elegans ras gene let-60 acts
    as a switch in the pathway of vulval induction. Nature 348: 503–509.
41. Han, M. & Sternberg, P. W. 1990. let-60, a gene that specifies cell fates during C. elegans
    vulval induction, encodes a ras protein. Cell 63: 921–31.
42. Koelle, M. R. & Horvitz, H. R. 1996. EGL-10 regulates G protein signaling in the C.
    elegans nervous system and shares a conserved domain with many mammalian pro-
    teins. Cell 84: 115–25.
43. Hengartner, M. O., Ellis, R. E. & Horvitz, H. R. 1992. Caenorhabditis elegans gene ced-9
    protects cells from programmed cell death. Nature 356: 494–499.
44. Sternberg, P. W. & Horvitz, H. R. 1989. The combined action of two intercellular sig-
    naling pathways specifies three cell fates during vulval induction in C. elegans. Cell 58:
    679–93.
45. Clark, S. G., Stern, M. J. & Horvitz, H. R. 1992. C. elegans cell-signalling gene sem-5 en-
    codes a protein with SH2 and SH3 domains. Nature 356: 340–4.
46. Chang, C. & Sternberg, P. W. 1999. C. elegans vulval development as a model system to
    study the cancer biology of EGFR signaling. Cancer Metastasis Rev 18: 203–13.
47. Parada, L. F., Tabin, C. J., Shih, C. & Weinberg, R. A. 1982. Human EJ bladder carci-
    noma oncogene is homologue of Harvey sarcoma virus ras gene. Nature 297: 474–8.
48. Lu, X. & Horvitz, H. R. 1998. lin-35 and lin-53, two genes that antagonize a C. elegans
    Ras pathway, encode proteins similar to Rb and its binding protein RbAp48. Cell 95:
    981–91.
49. Ceol, C. J. & Horvitz, H. R. 2001. dpl-1 DP and efl-1 E2F act with lin-35 Rb to antago-
    nize Ras signaling in C. elegans vulval development. Mol Cell 7: 461–73.
50. Friend, S. H., Bernards, R., Rogelj, S., Weinberg, R. A., Rapaport, J. M., Albert, D. M.
    & Dryja, T. P. 1986. A human DNA segment with properties of the gene that predis-
    poses to retinoblastoma and osteosarcoma. Nature 323: 643–6.
51. Glücksmann, A. 1951. Cell deaths in normal vertebrate ontogeny. Biol. Rev. 26: 59–86.
52. Saunders, J. 1966. Death in embryonic systems. Science 154: 604–612.
53. Kerr, J. F., Wyllie, A. H. & Currie, A. R. 1972. Apoptosis: a basic biological phenome-
    non with wide-ranging implications in tissue kinetics. Br J Cancer 26: 239–57.
54. Sulston, J. E. 1976. Post-embryonic development in the ventral cord of Caenorhabditis
    elegans. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London Ser. B 275: 287–298.
55. Hedgecock, E. M., Sulston, J. E. & Thomson, J. N. 1983. Mutations affecting pro-
    grammed cell deaths in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 220: 1277–1279.
56. Horvitz, H. R., Sternberg, P. W., Greenwald, I. S., Fixsen, W. & Ellis, H. M. 1983.
    Mutations that affect neural cell lineages and cell fates during the development of the
    nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 2: 453–63.
57. Horvitz, H. R., Ellis, H. M. & Sternberg, P. 1982. Programmed cell death in nematode
    development. Neuroscience Commentaries 1: 56–65.


348


58. Ellis, H. M. & Horvitz, H. R. 1986. Genetic control of programmed cell death in the
    nematode C. elegans. Cell 44: 817–829.
59. Avery, L. & Horvitz, H. R. 1987. A cell that dies during wild-type C. elegans develop-
    ment can function as a neuron in a ced-3 mutant. Cell 51: 1071–8.
60. Trent, C., Tsung, N. & Horvitz, H. R. 1983. Egg-laying defective mutants of the nema-
    tode Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 104: 619–647.
61. Yuan, J. Y. & Horvitz, H. R. 1990. The Caenorhabditis elegans genes ced-3 and ced-4 act
    cell autonomously to cause programmed cell death. Dev Biol 138: 33– 41.
62. Yuan, J. & Horvitz, H. R. 1992. The Caenorhabditis elegans cell death gene ced- 4 en-
    codes a novel protein and is expressed during the period of extensive programmed
    cell death. Development 116: 309–320.
63. Zou, H., Henzel, W. J., Liu, X., Lutschg, A. & Wang, X. 1997. Apaf-1, a human protein
    homologous to C. elegans CED-4, participates in cytochrome c-dependent activation of
    caspase-3. Cell 90: 405–13.
64. Yuan, J., Shaham, S., Ledoux, S., Ellis, H. M. & Horvitz, H. R. 1993. The C. elegans cell
    death gene ced-3 encodes a protein similar to mammalian interleukin- 1 beta-convert-
    ing enzyme. Cell 75: 641–652.
65. Thornberry, N. A., Bull, H. G., Calaycay, J. R., Chapman, K. T., Howard, A. D.,
    Kostura, M. J., Miller, D. K., Molineaux, S. M., Weidner, J. R., Aunins, J., Elliston, K.,
    Ayala, J., Casano, F., Chin, J., Ding, G., Egger, L., Gaffney, E., Limjuco, G., Palyha, O.,
    Raju, S., et al. 1992. A novel heterodimeric cysteine protease is required for inter-
    leukin-1 beta processing in monocytes. Nature 356: 768–774.
66. Cerretti, D. P., Kozlosky, C. J., Mosley, B., Nelson, N., Ness, N., Greenstreet, T. A.,
    March, C. J., Kronheim, S. R., Druk, T., Cannizzaro, L. A., Huebner, K. & Black, R. A.
    1992. Molecular cloning of the interleukin-1b converting enzyme. Science 256: 97–100.
67. Nicholson, D. W. 1999. Caspase structure, proteolytic substrates, and function during
    apoptotic cell death. Cell Death Differ 6: 1028–42.
68. Xue, D., Shaham, S. & Horvitz, H. R. 1996. The Caenorhabditis elegans cell-death pro-
    tein CED-3 is a cysteine protease with substrate specificities similar to those of the hu-
    man CPP32 protease. Genes Dev. 10: 1073–1083.
69. Miura, M., Zhu, H., Rotello, R., Hartwieg, E. A. & Yuan, J. 1993. Induction of apopto-
    sis in fibroblasts by IL-1 beta-converting enzyme, a mammalian homolog of the C. ele-
    gans cell death gene ced-3. Cell 75: 653–60.
70. Shi, Y. 2002. Mechanisms of caspase activation and inhibition during apoptosis. Mol
    Cell 9: 459–70.
71. Ellis, R. E. & Horvitz, H. R. 1991. Two C. elegans genes control the programmed deaths
    of specific cells in the pharynx. Development 112: 591–603.
72. Hengartner, M. O. & Horvitz, H. R. 1994. C. elegans cell survival gene ced-9 encodes a
    functional homolog of the mammalian proto-oncogene bcl-2. Cell 76: 665–676.
73. Bakhshi, A., Jensen, J. P., Goldman, P., Wright, J. J., McBride, O. W., Epstein, A. L. &
    Korsmeyer, S. J. 1985. Cloning the chromosomal breakpoint of t(14;18) human lym-
    phomas: clustering around JH on chromosome 14 and near a transcriptional unit on
    18. Cell 41: 899–906.
74. Cleary, M. L., Smith, S. D. & Sklar, J. 1986. Cloning and structural analysis of cDNAs
    for bcl-2 and a hybrid bcl- 2/immunoglobulin transcript resulting from the t(14;18)
    translocation. Cell 47: 19–28.
75. Tsujimoto, Y. & Croce, C. M. 1986. Analysis of the structure, transcripts, and protein
    products of bcl-2, the gene involved in human follicular lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci
    U S A 83: 5214–8.
76. Vaux, D. L., Cory, S. & Adams, J. M. 1988. bcl-2 gene promotes haemopoietic cell sur-
    vival and cooperates with c-myc to immortalize pre-B cells. Nature 335: 440–442.
77. Hockenbery, D., Nunez, G., Milliman, C., Schreiber, R. D. & Korsmeyer, S. J. 1990. Bcl-
    2 is an inner mitochondrial membrane protein that blocks programmed cell death.
    Nature 348: 334–336.



                                                                                          349


 78. Gross, A., McDonnell, J. M. & Korsmeyer, S. J. 1999. BCL-2 family members and the
     mitochondria in apoptosis. Genes Dev 13: 1899–911.
 79. Cory, S. & Adams, J. M. 2002. The Bcl2 family: regulators of the cellular life-or-death
     switch. Nat Rev Cancer 2: 647–56.
 80. Vaux, D. L., Weissman, I. L. & Kim, S. K. 1992. Prevention of programmed cell death
     in Caenorhabditis elegans by human bcl-2. Science 258: 1955–1957.
 81. Shaham, S. & Horvitz, H. R. 1996. Developing Caenorhabditis elegans neurons may
       contain both cell-death protective and killer activities. Genes Dev. 10: 578– 591.
 82. Conradt, B. & Horvitz, H. R. 1998. The C. elegans protein EGL-1 is required for pro-
       grammed cell death and interacts with the Bcl-2-like protein CED-9. Cell 93:
       519–529.
 83. Horvitz, H. R., Chalfie, M., Trent, C., Sulston, J. E. & Evans, P. D. 1982. Serotonin
       and octopamine in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 216: 1012–4.
 84. Metzstein, M. M., Hengartner, M. O., Tsung, N., Ellis, R. E. & Horvitz, H. R. 1996.
       Transcriptional regulator of programmed cell death encoded by Caenorhabditis ele-
       gans gene ces-2. Nature 382: 545–547.
 85. Metzstein, M. M. & Horvitz, H. R. 1999. The C. elegans cell death specification gene
       ces-1 encodes a snail family zinc finger protein. Mol Cell 4: 309–19.
 86. Inaba, T., Inukai, T., Yoshihara, T., Seyschab, H., Ashmun, R. A., Canman, C. E.,
       Laken, S. J., Kastan, M. B. & Look, A. T. 1996. Reversal of apoptosis by the
       leukaemia-associated E2A-HLF chimaeric transcription factor. Nature 382: 541– 544.
 87. Inukai, T., Inoue, A., Kurosawa, H., Goi, K., Shinjyo, T., Ozawa, K., Mao, M., Inaba,
       T. & Look, A. T. 1999. SLUG, a ces-1-related zinc finger transcription factor gene
       with antiapoptotic activity, is a downstream target of the E2A-HLF oncoprotein. Mol
       Cell 4: 343–52.
 88. Conradt, B. & Horvitz, H. R. 1999. The TRA-1A sex determination protein of C. ele-
       gans regulates sexually dimorphic cell deaths by repressing the egl-1 cell death acti-
       vator gene. Cell 98: 317–327.
 89. Zarkower, D. & Hodgkin, J. 1992. Molecular analysis of the C. elegans sex-determin-
       ing gene tra-1: a gene encoding two zinc finger proteins. Cell 70: 237– 49.
 90. Kinzler, K. W., Ruppert, J. M., Bigner, S. H. & Vogelstein, B. 1988. The GLI gene is a
       member of the Kruppel family of zinc finger proteins. Nature 332: 371– 4.
 91. Vortkamp, A., Gessler, M. & Grzeschik, K. H. 1991. GLI3 zinc-finger gene interrupt-
       ed by translocations in Greig syndrome families. Nature 352: 539–40.
 92. Hodgkin, J. 1988. Developmental genetics. Everything you always wanted to know
       about sex. Nature 331: 300–1.
 93. Ellis, R. E., Jacobson, D. M. & Horvitz, H. R. 1991. Genes required for the engulf-
       ment of cell corpses during programmed cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics
       129: 79–94.
 94. Wu, Y. C. & Horvitz, H. R. 1998. C. elegans phagocytosis and cell-migration protein
       CED-5 is similar to human DOCK180. Nature 392: 501–504.
 95. Wu, Y. C. & Horvitz, H. R. 1998. The C. elegans cell corpse engulfment gene ced-7 en-
       codes a protein similar to ABC transporters. Cell 93: 951–960.
 96. Liu, Q. A. & Hengartner, M. O. 1998. Candidate adaptor protein CED-6 promotes
       the engulfment of apoptotic cells in C. elegans. Cell 93: 961–972.
 97. Reddien, P. W. & Horvitz, H. R. 2000. CED-2/CrkII and CED-10/Rac control phago-
       cytosis and cell migration in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Cell Biol 2: 131–136.
 98. Zhou, Z., Hartwieg, E. & Horvitz, H. R. 2001. CED-1 is a transmembrane receptor
       that mediates cell corpse engulfment in C. elegans. Cell 104: 43–56.
 99. Zhou, Z., Caron, E., Hartwieg, E., Hall, A. & Horvitz, H. R. 2001. The C. elegans PH
       domain protein CED-12 regulates cytoskeletal reorganization via a Rho/Rac GTPase
       signaling pathway. Dev Cell 1: 477–89.
100. Reddien, P. W., Cameron, S. & Horvitz, H. R. 2001. Phagocytosis promotes pro-
       grammed cell death in C. elegans. Nature 412: 198–202.



350


101.   Wu, Y. C., Stanfield, G. M. & Horvitz, H. R. 2000. NUC-1, a Caenorhabditis elegans
       DNase II homolog, functions in an intermediate step of DNA degradation during
       apoptosis. Genes Dev 14: 536–548.
102.   Rudin, C. M. & Thompson, C. B. 1997. Apoptosis and disease: regulation and clini-
       cal relevance of programmed cell death. Annu Rev Med 48: 267–81.
103.   Nicholson, D. W. 2000. From bench to clinic with apoptosis-based therapeutic
       agents. Nature 407: 810–6.
104.   Mullauer, L., Gruber, P., Sebinger, D., Buch, J., Wohlfart, S. & Chott, A. 2001.
       Mutations in apoptosis genes: a pathogenetic factor for human disease. Mutat Res
       488: 211–31.
105.   Robertson, J. D., Fadeel, B., Zhivotovsky, B. & Orrenius, S. 2002. ‘Centennial’ Nobel
       Conference on apoptosis and human disease. Cell Death Differ 9: 468–75.
106.   Chader, G. J. 2002. Animal models in research on retinal degenerations: past
       progress and future hope. Vision Res 42: 393–9.
107.   McDonnell, T. J., Deane, N., Platt, F. M., Nunez, G., Jaeger, U., McKearn, J. P. &
       Korsmeyer, S. J. 1989. bcl-2–immunoglobulin transgenic mice demonstrate extend-
       ed B cell survival and follicular lymphoproliferation. Cell 57: 79–88.




                                                                                       351
