                         H . KE F F E R H   ARTLINE



          Visual receptors and retinal interaction
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1967


The neuron is the functional as well as the structural unit of the nervous sys-
tem. Neurophysiology received an impetus of far-reaching effect in the
1920’s, when Adrian and his colleagues developed and exploited methods for
recording the activity of single neurons and sensory receptors. Adrian and
Bronk were the first to analyze motor function by recording the activity of
single fibers dissected from a nerve trunk and Adrian and Zotterman the first
                                                     1
to elucidate properties of single sensory receptors . These studies laid the
foundations for the unitary analysis of nervous function.
   My early interest in vision was spurred by another contribution from
Adrian’s laboratory: his study, with R. Matthews, of the massed discharge of
nerve impulses in the eel’s optic nerve2 . I aspired to the obvious extension of
this study: application of unitary analysis to the receptors and neurons of the
visual system.
    Oscillograms of the action potentials in a single nerve fiber are now com-
 monplace. The three shown in Fig. 1 are from an optic nerve fiber whose ret-
 inal receptor was stimulated by light, the relative values of which are given
 at the left of each record. One of the earliest results of unitary analysis was to
 show that higher intensities are signaled by higher frequencies of discharge of
 uniform nerve impulses.
    In 1931, when C. H. Graham and I sought to apply to an optic nerve the
 technique developed by Adrian and Bronk for isolating a single fiber, we
                                                     3
 made a fortunate choice of experimental animal . The xiphosuran arachnoid,
Limulus polyphemus, commonly called "horseshoe crab", abounds on the east-
 ern coast of North America4. These "living fossils" have lateral compound
 eyes that are coarsely faceted and connected to the brain by long optic nerves.
 The optic nerve in the adults can be frayed into thin bundles which are easy to
 split until just one active fiber remains. The records in Fig. 1 were obtained
 from such a preparation.
   The sensory structures in the eye of Limulus from which the optic nerve
fibers arise are clusters ofreceptor cells, arranged radially around the dendritic
process of a bipolar neuron (eccentric cell)5. Each cluster lies behind its corneal


270                       1967 H. KEFFER HARTLINE




Fig. 1. Oscillograms of the electrical activity (discharge of nerve impulses) in a single -
optic nerve, from the lateral eye of Limulus, stimulated by illumination of the facet
associated with its receptor. Relative values of light intensity given at left. Time marked
in 1/5 sec in trace at bottom of each record; signal marking period of steady illumi-
    nation blackens out the white band just above time marks. (After Hartline 11)

 facet and crystalline cone, which give it its own, small visual field (Fig. 2).
 Each such ommatidium, though not as simple as I once thought, seems to act
 as a functional receptor unit. Restriction of the stimulating light to one facet
 elicits discharge in one fiber - the axon of the bipolar neuron whose dendritic
 process is in intimate contact with the light-sensitive rhabdom that is borne
 by the encircling retinular cells.
    Many of the properties of vision that are familiar to us from behavioral ex-
 periments on animals, from psychophysical experiments with human sub-
jects, and indeed from our own everyday visual experience find parallels in
 the responses of the photoreceptor units in the Limulus eye. Reciprocity be-
 tween intensity and duration of short flashes in stimulating single receptors,
 the spectral sensitivity of individual receptors, the course of light and dark
 adaption, and threshold uncertainty as related to quantum fluctuations are
 examples of such parallels6.
    Two well-known and very elementary features of receptor responses ap-
 pear in the records shown in Fig.1. The first is that the stimulation intensities
 cover a wide range; the corresponding steady frequencies ofimpulse discharge
 cover only a modest range. Intensity information is considerably compressed
 in being translated into discharge frequency of the nerve fiber. Our vision,
 and that of most animals, functions well over an enormous range of ambient
 light intensity; we may surmise that this capability results in a large measure
 from the inherent properties of the individual receptors.


          VISUAL RECEPTORS AND RETINAL INTERACTION                                    271

    The second feature to note in Fig. 1 is the high rate of impulse discharge
 which signals the onset of illumination. After this initial transient the familiar
 process of sensory adaption sets in to reduce the discharge to a more modest
 rate. By virtue of this property, a receptor can signal even small changes in in-
 tensity while still retaining its ability to function over a wide range of ambient
 illumination.
    This is further illustrated in Fig. 3, which shows the response of a Limulus
receptor to an increment in light intensity imposed shortly after adaptation to
a stronger background light had taken place. This oscillogram was obtained
by means of a micropipette electrode thrust into the eccentric cell of the om-
matidium 7. It shows both the slow depolarization of the cell - the "generator
potential", to use Granit’s term8 - and the train of superimposed nerve impulse
spikes that are generated in the axon by the local currents from the depolar-
ized cell9. Both features of the response-the graded depolarization and the
frequency of impulse discharge - display exaggerated transients at the onset
and cessation of the incremented step in light intensity. The basic mechanism
of the receptor is one that emphasizes change.




Fig. 2. Section perpendicular to cornea through a portion (approx. 1.5 mm) of the lateral
(compound) eye of Limulus, showing 7 ommatidia: the cornea is above; the crystalline
cones project downward to the sensory portions of the ommatidia, which have been
partially bleached to reveal the retinulae. Fibers of optic nerve and plexus show faintly
                     below. Micrograph by W. H. Miller (cf. ref. 7).


272                         1967 H. KEFFER HARTLINE

   The response patterns of Figs. 1 and 3 are not faithful representations of the
light stimuli, which were simple steps ofintensity. To some extent, the recep-
tor mechanism distorted the sensory information. This illustrates the broad
principle established by the earliest studies of single sensory endings: recep-
tors, by virtue of their inherent properties, operate upon the information they
collect from their surroundings to favor certain features of it. The processing
of sensory data begins in the receptors.




Fig. 3. Oscillogram of the electrical activity of a receptor unit in the lateral eye of Limulus,
recorded by a pipette microelectrode in the eccentric cell of an ommatidium, showing
"generator potential" and superimposed nerve impulse "spikes". Stimulation by light
signalled by black lines above the (1/5 sec) time marks. Light shone steadily, starting near
the beginning of the record; in the middle of the record the light was incremented by
approx. 50%, marked by second black lime. Calibration deflection at right = 10 mV.
       Baseline at beginning of record ca. 50 mVnegative with respect to outside cell.

Successful recording from single fibers in the optic nerve of Limulus em-
boldened me to apply the same methods to the vertebrate eye. The optic
nerve of a vertebrate is very different from that of Limulus; dissection of bun-
dles of fibers from it seemed a quite hopeless task. Moreover, this was before
Granit and his colleagues developed micro-electrodes for retinal recording.
But Nature has provided a ready-made dissection of the opticnerve, spread-
ing it in a thin layer over the vitreous surface of the retina. Picking up small
bundles from the exposed retina of a frog’s eye was easy; splitting one of them
until only a single active fiber remained was not too difficult.
   The findings were unexpected: different optic nerve fibers responded to
light in different ways (Fig. 4). Some fibers gave discharges much like those
in Limulus, some responded vigorously at onset and again at cessation of illu-
mination or when slight changes in intensity were made, and were otherwise
silent. Still other fibers gave no response during illumination, firing a vigorous
and prolonged train of impulses only when light was dimmed.


          VISUAL RECEPTORS AND RETINAL INTERACTION                                         273




 Fig.4. Oscillograms of the electrical activity of single optic serve fibers, dissected from
 the vitreous surface of the retina of a frog’s eye. Recording as in Fig.1 (After Hartline 10,
                                            1938)

 Further study of these responses of single retinal ganglion cells revealed in-
 teresting properties. Slight movements of a small spot or shadow elicited re-
 sponses in some optic nerve fibers if they were within the square millimeter
 or so of retinal area that is the receptive field of the fiber’s ganglion cell (Fig.
 5). Convergence of excitatory and inhibitory influences was found to take




Fig. 5. Discharge of impulses in a single optic nerve fiber in the frog’s retina in response to
movements of a spot of light on the retina. Lower record: a small spot (so,u diam.) was
moved twice within the fiber’s receptive field, about 30~ each time, as signalled by the
white lines crossing the blackened band just above the 1/5 sec time marks. Upper record:
same fiber responded only to light going on and off, when no movement of the spot took
place. (Steady light signalled by blackening of band above time marks.) (After Hartline 10,
                                            1940)


274                     1967 H. KEFFER HARTLINE

place within the receptive fields of fibers, and summation of excitation was
demonstrated. Receptive fields of fibers were shown to overlap extensively; a
given small area of the retina is held in common within the confines of many
receptive fields, belonging to fibers of greatly diverse response characteris-
tics 10,11. Thus there is interaction in the retina, as Granit had shown, and as
Adrian and Matthews had demonstrated earlier. It is evident that a great deal
of elaborate and sophisticated "data processing" takes place in the thin layer of
nervous tissue that is the retina.
   Since those early observations a wealth of new knowledge has been ob-
tained by workers in many laboratories. From studies of the retinas of mam-
mals as well as cold-blooded vertebrates, from recordings of units, for ex-
ample, in the ganglionic layers in the eyes of crustaceans and insects, and by the
use of various patterns of light, moving and stationary and of various colors,
new and surprising properties of retinal neurons have been and are constantly
being discovered . It is now clear that the retina is even more powerful in the
                     12



integrative tasks it performs than my early experiments had intimated.
   Can we understand how these diverse and complex response patterns,
highly specialized for specific tasks, are generated in the retina? Broad Sher-
ringtonian principles can guide us - the interplay of excitatory and inhibitory
influences in convergent and divergent pathways, with various spatial distri-
                                       8
butions, thresholds, time courses . But the application of broad principles to
specific cases of such complexity is not easy. It is here that comparative physiol-
ogy can help. The animal world is rich in its variety of visual systems, built in
different ways and with different degrees of complexity, although all gov-
erned, we are confident, by the same universal, basic principles.
   In this, Limulus has again proved to be a valuable experimental animal. It,
too, has a retina, although a much simpler one than those of the vertebrates
or higher invertebrates. Interaction in the Limulus retina is complex enough
to be interesting, yet simple enough to be analyzed with relative ease.
   When I first worked with Limulus, I thought that the receptor units acted
independently of one another. But I soon noticed that extraneous lights in the
laboratory, rather than increasing the rate of discharge of impulses from a re-
ceptor, often caused a decrease in its activity. Neighboring ommatidia, view-
ing the extraneous room lights more directly than the receptor on which I was
working, could inhibit that receptor quite markedly13. With my colleagues
H.G. Wagner and F. Ratliff, I undertook the investigation of this inhibitory
process 14.
   An experiment illustrating inhibition in the Limulus retina is shown in Fig.


         VISUAL RECEPTORS AND RETINAL INTERACTION                                       275




 Fig. 6. Inhibition in the eye of Limulus. The train of impulses from a receptor, elicited by
 steady illumination, was slowed by illumination of a group of 20-30 neighboring re-
 ceptors in an annular region surrounding it (signalled by blackening of the white band
            above the 1/5 sec time marks). (From Hartline et al. 7)

 6. Illumination of a small group ofommatida (20-30) in the neighborhood of
 an arbitrarily chosen, steadily illuminated test receptor caused a substantial
  slowing of its discharge. After the light on the neighboring receptors was
  turned off, there was prompt recovery, followed by a small but distinct over-
  shoot - a post-inhibitory rebound.
     The basic properties of the inhibition in the Limulus eye are quickly sum-
marized. The brighter the light on neighboring receptors, the greater is the
slowing of the discharge of a receptor being tested. The greater the number of
neighboring receptors illuminated, the greater is their effect: there is spatial
summation of inhibitory influences. Receptors close to a given receptor inhib-
it it more strongly, on the average, than do distant ones. Each ommatidium
in the eye has its surrounding field of inhibition. The influences are mutual:
each receptor, being a neighbor of its neighbors, inhibits and is inhibited by
those neighbors. Interaction in the Limulus eye, as far as is yet known, is purely
inhibitory. Ratliff and I, with many colleagues in our laboratory, have been
engaged over the past decade and a half in the analysis of this processis.
    The anatomical basis for the inhibitory influences that are exerted mutually
 in the Limulus eye is a network of nerve fibers - a true retina-lying just behind
 the layer of ommatidia, and interconnecting them (Fig. 7). It is over this
 plexus of fiber bundles that run laterally from ommatidium to ommatidium
 that the inhibitory influences pass: cut these bundles, and the inhibition van-
 ishes. Fibers in these bundles arise as branches of the sensory axons from the
ommatidia that traverse the plexus on their way to become the optic nerve;
scattered profusely through the plexus are clumps of neuropil, rich in synaptic
 regions and packed with synaptic vesicles16.
   Electrophysiological evidence confirms the synaptic nature of the inhibi-
tory interaction in the Limulus retina. Hyperpolarizing potentials are observed
by intracellular recording in the eccentric cell of an ommatidium, coincident
with inhibition of the receptor . Analysis of these and the accompanying
                                  16,17



conductance changes indicates that these are inhibitory post-synaptic poten-
tials like those met with elsewhere in nervous systems18,19.


276                       1967 H. KEFFER HARTLINE




Fig.7. Section, perpendicular to the cornea, through part of a lateral eye of an adult
Limulus. At the top of the figure are shown the heavily pigmented sensory portions of the
ommatidia. Bundles of nerve fibers are shown emerging from the ommatidia, with the
plexus of interconnecting fibers, and a portion of the optic nerve below. Samuel’s silver
stain. The chitinous cornea and crystalline cones that appear in Fig. 2 were stripped away
prior to fixation. Prepared by W.H. Miller. (From Hartline et al. 14)

Before proceeding to a detailed consideration of inhibitory interaction we
may ask what roles it might play in vision. One role is enhancement of con-
trast. Strongly excited receptor elements in brightly lighted regions of the
retinal image exert a stronger inhibition on receptors in more dimly lighted
regions than the latter exert on the former. Thus the disparity in the actions of
the receptors is increased, and contrast enhanced. Since inhibition is stronger
between close neighbors than between widely separated ones, steep intensity
gradients in the retinal image-edges and contours-will be accentuated by
contrast.
   "Simultaneous contrast", "border contrast", and the like are well known in
visual physiology 2 0. A century ago Ernst Mach correctly ascribed them to
inhibitory interaction in the visual system. Most of us have noted the fluted
appearance of uniform steps in intensity, as those in shadows cast by multiple
light sources as, for example, a cluster of candles. The Mach bands flanking a


          VISUAL RECEPTORS AND RETINAL INTERACTION                                    277
  simple gradient are also familiar "illusions" in which contrast is overempha-
  sized by the use of a special pattern of light. Such "distortions" of sensory in-
  formation ordinarily serve a useful function to accent and "crispen" impor-
  tant features of the visual scene and to sharpen spatial resolution. It is possible
  to demonstrate analogous distortions of spatial patterns of optic nerve activity
  in Limulus, when its eye views similar patterns of light (Fig. 8). These phe-
  nomena are all the result of inhibitory interaction in the visual system.




Fig. 8. Contrast phenomena, analogous to Mach bands, demonstrated by patterns of op -
tic nerve fiber activity in the eye of Limulus. The discharge of impulses from a receptor
was recorded as the eye was caused to scan slowly a pattern of illumination containing a
simple gradient of intensity shown in the inset, upper right. When all the receptors were
masked except the one from which activity was being recorded, a faithful representation
of the actual physical distribution of light was obtained (upper graph, triangles). With
the mask removed, so that all the receptors viewed the pattern, the lower graph (circles)
was obtained, with a maximum and a minimum where Mach bands are seen by a human
         observer viewing the same pattern. (From Ratliff and Hartline 21)

Inhibitory interaction in the retina is a simple neural mechanism that oper-
 ates on the sensory data supplied by the receptors, modifying spatial features
just as the inherent mechanism of the receptors modifies temporal charac-
 teristics. Both of these "data processing" operations are integrative functions
 taking place in the earliest phases of the visual process.
  Enhancement of contrast is but one consequence of inhibitory interaction.
Inhibition plays a pervading and subtle role, in vision as elsewhere in nervous
function. To the basic excitation furnished by light, retinal inhibition adds a
molding influence, increasing temporal and spatial resolution and supplying
a mechanism for increased versatility of response. The opportunity to analyze


278                       1967 H. KEFFER HARTLINE

 this process in a retina that is much simpler than those of higher animals should
 prove helpful in understanding the more complex functions of more complex
 visual systems.
    We begin this analysis22 with an experiment showing the interaction of
just two ommatidia (Fig. 9). Illuminated together, each of these receptor units
 discharged impulses at a lower rate than when it was illuminated by itself For
 each illuminated alone, its frequency of discharge measures its excitation, e,
 at the particular intensity being used on it. When both are illuminated to-
 gether, at the same intensities, we will call their responses r. Analysis shows
 that the lowering of frequency of each, e - r, is to be related quantitatively to
 the concurrent frequency, r, of the other. It is the output of a receptor unit -
 its rate of discharge of nerve impulses that determines how much inhibition



   A




 simultaneously from two optic nerve fibers, showing the discharges when their respective
 ommatidia were steadily illuminated, separately and together. The numbers on the right
 give, for the respective cases, the total number of impulses discharged in the period of
 1.5 sec shown. The inhibitory effect on A, 53-43, is to be associated with the concurrent
 frequency of B, 35; likewise the effect on B, 46-35, is to be associated with the concurrent
          frequency of A, 43. Time in 1/5 sec. (From Hartline and Ratliff 22)


          VISUAL RECEPTORS AND RETINAL INTERACTION                                       279
 it exerts on other units. A receptor that inhibits another receptor affects the
 very output that in turn inhibits it. Thus the inhibitory interaction is recurrent
 in its operation, as may be visualized schematically, for just two elements, by
 Fig.10. Mathematically, the mutual interaction of two units can be expressed
 by a pair of simultaneous equations. Measurements of the response of two
 interacting receptor units, stimulated by various intensities of light in various
 combinations, permit the construction of two graphs shown in Fig. II, in
 which the lowering of frequency of each, e - r, is plotted against the con-
 current response, r of the other. Evidently the two simultaneous equations
 that describe the relationship between the responses of the two interacting re-
 ceptors are piecewise linear. Considered over the entire range, each relation-
 ship is highly non-linear as a result of the fairly abrupt threshold, r0, below
 which the steady firing of a receptor exerts no inhibition on its neighbors.




Fig.10. Schematic representation of the recurrent nature of mutual inhibition of two
receptor units. Excitation of each generates trains of impulses which originate near the
point of emergence of the axon from the cell body, marked x. Influences pass back up the
recurrent branches of each to exert inhibition on the other at synapses at or near the points
                               emergence. (From Ratliff et al. 17)

 Above this threshold, however, a linear relation holds to a fair degree of ap-
proximation. The slope of each graph, K, is the inhibitory coefficient meas-
 uring the strength of the influence of each element, respectively, on the
other.
   To describe the interaction of more than two elements, more equations are
required. For a group of n interacting receptor units a set of n simultaneous
equations, piecewise linear, must be written, and in the equation for each


280                      1967 H. KEFFER HARTLINE




                              Frequency (impulses per sec.)
Fig.11. Mutual inhibition of two receptor units in the eye of Limulus. In each graph, the
magnitude of the inhibitory action (decrease in frequency of impulse discharge) exerted
on one of the ommatidia is plotted ( ordinate) as a function of the concurrent frequency of
the other (abscissa), as explained in the legend of Fig. 9. The different pairs of points
(identified by the same symbols in the two graphs) were obtained by using various in-
tensities of illumination on the two ommatidia, in various combinations. (From Hartline
                                          and Ratliff22)

unit inhibitory terms must be introduced and summed to express the inhibi-
tion on that particular unit by all of the units that act upon it:




 In this set of equations, rp is the response of the pth receptor, which if free of
 inhibition would have discharged impulses at a rate ep, but which is subjected
 to the summed inhibitory influences expressed by the linear terms on the
 right. In each term Kp,j is the inhibitory coefficient measuring the action of the
jth receptor on the p th ; rap, j is the associated threshold of that action .
                                                                            23



     In the eye, receptors are deployed spatially, in a mosaic, and the strength of
  their interaction, as already noted, depends on their separation. In general the
 coefficients K decrease and the thresholds r 0 increase with increasing separa-
  tion of interacting ommatidia in the eye. The spatial distribution of values of
  the coeffkients in the inhibitory field surrounding a small group of receptors


        VISUAL RECEPTORS AND RETINAL INTERACTION                              281

has recently been mapped in detail by R. Barlow . Such maps will be indis-
                                                     24



pensable in the analysis of the spatial properties of retinal interaction.
   The set of simultaneous equations written above provides a succinct and
useful description of steady state inhibitory interaction in the retina of Limu-
lus. Quantitative measurements of the activity of interacting receptors and
groups of receptors, in various configurations, are satisfactorily accounted
for17. With measured or postulated inhibitory fields, spatial patterns such as
Mach bands are successfully represented as. Ratliff’s recent book treats this
subject in detail20. Von Békésy, using mathematically equivalent formula-
tions to represent inhibitory interaction, has discussed in his recent book 26
the applications to other sensory systems.
   Up to this point we have restricted our discussion of inhibitory interaction
to the steady state of receptor activity, after all the mutual interactions have
come into balance. Whenever, as in the natural world, changes occur in the
patterns of light and shade on the retinal mosaic, receptor transients occur,
new distributions of excitation are established, and readjustments of the in-
hibitory interactions are mediated over the retinal network. The interplay
of excitation and inhibition is a dynamic process.
   Vision itself is a dynamic process. There is little in the world that stands
still, at least not as imaged in our retinas, for our eyes are always moving. The
visual system is almost exclusively organized to detect change and motion.
How can we explain this? How are we to understand, for example, the ex-
quisite sensitivity of some of the frog’s retinal fibers to slight movements of
the shadow of a fine wire across their receptive fields? Or, what mechanisms
can explain the responses that are so highly specific to certain features of the
moving pattern, such as curvature of a boundary, size of an object, direction
of its motion, etc., as Lettvin and his colleagues 27, and others, report? Study of
visual dynamics in a retina as simple as that of Limulus can hardly solve such
problems, but it may suggest principles that can be applied toward their solu-
 tion 28.
    If responses are recorded from representative receptors in two interacting
groups in a Limulus eye, and one group subjected to a small increment in inten-
sity, the other, steadily illuminated, will be disturbed only by the inhibitory
influences exerted by the first29.
   Experiments of this kind furnish good examples of dynamic responses that
might be encountered in nature. However, they are not suited to quantitative
analysis, because the time courses of photoreceptor discharges are difficult to
control and those features that are contributed solely by the dynamic proper-


282                       1967 H. KEFFER HARTLINE

ties of the inhibitory interaction are hard to distinguish. Fortunately, lateral
inhibition of a receptor unit can be produced artificially by electrical stimu-
lation of the optic nerve fibers from the receptors’ neighbors, as Tomita first
showed 30. This affords an exact control of temporal factors that is not pos-
sible when the neighbors are excited naturally by light.
    By this method, sinusoidally modulated inhibition can be exerted on a
 receptor, and if the influences are above all thresholds, linear systems-analysis
 can be applied 31. Alternatively, abrupt stepwise increments of inhibition can
 be generated artificially to excite transients of inhibitory systems. Since the
 latencies and transients of the photic mechanism are thereby avoided, the
 dynamics of the inhibition itself are revealed (Fig. 12). Inhibition is then seen
 to set in after an appreciable delay of its-own, and often, though not always;
 with a transient undershoot at the beginning. After the cessation ofinhibition,
 no matter how it is produced, the post-inhibitory rebound we have already
 noted always occurs; it is a true <off> response 33.




Fig.12. Inhibition of a steadily illuminated receptor, elicited artificially by electrical
shocks applied to optic nerve fibers from neighboring receptors to generate a train of
antidromic volleys of impulses at constant frequency. Frequency of discharge of impulses
from the receptor during an experimental run of 9 sec that included the 5 sec period of
inhibition (signalled by step at bottom) is plotted as ordinate (vs. time as abscissa) after
subtracting the frequency of discharge during a "control" run taken over a comparable
period, but with no inhibition. The ordinates are given as impulses per second above or
                         below control. Experiment by Lange32.

The delayed onset of lateral inhibition as a simple consequence, which ap-
pears when a large area of the receptor mosaic is suddenly illuminated (Fig.
13). The first part of the strong <on> transient of each receptor escapes the ac-
tion of lateral inhibition from its neighbors. After the delay, however, mutual
inhibition quickly sets in, sometimes suppressing the discharge for a fraction
of a second, before the steady discharge is established, often withminor oscil-
lations, as the receptor adapts and as mutual interactions come into balance16.
This "crispening" of the <on> response is an augmentation of the sensory adap-
tation that is an inherent property of each individual receptor.


 VISUAL RECEPTORS AND RETINAL INTERACTION                                        283




 Fig. 13. "Crispening" of the <on> transient of the discharge of a receptor unit by the in-
 clusion of neighboring receptors in the area illuminated. The upper, heavy curve gives
 the frequency of discharge of a "test" receptor when it was illuminated alone. The lower
 curve gives the frequency of discharge of the same receptor when the area of illumination
 (same intensity as before) was enlarged to include neighboring receptors; the time delay
 of their inhibitory action on test receptor was long enough that the initial peak of the
 discharge was unaffected, only the subsequent discharge being reduced to thesteady level
 that reflected the steady state interaction within the entire group. (From Hartline et al. 16)

 Related to this is the emphasis a short delay in the development of lateral
 inhibition can give to light fluctuations of a certain frequency occurring over
 a large retinal area in which there is strong mutual interaction. When the
 frequency of the fluctuation is such that a minimum of excitation occurs just
 as the delayed inhibition from the previous maximum comes to its full value,
 the net fluctuation of the response may actually be amplified, compared to
 what it would have been had the area been small, with no large numbers of
 receptors to supply mutual inhibition. The eye of Limulus shows such an am-
 plification of response, at about 3 cycles per sec, to a sinusoidally modulated
 light shining on a large area?34.
    Before we can understand fully the dynamics of inhibitory interaction, we
must consider a new feature of the inhibitory process in the Limulus eye : the
inhibition of a receptor unit by its own discharge. This was first analyzed by
Stevens35 and has recently been studied by Purple and Dodge 36. They present
evidence that this "self-inhibition" may be a synaptic process like lateral in-
hibition: following each impulse discharged by an ommatidium, a hyperpo-


284                     1967 H. KEFFER HARTLINE

larizing potential appears. Whatever the mechanism underlying it, self-inhi-
bition forms a substantial component of the adaptation process in the Limulus
receptor, and by tending to oppose any change in the discharge rate of a re-
ceptor unit, has a strong influence on the dynamics of receptor action and in-
teraction.
    The rise of inhibition, as successive impulses contribute their additive effects,
 and its decay, resulting presumably from removal or inactivation of inhibi-
 tory transmitter, determine the form of the transients exhibited by the inter-
 acting system as it adjusts to changing influences. When lateral inhibition is
 suddenly applied and builds up on a receptor unit, so that its discharge rate
 drops, its self-inhibition subsides to a new equilibrium, opposing the full
 effects of the lateral influence. Lateral-inhibition has an inherently shorter
 time constant than self-inhibition, hence the transient in the discharge of a re-
 ceptor usually is an undershoot when lateral inhibition increases, and a post-
 inhibitory rebound when it decreases. Non-linearities introduced by the
 thresholds of lateral inhibition increase the delay in the onset of the inhibition,
 diminish the undershoot and augment the rebound. Fig. 14 illustrates the two
 cases, linear and non-linear, by means of a computer simulation, like one
 devised by Lange37.
    For all of the modifications introduced by inhibitory interaction, patterns
 of optic nerve activity in Limulus remain not too grossly distorted represen-
 tations of the patterns of light and shade on the receptor mosaic. Although
 significant integration of sensory data is prominent, the effects are mild, com-
 pared to what takes place in more complex retinas. Even in Limulus, however,
 the potentiality for more extreme modifications of optic patterns can be dem-
 onstrated. Ratliff and Conrad Mueller38, by careful adjustments of patterns
  of light, were able to elicit, from a perfectly normal receptor in Limulus, <on-
 off> and pure <off> responses, shown in Fig. 15. Here, by a contrived interplay
 of excitation (by light on the receptor) and inhibition (by light on its neigh-
  bors), taking advantage of time delays and post-inhibitory rebounds, re-
  sponse patterns simulating some of those observed in the vertebrate retina
  were "synthesized" What Ratliff and Mueller contrived more or less artifi-
  cially resembles the dynamic interplay we believe takes place naturally as a
  result of the complex neural organization in more highly developed retinas
  and higher visual centers.
     The unitary analysis of visual function has yielded substantial knowledge
  about receptor properties, and about dynamic integrative mechanisms in the
  retina. In the eye of Limulus, the relative simplicity ofretinal interaction facili-


       VISUAL RECEPTORS AND RETINAL INTERACTION                                      285




Fig.14. Simulations by means of a computer program of the responses ofa steadily excited
receptor subjected to a period of constant inhibition fromneighboring receptors, as in the
actual experiment of Fig.12. The decay constants assigned to the self-inhibitory and
lateral-inhibitory influences were respectively 1 sec and 0.4 sec. For the upper tracing, a
threshold of zero was assigned to the lateral inhibition; for the lower tracing, a threshold
was introduced that was unrealistically large, considering the strong lateral influence that
was assigned. This served to exaggerate, for illustrative purposes, the asymmetries of
onset and cessation of inhibition, especially the "post-inhibitory rebound". Cf. ref. 28.




Fig.15. Response of a receptor in the eye of Limulus imitating the <on-off> and <off>
discharges of vertebrate optic nerve fibers. Obtained by the use of special patterns of
stimulation under special conditions of adaptation that suppressed the steady discharge
but retained the transient at <on> and <off>, the latter the consequence of post-inhibitory
rebound. Steady illumination of receptor signalled by blackening of white band above
           1/5 sec time marks. (Record by Ratliff and Mueller, cf. ref. 38)


286                    1967 H. REFFER HARTLINE

tates its analysis. In more highly organized retinas, a vastly richer integration
takes place. Many workers, in many laboratories, are engaged in the study of
the diverse and highly specialized responses generated by visual neurons as
neural information is processed for transmission to still higher centers. I am
confident that the familiar neurophysiological concepts that were needed in
the analysis of the simple interaction in the Limulus retina will prove useful in
elucidating these very complex and very interesting features of visual phys-
iology.




1. E.D. Adrian and D. W.Bronk, J. Physiol. (London), 66 (1928) 81; E.D. Adrian and
    Y. Zotterman, J. Physiol. (London), 61 (1926) 151.
2. E.D. Adrian and R. Matthews, J. Physiol. (London), 63 (1927) 378; 64 (1927) 279; 65
   (1928) 273.
3. H.K. Hartline and C.H. Graham, J. Cell. Comp. Physiol., 1 (1932) 227.
4. C.N. Shuster, Xiphosura, in Encyclopedia of Science and Technology, Vol.14, McGraw-
   Hill, New York, 1960, p. 563; L. Milne and M. Milne, The Crab That Crawled Out of
   the Past, Atheneum, New York, 1965 (popular).
5. W.H. Miller, Morphology of the ommatidium of the compound eye of Limulus,
    J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol., 3 (1957) 421.
6. H.K. Hartline, J. Cell. Comp. Physiol., 5 (1934) 229; C.H. Graham and H.K. Hartline,
   J. Gen. Physiol., 18 (1935) 917; H.K. Hartline and P.R. McDonald, J. Cell. Comp.
   Physiol., 30 (1947) 225; H.K. Hartline, L.J. Milne and LH. Wagman, Federation Proc.,
   6 (1947) 124 (Abstr.); see also: M.H. Pirenne, Vision and the Eye, Science Paperback,
   Associated Book Publishers, London, 1967, Chapter 9. For short review
   of earlier papers see ref.1 I.
7. H.K. Hartline, H.G. Wagner and E.F. MacNichol Jr., Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
   Quant. Biol., 17 (1952) 125.
8. R. Granit, Sensory Mechanisms of the Retina, Oxford University Press, London, 1947;
   Receptors and sensory perception, Silliman Lectures, Vo1.12, Yale University Press,
   New Haven, 1955.
9. Some of the important recent papers on the generator potential in Limulus are:
   E.F. MacNichol Jr., in Molecular Structure and Functional Activity of Nerve Cells,
   Publication No. 1 of American Institute of Biological Sciences, 1956, p. 34; M. G. F.
   Fuortes, J. Physiol. (London), 148 (1959) 14; W.A.H. Rushton, J. PhysioI. (London),
   148 (1959) 29; R.L. Purple, ref. 18; M.G.F. Fuortes and A.L. Hodgkin, J. Physiol.
   (London), 172 (1964) 239; F.A. Dodge Jr., B.W. Knight and J. Toyoda, Science, 160
   (1968) 88. Broader coverage of receptor potentials in sense organs may be found
   in Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 30 (1965).
10. H.K. Hartline, Am. J. Physiol., 121 (1938) 400; 130 (1940) 690; 130 (1940) 700.


          VISUAL RECEPTORS AND RETINAL INTERACTION                                        287
11. H.K. Hartline, Theneural mechanisms of vision, The Harvey Lectures, Ser. 37 (1941-
    1942) 39.
12. Examples from this extensive and rapidly growing field: S.W. Kuffler, J. Neuro-
    physiol., 16 (1953) 37; H.B. Barlow, J. Physiol.(London), 119 (1953) 69; H.G. Wag-
    ner, E.F. MacNichol Jr. and M.L. Wolbarsht, J. Gen. Physiol., 43 (1960) 45; G.
    Baumgartner, in R. Jung and H. Kornhuber, (Eds.), Neurophysiologie und Psychophysik
    des visuellen Systems, Springer, Berlin, 1961, p. 45 ; G.A. Horridge, S. Shaw and J.P.
    Tunstall, in J.E. Treherne and J.W.L. Beament (Eds.), The Physiology of the Insect
    Nervous System, Academic Press, New York, 1965; C.A.G. Wiersma and Y. Yama-
    guchi, J. Comp. Neurol., 128 (1966) 333. See also: ref. 27; see R. Granit, ref. 8 for
    review of his contributions, and references.
13. H.K. Hartline, Federation Proc., 8, No.1 (1949) 69 (Abstr.).
14. H. K. Hartline, H.G. Wagner and F. Ratliff, J. Gen. Physiol., 39 (1956) 651.
15. Reviews of this work, in detail, may be found in: Hartline et al. and Ratliff .
                                                                         16          20


16. H.K. Hartline, F. Ratliff and W.H. Miller, in E. Florey (Ed.), Nervous Inhibition,
    Pergamon, Oxford, 1961, p.241.
17. F. Ratliff, H.K. Hartline and W.H. Miller, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 53 (1963) 110.
18. R.L. Purple, Thesis, The Rockefeller Institute, New York, 1964.
19. R.L. Purple and F.A. Dodge, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 30 (1965) 529.
20. F. Ratliff, Mach Bands: Quantitative Studies on Neural Networks in the Retina, Holden-
    Day, San Francisco, 1965.
21. F. Ratliff and H.K. Hartline, J. Gen. Physiol., 42 (1959) 1241.
22. H.K. Hartline and F. Ratliff, J. Gen. Physiol., 40 (1957) 357.
23. H.K. Hartline and F. Ratliff, J. Gen. Physiol., 41 (1958) 1049. See also: Hartline. 16
    for restrictions on the equations.
24. R. B. Barlow, Thesis, The Rockefeller University, New York, 1967.
25. W. Reichardt and G. MacGinitie, Kybernetik, 1 (1962) 155; K. Kirschfeld and W.
    Reichardt, Kybernetik, 2 (1964) 43,
26. G. von Békésy, Sensory Inhibition, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1967.
27. J.Y. Lettvin, H.R. Maturana, W.S. McCulloch and W.H. Pitts, Proc. Inst. RadioEng.,
    47 (1959) 1940; H.R. Maturana, J.Y. Lettvin, W.S. McCulloch and W.H. Pitts,
    Anatomy and physiology of vision in the frog (Rana pipiens); J. Gen. Physiol., 43
    (1960) 129; U. Grüsser-Comehls, O.-J. Grüsser and T.H. Bullock, Science, 141(1963)
    820; H.B. Barlow, R.M. Hill and W.R. Levick, J. Physiol. (London), 173 (1964) 377;
    H.B. Barlow and W.R. Levick, J. Physiol. (London), 178 (1965) 477. For discussion of
    these and related papers see Ratliff20, Chapter 4.
28. Recent papers on the dynamics of the inhibitory interaction in Limulus are: F. Ratliff,
    H.K. Hartline and David Lange, in C.G. Bernhard( Ed.), The Functional Organization
    of the Compound Eye, Pergamon, Oxford, 1966, p. 399; David Lange, H.K. Hartline
    and F. Ratliff, ibid., 1966, p. 425; Hartline et al. 16; Ratliff et al. I7 and refs. in ref. 37.
29. F. Ratliff, in W.A. Rosenblith (Ed.), Sensory Communication, M. I. T. Press and Wiley,
     New York, 1961, p.183.
30. T. Tomita, Mechanism of lateral inhibition in the eye of Limulus, J. Neurophysiol., 21
    (1958) 419.
31. B.W. Knight J. Toyoda, and F.A. Dodge Jr., J. Gen. Physiol., 56 (1970) 421.


288                       1967 H. KEFFER HARTLINE

32. David Lange, Thesis, The Rockefeller Institute, New York, 1965.
33. See discussion by Granit8 for relation of “off “responses to post-inhibitory rebound.
34. F. Ratliff, B.W. Knight, J. Toyoda and H.K. Hartline, Science, 158 (1967) 392.
35. C.F. Stevens, Thesis, The Rockefeller Institute, New York, 1964.
36. R.L. Purple and F.A. Dodge Jr., in C.G. Bemhard (Ed.), The Functional Organiza-
     tion of the Compound Eye, Pergamon, Oxford, 1966, pp.451-464.
37. Langea 32; David Lange, H.H. Hartline and F. Ratliff, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 128 (1966)
     955.
38. F. Ratliff and C.G. Mueller, Science, 126 (1957) 840.
