NUCLEOTIDE SEQUENCE SPECIFICITY OF
RESTRICTION ENDONUCLEASES
Nobel Lecture, 8 December, 1978
by
HAMILTON O. SMITH
Department of Microbiology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, U. S. A.



INTRODUCTION

In the past seven to eight years we have witnessed the development of a
new DNA technology that has fundamentally altered our approach to
modern genetics. The basic ingredients of this new technology are the
cleavage-site-specific restriction enzymes: a special class of bacterial endo-
nucleases that can recognize specific nucleotide sequences in duplex DNA
and produce double-stranded cleavages. Using a collection of these en-
zymes, each with its own particular sequence specificity, DNA molecules
may be cleaved into unique sets of fragments useful for DNA sequencing,
chromosome analysis, gene isolation, and construction of recombinant
DNA. The latter, combined with the concept of molecular cloning, has
given birth to the new field of genetic engineering, and from this are
expected many new and exciting medical and research applications.
   My own role in these developments occurred primarily in the period of
1968-1970 when my colleagues and I made the chance discovery of the
first of the cleavage-site-specific restriction enzymes. I should like to briefly
describe this work in historical context as it leads naturally into the main
part of my lecture describing our present knowledge of restriction and
modification enzymes. I shall not go into the many applications as these
have been reviewed elsewhere (1). However, I should like to describe in
some detail the use of these enzymes as model systems for studying
sequence-specific protein-DNA interactions since this is one of our major
research interests.

Restriction and Modification in Bacteria: the Discovery of Restriction Enzymes
The observations leading to the discovery of restriction enzymes span a
period of nearly two decades and constitute a prime example of how basic
research on an apparently insignificant bacteriological phenomenon has
had unexpectedly far-reaching implications. The story begins in the early
1950s with some observations by Luria and Human (la) and Bertani and
Weigle (2) concerning the curious behavior of phage grown on two differ-
ent strains of bacteria. Phage propagated on one strain were found to grow
poorly (were “restricted”) on the second, and vice-versa. However, a few
phage always escaped restriction and could then grow well on the new
host. They apparently had acquired some type of host-specific modifica-
tion that then protected them from the restriction effects of the host. The

                                                                              523


524                     Physiology or Medicine 1978


biochemical basis of this phenomenon remained a mystery until the early
1960s when Werner Arber and co-workers were able to show that host-
specific modifications was carried on the phage DNA (3), and that restric-
tion was associated with degradation of the phage DNA (4). In a remark-
ably prophetic review in 1965, Arber postulated the existence of site-
specific restriction enzymes and suggested that modification might be
produced by hostspecific DNA methylases (5). Thus, the notion became
established that each restriction and modification (R-M) system in bacte-
ria was composed of two enzymes with identical specificity: a restriction
endonuclease that recognized short nucleotide sequences and cleaved
DNA, and a modification enzyme that recognized the same sequence and
modified it to protect against cleavage. In this way, the host cell DNA
would be protected but foreign DNA entering from outside with improper
modification would be cleaved and destroyed.
   Although the existence of restriction enzymes was predicted with confi-
dence by 1965, it was not until early 1968 that Linn and Arber (6) actually
found an activity in extracts of E. coli B with the expected properties of
such an enzyme. At the same time, Meselson and Yuan (‘7) reported more
extensive experiments with a highly purified restriction endonuclease
from E. coli K. Using sucrose gradient centrifugation, the latter demon-
strated that their enzyme cleaved unmodified phage λ DNA into large
fragments while modified DNA remained undegraded. An unusual fea-
ture of the enzyme was its requirement for the cofactors S-adenosylmeth-
ionine, ATP, and Mg Meselson
                           .       and Yuan assumed from Arber’s work
                        2+



that their enzyme was attacking the λ DNA at fixed sites, but were unable
to confirm this by sucrose gradient analysis of the fragment species.
   It is now known that restriction enzymes of E. coli B and K are examples
of a class of restriction enzymes that do not cleave DNA at specific sites,
although this fact was not appreciated for several years. Such Class I
enzymes are complex, multimeric proteins that generally require ATP, S-
adenosylmethionine and Mg 2+ as cofactors and function both as restriction
endonucleases and as modification methylases (8). Although they recog-
nize specific sites in the DNA, they cleave randomly at a considerable
distance from the recognition site (9, 10, 11). Because of this property,
they have not proven useful as enzymatic tools for DNA analysis.

Discovery of a Cleavage-Site-Specific Restriction Endonuclease in Haemophilus
influenzae Rd
In early Spring of 1968, I read the Meselson and Yuan paper with great
interest. Their work imparted, in a very explicit way, a sense of biochemi-
cal reality to Arber’s observations. I had at that time recently joined the
faculty of the Department of Microbiology at Johns Hopkins and, with a
young graduate student named Kent Wilcox, was just beginning to explore
genetic recombination in Haemophilus influenzae, strain Rd, an efficiently
transformable bacterium that we had been introduced to by Roger Her-
riott of the School of Hygiene. Some of our experiments employed a


           Nucleotide   Sequence Specificity of Restriction Endonucleases   525


viscometer as a particularly sensitive measure of endonucleolytic cleavage
of DNA by cell extracts. Other experiments involved recovery of donor
DNA from cells after uptake. In one such experiment we happened to use
labeled DNA from phage P22, a bacterial virus I had worked with for
several years before coming to Hopkins. To our surprise, we could not
recover the foreign DNA from the cells. With Meselson’s recent report in
our minds, we immediately suspected that it might be undergoing restric-
tion, and our experience with viscometry told us that this would be a good
assay for such an activity. The following day, two viscometers were set up,
one containing P22 DNA and the other, Haemophilus DNA. Cell extract
was added to each and we began quickly taking measurements. As the
experiment progressed, we became increasingly excited as the viscosity of
the Haemophilus DNA held steady while the P22 DNA viscosity fell. We
were confident that we had discovered a new and highly active restriction
enzyme. Furthermore, it appeared to require only Mg 2+ as a cofactor,
suggesting that it would prove to be a simpler enzyme than that from E .
coli K or B. From that point on, other work in the laboratory was shelved
while we turned our full attention to the isolation and study of the new
enzyme.
   After several false starts and many tedious hours with our laborious, but
sensitive viscometer assay, Wilcox and I (12) succeeded in obtaining a
purified preparation of the restriction enzyme. We next used sucrose
gradient centrifugation to show that the purified enzyme selectively de-
graded duplex, but not single-stranded, P22 DNA to fragments averaging
around 100 base pairs in length, while Haemophilus DNA present in the
same reaction mixture was untouched. No free nucleotides were released
during the reaction, nor could we detect any nicks in the DNA products.
Thus, the enzyme was clearly an endonuclease that produced double-
strand breaks and was specific for foreign DNA. Since the final (limit)
digestion products of foreign DNA remained large, it seemed to us that
cleavage must be site-specific. This proved to be case and we were able to
demonstrate it directly by sequencing the termini of the cleavage frag-
ments.

Sequencing the Recognition Site
We began our sequencing efforts in late 1968 using a method that had
been worked out by Bernard Weiss and Charles C. Richardson at Har-
vard. The method involved labeling the 5’-termini of DNA with radioactive
phosphorus using T4 polynucleotide kinase and 32P gamma-labeled ATP,
followed by digestion with pancreatic DNase and either venom phospho-
diesterase to yield terminal nucleotides, or exonuclease I to yield terminal
dinucleotides (13). These could then be separated by electrophoresis and
identified by comparison with known marker nucleotides.
   Weiss had come to Hopkins in the Fall of 1967 and occupied a neighbor-
ing laboratory in the Microbiology Department. He instructed us in the
procedure and supplied us with both the kinase and the 32P-gamma-labeled


526                       Physiology or Medicine 1978


ATP. We started our sequencing using restriction enzyme digests of phage
T7 DNA, a fortuitous choice as we later learned. In our first experiment,
we found it necessary to treat with alkaline phosphatase to remove a
terminal 5’-phosphoryl group from the cleavage fragments in order to
obtain labeling; thus cleavage of the DNA chain produced 3’-hydroxyl, 5’-
phosphoryl termini. We next examined the terminal nucleotides and
found terminal 32 P label appearing only in dGMP and dAMP. Thus, our
enzyme was specific!
   We were ready by early 1969 to proceed to the dinucleotide level.
Unfortunately, just at this most exciting stage of the work, Wilcox received
his draft notice from the Army and was forced to discontinue the work so
that he could complete his formal requirements for the Master’s degree.
Meanwhile, I began occupying myself, for the space of several months,
with the laborious preparation of the dinucleotide standards that would be
necessary for identification of the terminal dinucleotides. I also prepared a
supply of exonuclease I from a side fraction of a large DNA polymerase
preparation generously given to me by Paul Englund. Using the exonu-
clease I and the standards, I proceeded to show by the Weiss and Richard-
son method that the terminal dinucleotide was either (5’)pGpA or
(5’)pApA, further confirming the remarkable cleavage specificity of our
restriction enzyme. I believed that extension of the analysis beyond this
point was possible, but standard oligonucleotides with which to identify the
longer terminal species were unavailable.
   About this time, Thomas J. Kelly, Jr. joined my laboratory, and in a series
of discussions we worked out an approach, using the newly available
isotope P that was to prove successful. In this approach, T7 DNA was
         33



uniformly 33P-labeled, cleaved with the restriction endonuclease, 5’-termi-
nally labeled with the second isotope, 32 P ,and then digested to oligomers
using pancreatic DNase. The products were fractionated according to
length by ion-exchange chromatography, and we then analyzed the oligo-
nucleotides of each size class electrophoretically. Two 32 P-terminal, 33 P -
uniformly labeled species were obtained at the dimer and trimer level, but
at least six species out of a possible eight were identified at the tetramer
level, so that specificity was lost at that point. The dimer and trimer species
were eluted from the electrophoretic strip, digested with venom phospho-
diesterase and the 33 P-labeled nucleotides identified. In this way, the 5’-
terminal dinucleotide was again confirmed as pPu-A and the trinucleotide
was found to be pPu-A-C.
   Three possible sequence arrangements could account for our result
depending on whether cleavage was “even” or “staggered.” To resolve this,
we used micrococcal nuclease to release the 3’-terminal dinucleoside mono-
phosphate and this turned out to be unique and complementary to the 5’-
terminal dinucleotide. Thus, our enzyme recognized the 2-fold rotationally
symmetrical six nucleotide sequence: . . . (5’)                 Pu-A-C (3’) . . .
.                              and produced an even duplex cleavage as indi-


cated by the arrows (14). Based on the expected occurrence of this
sequence in random DNA, the enzyme would be expected to cut once every
 1024 base pairs: a value in good accord with our previous observations. The
most interesting feature of the sequence was its symmetry, and we specu-
lated that this might have important implications for the restriction enzyme
structure (see later sections).
   In retrospect the proof of cleavage specificity was clearly our most
important result. It had not been shown for the E. coli K and B enzymes,
and, in fact, could not have been shown since these were randomly cleav-
ing Class I enzymes. Our enzyme belonged to a different, and as we shall
see, a much larger class of restriction enzymes. Such Class II enzymes (8)
are cleavage-site-specific and require only Mg as cofactor. Later studies
                                                2+



have revealed that they are relatively simple proteins, existing typically as
dimers or tetramers of a single polypeptide chain (15, 16, 17), and their
corresponding modification methylases are separate proteins that exist in
some cases as monomers (18). However, in 1970 when we completed the
sequence work, only Class I methylases had been studied in vitro (8), so we
turned next to the isolation of a modification methylase from H. influenzae
Rd.

Modification Methylases in H. influenzae Rd
While we did not hesitate to call our cleavage-site-specific endonuclease a
restriction enzyme-after all it was specific for foreign DNA-formal objec-
tions existed to that classification unless a modification enzyme of the same
specificity could be found. In the absence of such a modifying enzyme to
protect host sequences against cleavage, it would be necessary to postulate
total absence of the sequence in the cell chromosome (a rather remote
possibility) or, alternatively, a compartmentalization of the activity. To
allay these objections, and to satisfy our own curiosity, Paul Roy (a grad-
uate student) and I undertook a survey of the DNA methylases in H .
influenzae Rd in late 1970 (19, 20).
   We first established that H. influenzae Rd like many other strains of
bacteria (21), contains a small percentage of methylated bases in its DNA:
5-methylcytosine occurs once per about 8 000 bases, and N-6-methylade-
nine is found once per about 280 bases. We realized that much of this
methylation might be unrelated to R-M systems and that several methy-
lases could be present. Arber had shown that in E. coli the majority of DNA
methylation was not associated with R-M systems; in E. coli B, as little as
5% was so involved (22). With this in mind, we adopted a general ap-
proach designed to reveal the total DNA methylases of the cells. Proteins
from a crude cell extract were chromatographed on phosphocellulose and
assayed for ability to transfer [ H]methyl groups from labeled S-
                                        3



adenosylmethionine onto salmon sperm DNA or T7 DNA. In this way,
four DNA adenine methylases were detected.
  One of these methylases protected T7 DNA from cleavage by our
restriction enzyme; and conversely, the sites for this enzyme in salmon


528                     Physiology or Medicine 1978


sperm DNA were destroyed by predigestion with our restriction enzyme
preparation. These two results together indicated that both the restriction
enzyme and the methylase shared common DNA recognition sites. As a
further proof that we had isolated the modification methylase, we ana-
lyzed 3’ and 5’ nearest neighbors to the 3H-methylated adenine residues
produced by the enzyme. The results gave as the partial sequence for the
methylase, the trinucleotide (5’)Pu-A-C, in direct agreement with our
restriction enzyme sequence.
   One additional and unexpected observation came out of our methylase
studies. In the salmon sperm DNA experiment in which we predigested
with our restriction enzyme preparation, methyl acceptor ability was also
lost for one of the other DNA methylases. This particular methylase was
not active on T7 DNA unlike our restriction enzyme. It appeared that a
second restriction enzyme, corresponding in specificity to this methylase,
was contained in our endonuclease preparation. Our interpretation was
confirmed by separation of these two restriction activities in Nathans’
laboratory, and by a letter from Kenneth Murray of Edinburgh, Scotland
reporting that he had purified the new enzyme and determined its recog-
nition site sequence as                                At this point it is
interesting to recall our choice of T7 DNA for the sequencing work. Since,
unbeknownst to us, we had worked with a mixture of two enzymes, it was
indeed fortuitous that only one was active on T7 DNA.

Search for New Restriction Enzymes
Through the work of Nathans and colleagues (24), beginning in 1969, in
which they applied cleavage-site-specific restriction endonucleases to the
analysis of the SV40 tumor virus genome, it became clear that these
enzymes were valuable tools for DNA analysis. Their work provided an
early stimulus to the search for new enzymes of differing specificities. An
important consequence of our work with the Haemophilus restriction endo-
nuclease was the realization that such enzymes could be readily detected in
bacteria by purely biochemical procedures. This was especially true after
the introduction of gel electrophoresis by Nathans for analysis of DNA
restriction cleavage fragments (24) and the introduction of ethidium bro-
mide as a fluorescent stain for DNA by Sharp et al. (25). Armed with easy
and specific assays, other laboratories were soon reporting new restriction
endonucleases, first in E. coli (26) and other Haemophilus species (25, 27,
28), and then in a variety of other bacteria. Richard J. Roberts of the Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratories, who had a special interest in their possible
use for DNA sequencing, spearheaded the drive to isolate new enzymes.
Bacteria available from the American Type Culture Collection were sys-
tematically examined for cleavage-site-specific endonucleases that would
digest phage lambda and other viral DNAs so as to produce discrete bands
on electrophoretic gels. Many other laboratories joined in the effort, and
today some 150 enzymes with nearly 50 different cleavage specificities are
known (29).


A Catalog of Restriction Enzymes and Their Specificities
In Table I is a current list of known restriction endonuclease cleavage
specificities grouped according to type of recognition sequence. The list is
taken from Roberts (29) and includes for each sequence only the prototype
enzyme name*. In many cases, other enzymes recognizing the same se-
quence are known. These have been called isoschizomers by Roberts and
are given in his complete listing (29); e.g. isoschizomers of Hind II a r e
Chu II, Hinc II, and Mnn I. It is important to note that among a group of
isoschizomers, cleavage position within the site may vary; e.g., S m a I




t Compiled from data published by R. J, Roberts (29). Names of host organisms and refer-
ences for enzymes and sequences are listed in his article.
   From Reiser, J., personal communication
Sequences are 5’      3’. They should be visualized as duplexes although the sequence of only
one strand is given. Vertical lines represent cleavage positions. Asterisks (*) indicate bases
modified by the corresponding modification enzymes. An “m” represents a methyl group.
Only the prototype enzyme name is given for each sequence specificity; isoschizomers exist
for many sequences and are given in the Roberts reference. Bases in parenthesis indicate that
either base may occupy the position; e.g.,       recognizes GT(A/C)(G/T)AC which signifies
the following sequence possibilities: GTAGAC, GTATAC, GTCGAC, GTCTAC. (The first
and last sequences are the same in duplex form.) Pu is purine and Py is pyrimidine.


530                              Physiology or Medicine 1978


cleaves (5’)                                           cleaves (5’)
   Nucleotide sequences of recognition sites have in most cases been deter-
mined by analysis of oligonucleotides released from the 3’ or 5’ labeled
termini of cleavage fragments in a manner analogous to that first used for
         (14). Recently a simple method for palindromic sequences has been
devised. It depends on comparing digest fragments of φ X174 and SV40
DNA produced by a given restriction enzyme with a table of possible
fragments predicted by computer analysis of all tetra, penta, and hexanu-
cleotide palindromes in these DNAs (31). Usually a unique sequence
assignment is possible. For enzymes that cleave outside of their recognition
site, identification can be made by analysis of the location of mutations that
remove the site and by determining the position of bases, which when
modified by a specific methylase or by certain chemical agents such as
dimethylsulfate, inactivate the site (32).
   Sites are classified according to whether they show P-fold rotational
symmetry (palindromes) or are asymmetric. Among the symmetric sites
are 20 perfect hexanucleotide sites, 6 degenerate hexanucleotide sites, 5
pentanucleotide sites with a central degeneracy, 7 perfect tetranucleotide
sites, 1 hexanucleotide site with a central degeneracy, and 1 tetranucleo-
tide site requiring a methylated adenine (see below). Each of the tetranu-
cleotide sites can also be found as a central tetranucleotide in one or more
of the hexanucleotide sites. The degenerate hexanucleotide sites, while
losing strict structural symmetry at the degenerate position, retain a basic
overall symmetry and are probably recognized as symmetrical by the
enzymes (see below). When a complete degeneracy exists as in the
sequence, G - A - N - T - C , s y m m e t r y i s n o t l o s t s i n c e n o d i s c r i m i n a t i n g
enzyme contacts are made with the degenerate base.
         is unique in that it recognizes the sequence, G-Am-T-C, only when
it contains the methylated adenine. It is difficult to rationalize this reversal
of the normal role of methylation since other Diplococcus pneumoniae strains
carry the more conventional restriction enzyme,               recognizing un-
methylated G-A-T-C (33).
   Among the 5 restriction enzymes recognizing asymmetric sites, 1 recog-
nizes a tetranucleotide site and 4 recognize pentanucleotides. These en-
zymes cleave asymmetrically at a distance of 5 to 10 nucleotides 3’ to the
recognition sequence.          deserves special comment since it generates


*Restriction endonucleases derive their names from an R-M system nomenclature (30)
that uses an italicized three-letter abbreviation for the host organism followed by a fourth
letter for strain where necessary and a roman numeral to indicate each R-M system in the
organism. For example,                is the name of the R-M system from which our original
restriction endonuclease comes. Restriction enzymes are indicated as endonuclease R
followed by the system name, and similarly, modification enzymes are designated methy-
lase M followed by the system name; endonuclease                           and methylase
Most often a shorter form                     or               is used, and when only restriction
enzymes are being considered, they carry just the system name, i. e.,
etc.


DNA cleavage fragments with cohesive termini that have a high probabil-
ity of specific reunion with the original complementary partner; thus a
small genome could be cut into several fragments that would religate only
in original order (34).
   Three main cleavage modes are observed by enzymes with symmetric
recognition sites: even breaks (e.g.         staggered breaks generating 3’-
single-stranded cohesive termini (e.g. PstI), and staggered breaks generat-
ing 5’-single-stranded cohesive termini (e.g.            Each of these types
of termini has found special uses in recombinant DNA work. So far, all the
enzymes examined cleave so as to produce 3’-hydroxyl, 5’-phosphoryl
termini.

Mechanism of Nucleotide Sequence Recognition
Restriction and modification enzymes, because of their variety and relative
structural simplicity, provide excellent model systems for study of se-
quence-specific DNA-protein interactions. We have had an interest in this
area for some time, and I should like to present, in a general way, our
approach to this problem as well as possible directions for future research
in the area.
   The majority of R-M system recognition sites possess 2-fold rotational
symmetry. Two basic recognition mechanisms are possible for these sites:
symmetric recognition involving bilaterial symmetric contacts in a duplex
site and asymmetric recognition involving a set of nonsymmetric contacts
 (Fig. 1). For single-stranded sites, only the asymmetric mechanism can
apply. An important consideration then, is whether or not restriction
enzymes or their corresponding modification methylases can act on single-
stranded sites.
   Most restriction endonucleases appear to require duplex sites, as origi-
nally demonstrated for Hind11 (14). A few enzymes, for example,
                   and         act slowly on single-stranded DNAs (35, 36,
37), but this is now thought to be due to formation of transient duplexes
(38). It is probable that most of the restriction enzymes employ a symmet-
ric recognition mechanism. This is based on several arguments. First, since
hemimethylated sites are generated during replication, the recognition
process must be responsive to methylation on either strand. This is most
easily achieved by bilaterial, symmetric protein-DNA contacts at the methy-
lation positions within the duplex site. Second, from the standpoint of
genetic economy it is less expensive to specify a protein monomer site
recognizing n/2 bases than one recognizing n bases (Fig. 1). Finally, the
        endonuclease exists as dimers and tetramers of a single 28,500
dalton subunit, and under physiological conditions, cleaves both strands of
a duplex site in one binding event (18). It seems likely from symmetry
considerations that such a dimeric or tetrameric structure will prove to be
the rule for other enzymes.
   Modification methylases may recognize sites in a fashion quite different
from the restriction enzymes. Some of these enzymes appear capable of’


532                            Physiology or Medicine 1978




                                                             Asymmetric
                                                             Recognition



Fig. 1: Two different ways in which restriction and modification enzymes may interact with
two-fold rotationally symmetrical nucleotide sequences in order to achieve recognition. In the
symmetric recognition model, the protein possesses subunits arranged in two-fold rotational
symmetry and each identical half interacts with a minimum of n/2 nucleotides. In the
asymmetric model, the protein is assumed to have an asymmetric structure and must interact
with at least one nucleotide at each base pair position for a total of n nucleotides. The simplest
case, where all the interactions are on one strand, is shown.



acting on purely single-stranded sites, implying an asymmetric recognition
process (Fig.1). Michael B. Mann, in my laboratory (39), has shown that
         methylates C residues in the random copolymer, poly(dN-acetyl
G, dC) which is unable to form any Watson-Crick base pairing (based on
absence of a thermal melting transition), and that             and
methylate poly(dX, dC) which also shows no thermal melting transition.
           and            also methylate denatured salmon sperm DNA to
the same total extent as native DNA, although at half the rate. A lower rate
and extent (30% ) was achieved with             These observations support
the notion that these methylases can act on single-stranded sites with
preservation of specificity. This implies that discriminatory interactions
need involve only the bases on one strand. Rubin and Modrich (18) have
shown that the EcoRI methylase is a functional monomer of molecular
weight 39,000 that transfers methyl groups to each strand of the EcoRI site
in individual catalytic events that are interrupted by dissociation from the
site. On theoretical grounds, an asymmetric recognition mechanism is
reasonable for the modification methylases because, as pointed out by the
above authors, the usual in vivo hemimethylated duplex substrate is inher-
ently asymmetric.
  Turning again to the restriction endonucleases, it was early proposed
that recognition of a symmetric site might depend on some unusual struc-
ture of the site. Kelly and I (14) initially suggested the enzymes might
interact with open (melted) sites (Fig. 2) because at that time we felt
there was insufficient opportunity for base specific interactions in the
helical grooves. Meselson et al. (41) proposed that symmetric sites might
transiently form cruciform structures with special features that would
promote enzyme recognition (Fig. 2). Both open and cruciform struc-


                                                                                             533


                               Duplex
                                Site




Fig. 2: Representations of three possible structures of a recognition site that might facilitate
specific protein-DNA interaction.




tures are energetically unfavorable, and there are no compelling theoreti-
cal reasons to favor them. We now accept, as a result of the lac repressor-
operator studies (42, 43) and recent structural analyses of base pairs (40),
that the base groups exposed in the major and minor grooves of helical
DNA are sufficient for discriminatory interactions. Therefore, to simplify
the discussion, it will be assumed that sites are recognized while in the
helical configuration.
   The restriction enzyme          was chosen by Michael Mann and myself
for initial studies because the site, (5’)pG-C-GJC is particularly simple and
can easily be synthesized in alternating polymer form. We have chosen
chemical modification of the bases as an approach to determining those
groups in the major or minor grooves that play a role in recognition.
Effects on catalytic activity rather than binding are most easily measured
and have been used in our studies, although we acknowledge that each
may provide somewhat different information.
   We have depended heavily on the analysis of Seeman et al. (40) for
interpretation of our results. These authors compare the various potential
sites for discriminatory protein-DNA contacts in the major and minor
grooves of the different base pairs. A         base pair, the only kind in the
       site, is shown in Fig. 3. The major and minor grooves may be
visualized as divided into outer and central regions. In the central major
groove, the 06 atom of guanine is hydrogen bonded to the amino N4 of
cytosine. The outer major groove contains the N7 atom of guanine and C5
hydrogen atom of cytosine. The central minor groove contains the 2-
amino (N2) group of guanine. The outer minor groove contains the N3
atom of guanine and the 02 atom of cytosine. (The latter is hydrogen
bonded to the 2-amino group of guanine). A top view of the major groove


534                           Physiology or Medicine 1978




Fig. 3: Potential major and minor groove discriminatory protein-DNA interaction positions in
the        restriction endonuclease recognition site. A. A stereochemical drawing of a
base pair in DNA (adapted from Seeman et al. (40). Potential atoms for interaction are
indicated. B. A rough sketch of a section of helical DNA containing an        site. Base pairs
are indicated by horizontal bars. The view is from above the major groove, and approximate
positions of interacting atoms are shown.



in the         site is shown in Fig. 3 with potential atoms for interaction
diagramatically represented.
   The        modification methylase transfers methyl groups from S-aden-
osylmethionine onto the 5-position of the internal cytosines (situated be-
tween the two guanines) in the           site and protects against cleavage by
the         endonuclease (39). Since the methyl groups probably interfere
sterically, we infer that contacts between protein and DNA must take place
at these two outer major groove positions of the duplex site. Mann and I
have also shown that methylation introduced on the 5-position of the
external cytonsines inhibits cleavages by             Therefore, it is likely that
these are also closely fitted by the enzyme. In another experiment, we used
dimethylsulfate to introduce methyl groups on the N7 positions of guan-
ine in an             positioned 20 bases from the 5’ terminus of a
DNA fragment of known sequence. After this treatment, the fragment was
digested with          endonuclease, and fractionated by gel electrophoresis
into cleaved and uncleaved molecules. These were then treated by Maxam
and Gilbert (44) sequencing methods so as to cleave at the methylated
position and analyzed by electrophoretic gels. Bands representing G’s in


the site were greatly increased in intensity in the gel tract representing
uncleaved molecules and absent from the gel tract representing cleaved
molecules. We concluded that methylation of the N7 position of any G
residue in the site conferred protection against cleavage. Again, the effect
is likely to be steric, and we infer that the enzyme closely fits these positions
in the outer major groove of the site (Fig. 2B). In summary, we have been
able to demonstrate that methylation at any of eight positions in the outer
portions of the major groove inhibits cleavage. Study of the central major
groove groups by this approach is more difficult because modifications often
destroy helical pairing.
   To examine minor groove interactions, we looked at activity on alternat-
ing poly(dI-dC). Inosine contains a H-atom in place of the 2-amino group
of guanine in the central minor groove. A dI-dC base pair mimics a dA-dT
base pair when viewed from the minor groove.                      cleaves alternating
p o l y ( d I - d C )efficiently, thus the 2-amino group is not essential for discrimi-
nation, and more specifically, plays no role in discrimination of                 from
G.C base pairs. The central minor groove thus seems not to be occupied.
Interaction is still possible in the outer positions of the minor groove where
the N3 atom of purines and the 02 atom of pyrimidines are exposed.
However, since these are both electron-rich hydrogen bond acceptors and
occupy strictly similar positions regardless of base pair type, they are not
considered likely for discriminatory interactions (40). We have tentatively
concluded then that                 endonuclease occupies the major groove and
derives all discriminatory contacts from groups in the central and outer
major groove positions.
   It is likely that            and other restriction endonucleases also interact
with the sugar-phosphate backbone within a site. We suggest that stabiliz-
ing interactions of this sort, and also non-discriminatory outer minor
groove interactions, may extend to adjacent nucleotides to either side of a
site. These interactions could explain two observations. First is the size
effect. Greene et al. (45) found that the affinity of               endonuclease for
the symmetric octanucleotide (5’)                                containing a central
         recognition site is 200 times less than for the                 site in SV40
DNA. We found similarly that a symmetric decanucleotide containing
terminal              sites is not detectably cleaved by           endonuclease, but
addition of nucleotides to the end restores the site (46). Second is the
finding that some sites are cut preferentially, depending on external
sequence context (47, 48), suggesting that weak contacts are made at
neighboring nucleotides outside of the site.

Recognition of Degenerate Sites
Degenerate sites are not strictly symmetrical by structural criteria.
endonuclease recognizes the site                           which exists as
four combinations of the degenerate nucleotides: G-T-A-G-A-C, G-T-A-T-
A-C, G-T-C-G-A-C, and G-T-C-T-A-C. The first and last combinations are
asymmetric. Yet it is very appealing to think of the enzyme as interacting


with each of these sequences in a similar way so as to preserve symmetry.
The discrimination rules of Seeman et al. (40) allow for this possibility.
They describe several potential positions for major and minor groove
interaction with each of the Watson-Crick base pairs. A protein-DNA
interaction, e.g. a single hydrogen-bond directed to one of the positions, is
insufficient to allow discrimination between all the base pairs, although
two interactions can be sufficient. Thus, a restriction or modification
enzyme making only a single contact at symmetrically placed base pairs
could allow a degeneracy, i.e., an ambiguity in recognition.
   According to this scheme, four types of degeneracy appear to be possi-
ble: (A/G)-(T/C) (Pu-Py type), (A/C)-(G/T), (A/T)-(T/A), and (G/C)-(C/G).
The Pu-Py type degeneracy could arise from outer major groove contact
directed toward the purine N7 atom. The (A/C)-(G/T) degeneracy could
result from a single interaction directed to the central major groove amino
N4 of cytosine and amino N6 of adenine position, or to the carbonyl
oxygen of thymine or guanine, since these pairs of groups occupy similar
positions in the specified degeneracy. The (A/T)-(T/A) degeneracy could
result from a central minor groove interaction since the C2 hydrogen atom
of adenine occupies a sterically similar position in each        orientation.
Finally, the (G/C)-(C/G) d egeneracy could result from interaction in the
central minor groove with the 2-amino group of guanine which is in a
sterically similar position for each orientation of the      pair. Inspection
of the six degenerate hexanucleotide sequences in Table 1 reveals that, of
the four predicted degeneracies, only (G/C)-(C/G) has not yet been found.
   Among the symmetrical pentanucleotide sites, two are completely de-
generate at the middle nucleotide position implying either absence of
protein-DNA interaction or possibly non-discriminatory outer minor
groove contacts. Three of the pentanucleotide sites contain a middle (A/T)
nucleotide degeneracy. This is compatible with a single interaction direct-
ed to the C2 hydrogen atom of adenine, which is inherently symmetrical
since it falls almost directly on the dyad axis of the site. Other types of
degeneracy in the middle nucleotide position of pentanucleotide sites
appear less likely.
   The general agreement between the above predicted and observed
degeneracies further reinforces the notion that restriction enzymes accom-
plish nucleotide sequence recognition through major and minor groove
interactions.

Relaxation of Sequence Specificity
Several DNA enzymes, e.g., terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (49)
and pancreatic DNase (50), show changes in specificity according to species
of divalent cation and ionic conditions in the reaction mixture. Some
restriction endonucleases appear to be similarly affected.         endonu-
clease cleaves the sequence (5’)G-A-A-T-T-C in a reaction mixture contain-
ing 100m M Tris-Cl (pH 7.3), 50 mM NaCl, and 5 mM MgC1 2. When the
conditions are changed to 25 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.5), 2 mM MgCl 2 , the


                                                                             537




specificity is lowered to the central tetranucleotide sequence (5’)A-A-T-T
(51). However, the enzyme retains a strong preference for the canonical
site; extensive digestion is required to achieve cleavage at the new tetranu-
cleotide sites, and there is great variability among them in regard to clea-
vage rate. The latter presumably reflects the degree of relatedness to the
canonical site.
   Hsu and Berg (52) obtained decreased specificity with              by substi-
tuting Mn
            2 +
                for Mg 2 + . They also noted relaxed specificity with
                   in the presence of Mn . This appears to be a promising
                                           2 +
but not
area for more investigation.

Cloning R-M System Genes
Detailed studies of restriction and modification enzymes require quantities
of pure enzyme. However, enzymes are often obtained in poor yield from
source bacteria. Because of this we have begun to explore the possibilities
of cloning various R-M system genes as a means to achieve enzyme over-
production. Using this approach, Michael Mann and Nagaraja Rao, in my
laboratory, have recently cloned            system from Haemophi1us haemo-
lyticus in the E. coli-pBR322 host-vector system using a “shotgun” approach
(53). Total chromosomal DNA was cleaved with              endonuclease and
inserted into the       cloning site of the plasmid, located in the ampicillin
resistance gene, by means of a GC-extension procedure developed by
Rougeon et al (54). After transfection into an         E. coli host (HB 101),
tetracycline-resistant recombinant clones were tested for acquisition of a
new restriction phenotype using phage λ. A single such clone was found


Fig. 5: Single-stranded DNA-agarose affinity chromatography of                endonuclease. A
crude extract from about 10 gm of thermally induced KJ34 cells was processed to remove
nucleic acids and then chromatographed on a single-stranded DNA agarose column (2.5X20
cm) using a 1,000 ml gradient essentially as described by Mann et al. (53). Fractions (approxi-
mately 12 ml) were collected and assayed for protein by absorbance at 280 nm and for
          activity by gel electrophoresis of lambda DNA digestion products. The endonuclease
units represent estimates of the percent of complete digestion. Protein species in load and in
peak endonuclease fractions were examined by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.



among 1400 tested. The recombinant plasmid, pDIl0, recovered from this
clone contained a 3.0 kb DNA insert flanked by         sites. A cleavage map
is shown in Fig. 4. The HB101 clone carrying pDI10 exhibits classical
restriction and modification behavior with phage λ (e.o.p. ~ 10 -7 ) and
several other phages.
   T h e p D I l 0 D N A efficiently re-transfects new HB101 cells suggesting
that methylation is expressed well in advance of restriction. To account for
this, we have suggested that the methylase might act as a positive regulator
for expression of the restriction gene. By this scheme, methylase would
initially be occupied with methylation of host chromosomal sites, becoming
free to induce restriction enzyme only after its job was complete. This is
only one possible scheme to explain the apparent sequential action of these
genes. Study of the regulation should prove interesting.
   To increase plasmid copy number and consequent enzyme overproduc-
tion, the 3.0 kb DNA fragment was excised from pDI10 DNA and trans-
ferred into a second plasmid vector, pKC16, a hybrid of pBR322 and


phage λ containing a thermally-inducible h-replication region (55), to yield
a new hybrid plasmid pDI21. Using a clone containing pDI21, a 20 minute
42”C treatment raises plasmid copy number and enzyme yield several fold
over that obtainable with pDI10. The restriction endonuclease and modifi-
cation methylase were purified from crude extracts of this clone by single-
stranded DNA-agarose affinity chromatography. Typical results for the
endonuclease are shown in Fig. 5. This essentially one-step procedure
yielded an active fraction showing a single major protein band of about
24,000 daltons by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Fig. 5). The
purified endonuclease gives a DNA cleavage pattern on          174RF DNA
identical to       with the sequence specificity (5’)pGA-N-T-C. The DNA
methylase from the clone protects against both         and         cleavage.
   We believe that future developments in the field of restriction and
modification enzymes will depend heavily on gene cloning, both for en-
zyme overproduction and for genetic studies. There is a great advantage
to having the          g e n e s o n a small segment of’ DNA chat can be
propagated and expressed in E. coli. The genes are easily accessible for
genetic studies in the new host, whereas this would be difficult or impossi-
ble in the original Haemophilus strain. The DNA segment is small enough
to be readily sequenced, thus providing direct information on gene ar-
rangement, regulatory sequences, and protein amino acid sequences. The
latter will he valuable for future crystallographic studies of enzyme struc-
ture, a goal which must he achieved if we are to fully understand the
nature of’ the protein-DNA interactions involved in nucleotide sequence
recognition.


REFERENCES

  1. Nathans, D. and Smith, H.O. (1975) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 44, 273-293.
  la. Luria, S.E. and Human, S.L. (1952) J. Bacterial. 64, 557-569.
  2. Bertani, G. and Weigle, J.J. (1953) J. Bacterial. 65, 113-121.
  3. Arber, W. and Dussoix, D. (1962) J. Mol. Biol. 5, 18-36.
  4. Dussoix, D. and Arber, W. (1962) J. Mol. Biol. 5, 37-49.
  5. Arber, W. (1965) Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 365-378.
  6. Linn, S. and Arber, W. (1968) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 39, 1300-1306.
  7. Meselson, M. and Yuan, R. (1968) Nature 217, 1110 - 1114.
  8. Boyer, H.W. (1971) Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 25, 153- 176.
  9. Horiuchi, K. and Zinder, N.D. (1972) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 69, 3220-3224.
10. Adler, S.P. and Nathans, D. (I 973) Biochem. Biophys. Acta 299, 177- 188.
11. Murray, N.E., Batten, P.L., and Murray, K. (1973) J. Mol. Biol. 81, 395-407.
 12. Smith, H.O. and Wilcox, K.W. (1970) J. Mol. Biol.51, 379-391.
 13. Weiss, B. and Richardson, C.C. (1967) J. Mol. Biol. 23, 405-417.
 14. Kelly, T.J. Jr. and Smith, H.O. (1970) J. Mol. Biol. 51, 393-409.
15. Modrich, P. and Zabel. D. (1976) J. Biol. Chem. 251, 5866-5874.
16. Greene, P.J., Betlach, M.C., Goodman, H.M., and Boyer, H.W. (1974) Methods Mol.
     Biol. 7, 87-111.
 17. Smith, L.A. and Chirlkjian, J.C., personal communication.
18. Rubin, R.A. and Modrich, P. (1977).J. Biol. Chem. 252, 7265-7272.
19. Roy, P. H. and Smith, H. 0. (1973) J. Mol. Biol. 81, 427-444.
20. Roy, P.H. and Smith, H.O. (1973) J. Mol. Biol. 81, 445-459.
21. Vanyushin, B.F., Belozersky, A.N., Kokurina, N.A., and Kadirova, D.X. (1968) Nature
     218, 1066-1067.
22. Arber, W. and Linn, S. (1969) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 38, 467-500.
23. Old, R., Murray, K., and Roizes, G. (1975) J. Mol. Biol. 92, 331-339.
24. Danna, K. and Nathans, D. (1971) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 68, 2913-2917.
25. Sharp, P.A., Sugden, B. and Sambrook, J. (1973) Biochemistry 12, 3055-3063.
26. Yoshimori, R. (197 1) Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of Calif., San Francisco.
27. Middleton, J.H., Edgell, M.H., and Hutchison, C.A.111. (1972) J. Virol. IO, 42-50.
28. Gromkova, R. and Goodgal, S.H. (1972) J. Bacterial. 109, 987-992.
29. Roberts, R.J. (1978) Gene, 4, 183- 193.
30. Smith, H.O. and Nathans, D. (1973) J. Mol. Biol. 81, 419-423.
3 1. Fuchs, C., Rosenvold, E.C., Honigman, A., and Szybalski, W. (1978) Gene 4, l-23.
32. Kleid, D., Humayun, Z., Jeffrey, A., and Ptashne, M. (1976) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA
     73, 293-297.
33. Lacks, S. and Greenberg, B. (1975) J. Biol. Chem. 250, 4060-4066.
34. Brown, N.L. and Smith, M. (1977) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 3213-3216.
35. Blakesley, R.W. and Wells, R.D. (1975) Nature 257, 421-422.
36. Horuichi, K. and Zinder, N.D. (1975) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 72, 2555-2558.
37. Godson, G.N. and Roberts, R.J. (1976) Virology 73, 561-567.
38. Blakesley, R.W., Dodson, J.B., Nes, I.F., and Wells, R.D. (1977) J. Biol. Chem. 252,
     7300-7306.
39. Mann, M.B. and Smith, H.O. (1978) in Transmethylation, eds. E. Usdin, R. T. Bor-
     chardt, C. R. Creveling (Elsevier/North Holland) pp 483-493.
40. Seeman, N.C., Rosenberg, J.M., and Rich, A. (1976) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 73, 804-
     808.
41. Meselson, M., Yuan, R., and Heywood, J. (1972) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 41, 447-466.
42. Adler, K., Beyrenther, K., Fanning, E., Geisler, N.. Gronenborn. B., Klemm, A., Müller-
     Hill, B., Pfahl, M., and Schuitz, A. (1972) Nature 237, 322-327.
43. Gilbert, W., Maxam, A., and Mirzabekov, A. (1976) in Control of Ribosome Synthesis,
     Alfred Benson Symposium IX, eds. Kjeldgaard, N.O., Maaloe, 0. (Munksgaard, Copen-
     hagen) pp. 139- 148.


             Nucleotide Sequence Specificity of Restriction Endonucleases             541


44. Maxam, A. and Gilbert, W. (1977) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 560-564.
45. Greene, P.J., Poonian, MS., Mussbaum, A.L., Tobias, L., Garfin, D.E., Boyer, H.W., and
    Goodman, H.M. (1975) J. Mol. Biol. 99, 237-261.
46. Mann, M.B. and Smith, H.O. (1977) Nucl. Acids Res. 4, 4211-4221.
47. Thomas, M. and Davis, R.W. (1975) J. Mol. Biol. 91, 315-328.
48. Smith, H.O. and Birnstiel, M. (1976) Nucl. Acids Res. 3, 2387-2398.
49. Roychondhury, R., Jay, E., and Wu, R. (1976) Nucl. Acids Res. 3, 863-877.
50. Melgar, E. and Goldthwait, D.A. (1968) J. Biol. Chem. 243, 4409-4416.
5 1. Polisky, B., Greene, P., Garfin, D.E., McCarthy, B.J., Goodman, H.M., and Boyer, H.W.
    (1975) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 72, 3310-3314.
52. Hsu, M. and Berg, P. (1978) Biochemistry 17, 131-138.
53. Mann, M.B., Rao, N.R., and Smith, H.O. (1978) Gene 3, 97-112.
54. Rougeon, F., Kourilsky, P., and Mach, B. (1975) Nucl. Acids Res. 2, 2365-2378.
55. Rao, N.R. and Rogers, S.G. (1978) Gene 3, 247-263.
