                             H   ANS   A . KR E B S


                        The citric acid cycle
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1953



In the course of the 1920’s and 1930’s great progress was made in the study
of the intermediary reactions by which sugar is anaerobically fermented to
lactic acid or to ethanol and carbon dioxide. The success was mainly due to
the joint efforts of the schools of Meyerhof, Embden, Parnas, von Euler,
Warburg and the Coris, who built on the pioneer work of Harden and of
Neuberg. This work brought to light the main intermediary steps of anaer-
obic fermentations. In contrast, very little was known in the earlier 1930’s
about the intermediary stages through which sugar is oxidized in living cells.
When, in 1930, I left the laboratory of Otto Warburg (under whose guid-
ance I had worked since 1926 and from whom I have learnt more than from
any other single teacher), I was confronted with the question of selecting a
major field of study and I felt greatly attracted by the problem of the in-
 termediary pathway of oxidations. These reactions represent the main en-
 ergy source in higher organisms, and in view of the importance of energy
production to living organisms (whose activities all depend on a continuous
 supply of energy) the problem seemed well worthwhile studying.
    The application of the experimental procedures which had been successful
 in the study of anaerobic fermentation however proved to be impracticable.
 Unlike fermentations the oxidative reactions could not be obtained in cell-
 free extracts. Another difficulty was the rapid deterioration of the oxidative
reactions which occurred when tissues were broken up by mincing or
 grinding, and by suspending them in aqueous solutions.
    We now know the reasons for this loss of activity. The chief is the destruc-
 tion of coenzymes of the nucleotide-type under the influence of hydrolysing
 enzymes. In the intact tissues these cofactors are apparently separated from
 the enzymes that can attack them but they become exposed to their action
 when the tissue structure is destroyed.
    It is nowadays possible to take countermeasures against these interfering
 reactions. Rapid fractionation of the tissue by centrifugation near freezing
 point separates the destructive enzymes; co-factors which are also removed
 are known and can be replaced by addition of the pure substances. But this


400                            1953 H.A.KREBS

information was not available to the earlier workers and their methods of
approach were somewhat indirect.



                                  Early work

The first major investigation into the intermediary metabolism of oxidation
was that of Thunberg1, who examined systematically the oxidizability of
organic substances in isolated animal tissues. Between 1906 and 1920 he
tested the oxidation of over 60 organic substances, chiefly in muscle tissue.
He discovered the rapid oxidation of the salts of a number of acids, such as
lactate, succinate, fumarate, malate, citrate, and glutamate. Thunberg’s re-
                                                               2
sults were confirmed and extended by Batelli and Stern and later inves-
tigators. Batelli and Stern appreciated already in 1910 some of the significance
of these findings when they wrote, "Man kann annehmen, dass der die Oxy-
dation dieser Sauren bewirkende Prozess mit dem der Hauptatmung der
Gewebe identisch ist."
   However the data of Thunberg and of Batelli and Stern remained isolated
observations because they could not be linked to the chief oxidative process
of muscle tissue, the oxidation of carbohydrate. Another twenty years had to
elapse before they could be incorporated into a coherent account of respira-
tion.
                                                                                3
   An important development came from the laboratory of Szent-Györgyi
of Szegedin 1935, who discovered that pigeon breast muscle - the chief flight
muscle and therefore particularly powerful - is especially suitable for the
study of oxidative reactions because this tissue maintains its oxidative capac-
ity well after disintegration in the "Latapie" mill and suspension in aqueous
media. He confirmed on this material the rapid oxidation of the C4-dicar-
boxylic acids - succinic, fumaric, malic, and oxaloacetic acids - and arrived at
the new conclusion that part of the action of these substances was of a cat-
 alytic nature. Final proof of this catalytic effect (as opposed to the oxidation
in which the acids serve as substrate) was provided by Stare and Baumann4
in December 1936. These workers showed that very small quantities of the
acids suffice to effect an increase in respiration, and that the increase is a
 multiple of the amount of oxygen necessary for the oxidation of the added
substance (Table 1). Moreover the added C4-dicarboxylic acid was not used
up when it stimulated oxidations and could be subsequently detected in the
medium. There thus remained no doubt that the acids can act as catalysts in


                           THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE                                   401
Table 1. Catalytic effect of fumarate on the respiration of minced pigeon breast muscle.
                              (Stare and Baumann, 1936.)




respiration, but neither Szent-Györgyi, nor Stare and Baumann could offer
a satisfactory explanation of the catalytic effect. They assumed that the dicar-
boxylic acids served as hydrogen carriers between foodstuff and cyto-
chrome.




The next step was the discovery, made in Sheffield early in 1937, that citrate
can act as a catalyst in the same way as succinate. A decisive contribution to
                                                              5
the field was made in March 1937 by Martius and Knoop , who elucidated
the fate of citrate when undergoing oxidation in biological material. Whilst
it has long been known that citrate can be oxidized in plants, animals, and
 micro-organisms, the intermediary steps remained obscure until Martius and
 Knoop discovered                       as a product of citrate oxidation. They
 showed this reaction in extracts of liver and of cucumber seeds and suggested
 that cis -aconitate and isocitrate were intermediates, as formulated in Fig. 1.
 This interpretation was in accordance with the earlier discovery of Wagner-
Jauregg and Rauen6 that isocitrate behaves in the same way as citrate in
 extracts of cucumber seeds.
    Further relevant observations were made in the Sheffield laboratory
 between March and June 1937 . Firstly, the reaction which Martius and
                                    7



 Knoop had demonstrated in liver was found to occur at a rapid rate in
  muscle and other tissues. The rate was found to be sufficient to justify the
  assumption that the reaction constitutes a component of the main respiratory
 process of the tissue. The formation of ketoglutarate from citrate could be
  demonstrated by two procedures, either by the addition of arsenite or by
  raising the concentration of citrate to a high level. Arsenite preferentially
  inhibits the oxidation of ketonic acids, presumably by reacting with the sul-


402                                 1953 H.A.KREBS




Fig. 1. Conversion of citric into                 acid according to Martius and Knoop
                                        (1937).

phydryl group of coenzyme A which is essential for the metabolism of
         acids. A high substrate concentration causes a competitive inhibition
of the oxidation of other substances. When malonate was added, succinate
was found to be a major product of the oxidation of citrate. Of major signif-
icance was another new observation: citrate was not only broken down at a
rapid rate but was also readily formed in muscle and in other tissues provided
that oxaloacetate was added. This could be explained by the assumption that
some oxaloacetate was broken down to pyruvate or acetate, and that the
formation of citrate was the result of a combination between the remaining
oxaloacetate on one hand, and pyruvate or acetate on the other. The discov-
ery of the synthesis of citrate from oxaloacetate and a substance which could
be derived from carbohydrate, like pyruvate or acetate, made it possible to
formulate a complete scheme of carbohydrate oxidation7. According to this
scheme (Fig. 2) pyruvate, or a derivative of pyruvate, condenses with oxa-
loacetate to form citrate. By a sequence of reactions in which cis -aconitate,
isocitrate, α-ketoglutaric, succinic, fumaric, malic, and oxaloacetic acid are
intermediates, one acetic acid equivalent is oxidized and the oxaloacetic acid
required for the condensing reaction is regenerated. The concept explained
the catalytic action of the di- or tricarboxylic acids, the oxidizability of these


                         THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE                                   403
                                    Carbohydrate




   Fig. 2. The original citric acid cycle. (Krebs and Johnson, 1937; Krebs, 1943.)


 acids in tissues which oxidize carbohydrates, and the similarity of the char-
 acteristics of the oxidation of these substances and of the main respirations
already noted by Batelli and Stem in 1910. The scheme describes in detail
the fate of the carbon atoms of the substrate and the stages where hydrogen
is removed and CO2 is released.
   It is convenient to use a brief term for the kind of scheme. Its essential
feature is the periodic formation of a number of di- and tricarboxylic acids.
As there is no term which would serve as a common denominator for all the
various acids, it seemed reasonable to name the cycle after one, or some, of
its characteristic and specific acids. It was from such considerations that the
term "citric acid cycle" was proposed in 1937.




The evidence in support of the cycle mentioned so far comes under two
main headings: firstly, all the individual stages of the cycle have been dem-
onstrated to occur in animal tissues, and their rates are high enough to
comply with the view that they are components of the main respiratory
process. Secondly, di- and tricarboxylic acids have been shown under suit-
able conditions to stimulate oxidations catalytically.
  A third set of experiments supporting the concept employs the inhibitor
                                        8
malonate, first recognized by Quastel as a specific agent for succinic de-


404                            1953 H.A.KREBS

hydrogenase. Malonate competitively prevents succinate from reacting with
the enzyme, an effect due to the similarity between the structures of the two
compounds. The blockage of succinic dehydrogenase in any system where
succinate is an intermediate causes an accumulation of succinate. It is a spe-
cial advantage of the inhibitor technique that it can be applied without se-
rious interference with the natural conditions, e.g. without disintegrating
the tissue (although in some cases permeability barriers may prevent the
penetration of the inhibitor to the site of the enzymes). Malonate has been
found to inhibit the respiration of all animal tissues, and the expected accu-




 mulation of succinate is found even when the inhibitor is injected into the
 intact organism9,10. These observations may be taken as independent proof
of the participation of succinic dehydrogenase in the respiration of animal
 tissues.
    More recently Peters 1 1 has discovered another valuable specific inhibitor.
 Injection of fluoroacetate into the intact organism leads to an accumulation
 of citrate in animal tissues. The actual inhibitor is probably a fluorotricar-
 boxylic acid which arises from fluoroacetate and oxaloacetate and appears to
 prevent competitively the metabolic removal of citrate. The accumulation of
 citrate in the poisoned organism, by analogy with the accumulation of suc-
 cinate, may be taken as an indication of its normal intermediary formation.




Since the original formulation of the cycle in 1937, three additional inter-
mediates have been identified. In 1948 Ochoa12 and independently Lynen12
finally established oxalosuccinic acid as an intermediate, as already postulated
by Martius and Knoop. They demonstrated the presence of a specific de-
carboxylase converting oxalosuccinate to α-ketoglutarate. A very major
achievement was the identification of the derivative of pyruvate which con-


                       THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE




                Fig. 3. Extended version of the citric acid cycle.

denses with oxaloacetate to form citrate. Thanks to the work of Lipmann’s,
Stem and Ochoa14 and Lynen this is now known to be acetyl coenzyme
                               15,16



A. As Dr. Lipmann will himself deal with the biochemistry of coenzyme A
I will not further discuss the matter. Finally, experiments of the schools of
Ochoa 17 and Green18 have shown that coenzyme A also participates in the
conversion of α-ketoglutarate to succinate and that succinyl coenzyme A is
an intermediary stage. The place of these three intermediates in the cycle is
shown in Fig. 3.




The concept of the citric acid cycle was originally put forward as a scheme
of the oxidation of carbohydrate. It was however clear from the beginning


406                            1953 H.A.KREBS

that the cycle must also play a major part in the oxidation of a considerable
fraction of the protein molecule. Of the 20 amino acids that are commonly
found as protein constituents, three - glumatic acid, aspartic acid, and alanine
- form derivatives which are intermediate in the citric acid cycle. Five other
amino acids - histidine, arginine, citrulline, proline, hydroxyproline - are
known to form glutamic acid in the animal body and they can therefore
enter the citric acid cycle via                 acid. Five further amino acids -
 the three leucines, tyrosine, phenylalanine - yield acetyl coenzyme A and
malic acid; the 13 amino acids listed constitute a large proportion of the
common proteins, e.g. more than 75% in the case of casein. The metabolic
fate of the carbon chain of the chief remaining amino acids is not yet fully
established and it is likely that future work will reveal further connections
between these amino acids and the citric acid cycle. It is thus evident that a
substantial proportion of protein molecules pass through the citric acid cycle
when undergoing oxidation.
   Since 1943 it has become evident that the citric acid cycle also comes into
play in the later stages of the oxidation of fatty acids. The classical work on
the β-oxidation of the higher fatty acids had shown that the carbon skeleton
of the fatty acids is broken down by the removal of pairs of carbon atoms
and that acetoacetic and                        acids are products of oxidation.
These "ketone bodies" were presumed to arise from the last four carbon
atoms of the chain. Earlier work on isolated tissues by Quastel19, Edson20,
Stadie 21 and others produced much confirmatory evidence in support of
oxidation and added the new observation that, contrary to the older as-
sumption, more than one molecule of ketone body could be formed from
one fatty acid molecule. It is further of interest to record that inhibitor exper-
iments with malonate by Quastel and Wheatley8, and Edson and Leloir20
suggested already in 1935 that the oxidative removal of the ketone bodies
was associated with the metabolism of the C 4-dicarboxylic acids. Decisive
progress in this field dates from 1943 onwards. In that year Breusch 22 and
                          23
Wieland and Rosenthal reported independently that acetoacetate could
cause a formation of citrate in animal tissues if oxaloacetate was present. The
evidence presented by these workers was not conclusive because oxaloace-
tate alone forms much citrate and the increased yield could be explained
without assuming a direct participation of acetoacetate in the formation of the
tricarboxylic acids2 4. But isotope work from 1944 onwards by American
 workers has removed any doubts; they show conclusively that the carbon
 atoms of fatty acids, and of acetoacetatc, appear in the acids of the citric acid


                             THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE                               407
     cycle, and that these acids are thus intermediates in the complete oxidation
--
     of fatty acids25.
        This has been confirmed by the more recent investigations with enzyme
     preparations carried out by the school of Lynen, Lipmann, Ochoa, Stem, and
     Green 26-30 which have demonstrated the details of the pathway that leads
     from fatty acids to the citric acid cycle. Acetyl coenzyme A is the form in
     which all carbon atoms of fatty acids enter the cycle.
        It is indeed remarkable that all foodstuffs are burnt through a common
     terminal pathway. About two-thirds of the energy derived from food in
     higher organisms is set free in the course of this common pathway; about
     one-third arises in the reactions which prepare foodstuffs for entry into the
     citric acid cycle. The biological significance of the common route may lie in
     the fact that such an arrangement represents an economy of chemical tools.
     An analysis of the energy giving reactions (which I cannot here pursue in
     detail; see Krebs31) shows that in spite of a multitude of sources of energy the
     number of steps where energy is utilized is astonishingly small - only seven.
     The common pathway of oxidation is one of the devices reducing the num-
     ber of steps where special chemical tools for the transformation of energy
     are required.




     The main experiments on which the concept of the citric acid cycle is based
     were carried out on striated muscle, chiefly of pigeon-breast muscle, and on
     pigeon liver. The crucial experiments have been repeated with many other
     animal materials and they suggest that the cycle occurs in all respiring tissues
     of all animals, from protozoa to the highest mammal. It is true that some
     tissues and material at first appeared to give negative results. These were
     later found to be due to special complications such as permeability barriers,
     or destruction of enzyme systems as a result of manipulating the tissues. These
     experimental difficulties have been overcome in many instances by improved
     methods of handling respiring material, and wherever this was possible the
     occurrence of the cycle has been demonstrated.
        The component reactions of the citric acid cycle have also been shown to
     occur in many micro-organisms32 and in plants. In some materials the rates
     of the individual steps are sufficiently rapid to justify the assumption, sup-
     ported by isotope data, that the cycle represents the main terminal pathway


408                             1953 H.A.KREBS

of oxidation. This applies to organisms of widely different types such as
Azotobacter, Micrococcus leisodeicticus, and Rhodospirillum rubrum, and the
seedlings of beans and peas 3 3. But there are other materials where the ev-
idence in support of the cycle falls short in respect to the quantitative aspects.
In yeasts, for example, the activities of the enzymes that oxidize the malate
and citrate are at most 5-25% of the expected order. Moreover when 14C-
labelled acetate is oxidized by baker’s yeast the intracellular dicarboxylic
acids remain unlabelled, an observation which argues against the participa-
tion of the dicarboxylic acids in the oxidation of acetate 32. It is true that these
results may not be looked upon as conclusive because permeability barriers
might prevent the mixing of substances arising as intermediates with those
that are present in other compartments of the cell, and at present it is best to
regard the terminal pathway of oxidation in yeast, and certain other micro-
organisms, e.g. E. coli, as an open problem, even though the reactions of the
cycle occur in these materials.




If, for the sake of argument, it is assumed that in some cells the cycle is not
the main mechanism by which energy is produced but if nevertheless the en-
zyme systems responsible for the component reactions of the cycle occur, the
problem of the physiological significance of the cycle in these materials pre-
sents itself It is relevant with regard to this problem that in addition to the
energy-giving mechanisms there is another major set of chemical changes in
rapidly growing organisms: the synthetic processes connected with growth.
As far as the turnover of carbon is concerned both types of reactions can be
of the same order of magnitude. The reactions of the cycle can supply an
important intermediate for a number of syntheses, e.g. α-ketoglutaric acid,
which is a precursor of glutamic acid and other amino acids, as well as of the
porphyrins required for the synthesis of the cytochromes and the blood
pigments. Many observations32, especially from isotope experiments, sup-
port the view that in some micro-organisms the cycle primarily supplies
intermediates rather than energy, whilst in the animal and most other or-
ganisms it supplies both energy and intermediates.


                        THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE                                  409

                 Common features of different forms of life

Before I conclude I would like to make an excursion into general biology,
prompted by the remarkable fact that the reactions of the cycle have been
found to occur in representatives of all forms of life, from unicellular bacte-
ria and protozoa to the highest mammals. We have long been familiar with
the fact that the basic constituents of living matter, such as the amino acids
and sugars, are essentially the same in all types of life. The study of interme-
diary metabolism shows that the basic metabolic processes, in particular those
providing energy, and those leading to the synthesis of cell constituents are
also shared by all forms of life.
   The existence of common features in different forms of life indicates some
relationship between the different organisms, and according to the concept
of evolution these relations stem from the circumstance that the higher or-
ganisms, in the course of millions of years, have gradually evolved from sim-
pler ones. The concept of evolution postulates that living organisms have
common roots, and in turn the existence of common features is powerful
support for the concept of evolution. The presence of the same mechanism
 of energy production in all forms of life suggests two other inferences, firstly,
that the mechanism of energy production has arisen very early in the evolu-
tionary process, and secondly, that life, in its present forms, has arisen only
once.




 1. T. Thunberg, Skand. Arch. Physiol., 24 (1910) 23; 41 (1920)1.
 2. F. Batelli and L. Stem, Biochem. Z., 31 (1910) 478.
 3. A. Szent-Györgyi, Z. Physiol. Chem., 236 (1935)I; 244 (1936) 105.
 4. F. J. Stare and C. A. Baumann, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, B 121 (1936) 338.
 5. C. Martius and F. Knoop, Z. Physiol Chem., 246 (1937)I ; C. Martius, ibid., 247
    (1937) 104.
 6. T. Wagner-Jauregg and H. Rauen, Z. Physiol. Chem., 237 (1935) 228.
 7. H. A. Krebs and W. A. Johnson, Biochem. J., 31 (1937) 645.
 8. J. H. Quastel and A. H. M. Wheatley, Biochem. J., 25 (1931) 117.
 9. H. A. Krebs, E. Salvin, and W. A. Johnson, Biochem. J., 32 (1938) 113.
10. H. Busch and V. R. Potter, J. Biol. Chem., 198 (1952) 71.
11. R. A. Peters, R. W. Wakelin, P. Buffa, and L. C. Thomas, Proc. Roy. Soc. London,
     B 140 (1953) 497. R. A. Peters, Brit. Med. Bull., 9 (1953) 116.
12. S. Ochoa, J. Biol. Chem., 174 (1948) 115. F. Lynen and H. Scherer, Ann. Chem.
    Liebigs, 560 (1948) 164.


410                             1953 H.A.KREBS

13. G. D. Novelli and F. Lipmann, J. Biol. Chem., 182 (1950) 213.
14. J. R. Stem and S. Ochoa, J. Biol. Chem., 179 (1949) 491; 191 (1951) 161; 193
     (1951) 691.
15. F. Lynen and E. Reichert, Angew. Chem., 63 (1951) 47.
16. J. R. Stem, S. Ochoa, and F. Lynen, J. Biol. Chem., 198 (1952) 313.
17. S. Kaufman, Federation Proc., 12 (1953) 704.
18. D. R. Sanadi and J. W. Littlefield, J. Biol. Chem., 201 (1953) 103.
19. M. Jowett and J. H. Quastel, Biochem. J., 29 (1935) 2159; J. H. Quastel and A. H.
     M. Wheatley, Biochem. J., 29 (1935) 2773.
20. N. L. Edson and L. F. Leloir, Biochem. J., 30 (1936) 2319.
21. W. C. Stadie, Physiol. Rev., 25 (1945) 395.
22. F. L. Breusch, Science, 97 (1943) 490; Enzymologia, 11(1943) 169.
23. H. Wieland and C. Rosenthal, Ann. Chem. Liebigs, 554 (1943) 241.
24. H. A. Krebs and L. V. Eggleston, Biochem. J., 39 (1945) 408.
25. H. A. Krebs, Harvey Lectures, 44 (1950) 165.
26. F. Lynen and S. Ochoa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 12 (1953) 299.
27. F. Lynen, Federation Proc., 12 (1953) 683.
28. H. R. Mahler, Federation Proc., 12 (1953) 694.
29. J. R. Stem, M. J. Coon, and A. Del Campillo, Nature, 171(1953) 28; J. Am. Chem.
      Soc., 75 (1953) 1517.
30. M. E. Jones, S. Black, R. M. Flynn, and F. Lipmann, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 12
     (1953) 141.
31. H. A. Krebs, Brit. Med. Bull., 9 (1953) 97.
 32. .H. A. Krebs, S. Gurin, and L. V. Eggleston, Biochem. J., 51 (1952) 614.
33. A.Millerd, J. Bonner, B. Axelrod, and R. Bandurski, Proc. Natl. Acad Sci. U.S.,
      37 (1951) 855; D. D. Davies, J: Exptl. Botany, 4 (1953) 173.
