                            H . GO B I N D K H O R A N A


  Nucleic acid synthesis in the study of the genetic code
                           Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1968



                                   1. Introduction

  Recent progress in the understanding of the genetic code is the result of the
  efforts of a large number of workers professing a variety of scientific disci-
  plines. Therefore, I feel it to be appropriate that I attempt a brief review of the
  main steps in the development of the subject before discussing our own con-
  tribution which throughout has been very much a group effort. I should also
  like to recall that a review of the status of the problem of the genetic code up
                                                           1
  to 1962 was presented by Crick in his Nobel lecture .
    While it is always difficult, perhaps impossible, to determine or clearly
 define the starting point in any area of science, the idea that genes make pro-
 teins was an important step and this concept was brought into sharp focus by
 the specific one gene-one enzyme hypothesis of Beadle and Tatum2. The field
 of biochemical genetics was thus born. The next step was taken when it was
 established that genes are nucleic acids. The transformation experiments of
 Avery and coworkers3 followed by the bacteriophage experiments of Hershey
             4
 and Chase established this for DNA and the work with TMV-RNA a few
 years later established the same for RNA5,6. By the early 1950’s it was, there-
 fore, clear that genes are nucleic acids and that nucleic acids direct protein
 synthesis, the direct involvement of RNA in this process being suggested by
 the early work of Caspersson7 and of Brachet8. It was important at this stage
 to know more about the chemistry of the nucleic acids and, indeed, the accel-
 erated pace of discovery that soon followed, was largely because of work at
 the chemical and biochemical level in the field ofnucleic acids.
    The structural chemistry of the nucleic acids, which developed over a peri-
od of some seventy years in many countries, progressed step-by-step from
the chemistry of the constituent purines, pyrimidines and the sugar moieties,
to work on the nucleosides and then onto the nucleotides. A distinct climax
was reached in 1952 with the elucidation of the internucleotidic linkage in
nucleic acids by Brown and Todd and their coworkersa. (It was my good for-
tune to be associated with Professor, now Lord, Todd’s laboratory before the


 342                    1968 H.GOBIND KHORANA

 start of our own work in the nucleotide field). Shortly thereafter, the Watson -
 Crick structure10 for DNA was proposed, which focused attention, in partic-
 ular, on the biological meaning of its physical structure. It is also about this
 time that the hypothesis that a linear sequence of nucleotides in DNA specifies
 the linear sequence of amino acids in proteins was born. A few years later, the
 enzymology of DNA got into its stride with the work of Kornberg and his
 coworkers 11 : their discovery and characterization of the enzyme DNA poly-
 merase was a major triumph of modern enzymology and the methods devel-
 oped distinctly aided the characterization, a few years later, of DNA-depen-
 dent RNA polymerase 1 2 - 1 6. The discovery of this enzyme clarified the
 manner by which information in DNA is transcribed into an RNA, which
 we now equate with messenger RNA17-21      . The last biochemical landmark.
 to be introduced in the development of a cell-free amino acid incorporating
 system. Work on this really began with efforts to understand the biosynthesis
 of the peptide bond. The subject has a long history but critical progress began
 to be made in the early fifties. One thinks, in particular, of the pioneering
 work of Zamecnik and Hoagland22, of Lipmann23, of Berg24 and in regard to
 the bacterial system that of Watson’s laboratory25, of Berg26, and of the im-
 portant refinement made in 1961 by Matthaei and Nirenberg 27.
    With the knowledge of the chemical structures of the nucleic acids, the two
 major tasks which faced the chemists were those of synthesis and sequential
 analysis. Chemical synthesis of short-chain oligonucleotides began to be a
 preoccupation in my laboratory. The types of problems that one faced were:
 (1) activation of the phosphomonoester group of a mononucleotide so as to
 phosphorylate the hydroxyl group of another nucleoside or nucleotide; (2)
 design of suitable protecting groups for the various functional groups (pri-
 mary and secondary hydroxyl groups in the sugar rings, amino groups in the
 purine and pyrimidine rings, phosphoryl dissociation in the phosphomono-
 ester group); (3) deve lopment of methods for the polymerization of mono-
 nucleotides and for the separation and characterization of the resulting poly-
 nucleotides, and (4) evaluation of approaches to the stepwise synthesis of
 polynucleotides of specific sequences.
    While even at present, organo-chemical methods demand further investi-
 gation and refinement, nevertheless, synthesis of short chains of deoxyribo-
 polynucleotides with predetermined and fully controlled sequences became
possible in the early sixties. In addition, unambiguous synthesis of short ribo-
 oligonucleotides containing strictly the        5’-internucleotidic linkages also
 became feasible. A discussion of the chemical aspects of these problems is out-


      NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                            343

side the scope of the present lecture and reviews given elsewhere 28-33 should
be consulted. The following review will be restricted to that part of the syn-
thetic work which bears on the problem of the genetic code and attention will
be focused in the main on the biochemical experiments made possible by the
synthetic polynucleotides.




 A few words about the experimental development of the coding problem are
 now appropriate. In the fifties, possible rules governing the genetic code en-
 gaged the attention of many theoreticians, Gamow 34 being the first to specu-
 late on the possible relation between DNA and protein structure. However,
 until 1961 the only experimental approach was that of direct correlation of
 the sequence of a nucleic acid with that of a protein specified by it. It was
 hoped to do this either chemically, for example, by working with the coat
 protein of a virus and its RNA, or by mutagenic techniques. An ingenious
 application of the <frameshift mutation> idea was, indeed, that of Crick and
 coworkers, who correctly deduced several of the fundamental properties of
 the genetic coder. These approaches, however, offered little immediate hope
 of getting directly at the coding problem.
   The discovery which introduced a direct experimental attack on the genetic
code was that of Matthaei and Nirenberg27 who observed that polyuridylate
directs the synthesis of polyphenylalanine in the bacterial cell-free amino acid
incorporating system. The aim now was to use synthetic polynucleotides of
defined composition as messengers in the in vitro system. A great deal, in fact,
was learned during the years 1961-1963, both in the laboratories of Ochoa 35




 Scheme 1. Proposed reaction sequence for the preparation of high-molecular-weight
 RNA messengers and the subsequent in vitro synthesis of polypeptides of known amino
                                  acid sequences.


344                       1968 H.GOBIND KHORANA

and of Nirenberg and their coworkers 36, about the overall nucleotide com-
position of the coding units by using polynucleotides made by the agency of
the enzyme, polynucleotide phosphorylase.


      (a) Short chains of deoxyribopolynucleotides containing repeating nucleotide
                                      sequences*

The hope in my laboratory was to prepare ribopolynucleotide messengers of
completely defined nucleotide sequences. However, chemical methodology
permitted at this time the synthesis of oligonucleotides containing but a few
ribonucleotide units (see below for trinucleotide syntheses). In the deoxyri-
bonucleotide series, chemical synthesis was a little more advanced and the-
synthesis of longer, but still short, chains containing ten to fifteen nucleotide
units was feasible. Therefore, it was decided to study the RNA-transcribing
enzyme with the hope that this enzyme might use short chemically synthe-
sized deoxyribopolynucleotides as templates in the manner that it uses bio-
logically functional DNA.
   The initial experiments with the RNA polymerase37 were, in fact, a follow-
up of the observation first made by Hurwitz and coworker38 that a mixture
of chemically synthesized thymidine oligonucleotides served as a template for
the synthesis of ribo-polyadenylate. Our aim was to obtain a ribopolynucleo-
tidic product matching in chain length the deoxypolynucleotide used as the
template. However, analysis showed that irrespective of the size of the short
deoxypolynucleotide template, the RNA product was always much longer;
it contained invariably more than 100 nucleotide units. At first sight, the re-
sults appeared to be discouraging in that we were losing control on the exact

*The abbreviations used are as follows. The letters, A, C, G, T and U stand for the
nucleosides or the nucleotides of adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine and uracil respec-
tively; the prefixes d and r represent deoxyribose and ribose series of polynucleotides,
respectively. All the polynucleotides containing more than one kind ofnucleotide, which
are used in the text, in Tables and in Figures, have strictly repeating nucleotide sequences
and the repeating unit is shown. For example, poly-rUG and poly-rUAG represent
polymers in which the dinucleotide, U-G, and the trinucleotide, U-A-G, sequences
repeat. Polythymidylate containing eleven nucleotide units in the chain if abbreviated
to dT11 and the hepta-deoxyadenylate if abbreviated to dA7. tRNA or sRNA stands
for transfer RNA ; met-tRNAmet stands for the non-formylatable species of methio-
nine-specific tRNA which has been charged with the amino acid and fmet-tRNAmet
stands for the formylatable species of methionine-specific tRNA which has been charged
              with methionine and the latter residue subsequently formylated.


       NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                          345

 size of the product, despite our having carefully defined the size of the oligo-
 thymidylate template. However, it soon became apparent that this <slipping>
 or reiterative copying on the part of the enzyme could be a highly useful de-
 vice to amplify the messages contained in the short chemically-synthesized
 polynucleotides. In a further study, attention was paid to understand a little
 better the conditions for the <amplification> to occur39.
    Some months later I visited Kornberg’s laboratory (this was one of the
many pilgrimages that I have made to this great laboratory) and started a few
experiments with the DNA polymerase and here, again, very short synthetic
oligonucleotides containing alternating A and T units induced the enzyme to
bring about extensive synthesis of the previously characterized high molecu-
lar weight dAT polymer40. These encouraging results led to a generalized
scheme ( Scheme 1) for the in vitro studies of the coding problem. The amplifi -
cation to produce DNA or RNA products was conceived at this time to be a
general behaviour of the polymerases so long as there was a repeating pattern
of nucleotide sequences (homopolynucleotides, repeating di- or tri-nucleo-
tides) in the chemically-synthesized deoxypolynucleotide templates. Every-
thing from this point on went remarkably well and the period starting with the
spring of 1963 and ending with 1967 was a period, essentially, of uninter-
rupted success in work devoted to the genetic code.
   The decision to synthesize deoxyribopolynucleotides with repeating nu-
cleotide sequences was fortunate for another reason. The cell-free protein-
synthesizing system, being a crude bacterial extract, undoubtedly contained
powerful nucleases and peptidases. The use of messengers with completely
defined but strictly repeating nucleotide sequences could be expected to give
unequivocal answers despite (1) the exo- and/or endo-nucleolytic damages
to the synthetic messengers and (2) the corresponding activities of the proteo-
lytic enzymes on the polypeptide products.
    The actual choice of nucleotide combinations in the deoxyribopolynucleo-
tides to be synthesized was influenced by the then available knowledge that,
at least in the cell-free protein-synthesizing system, the messenger RNA ap-
pears to be used in the single-stranded configuration. In fact, the only DNA
containing more than one type of nucleotide, whose sequence was completely
known, was the above-mentioned poly-dAT. Although RNA polymerase
nicely produces from it the expected poly-rAU containing the two bases in
strictly alternating sequence, this product, because of self-complementarity,
has a tight double-stranded structure and elicits no response from the ribo-
somes in the cell-free system. It was, therefore, clear that those combinations


346                   1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA

of nucleotides which would lead to overwhelming base-pairing in the poly-
nucleotides should be avoided30-32 .
   All of the chemical syntheses relevant to the genetic code which were car-
ried out are shown in Table I. First, we made the two sets of polynucleotides
shown on the left, which contained repeating dinucleotide sequences: one set
contains the hexamer of the dinucleotide with alternating thymidylate and
guanylate residues and the hexamer of the dinucleotide with alternating
adenylate and cytidylate residues; the second set consists of the hexamer of
alternating thymidylate and cytidylate residues and the hexamer of alternat-
ing adenylate and guanylate residues 4 1. This work was then extended to




we prepared seven such sets4 2 - 4 6. Shown also in Table 1 are two sets of poly-
mers with repeating tetranucleotide sequences47,48 . Two additional con-
siderations for the selection of the nucleotide sequences in them are: (1) they
contain in every fourth place the chain- terminating codons and (2) this class
of polymers can be used to prove the direction of reading of the messenger
RNA49-51. Two general points about all the synthetic polynucleotides shown
in Table I may be noted. The first point is that every set comprises two poly-
nucleotides which are complementary in the antiparallel Watson-Crick
base-pairing sense. A set of repeating trinucleotide polymers, which was
complementary in the parallel sense, was found to be unacceptable to the
DNA polymerase 5 2. The second point is that it was necessary to synthesize
segments corresponding to both strands of the DNA-polymer eventually
desired (see below). DNA polymerase failed to bring about polymerization
reactions when given only one of the segments of a set as a template.


      NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                          347

             (b) Double-stranded DNA-like polymers with repeating
                               nucleotide sequences

 In a part of the early work, short-chain deoxyribopolynucleotides with re-
 peating sequences, for example, (TTC)3 and (TC)5, were directly used as tem-
  plates for the RNA polymerase of Escherichia coli. While these experiments
  were successful31,53 , further work soon showed that use of the DNA poly-
  merase as the first <amplification> device was preferable by far. Therefore, a
  major concern, following the chemical syntheses of the templates, was the
 study of the DNA polymerase and characterization of the DNA-like prod-
  ucts produced by it in response to the short templates.
    Scheme 2 lists the four types of reactions which have been elicited from the
 DNA polymerase, including the use of short homopolynucleotides. As seen,
 in reaction 1, a mixture of dT 11 and dA7 caused the extensive polymerization
 of dATP and dTTP to give a DNA-like polymer containing polyadenylate
 and polythymidylate in the two strands. In reaction 2, a mixture of the two
 short-chain polynucleotides with repeating dinucleotide sequences directed
 the extensive synthesis of a double-stranded DNA-like polymer containing
 exactly the sequences present in the short-chain templates54,55 . In further
 work, similar reactions were demonstrated with short-chain templates con-
 taining repeating tri- as well as tetra-nucleotide sequencess52,56. Characteriza-
 tion of the high molecular weight DNA-like polymers was accomplished by
 a variety of methods. The techniques used included nearest-neighbor analysis,
 electron microscopy (in a part of the early work55), sedimentation velocity
 and banding in alkaline cesium chloride density gradients57.
   Many of the features of the DNA-polymerase catalyzed reactions are truly
remarkable. Thus: (1) in all the reactions studied (Scheme 2) the enzyme
shows complete fidelity in the reproduction of sequences; (2) the synthesis is
exstensive, 50-200-fold, and the products are of high molecular weight
(300000 to over 1 000000) ; (3) the enzyme thus amplifies and multiplies the
information created by chemical methods; (4) finally, from the standpoint of
an organic chemist, the most satisfying aspect is that the DNA polymers thus
made can be used repeatedly for further production of the same polymers. It
is unnecessary to go back to the time-consuming chemical synthesis for ob-
taining the templates again. DNA polymerase assures the continuity of these
sequences.
   Table II catalogues the different kinds of polymers which have so far been
prepared and characterized. Thus, we have three classes of polymers: two


348                     1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA




 polymers are written so that the colon separates the two complementary strands. The
 complementary sequences in the individual strands are written so that antiparallel base-
                                   pairing is evident.




 double-stranded polymers with repeating dinucleotide sequences, four pol-
 ymers with repeating trinucleotide sequences and two polymers with repeat-
 ing tetranucleotide sequences.


                 (c) Single-stranded ribo-polynucleotides with repeating
                                   nucleotide sequences

The next step was the transcription of the DNA-like polymers by means of
RNA polymerase to form single-stranded ribo-polynucleotides. The prin-


      NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                         349




Scheme 3. The preparation of single-stranded ribopolynucleotides from DNA-like
              polymers containing repeating nucleotide sequences.

ciple used throughout is illustrated in Scheme 3. All of the DNA-like poly-
mers contain two, or a maximum of three, different bases in individual
strands. It is therefore possible, by giving the nucleoside triphosphates re-
quired for copying only one strand, to restrict the action of RNA polymerase
to that strand. This is the case for all of the polymers, examples of which are
shown in Scheme 3. Nearest-neighbor frequency analysis of all of the RNA


350                    1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA

products again shows that they contain strictly repeating nucleotide sequences
58-60
      . The total RNA-like polymers prepared so far are listed in Table III.
      The work described so far can be summarized as follows. By using a combi-
nation of purely chemical methods, which are required to produce new and
specified information, and then following through with the two enzymes,
DNA polymerase and RNA polymerase, which are beautifully precise copy-
ing machines, we have at our disposal a variety of high-molecular-weight
ribo-polynucleotides of known sequences. Mistake levels, if they occur at
all, are insignificant.


        (d) Chemical synthesis of the sixty-four possible ribotrinucleotides

At about the time that the above methods for the synthesis of long ribo-poly-
nucleotides of completely defined nucleotide sequences were developed, the
use of ribo-trinucleotides in determining the nucleotide sequences within
codons for different amino acids was introduced by Nirenberg and Leder
(see below). As mentioned above, chemical methods in the ribonucleotide
field developed in this laboratory had previously resulted in general methods
for the synthesis of the ribotrinucleotides. In view of the importance of these
oligonucleotides in work on the genetic code, all the 64 trinucleotides deriv-
able from the four common ribonucleotides, A, C, U, and G, were unambig-
uously synthesized and characterized. A separate report61 should be con-
sulted for the details of the chemical principles used in these syntheses. The
use of the trinucleotides in work on the codon assignments for different amino
acids is reviewed below.



              3. Polypeptide Synthesis in vitro and the Genetic code

             (a) Cell-free polypeptide synthesis using polynucleotides with
                                    repeating sequences
Polymers with repeating dinucleotide sequences, (AB)n, contain two triplets,
ABA and BAB, in alternating sequence. Assuming three-letter, non-over-
lapping properties of the code, such polymers should direct incorporations of
two amino acids in strictly alternating sequence. Repeating trinucleotide pol-
ymers, (ABC)n, contain three repeating triplets depending upon the starting
point. These are: ABC, BCA, and CAB, Here one would predict that one
amino acid should be incorporated at a time to form a homopolypeptide


        NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                                  351

 chain, and a maximum of three such chains should result. Similar considera-
 tions for polynucleotides withrepeating tetranucleotide sequences,(ABCD)n,
 show that in vitro polypeptide synthesis should give products containing re-
 peating tetrapeptide sequences, irrespective of the starting point in the reading
 of the messengers. All these predictions have been fully borne out experimen-
 tally without a single exception. The results with the three classes of polymers
 may be reviewed as follows.




Fig.1. Characteristics of the incorporation of [14C] serine and [14C]leucine into polypep-
                            tide in the presence of poly-UC.


 Shown in Fig. 1 is an example of the type of results obtained with ribopoly-
 nucleotides containing two nucleotides in alternating sequence. Three fea-
 tures of the amino acid incorporations shown in Fig. 1, and which are com-
 mon for all the messengers of this class, are (1) incorporation of only two
 amino acids is observed; (2) incorporation of one of these amino acids is de-
 pendent on the presence of the second amino acid, and, (3) the incorporations
 of the two amino acids are equimolar. All these features suggest that in these
 reactions copolypeptides containing two amino acids in alternating sequence
 are being produced. This has been demonstrated by extensive analysis of all the
 four series of polypeptidic products which are listed in Table IV58,62.
   Table V shows the results obtained with repeating trinucleotide polymers.
Thus, these polymers, have as a rule given three homopolypeptides 63,64 and
it should now be emphasized that this was because in all the work with the
cell-free system artificially high Mg2+ ions concentration was used and, there-
fore, polypeptide chains could initiate without a proper signal. Two poly-
mers, poly-rUAG and poly-rAUG, were exceptions in that they stimulated
the incorporation of only two amino acids . These polymers contain each a
                                              64


352                     1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA

                                     Table IV
Cell-free copolypeptide syntheses using messengers containing repeating dinucleotide
                                      sequences
                             (System, Escherichia coli B)




Cell-free homopolypeptide syntheses using messengers containing repeating trinucleo-
                                   tide sequences
                            (System, Escherichia coli B)




 chain-terminating triplet; UAG is the well-known amber triplet, and UGA
 is also now known to be a chain- terminating triplet.
      Finally, as seen in Table VI, repeating tetranucleotide polymers, in fact,
 direct amino acid incorporations such that products containing repeating te-
 trapeptide sequences are formed except when chain- terminating triplets are
 present. This has been proved by analysis for the two products shown in
 Table VI 50 . This analysis of the repeating tetrapeptide sequences proves in-
 dependently that the direction of reading of the messenger is from the 5’- to
 the 3’-end. This result is in agreement with that from a number of other lab-
 oratories 65,66 . The last two polynucleotides shown contain in every fourth
 place the chain-terminating triplets, UAG and UAA; for this reason, they
 fail to give any continuous peptides, but the formation of tripeptides has been
 demonstrated 51 .


       NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                              353
                                Table VI
Cell-free polypeptide syntheses using messengers containing repeating tetranucleotide
                                      sequences
                        (System, Escherichia coli B)




The results summarized above lead to the following general conclusions:
(1) DNA does, in fact, specify the sequence of amino acids in proteins and this
information is relayed through an RNA. (This was the first time that a direct
sequence correlation between DNA and a protein had been established.) (2)
All the results prove the 3-letter and non-overlapping properties of the code.
(3) Finally, information on codon assignments can also be derived from these
results.


            (b) Codon assignments- The structure of the code

For this large question of codon assignments, however, unless one does a
large number of polypeptide syntheses, the experiments reviewed above do
not individually provide unique assignments to the codons. For example, of
the two codons, UCU and CUC, which stand for serine and leucine, it is not
possible to say which stands for which amino acid. Now the code has, in fact,
been derived by a combination of the results obtained by the use of the binding
technique developed by Nirenberg and Leder67 and the work with the re-
peating polymers reviewed above. In Nirenberg’s technique, one looks for the
stimulation of the binding of different aminoacyl-tRNA’s to ribosomes in
the presence of specific trinucleotides. An example of its use is shown in Fig. 2,
where the question of which of the three sequence isomers, AAG, AGA,
GAA, which codes for lysine, is investigated. One measures the binding of
 [14C] lysyl-tRNA to ribosomes in the presence of increasing amounts of these
trinucleotides. As seen in Fig. 2 the binding is specifically induced by AAG.
The other trinucleotide which also promotes a strong binding is AAA and the
experiment using this is also included in Fig. 2. The trinucleotides AAG and
 AAA are, therefore, the codons for lysine. This technique has been used ex-
 tensively in Nirenberg’s laboratory, and my own colleagues have also tested


 354                    1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA




Fig. 2. Stimulation of the binding of [14C] lysyl-tRNA to ribosomes by trinucleotides.

all of the 64 synthetic trinucleotides in this type of analysis. While extremely
useful, the technique has not proved to be completely reliable. Often the
effects are very small and there are cases where certain trinucleotides stimulate
the binding of unexpected tRNA’s. Conversely, there are cases where authen-
tic trinucleotide codons do not give any binding. As already mentioned, most
of the code actually has been worked out by using this technique in combina-
tion with the results from the repeating polymers and often by using evidence
from a number of in vivo experiments.
   The structure of the code which has emerged is shown in Table VII. This is
by now a familiar method of presentation65. There is a box in the left-hand
column for each base as the first letter; within each box in the right-hand
column is shown each one of the four bases as the third letter; and in the
middle are four columns, one for each base as the second letter. (For use of the
Table see the legend). Only a few general observations may be made. (1) The
code as shown is for the micro-organism Escherichia coli B, but probably will
hold essentially for other organisms as well, although detailed and systematic
checking in other systems (plants and animals) remains to be carried out. (2)
There are entries for all of the sixty-four trinucleotides (there is no absolute
nonsense). The code is highly degenerate in a semi-systematic way. Most of
the degeneracy pertains to the third letter, where all of the four bases may


      NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                                     355

                                 Table VII
The abbreviations for amino acids are standard. C. T. stands for chain termination, i.e.,
the trinucleotide sequence does not stand for any amino acid but probably signals the
end of protein chain formation. C. I. stands as a signal for chain initiation in protein syn-
thesis. The method of presentation used in this Table follows the conventional way of
writing of trinucleotides: thus, the first letter (base) of the trinucleotide is on the left
(the 5’-end) and the third letter (the 3’-end) is to the right of the middle (second) base.
The use of the Table for derivation of codons for different amino acids is exemplified as
follows: codons for the amino acid, PHE, are UUU and UUC; condons for the amino
                  acid, ALA, are GCU, GCC, GCA and GCG.




 stand for the same amino acid or where the two purine bases may stand for
 one amino acid and the two pyrimidines may stand for another ammo acid.
 An exception is the box with the first letter A and the second letter U. Here,
 AUU, AUC and AUA represent isoleucine while the fourth codon, AUG,
 stands for methionine. Three amino acids show additional degeneracy in posi-
 tions other than the third letter: thus, leucine and arginine are degenerate in
 the first letter while serine is unique in changing its position with regard to,
 both, the first and the second letters. (3) While the code is now generally ac-
 cepted to be essentially universal, it should not be inferred that all organisms
 use the same codons for protein synthesis. What the universality means is that


356                    1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA

a trinucleotide codon does not change its meaning from one organism to the
next. After all, there is very great divergence in the DNA composition of
diverse organisms and they therefore probably use different codons for the
same amino acid to varying extents. (4) The codons AUG and GUG, which
stand respectively for methionine and valine, are also used as signals for initia-
tion of polypeptide chain synthesis (see also a later section for initiation of
protein synthesis). (5) There are three trinucleotides, UAA, UAG and UGA,
which cause termination of polypeptide chain growth. It is not clear which
ones are used naturally and under what circumstances a particular one is used.
More recent work (see the lecture by M. W. Nirenberg, p. 372) indicates that
there may be protein factors which have specificity for the different termina-
tion codons.
   Finally, it should be emphasized that large portions of the code have been
derived or confirmed by the prolonged and intensive studies of Yanofsky and
coworkers, by the studies of Streisinger and coworkers, by Whitmann and by
Tsugita and others (for comprehensive accounts of these studies see ref. 65).



      4. Transfer RNA Structures: The Anticodons and Codon Recognition

The eludication of the nucleotide sequence of yeast alanine tRNA by Holley
and coworkers68 has been followed by similar work on a number of other
tRNA’s. At present some six yeast tRNA’s, four E. coli tRNA’s, one rat-liver
tRNA, and one wheat-germ tRNA, have been sequenced and it is likely that
the structures of many more will be known in the near future. Dr. RajBhanda-
ry and coworkers 6 9 have determined the primary structure of yeast phenyl-
alanine tRNA and this structure is shown in Fig. 3, the usual cloverleaf model
being used. In fact, a common feature of all the tRNA’s, whose primary
structures are known, is that they all can adopt the cloverleaf secondary struc-
ture. As discussed in detail by RajBhandary and coworkers69 and by others,
there is a remarkable overall similarity in regard to many important physical
features between the different tRNA’s. It is not my intention here to dwell in
detail on the broad and exciting subject of tRNA structure and its biological
function. The following paragraphs will be confined to those aspects where
particularly relevant information has been forthcoming from the work of my
own colleagues in Madison.
  The first general question that one can ask is: How are the trinucleotide
codons recognized by the protein-synthesizing apparatus? The first impor-


    NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                               357




Fig. 3. Cloverleaf model for the secondary structure of yeast phenylalanine tRNA. The
modifications in the minor bases are evident from the abbreviations shown against them.
    pseudouridine while the nucleoside, Y, next to the presumed anticodon, G-A-A, is
                        as yet unidentied.


tant advance here was the concept of an adapter molecule, which now is
clearly seen to be a tRNA molecule. The experiments of Benzer, Lipmann and
their coworkers70 brought an elegant confirmation of this hypothesis. The
next question is: What is the evidence that the recognition of codons, in fact,
involves nucleotide-nucleotide interaction by virtue of base-pairing? If this
is so, then one might expect to find in the primary structure of an amino acid
specific tRNA three contiguous nucleotide units, <complementary> to the
established codons for the particular amino acid. Indeed, the most encourag-
ing common feature of all the tRNA’s, whose primary sequence is known,
turns out to be that they all contain an identical looped- out region in which
such trinucleotide sequences are present. In Table VIII are assembled many of
the known anticodons and the established codons for different amino acids. It
can be seen that in every case the inferred anticodons show antiparallel Wat-
son-crick base-pairing with the codons. Moreover, the findings (1) that a
single nucleotide change in the anticodon of E. coli tRNA TYR brings about a
change in the coding properties of the tRNA71 and (2) that an oligonucleotide




      NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                         359

 fragment of E. coli t R N A fmet
                                 containing the anticodon sequence binds to
 ribosomes specifically in response to the codons for formyl-methionine 72
 give us confidence that the concept of an anticodon consisting of three ad-
jacent nucleotides in all tRNA’s is correct.
   Another important aspect of the biological function of tRNA’s deserves
comment. Can one tRNA molecule recognize more than one codon? At the
present time we believe that this is often the case for the third letter of the
codons and this occurs by a certain amount of "wobble" on the tRNA mole-
cule73, thus permitting base-pairs additional to the standard Watson-Crick
base-pairs. One such case of multiple recognition of codons by one tRNA
has been proven7 4. Thus phenylalanine tRNA, which we have available in a
pure state in our laboratory and of which we know the anticodon to be 2’-O-
methyl-GAA, can recognize both UUU and UUC which are the established
codons for phenylalanine. This has been done by actual polyphenylalanine
synthesis using precharged phenylalanyl- tRNA and the two polymers (1)
polyuridylate and (2) poly-UUC which contains a repeating trinucleotide
sequence (Fig. 4). T here are other possibilities for multiple recognition. For
example, it appears that inosine in the first position may recognize U, A and
C73. Support for this pattern of multiple recognition has also been provided


360                     1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA

   . Possible biological implications of multiple codon recognition by
75,76



tRNA molecules have been discussed elsewhere75.
   Transfer RNA’s are a unique class of molecules in the biological realm.
They clearly have to perform a variety of functions. There is a good deal of
evidence to suggest that in addition to a common secondary structure, these
molecules possess a tertiary structure 6 5. Further, a very plausible and attractive
model for the anticodon loop has been put forward77. The very recent success
in several laboratories 78-83 in obtaining crystals of tRNA’s signifies in all
probability a new era in the study of tRNA structure and function. The pro-
gress here would be very exciting not only for deepening our understanding
of the mechanism of protein synthesis but also because of the possibility that a
good part of the evolution of the genetic code is synonymous with the evolu--
tion of tRNA molecules.



               5. Further Aspects of the Code and of Protein Synthesis

                             (a) Initiation of protein synthesis

 As far as the initiation of protein synthesis in E. coli is concerned, a surge of
 activity occurred with the discovery of formylmethionyl-RNA by Marcker
 and Sanger65. It is now generally believed that formylmethionine (fmet) as
 carried by a particular species of methionine-specific tRNA is the initiation
 signal in protein synthesis. As mentioned above, in most of the work on the
 codon assignments using synthetic polynucleotides as messengers, artificially
             2 +
 high Mg ion concentrations were used. Under those conditions, the need
 for specific initiation of polypeptide chain synthesis is obviated. However,
 the requirement for the latter can be introduced by lowering the Mg2+ ion
 concentration to about 4-5 mM (compared with 10-15                used in earlier
 work). It is then found that prompt response in the cell-free system is elicited
 by only those messengers which contain codons that can recognize fmet-
  tRNA fmet . Now, the peptide synthesis starts with fmet at the amino terminus.
 Once again, time does not permit a complete account of the work reported
 from different laboratories on this subject. My attention will be restricted
 to those experiments from my own laboratory which (1) permit derivation
 of codons involved in chain initiation in E. coli84 and (2) shed a little light on
 the role of the ribosomal subunits in protein synthesis 85.
   Poly-rAUG, as mentioned above, directs polymethionine synthesis. When
this experiment is carried out at 5       Mg 2 + ion concentration, the results


      NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                            361

 shown in Fig. 5 are obtained. Thus, synthesis proceeds with a lag and poorly,
 when only met-tRNA met is provided. Addition of fmet-RNAfmet gives a
 dramatic acceleration of the rate of polymethionine synthesis. It is therefore
 concluded that fmet-tRNAfmet is required for initiation and met-tRNAmet
is required for chain propagation.

             I




Fig.5. Polymethionine synthesis in the presence of poly-rAUG and [14C]met-tRNA met.
The effects obtained on supplementing the system with fmet-tRNAfmet and initiation
                                 factors are shown.

Similarly, at 5          Mg2 ion concentration, poly-rUG-directed synthesis
of val-cys copolypeptide (Fig.6) requires the presence of fmet-tRNAfmet
and there is a striking effect following the addition of protein fractions which
have been designated initiation factors6 5. Analysis of the terminal sequence of
the polypeptidic product formed showed that fmet was present at the amino
end and it was followed by cys and then by val.
    From the above results, it is concluded that AUG and GUG are the codons
 for initiation in E. coli84. An intriguing point here is degeneracy in the first
 letter.
   That the 70S ribosomal particle from E. coli can be split to 30S and 50S sub-
units was already evident in the late fifties. However, the significance of the
two subunits in protein synthesis has remained obscure until recently. Gentle
lysis of E. coli cells was recently found to yield mainly the 30S and 50S sub-


362                    1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA




 Fig. 6. The synthesis of val-cys copolypeptide as directed by poly-rUG. The synthesis
 was carried out at 5 mM Mg2+ ion concentration. The effects of fmet-tRNAfmet and of
                             the initiation factors are shown.

  units and this finding further suggested a role for the 30S-50S couples in pro-
  tein synthesis86. It should be added that prior biochemical investigations had
  indicated at least two binding sites on the 70S ribosomes. More recently,
  Nomura and coworkers87 showed that in the presence of the viral f2-RNA,
  fmet-tRNA fmet showed specific binding to the 30S particles, whereas the
  noninitiator tRNA’s showed no binding to the 30S particles.
      A further study of the above-described polymethionine synthesis as directed
   by poly-rAUG gave results 8 5 which can be summarized as follows. (1)
   The 30S particles bind fmet-tRNAfmet in the presence of poly-rAUG at
   5       Mg2+ ion concentration. (2) The noninitiator rRNA, met-tRNAmet
   is bound only after the addition of 50S particles to the 30S particles. (3) It was
   possible to demonstrate the synthesis of the dipeptide formylmethionyl-
   methionine (fmet-met) by stepwise formation of the appropriate complex
   containing all the components. Thus fmet-tRNAfmet was bound to the 30S
   particles in the presence of poly-rAUG and the <initiation factors). The com-
   plex was isolated by centrifugation, supplemented first with 50S particles and
   then with met-tRNAmet. The resulting complex, containing now 30S par-
   ticles, poly-rAUG, fmet-tRNAfmet , 50S particles and met-tRNAmet , was
   again isolated by centrifugation. This complex when supplemented with the
   S-100 supernatant fraction gave the dipeptide fmet-met. Therefore, it is clear
    that both fmet-tRNAfmet and met-tRNAmet were being bound simultane-
   ously to 30S + 50S ribosomal particles. The results provide direct evidence for
   the presence of two tRNA binding sites on 70S ribosomes. Furthermore, the


       NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                            363
 picture of the role of the ribosomal subunits which emerges from this work is
 that the primary event in the initiation ofprotein synthesis is the binding of the
 initiator tRNA to 30S ribosome + messenger RNA complex. The resulting
 initiation complex is then joined by the 50S particles and is now able to accept
 another aminoacyl-tRNA so that a peptide bond may be formed. Nomura
 and coworkers87 arrived at the same conclusion from their work and the
 above results support their conclusions. Several other laboratories have subse-
 quently obtained similar results.
   As mentioned above, certain protein factors that can be released from the
ribosomes are required for the initiation of protein synthesis. These factors,
the general chemistry of the ribosomal proteins and the ribosomal subunits
themselves are all areas which are currently the subject of investigation in
many laboratories. Very recently, striking progress has been made in Nomu-
ra’s laboratory on the reconstitution of the 30S subunit. These and related
studies are rapidly opening up new approaches to a deeper understanding of
the mechanism of protein synthesis.


           (b) Missense suppression: tRNA involvement

Another application of the ribopolynucleotide messengers with repeating
nucleotide sequences was in the study of the mechanism of genetic suppression
( missense to sense). From the work of Yanofsky and his coworkers it is known
that many mutants of E. coli can only make a defective protein A of trypto-
phan synthetase. In one case, mutant A-78, one glycine residue in the A pro-
tein is replaced by cysteine. A suppressed mutant (A-78-Su-78) restores, to
a small extent, the original glycine in place of cysteine. Using the cell-free
protein-synthesizing system from E. coli B, it was shown88 that this system
when supplemented with the tRNA from the strain A-78-Su-78, incor-
porates [14C]glycine in the presence of valine under the direction of poly-r-
U G (Fig. 7). As reviewed above, the latter polymer normally directs the syn-
thesis of valine-cysteine copolypeptide. Valine-glycine copolypeptide
formed specifically in the presence of tRNA from A-78-Su-78 strain was
thoroughly characterized8 8. Similarly, Carbon, Berg and Yanofsky89 showed
that another missense suppressor of glycine to arginine mutation in protein A
also acted at the level of tRNA. Previously, tRNA had been shown to be re-
sponsible for suppression of an amber codon in a bacteriophage RNA90,91. As
already described above, in one case amber suppression has now been shown
to be due to a single nucleotide change in the anticodon of a tRNA 71.


364                   1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA




 Fig. 7. The incorporation of [14C]glycine into valine-glycinecopolypeptide as stimulated
   by poly-rUG in the presence of tRNA from A-78-Su-78 strain of Escherichia coli.



                    (c) Translation of single-stranded DNA-like polymers

 Recently the striking finding was reported92 that in the presence of amino-
 glycoside antibiotics such as neomycin B, denatured DNA stimulated the in-
 corporation of amino acids in the bacterial cell-free protein-synthesizing
 system. A further study of these observations using single-stranded deoxy-
 ribopolynucleotides with defined nucleotide sequences, poly-dTG, poly-
 dAC and poly-dT, gave most encouraging results93. Thus, the response from
 the DNA-like polymers was excellent and, surprisingly, the mistakes were
 very rare and small. For example, poly-dCA directed the synthesis of thr-his
 copolypeptide and no other amino acid was incorporated. In addition to pro-
 viding a further opportunity for the study of ribosome function, these results
 may have important practical applications in future work. As pointed out
 elsewhere 94, it is not inconceivable that the laboratory synthesis of specific


      NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THEGENETIC CODE                             365

proteins will be carried out using nucleic acid templates. For this purpose,
protected trinucleotides representing different codons will be made in quan-
tity and on a commercial basis, and these will be used in the synthesis of
nucleic acid templates for proteins, the approach offering flexibility and selec-
tivity in amino acid substitutions at the template level.



                              6. Conclusion

While clarity in some of the detailed aspects of the genetic code is still lacking,
it has been a most satisfying experience in the lives of many of us, who have
worked on the problems, to see complete agreement reached-in regard to its
general structure. Evidence coming from a variety of techniques, genetic and
biochemical, from in vivo and in vitro experiments, has furnished the codon
assignments reviewed above. It is unlikely that any of the assignments would
be revised. However, much remains to be done at chemical and biochemical
level to obtain an adequate understanding of the very elaborate protein-syn-
thesizing system. Nevertheless, the problem of the genetic code at least in the
restricted one-dimensional sense (the linear correlation of the nucleotide
sequence of polynucleotides with that of the amino acid sequence of poly-
peptides) would appear to have been solved. It may be hoped that this knowl-
edge would serve as a basis for further work in molecular and developmental
biology.




                           Acknowledgements

I wish to emphasize again that the work which has formed the content of this
lecture has been so much a collaborative effort. I am deeply indebted to a very
large number of devoted colleagues, chemists and biochemists, with whom I
had the good fortune to be happily associated.
   Work and progress in science becomes more and more interdependent:
this certainly has been true in work on the genetic code. Many of the great
scientists, who influenced directly or indirectly the work herein reviewed,
have been mentioned in the text. I wish to make a personal acknowledgement
to one more scientist. Fortunately, I was accepted by Professor V. Prelog of
the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, Zurich, as a postdoctoral student.


366                       1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA

The association with this great scientist and human being influenced immeas-
urably my thought and philosophy towards science, work and effort.
   The work had its start at the British Columbia Research Council, Van-
couver, Canada, where it was made possible by the encouragement of Dr.
 Gordon M. Shrum (now Chancellor of Simon Fraser University, B. C.) and
with the financial support from the National Research Council of Canada. In
more recent years, generous support has been received from the National
 Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health, U.S. Public Health
 Service, the National Science Foundation, Washington, the Life Insurance
 Medical Research Fund and the Graduate School of the University of Wis-
consin.


1. F. H. C. Crick, in On the genetic code, in Nobel Lectures, Physiology or Medicine 1942-
     1962, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1964, p.811.
2. G. W.Beadle and E. L.Tatum, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 27 (1941) 499.
3. O. T. Avery, C. M. Macleod and M. McCarty, J.Exptl. Med., 79 (1944) 137.
4. A.D.Hersey and M. Chase, J. Gen. Physiol., 36 (1952) 39.
5. A. Gierer and G. Schramm, Nature, 177 (1956) 702.
6. H.Fraenkel-Conrat, B. Singer and R. C. Williams, Biochim.Biophys.Acta, 25 (1957)
     87.
  7. T. Caspersson, Naturwissenschajien, 28 (1941) 33.
  8. J.Brachet, Arch.Biol. (Liège), 53 (1942) 207.
  9. D. M.Brown and A. R. Todd, in E. Chargaff and J.N.Davidson (Eds.), Nucleic
      Acids, Vol. I, Academic Press, New York, 1955, p.409.
10. J.D. Watson and F.H. C. Crick, Nature, 171 (1953) 737.
11. I.R.Lehman, M. J.Bessman, E. S. Simms and A.Kornberg, J.Biol.Chem., 233 (1958)
      163.
12. S.B. Weiss, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 46 (1960) 1020.
13. A.Stevens, J.Biol.Chem., 236 (1961) PC43.
 14. J.Hurwitz, J. J. Furth, M.Anders and A. Evans, J.Biol.Chem., 237 (1962) 3752.
 15. M. Chamberlin and P.Berg, Proc. NatI. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 48 (1962) 81.
16. D.P.Burma, H.Kroger, S.Ochoa, R.C.Wamer and J.D.Weill, Proc.Natl.Acad.
      Sci. (U.S.), 47 (1961) 749.
 17. A.D.Hershey, J.Dixon and M.Chase, J.Gen.Physiol., 36 (1953) 777.
 18. E.Volkin and L.Astrachan, Virology, 2 (1956) 149.
19. F. Jacob and J. Monod, J.Mol.Biol., 3 (1961) 318.
20. S.Brenner, F. Jacob and M.Meselson, Nature, 190 (1961) 576.
21. F. Gros, W.Gilbert, H.Hiatt, C.G.Kurland, R. W.Risebrough and J.D. Watson,
      Nature, 190 (1961) 581.
22. P. C.Zamecnik, Harvey Lectures, Ser. 54 (1958-1959) 256.
23. F. Lipmann, W. C.Hulsmann, G. Hartmann, Hans G.Boman and GeorgeAcs, J.Cell.
      Comp. Physiol., 54, Suppl. 1 (1959) 75.


       NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                                367
24. P.Berg, Ann.Rev.Biochem., 30 (1961) 293.
25. J. D. Watson, in The involvement of RNA in the synthesis of proteins, in Nobel
     Lectures, Physiology or Medicine 1942-1962, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1964, p. 785.
26. W.B. Wood and P.Berg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. ( U.S.), 48 (1962) 94.
27. J. H. Matthaei and M. W. Nirenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 47 (1961) 1580.
28. H. G. Khorana, Federation Proc., 19 (1960) 931.
29. H. G. Khorana, Some Recent Developments in the Chemistry of Phosphate Esters of Bio-
      logical Interest, Wiley, New York, 1961.
 30. H.G.Khorana, T.M.Jacob, M.W.Moon, S.A.Narang and E.Ohtsuka, J.Am.
      Chem. Soc., 87 (1965) 2954.
 31. H. G.Khorana, Federation Proc., 24 (1965) 1473.
 32. H.G.Khorana, in Proc. 7th. Intern.Congr.Biochem., Tokyo, August 19-25,1967, 1968,
      p.17
 33. H. G. Khorana, on Proc. Plenary Lectures of IUPAC Symp. Natural Products, London,
      1968.
 34. G.Gamow, Nature, 173 (1954) 318.
 35. S. Ochoa, Federation Proc., 22 (1963) 62.
 36. M.W.Nirenberg, J.H.Matthaei, O.W.Jones, R.G.Martin and S.H.Barondes,
    Federation Proc., 22 (1963) 55.
37. A.Falaschi, J.Adler and H.G.Khorana, J.Biol.Chem., 238 (1963) 3080.
38. J.Hurwitz, J.J.Furth, M.Anders and A.Evans, J.Biol.Chem., 237 (1962) 3752.
39. B.D.Mehrotra and H.G.Khorana, J.Biol.Chem., 240 (1965) 1750.
40. A. Kornberg, L.L.Bertsch, J.F. Jackson and H.G.Khorana, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
     (U.S), 51 (1964) 315.
41. E. Ohtsuka, M. W. Moon and H. G. Khorana, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 87 (1965) 2956.
42. T. M. Jacob and H. G. Khorana, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 87 (1965) 2971.
43. S. A.Nrang and H. G.Khorana, J.Am.Chem. Soc., 87 (1965) 2981.
44. S. A.Narang, T.M. Jacob and H.G.Khorana, J.Am.Chem.Soc, 87 (1965) 2988.
45. S. A. Narang, T.M. Jacob and H.G.Khorana, J.Am.Chem. Soc., 89 (1967) 2158.
46. S.A. Narang, T. M. Jacob and H. G. Khorana, J.Am.Chem. Soc, 89 (1967) 2167.
47. H.Kössel, H.Büchi and H.G.Khorana, J. Am.Chem.,Soc., 89 (1967) 2185.
48. E. Ohtsuka and H. G.Khorana, J.Am.Chem.Soc., 89 (1967) 2195.
49. H.G.Khorana, H.Büchi, T.M. Jacob, H.Kössel, S.A.Narang and E.Ohtsuka, J.
     Am.Chem.Soc., 89 (1967) 2154.
50, H. Kössel, A. R. Morgan and H. G. Khorana, J.Mol.Biol., 26 (1967) 449.
51. H.Kössel, Biochim.Biophys.Acta, 157 (1968) 91.
52. Robert D. Wells, T. M. Jacob, S. A.Narang and H. G.Khorana, J.Mol.Biol., 27
     (1967) 237.
53. S.Nishimura, T. M. Jacob and H.G.Khorana, Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. (U.S.), 52 (1964)
     1494.
54. C. Byrd, E. Ohtsuka, M. W. Moon and H.G.Khorana, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.),
     53 (1965) 79.
55. R.D. Wells, E.Ohtsuka and H.G.Khorana, J.Mol.Biol., 14 (1965) 221.
56. R.D. Wells, H.Büchi, H. Kössel, E. Ohtsuka and H. G.Khorana, J.Mol.Biol., 27
     (1967) 265.


368                      1968 H. GOBIND KHORANA

57. R.D. Wells and J.E.Blair, J.Mol.Biol., 27 (1967) 273.
58. S.Nishimura, D. S. Jones and H. G. Khorana, J.Mol.Biol., 13 (1965) 302.
59. H. G. Khorana, in Genetic Elements, Federation of European Societies for Biological
     Chemists, April 1966, p. 209.
60. Unpublished work of A.R. Morgan.
61. R. Lohrmann, D. Söll, H. Hayatsu, E. Ohtsuka and H. G.Khorana, J.Am. Chem. Soc,
     88 (1966) 819.
62. D. S. Jones, S.Nishimura and H. G.Khorana, J.Mol.Biol., 16 (1966) 454.
63. S. Nishimura, D. S. Jones, E. Ohtsuka, H.Hayatsu, T.M. Jacob and H. G.Khorana,
     J.Mol.Biol., 13(1965)283.
64. A.R. Morgan, R.D. Wells and H.G. Khorana, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 56 (1966)
     1899.
65. For references, see The Genetic Code, Cold Spring Harbor Symp.Quant.Biol., 31
     (1966).
66. H. Lamfrom, C. S.McLaughlin and A. Sarabhai, J.Mol.Biol., 22 (1966) 359.
67. M. W. Nirenberg and P. Leder, Science, 145 (1964) 1399.
68. R.W.Holley, J.Apgar, G.A.Everett, J.T.Madison, M.Marquisee, S.H.Merrill,
     J.R.Penswick and A. Zamir, Science, 147 (1965) 1462.
69. U.L.RajBhandary, S.H. Chang, A. Stuart, R.D.Faulkner, R.M.Hoskinson and
     H. G.Khorana, Proc. NatI. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 57 (1967) 751.
70. F. Chapeville, F.Lipmann, G.von Ehrenstein, B. Weisblum, W. J.Ray Sr. and S.
     Benzer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 48 (1962) 1086.
71. H. M. Goodman, J.Abelson,A.Landy, S.Brenner and J.D.Smith, Nature, 217 (1968)
      1019.
72. B.F. C. Clark, S. K. Dube and K.A. Marcker, Nature, 219 (1968) 484.
73. F.H. C. Crick, J. Mol.Biol., 19 (1966) 548.
74. D. Söll and U. L.RajBhandary, J. Mol.Biol., 29 (1967) 97.
75. D. Söll, J. Cherayil, D. S. Jones, R.D.Faulkner, A.Hampel, R.M.Bock and H. G.
      Khorana, p. 51 in ref. 65.
76. D. Söll, J.D.Cherayil and R.M.Bock, J. Mol.Biol., 29 (1967) 97.
 77. W.Fuller and A.Hodgson, Nature, 215 (1967) 817.
 78. B.F.C. Clark, B.P.Doctor, K. C.Holmes, A.Klug, K. A.Marcker, S. J.Morris and
      H.H.Paradies, Nature, 219 (1968) 1222.
 79. S.Kim and A.Rich, Science, 162 (1968) 1381.
 80. A.Hampel, M.Labanauskas, P.G.Connors, L.Kirkegaard, U.L.RajBhandary, P.
      B. Sigler and R.M.Bock, Science, 162 (1968) 1384.
 81. F. Cramer, F.v.d.Haar, W. Saenger and E. Schlimme, Angew. Chem., 80 (1968)
      969.
  82. H.H.Paradies, FEBS Letters, 2 (1968) 112.
  83. J.R.Fresco, R.D.Blake and R.Langridge, Nature, 220 (1968) 1285.
  84. H.P. Ghosh, D. Söll and H.G. Khorana, J. Mol. Biol., 25 (1967) 275.
85. H.P.Ghosh and H. G. Khorana, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. ( U.S.), 58 (1967) 2455.
  86. G.Mangiarotti and D. Schlessinger, J.Mol.Biol., 20 (1966) 123; 29 (1967) 395;
       D. Schlessinger, G. Mangiarotti and D. Apirion, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. ( U.S.), 58
       (1967) 1782.


      NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS AND THE GENETIC CODE                                 369

87. M. Nomura and C. V. Lowry, Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 58 (1967) 946; M. Nomu-
     ra, C.V. Lowry and C. Guthrie, ibid., 58 (1967) 1487.
 88. N.K.Gupta and H.G.Khorana, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. ( U. S.), 56 (1966) 772.
 89. J. Carbon, P.Berg and C. Yanofsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 56 (1966) 764.
90. M.R.Capecchi and G.N.Gussin, Science, 149 (1965) 417.
91. D. L. Engelhardt, R. Webster, R. C. Wilhelm and N. D. Zinder, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      (U.S.), 54 (1965) 1791.
92. B. J. McCarthy and J.J.Holland, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 54 (1965) 880.
93. A. R. Morgan, R.D. Weds and H. G.Khorana, J.Mol.Biol., 26 (1967) 477.
 94. A. Kumar and H. G. Khorana, J. Am. Chem. Soc., in the press.
