THE SEARCH FOR INFECTIOUS CAUSES
OF HUMAN CANCERS: WHERE AND WHY

Nobel Lecture, December 7, 2008
by
Harald zur Hausen
Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany.




Slightly more than 20% of the global cancer burden can currently be linked
to infectious agents, including viruses, bacteria and parasites. This manu-
script analyses reasons for their relatively late discovery and highlights epi-
demiological observations that may point to the involvement of additional
infectious agents in specific human cancers. Emphasis is placed on hae-
matopoietic malignancies, breast and colorectal cancers, but also basal cell
carcinomas of the skin and lung cancers in non-smokers.


INTRODUCTION


Present state of the global cancer burden
Currently a large number of infectious agents have been identified which ei-
ther cause or contribute to specific human cancers (reviewed in zur Hausen,
2006). They include two members of the herpes virus family, Epstein-
Barr virus and human herpes virus type 8, high risk and low risk human
papillomaviruses (HPV), Hepatitis B and C viruses, a recently identified hu-
man polyomavirus, Merkel cell polyomavirus (Feng et al., 2008), the human
T-lymphotropic retrovirus type 1 (HTLV-1), and human immunodeficiency
viruses (HIV) types 1 and 2. In addition, human endogenous retroviruses
have been suspected to play a role in human cancers. Besides viruses, other
pathogens have also been identified. They include the bacterium Helicobacter
pylori, a major contributor to gastric cancer, and parasitic infections, here in
particular Schistosoma haematobium, a major cause of bladder cancer in Egypt,
and liver flukes. The latter, Opisthorchis viverinni and Clonorchis sinensis, are
important factors for cholangiocarcinomas and hepatocellular carcinomas in
South-eastern Thailand and Southern China. Figure 1 shows an estimate of
the present contribution of infectious agents to global cancer incidence.




                                                                             223


Figure 1. Estimated annual global cancer incidence due to infections (with inclusion of
data from Parkin et al., 2002; modified from zur Hausen, 2006).


It is important to note that there exist vast gender differences in the global
role of papillomaviruses in human cancers. This is mainly due to the role
of this virus family in the induction of cancer of the cervix. More than 50%
of cancers linked to infections in females are caused by HPV infections. In
males only approximately 4.3% of cancers have been linked to this virus fam-
ily.


PROBLEMS IN IDENTIFYING INFECTIOUS AGENTS INVOLVED IN HU-
MAN CANCER INDUCTION


1. Why has it been so difficult to identify infectious agents as causative factors for hu-
man tumours?
The search for an infectious cause of at least some human cancers dates back
to the second half of the nineteenth century (reviewed in zur Hausen, 2006).
Yet the first hints for a role of infectious agents in human cancers date back
to the beginning of the 20th century, when Schistosoma infections in Egypt
and liver flukes in Eastern Europe and Asia were suspected to play a role in
the development of bladder and liver cancers. In spite of intensive search, it
took approximately 65 additional years before further evidence was obtained,
namely by linking a specific virus, Epstein-Barr virus, to two human cancers,
Burkitt’s lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. During the past three
or four decades progress has been more rapid, currently linking about 20%
of the global cancer incidence to infectious events.



224


  Why has it been so difficult to identify infectious agents as causative factors
for human cancers? Several reasons seem to provide an explanation:
1. Because no human cancer arises as the acute consequence of infection.
   The latency periods between primary infection and cancer development
   are frequently in the range of 15 to 40 years. The X-chromosome-linked
   lymphoproliferation (XLLP) represents a rare exception. Based on a spe-
   cific host cell mutation, Epstein-Barr virus here causes an acute lympho-
   proliferative disease.
2. Besides some rare exceptions, no synthesis of the infectious agents occurs
   in cancer cells.
3. Most of the infections linked to human cancers are common in human
   populations; they are ubiquitous. They were present during the whole hu-
   man evolution process. Yet only a small proportion of infected individuals
   develops the respective cancer type.
4. Mutations in host cell genes or within the viral genome are mandatory for
   malignant conversion.
5. Chemical (e.g. aflatoxin) and physical carcinogens (e.g. ultraviolet light in
   Epidermodysplasia verruciformis) usually act as mutagens. They facilitate
   the selection of specific mutations and frequently act synergistically with
   carcinogenic infectious agents.
6. Some infectious agents act as indirect carcinogens, without persistence
   of their genes within the respective cancer cells (HIV, Helicobacter pylori,
   Schistosoma haematobium, Hepatitis C and B).

Among all these factors, the ubiquity of most of these infections and the long
time periods required for malignant transformation were the main reasons
for the remarkable difficulties in identifying their carcinogenic functions.

2. Epidemiology provided hints for a successful search
a. Geographic coincidence
Geographic coincidence of a specific infection (Hepatitis B) and of liver
cancer led to the original suspicion that this infection may predispose the
patient to the subsequent development of hepatocellular carcinomas (re-
viewed in zur Hausen, 2006). The additional contribution of a chemical car-
cinogen was also suspected, based on similar observations. Figure 2 reveals
the geographic distribution of Hepatitis B virus infections and hepatocellular
carcinomas. Geographic clustering of specific cancers may, however, also
result from other causes: Countries with a high rate of heavy smokers also
experience a high incidence of lung cancer. The intensive solar exposure
of Caucasian populations in Australia, South Africa and South America is
responsible for a high percentage of skin cancer patients.




                                                                             225


Figure 2. Geographic distribution of Hepatitis B infections (left) and of hepatocellular car-
cinomas (right). Modified from figures provided by CDC and Globocan 2002.


b. Regional clustering of cases
Regional clustering of specific cancer types triggered some investigations
on a potential role of infectious agents in these malignant proliferations.
Burkitt’s lymphoma in equatorial Africa represents one of the most illustra-
tive examples. Burkitt noted the apparent dependence of tumour incidence
on climatic conditions and altitude and described the regional correlation
with holoendemic Plasmodium falciparum infections (Burkitt, 1962). As a con-
sequence he speculated that the tumour might be due to a viral infection,
transmitted by an arthropod vector, possibly the same one carrying malaria
parasites.
   Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, occurring at high frequency in specific re-
gions of South East Asia, represents another example. Adult T-cell leukaemia
in the coastal regions of Southern Japan, cholangiocarcinomas in South East
Thailand and bladder cancer in the Nile Delta or along the Nile River also
raised early suspicions of an infectious origin. These observations resulted in
speculations; they could not prove the underlying hypothesis by themselves.

c. Dependence on sexual contacts
If one disregards the occurrence of scrotum cancer in chimney sweepers, the
early studies of Rigoni-Stern in Verona, Italy, pointing in 1842 to the role of
sexual contacts in the causation of cervical cancer, represent a particularly
interesting example of suspected contact transmission of a human cancer. It
took another 140 years before viral infections were identified as causing this
frequent cancer in women. These observations led to the identification of ad-
ditional anogenital and oral cancers linked to the same virus infections.

d. Cancers arising under immunosuppression
Epidemiological surveys identified immunosuppression as a condition result-
ing in the appearance of remarkably specific forms of cancer. Many of those
malignancies have by now been shown to be caused by reactivated viruses,
whose oncogenic potential is usually suppressed by immunological reactions.
The most prominent tumours arising here are Epstein-Barr virus caused
B-cell lymphomas, Kaposi’s sarcomas linked to human herpesvirus type 8
reactivation, and Merkel cell carcinomas of the skin associated with a novel

226


polyomavirus. The initial discovery of the viral origin of cervical cancer and
its precursor lesions was not based on the moderately enhanced incidence
under immunosuppression. Specific types of common warts as a non-ma-
lignant proliferative condition also occur at high frequency in immunosup-
pressed patients, mainly containing of genus-Beta papillomaviruses. The viral
origin of basal and squamous cell carcinomas of the skin, frequently found in
these patients, remains controversial.


MECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF CANCER INDUCTION BY INFECTIONS
Figure 3 lists identified mechanisms by which infections may contribute to
cancer development. The expression of specific viral oncogenes as a manda-
tory precondition for the maintenance of the malignant phenotype has been
identified as directly contributing to human carcinogenesis (reviewed in zur
Hausen, 2006). A novel mode of direct viral carcinogenesis has probably
been identified in Merkel cell carcinomas, where functional inactivation of
the helicase part of the large T-antigen of the Merkel cell polyomavirus ren-
ders the viral DNA replication-incompetent (Shuda et al., 2008). Viral DNA
persisting in normal tissues seems to retain replication competence.




Figure 3. Summary of identified mechanisms by which infections either directly or indirect-
ly contribute to carcinogenesis. Mechanistic contributions of infections to human cancers
have been marked.

The most prominent indirect infectious carcinogens are agents causing im-
munosuppression or inducing reactive oxygen species via inflammatory reac-
tions. Whereas the mechanism of immunosuppression induced by human
immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) or after organ transplantation is reasonably
well understood, the accurate mechanism by which Hepatitis B and C viruses,
Helicobacter pylori and carcinogenic parasitic infections contribute to cancer
still remains somewhat obscure.




                                                                                      227


WHERE IS IT WORTHWHILE TO SEARCH FOR AN INFECTIOUS
ETIOLOGY OF HUMAN CANCERS NOT YET LINKED TO INFECTIONS?
When we summarise infectious agents that have been discovered during the
past 15 years, it is interesting to note that several novel viruses belonging to
potentially carcinogenic virus families have been identified even during the
past two years (Figure 4). This raises the suspicion that additional links to
novel or already identified infectious agents to cancers, hitherto not linked
to infections, will become apparent. Thus it appears worthwhile to search
for cancer-related epidemiologic observations that may point to the involve-
ment of infectious agents in cancers hitherto not linked to infections. The
following will summarise some hypotheses and considerations based on these
reports.




Figure 4. “New” human pathogenic viruses, 1994–2008. The light arrows identify important
human pathogens or a whole novel virus family (TT viruses). The dark arrows point to
established or potentially oncogenic virus isolates.


1. Cancers occurring under immunosuppression
A review published in 2006 by Vajdic and colleagues demonstrates a large
number of cancers occurring at increased frequency under immunosuppres-
sion after kidney transplantation. Kaposi’s sarcoma, mainly found in HIV-
infected patients, stands out and is found about 200 times more frequently
in these patients compared to non-infected controls (Figure 5). The most
interesting part of Figure 5 appears to be the 7–8 fold higher rate of vulvar
and penile cancer in comparison to cancer of the cervix. The vast majority of
cervical cancers are caused by high risk human papillomavirus (HPV) infec-
tions. In vulvar and penile cancers only 30–50% seems to be linked to the
same HPV infections. The etiology of 50–70% of these cancers is unknown.
Interestingly, the age distribution of HPV-positive and HPV-negative vulvar
and penile cancers differs in that the negative tumours regularly occur in
older age groups. Thus, the negative group should require attention as pos-

228


sible candidates for an unknown viral etiology. Unidentified types of HPVs or
novel polyomaviruses may represent interesting candidates. Salivary gland,
eye, thyroid and tongue cancers should also deserve attention.




Figure 5. Some of the most frequently occurring cancers occurring after kidney transplan-
tation (modified from Vajdic et al., 2006). The dotted line indicates the incidence in im-
munocompetent patients.



2. Cancers not elevated or even reduced after immunosuppression
   2a. Breast cancer as an example
Some cancers do not show an increased incidence during immunosup-
pression. Indeed, immunosuppression may even possess a protective effect
against some of these tumours. Those cancers are shown in Figure 6. Besides
prostate, rectal and brain tumours, human breast cancer represents a par-
ticularly intriguing malignancy, because murine mammary cancer is also
not increased under immunosuppression. This latter tumour is caused by a
retrovirus infection, murine mammary tumour virus (MMTV).




                                                                                     229


Figure 6. Cancer incidence marginally or not affected during immunosuppression after
kidney transplantation (modified from Vajdic et al., 2006).


In murine mammary tumours, the mechanism of a slightly protective ef-
fect exerted by immunosuppression is partially understood (see review zur
Hausen, 2006). It is schematically outlined in Figure 7. The primary infec-
tion occurs via the milk of the infected mother. The virus reaches the Peyer’s
patches where it infects B- and T-lymphocytes. Superantigen induction in
the infected cells leads to reactive T-cell depletion and immunotolerance.
The superantigen expressing cells produce high quantities of infectious
MMTV; this substantially increases the risk for the infection of mammary tis-
sue. Specific integration of the MMTV proviral DNA in the mammary cells
emerges as the prime risk factor for the resulting mammary carcinomas.
Immunosuppression of such infected animals apparently interferes with the
emergence of superantigen-producing T- and B-lymphocytes and, as a con-
sequence, suppresses virus production which in turn decreases the risk for
cancer development.




230


Figure 7. Schematic outline of events following infection of newborn mice with murine
mammary tumour virus (modified from zur Hausen, 2006).


Is it possible that a similar mechanism contributes to human mammary can-
cer? A few data seem to support this notion. They may point to a possible in-
volvement of a specific subgroup of human endogenous retroviruses (HERV)
in this malignancy. At least 8% of our genome consists of retroviral sequences
acquired in the course of human evolution. Although the vast majority of
these sequences no longer reveal functional open reading frames, mem-
bers of one subgroup HERV-K, which entered our germ line approximately
800,000 years ago, are still able to code for complete, though non-infectious
virus particles. Retroviral gag and env transcripts of the 22q11.21 region are
found in these particles (Ruprecht et al., 2008). Correction of stop codons in
HERV-K sequences resulted, moreover, in the re-constitution of infectious
HERV-K viruses (Dewannieux et al., 2006, Lee and Bieniasz, 2007). HERV-K
expression also becomes activated by other virus infections: HIV infections
activate HERV-K sequences (Laderoute et al., 2007). Similarly Epstein-Barr
virus infections result in the induction of HERV-K superantigen (Sutkowski et
al., 2004, Meylan et al., 2005, Hsiao et al., 2006). Epstein-Barr virus containing
Burkitt’s lymphoma cells occasionally reveal particles strongly resembling ret-
roviral type A structures upon induction by the tumour-promoting phorbol-
ester TPA (zur Hausen, unpublished). Typical structures are shown in Fig. 8.




                                                                                 231


Figure 8. Epstein-Barr virus particles (small arrows) and two clusters of A-type particle-like
structures (big arrows) in a TPA-treated Burkitt’s lymphoma cell.


Some recent reports may further stress a potential role of reactivated HERV-K
viruses in the pathogenesis of human breast cancer: an antigen-specific im-
mune response was demonstrated in breast cancer patients (Wang-Johanning
et al., 2008). In addition, breast cancer patients, HIV-associated lymphomas,
non-HIV-associated lymphomas and HIV-associated Hodgkin’s lymphomas
reveal about seven-fold elevated concentrations of HERV-K (HML-2) RNA in
their plasma when compared to healthy controls. (Contreras-Galindo et al.,
2008). The RNA titres in lymphoma patients in remission returned to control
values.
   Although the available data seem to support a potential role of endoge-
nous retroviruses in human breast cancer, they certainly do not prove it.
Other agents may also contribute to at least a proportion of these cancers. A
possible link between red meat consumption and breast cancer and a poten-
tial involvement of other viral factors will be discussed in connection with a
subsequent paragraph. Nevertheless, human breast cancer remains an inter-
esting candidate for a viral etiology.

3. Cancer incidence influenced by infections
The risk of some cancers seems to be influenced by other infections which
neither directly contribute to carcinogenesis nor induce long-lasting immu-
nosuppression.




232


Figure 9. Multifocal basal cell carcinomas in small pox vaccination scars.


3a. Basal cell carcinomas in pox scars
Figure 9 reveals an example of multiple basal cell carcinomas arising after 20
years in a smallpox vaccination scar. This does not represent a solitary obser-
vation, since a large number of basal cell carcinomas, but also melanomas,
squamous cell carcinomas, and a few more rarely occurring malignancies
(dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, fibrosarcoma and malignant fibrous his-
tiocytomas) have also been reported to occur in smallpox vaccination scars
(Waibel and Walsh, 2006) They are summarised in Figure 10.




                                                                             233


Figure 10. Malignant tumours arising in vaccinia virus vaccination scars (modified from
Waibel and Walsh, 2006).


Prior to the eradication of smallpox infections, vaccines against these infec-
tions were prepared by inoculating vaccinia virus into the scarified skin of
calves and harvesting the skin crusts containing the vaccinia virus particles. It
is possible that these preparations contained contaminating bovine viruses.
Previously it has been demonstrated that vaccinia virus infections cause am-
plification of persisting polyoma type virus genomes (Schlehofer et al., 1986).
This may increase the likelihood for contaminations with bovine members
of this virus family. Persistent papillomavirus DNA would be also affected in
cells replicating vaccinia virus (Schmitt et al., 1989).

The published data permit several interpretations:
u Vaccinia virus infection of calf skin resulted in the activation of specific
  cattle viruses whose subsequent inoculation into humans as contamination
  represented a risk factor for subsequent local cancer development;
u Vaccinia virus infection of the human skin resulted in local activation of
  human potentially oncogenic viruses, increasing the risk of cancer devel-
  opment 20–60 years later;
u Early inflammatory reactions induced by this vaccination resulted in mu-
  tational events resulting in some cases in the simultaneous appearance of
  multifocal cancers.

Although still other interpretations remain possible, and basal cell carcino-
mas have also occasionally been observed in other non-vaccination scars, the
observations described here should promote studies on a possible viral role
in the initiation of these malignant proliferations.

3b. Haematopoietic malignancies
As shown in Figure 11, a number of human viruses turn out to be oncogenic
when inoculated into newborn rodents. Intracerebral infections by JC virus
are able to induce astrocytomas in adult owl monkeys (London et al., 1978).
For obvious reasons the reverse question, whether specific animal viruses


234


are also able to induce tumours in humans, has not yet been carefully inves-
tigated (zur Hausen, 2001). Yet we are living in close contact with domestic
animals and regularly handle their products. This is particularly interesting
because contact with cattle and consumption of red meat have been identi-
fied as risk factors for specific human malignancies. Contact with cattle has
also frequently been considered as risk factor for haematopoietic malignan-
cies, in particular childhood acute lymphocytic leukaemias (reviewed in zur
Hausen, 2009).




Figure 11. Some human viruses are carcinogenic for several animal species. Do animal vi-
ruses exist that are potentially carcinogenic in humans?


3b 1. Risk and protective factors
In the following, the reasons for considering childhood leukaemias as poten-
tial candidates for an infectious etiology will be briefly summarised. A more
detailed account has been published recently (zur Hausen, 2009). Some pro-
tective factors as well as several risk factors for this malignancy are presented
in Figure 12.




                                                                                   235


Figure 12. Protective and risk factors for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.


Rare infections during the first year of life are frequently reported as risk factor
for childhood leukaemias (reviewed in zur Hausen, 2009). Conversely, mul-
tiple infections during this period emerge as a protective factor. These observa-
tions are underlined by correlative data: a high socioeconomic state represents
a risk factor, whereas crowded household conditions and many siblings emerge
as protective factors. Cattle farming has been reported as an additional risk fac-
tor, whereas more than six months of breast feeding seem to reduce the risk.
   Two additional sets of data deserve discussion: the frequent occurrence of
specific chromosomal translocations in leukaemic cells, often observed al-
ready prenatally (Greaves, 2003). The same types of chromosomal alterations
have also been found in healthy individuals, though here their frequency
appears to be very low. Another striking observation originates from the
description of occasional small clusters of leukaemic cases, specifically in
regions where an influx of urban populations occurred in previously rural
areas (reviewed in Kinlen, 2004).

3b. 2. Possible explanations
Three main hypotheses have been published to explain the epidemiologi-
cal findings: Greaves (summarised in 2006) speculated that there exists an
insufficient maturation state of the immune system in case of low exposure
to infections. Preceding chromosomal translocations as the first event, fol-
lowed by delayed infection “with an unspecified agent” should increase the risk
for subsequent leukaemic conversion. Alternatively, Kinlen (1995) proposed
that sudden mixing of a population of low exposure to a putative leukaemo-
genic agent (particularly in rural areas) with another population originat-
ing from urban areas previously highly exposed to the incriminated agent,
could promote an epidemic of the relevant infection. These hypotheses were

236


supplemented by a further speculation, assuming that the protective effect of
multiple infections during the first year of childhood was due to the reduc-
tion of the load with a putative leukaemogenic agent by interferon produc-
tion as outlined in figure 13 (zur Hausen and de Villiers, 2005; zur Hausen,
2009).




Figure 13. Schematic outline of the target cell conditioning hypothesis. Interferon synthe-
sis resulting from multiple infections in early childhood reduces the load of a persisting
potentially leukaemogenic agent and thus reduces the risk for malignant proliferation
(adapted from zur Hausen and de Villiers, 2005).


Reports on supertransforming properties of specifically replication-incom-
petent SV40 and murine polyomaviruses (Small et al., 1982; Roberge, C. and
Bastin, 1988), in addition to the recent demonstration of replication-incom-
petent Merkel cell polyomavirus in Merkel cell carcinomas (Shuda et al.,
2008) resulted in an attempt to combine the three hypotheses, assuming that
replication-incompetent polyoma-type viruses and high multiplicities at the
time of initial infection represent an important precondition for an increased
leukaemogenic risk. The generation of replication-incompetent viral proge-
ny seems to depend on high multiplicities of infection and the co-infection
of cells with both, replication-competent and incompetent genomes. The
sole subsequent infection of a susceptible cell with a replication-incompetent
genome may lead to the outgrowth of a leukaemic clone. Susceptibility of a
cell to this malignant conversion would require the previous or subsequent
acquisition of a specific chromosomal translocation. These translocations
also occur in healthy individuals, though at low frequency (Liu et al., 1994;
Bell et al., 1995; Fuscoe et al., 1996; Roulland et al., 2006). They represent

                                                                                      237


risk factors but are clearly not sufficient for cell transformation. They should
activate the oncogene of the replication-incompetent virus. A synopsis of this
hypothesis is presented in Figure 14.




Figure 14. Synopsis of the target cell conditioning model for childhood leukaemia.

A polyoma-type virus infection would fit best for this model, although mem-
bers of structurally related virus families might be also considered. Since a
number of reports document elevated risks in families of cattle farmers and
for individual in close contact with cattle (reviewed in zur Hausen, 2009), at
least part of childhood leukaemias could be due to a native cattle virus. This
virus should be replication-incompetent for human cells, but its oncogene
may become activated in cells with specific chromsosomal modifications.
Since a number of reports also suggest human occupational risks of persons
with communicative contacts (e.g. teachers, hairdressers), other types of
similar infections may be spread by human-human contacts (reviewed in zur
Hausen, 2009).
   It remains an interesting question to which extent other haematopoietic
malignancies, like acute and chronic myelogenous leukaemias, chronic lym-
phatic leukaemias, B- and T-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas, Epstein-Barr vi-
rus-negative Hodgkin lymphomas, and multiple myelomas could be included
in these considerations. Yet undefined polyomavirus-like particles have been
electronmicroscopically demonstrated in trichodysplasia of a patient with
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (e.g. Osswald et al., 2007).




238


4. Cancers potentially linked to animal – human transmission
   Colorectal, breast and lung cancers
A large number of reports consistently describe an increased risk for col-
orectal cancers related to a high consumption of red meat (reviewed in
Kuhnle et al., 2007; Santarelli et al., 2008). Recently this has also been noted
for lung cancer in non-smokers (Cross et al., 2007; Hu et al., 2008; Lam et
al., 2009) and, to a more limited degree and less consistently, also for breast
cancer (Taylor et al., 2007; Egeberg et al., 2008; Hu et al., 2008; Linos et al.,
2008; Mignone et al., 2009). A correlation seems to exist in countries with a
high rate of red meat consumption and a high risk for colorectal and breast
cancer. Common and frequently cited interpretations of these observations
are dietary factors. Carcinogenic N-nitroso compounds, heterocyclic amines
and heterocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons arise during cooking, broiling or
meat curing. Some of these compounds require metabolic activation prior to
conversion into a carcinogenic form, as initially described by Sugimura and
colleagues (Ohgaki et al., 1986). In addition, potentially carcinogenic nitrosyl
haem and nitroso thiols have been reported to be significantly increased in
faeces following a diet rich in red meat (Cross et al., 2002).
In contrast to red meat, consumption of white meat, and here specifically
chicken and other poultry meat, has not been found to be associated with an
elevated risk of colorectal or other cancers. It has been reported, however,
that fried, grilled or smoked chicken meat contains equally high concentra-
tions of heterocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and other carcinogens arising
in the preparatory steps prior to consumption (Yano et al., 1988; Kazerouni
et al., 2001; Reinik et al., 2007). If this holds up and if no other hitherto un-
known carcinogens are found specifically in red meat, these observations may
require a fresh look at previous interpretations. In meat prepared medium
or raw (Figure 15), temperatures in the central portions do not exceed 55
to 65° Celsius. At least members of the polyoma- and papillomavirus families
readily survive these temperatures without significant loss of their infectiv-
ity (Lelie et al., 1987; Sauerbrei and Wutzler, 2008). The only known bovine
polyomavirus was initially identified as a contamination of foetal bovine sera,
thus, it must have been present in the peripheral blood of yet unborn or new-
born calves. Existing members of the polyomavirus family have been poorly
studied in our domestic animals. These viruses are commonly non-oncogenic
in their natural hosts, but reveal carcinogenicity only in heterologous tissues.
At present, six different genotypes of polyomaviruses have been identified in
humans, but only one in cattle.




                                                                             239


Figure 15. Red meat cooked “raw”.

It is tempting to speculate that a hitherto unidentified bovine infectious
agent with pronounced thermostability, replication-incompetent for human
cells and possibly structurally related to the polyomavirus family, may play
a role in colorectal cancer, potentially also in lung cancers of non-smokers
and in breast cancer. This could be interpreted to mean that the described
chemical carcinogens arising during cooking or curing processes are not
sufficient for the induction of the respective cancers. In the case of red meat
consumption they may, however, interact with viral agents, present in red, but
not in white meat.


CONCLUSIONS
Although we know that at present, slightly more than 20% of global cancer
incidence is linked to infectious events, some epidemiological observations
suggest that this percentage will increase in the future. The recognition that
no cancer linked to infections develops without additional modifications
within the host cell genome permits the speculation that even cancers with
well established chromosomal modifications deserve a careful analysis for
additional involvement of infectious agents. Prime malignancies suggested
here as candidates for potential links with infections are haematopoietic
malignancies, particularly childhood lymphoblastic leukaemias, Epstein-Barr
virus-negative Hodgkin’s lymphomas, basal cell carcinomas of the skin, and
breast, colorectal and a subgroup of lung cancers. Although still hypotheti-
cal, this proposal is accessible to experimental verification. Even if only one

240


of these speculations turns out to be correct, this would have profound
implications for the prevention, diagnosis and hopefully also therapy of the
respective malignancy.

REFERENCES
Bell, D. A., Liu, Y., and Cortopassi, G. A., “Occurrence of bcl-2 oncogene translocation
   with increased frequency in the peripheral blood of heavy smokers”, J. Natl. Cancer Inst.
   1995; 87: 223–224.
Cross, A. J., Pollock, J. R., Bingham, S. A., “Red meat and colorectal cancer risk: the ef-
   fect of dietary iron and haem on endogenous N-nitrosation”, IARC Sci Publ. 2002; 156:
   205–206.
Burkitt, D. A., “Children’s cancer dependent on climatic factors”, Nature 1962; 194: 232
   –234.
Contreras-Galindo, R., Kaplan, M. H., Leissner, P., Verjat, T., Ferlenghi, I., Bagnoli, F.,
   Giusti, F., Dosik, M. H., Hayes, D. F., Gitlin, S. D., Markovitz, D. M., “Human endoge-
   nous retrovirus K (HML-2) elements in the plasma of people with lymphoma and breast
   cancer”, J. Virol. 2008; 82: 9329–9336.
Cross, A. J., Leitzmann, M. F., Gail, M. H., Hollenbeck, A. R., Schatzkin, A., Sinha, R., “A
   prospective study of red and processed meat intake in relation to cancer risk”, PLoS
   Med. 2007; 4: e325.
Dewannieux, M., Harper, F., Richaud, A., Letzelter, C., Ribet, D., Pierron, G., Heidmann,
   T., “Identification of an infectious progenitor for the multiple-copy HERV-K human
   endogenous retroelements”, Genome Res. 2006; 16: 1548–1556.
Egeberg, R., Olsen, A., Autrup, H., Christensen, J., Stripp, C., Tetens, I., Overvad, K.,
   Tjønneland, A., “Meat consumption, N-acetyl transferase 1 and 2 polymorphism and
   risk of breast cancer in Danish postmenopausal women”, Eur. J. Cancer Prev. 2008; 17:
   39–47.
Feng, H., Shuda, M., Chang, Y., Moore, P. S., “Clonal integration of a polyomavirus in hu-
   man Merkel cell carcinoma”, Science 2008; 319: 1096–1100.
Fuscoe, J. C., Setzer, R. W., Collared, D. D., Moore, M. M., “Quantification of t(14;18) in
   the lymphocytes of healthy adult humans as a possible biomarker for environmental
   exposures to carcinogens”, Carcinogenesis 1996; 17: 1013–1020.
Greaves, M., “Pre-natal origins of childhood leukemia”, Rev. Clin. Exp. Hematol. 2003; 7:
   233–245.
Greaves, M., “The causation of childhood leukemia: a paradox of progress?”, Discov. Med.
   2006; 6: 24–28.
Hsiao, F. C., Lin, M., Tai, A., Chen, G., Huber, B. T., “Cutting edge: Epstein-Barr virus trans-
   activates the HERV-K18 superantigen by docking to the human complement receptor 2
   (CD21) on primary B cells”, J. Immunol. 2006; 177: 2056–2060.
Hu, J., La Vecchia, C., DesMeules, M., Negri, E., Mery, L., Canadian Cancer Registries
   Epidemiology Research Group, “Meat and fish consumption and cancer in Canada”,
   Nutr. Cancer 2008; 60: 313–324.
Kazerouni, N., Sinha, R., Hsu, C. H., Greenberg, A., Rothman, N., “Analysis of 200 food
   items for benzo[a]pyrene and estimation of its intake in an epidemiologic study”, Food
   Chem. Toxicol. 2001 May; 39(5): 423–436.
Kinlen, L. J., “Epidemiological evidence for an infective basis in childhood leukaemia”, Br.
   J. Cancer 1995; 71: 1–5.
Kinlen, L. J., “Childhood leukemia and population mixing”, Pediatrics 2004 Jul; 114 (1):
   330–331.
Kuhnle, G. G., Bingham, S. A., “Dietary meat, endogenous nitrosation and colorectal can-
   cer”, Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2007; 35: 1355–1357.

                                                                                           241


Lam, T. K., Cross, A. J., Consonni, D., Randi, G., Bagnardi, V., Bertazzi, P. A., Caporaso, N.
   E., Sinha, R., Subar, A. F., Landi, M. T., “Intakes of red meat, processed meat, and meat
   mutagens increase lung cancer risk”, Cancer Res. 2009; 69: 932–939.
Lelie, P. N., Reesink, H. W., Lucas, C. J., “Inactivation of 12 viruses by heating steps applied
   during manufacture of a hepatitis B vaccine”, J. Med. Virol. 1987; 23: 297–301.
Linos, E., Willett, W. C., Cho, E., Colditz, G., Frazier, L. A., “Red meat consumption during
   adolescence among premenopausal women and risk of breast cancer”, Cancer Epidemiol.
   Biomarkers Prev. 2008; 17: 2146–2151.
Lee Y.N., Bieniasz P.D., “Reconstitution of an infectious human endogenous retrovirus”,
   PLoS Pathog. 2007; 3(1): e10.
Liu, Y., Hernandez, A. M., Shibata, D., Cortopassi, D. A., “BCL2 translocation frequency
   rises with age in humans”, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 1994; 91: 8910–8914.
London, W. T., Houff, S. A., Madden, D. L., Fuccillo, D. A., Gravell, M., Wallen, W. C.,
   Palmer, A. E., Sever, J. L., Padgett, B. L., Walker, D. L., ZuRhein, G. M., Ohashi, T.,
   “Brain tumors in owl monkeys inoculated with a human polyomavirus (JC virus)”,
   Science 1978; 201: 1246–1249.
Meylan, F., De Smedt, M., Leclercq, G., Plum, J., Leupin, O., Marguerat, S., Conrad, B.,
   “Negative thymocyte selection to HERV-K18 superantigens in humans”, Blood 2005; 105:
   4377–4382.
Mignone, L. I., Giovannucci, E., Newcomb, P. A., Titus-Ernstoff, L., Trentham-Dietz, A.,
   Hampton, J. M., Orav, E. J., Willett, W. C., Egan, K. M., “Meat consumption, heterocyclic
   amines, NAT2, and the risk of breast cancer”, Nutr. Cancer 2009; 61: 36–46.
Ohgaki, H., Hasegawa, H., Kato, T., Suenaga, M., Ubukata, M., Sato, S., Takayama, S.,
   Sugimura, T., “Carcinogenicity in mice and rats of heterocyclic amines in cooked
   foods”, Environ. Health Perspect. 1986; 67: 129–134.
Osswald, S. S., Kulick, K. B., Tomaszewski, M. M., Sperling, L. C., “Viral-associated
   trichodysplasia in a patient with lymphoma: a case report and review”, J. Cutan. Pathol.
   2007; 34: 721–725.
Parkin, D. M., Bray, F., Ferlay, J., Pisani, P., “Global cancer statistics, 2002”, CA Cancer J. Clin.
   2002; 55: 74–108.
Reinik, M., Tamme, T., Roasto, M., Juhkam, K., Tenno, T., Kiis, A., “Polycyclic aromatic
   hydrocarbons (PAHs) in meat products and estimated PAH intake by children and the
   general population in Estonia”, Food Addit. Contam. 2007; 24: 429–437.
Roberge, C., Bastin, M., “Site-directed mutagenesis of the polyomavirus genome: replica-
   tion-defective large T mutants with increased immortalization potential”, Virology 1988;
   162: 144–150.
Roulland, S., Lebailly, P., Lecluse, Y., Heutte, N., Nadel, B., Gauduchon, P., “Long-term
   clonal persistence and evolution of t(14;18)-bearing B cells in healthy individuals”,
   Leukemia 2006; 20: 158–162.
Ruprecht, K., Ferreira, H., Flockerzi, A., Wahl, S., Sauter, M., Mayer, J., Mueller-Lantzsch,
   N., “Human endogenous retrovirus family HERV-K(HML-2) RNA transcripts are selec-
   tively packaged into retroviral particles produced by the human germ cell tumor line
   Tera-1 and originate mainly from a provirus on chromosome 22q11.21”, J. Virol. 2008;
   82: 10008–10016.
Santarelli, R. L., Pierre, F., Corpet, D. E., “Processed meat and colorectal cancer: a review
   of epidemiologic and experimental evidence”, Nutr. Cancer 2008; 60: 131–144.
Sauerbrei, A., Wutzler, P., “Testing thermal resistance of viruses”, Arch. Virol. 2009; 154 (1):
   115–119.
Schlehofer, J. R., Ehrbar, M., zur Hausen, H., “Vaccinia virus, herpes simplex virus, and
   carcinogens induce DNA amplification in a human cell line and support replication of
   a helpervirus dependent parvovirus”, Virology 1986; 152: 110–117.




242


Schmitt, J., Schlehofer, J. R., Mergener, K., Gissmann, L., zur Hausen, H., “Amplification
   of bovine papillomavirus DNA by N-methyl-N’-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine, ultraviolet ir-
   radiation, or infection with herpes simplex virus”, Virology 1989; 172: 73–81.
Shuda, M., Feng, H., Kwun, H. J., Rosen, S. T., Gjoerup, O., Moore, P. S., Chang, Y., “T
   antigen mutations are a human tumor-specific signature for Merkel cell polyomavirus”,
   Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008; 105: 16272–16277.
Small, M. B., Gluzman, Y., Ozer, H. L., “Enhanced transformation of human fibroblasts by
   origin-defective simian virus 40”, Nature 1982; 296: 671–672.
Sutkowski, N., Chen, G., Calderon, G., Huber, B. T., “Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane
   protein LMP-2A is sufficient for transactivation of the human endogenous retrovirus
   HERV-K18 superantigen”, J. Virol. 2004; 78: 7852–7860.
Taylor, E. F., Burley, V. J., Greenwood, D. C., Cade, J. E., “Meat consumption and risk of
   breast cancer in the UK Women’s Cohort Study”, Br. J. Cancer 2007; 96: 1139–1146.
Vajdic, C. M., McDonald, S. P., McCredie, M. R., van Leeuwen, M. T., Stewart, J. H., Law,
   M., Chapman, J. R., Webster, A. C., Kaldor, J. M., Grulich, A.E., “Cancer incidence be-
   fore and after kidney transplantation”, JAMA. 2006; 296: 2823–2831.
Wang-Johanning, F., Radvanyi, L., Rycaj, K., Plummer, J. B., Yan, P., Sastry, K. J., Piyathilake,
   C. J., Hunt, K. K., Johanning, G. L., “Human endogenous retrovirus K triggers an
   antigen-specific immune response in breast cancer patients”, Cancer Res. 2008; 68:
   5869–5877.
Waibel, K. H., Walsh, D. S., “Smallpox vaccination site complications”, Int. J. Dermatol. 2006;
   45: 684–688.
Yano, M., Wakabayashi, K., Tahira, T., Arakawa, N., Nagao, M., Sugimura, T., “Presence
   of nitrosable mutagen precursors in cooked meat and fish”, Mutat. Res. 1988; 202:
   119–123.
zur Hausen, H., “Proliferation-inducing viruses in non-permissive systems as possible
   causes of human cancers”, Lancet 2001; 357: 381–384.
zur Hausen, H., “Infections causing human cancers”, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim – New York,
   Publ. 2006.
zur Hausen, H., “Childhood leukemias and other hematopoietic malignancies: interde-
   pendence between an infectious event and chromosomal modifications”, Int. J. Cancer
   2009; DOI 10.1002/ijc.24365.
zur Hausen, H., de Villiers, E. M., “Virus target cell conditioning model to explain some
   epidemiologic characteristics of childhood leukemias and lymphomas”, Int. J. Cancer
   2005; 115 (1): 1–5.
Portrait photo of Harald zur Hausen by photographer Ulla Montan.




                                                                                            243
