                              H   ENRIK   DAM


        The discovery of vitamin K, its biological
         functions and therapeutical application
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1946


The discovery of vitamin K arose from some studies on the cholesterol metab-
olism of chicks carried out during the years 1928-1930 in the Biochemical
Institute of the University of Copenhagen. It was then already known that
rats, mice, and dogs can synthesize cholesterol but some experiments had been
published which seemed to show that chicks could not thrive on a diet from
which the sterols had been removed by extraction. When these experiments
were published by Gardner and Lander in 1914, the role of fat-soluble vita-
mins was not very well recognized, and I therefore found it interesting to
repeat them using artificial, practically sterol-free diets to which vitamins A
and D were added in the form of sterol-free concentrates made from cod-
liver oil, or of small amounts of cod-liver oil of known cholesterol content.
Chicks were reared on such diets for different lengths of time from the day
of hatching, and the amount of cholesterol in their excretions and their body
was determined and compared with the cholesterol content in newly hatched
 chicks from the same litter. It was thereby found that a considerable part of
 the cholesterol which the newly hatched chick has taken over from the egg
 yolk disappears during the first 2 or 3 weeks, whereafter cholesterol is formed
 in increasing amount as the body weight increases. Chicks therefore are able
 to synthesize cholesterol, just as well as are rats, mice, and dogs, and they
 are also able to break it down.
    More interesting than this finding was, however, an unexpected symptom
 which showed up in some of the chicks which were kept on the diet for more
 than 2 or 3 weeks. They got hemorrhages under the skin, in muscles or other
 organs, and blood occasionally taken out for examination showed delayed
 coagulation.
    The lack or low content of cholesterol in the diet could not be the cause of
 the hemorrhages, since the experiments showed that chicks can synthesize
  cholesterol. Furthermore the hemorrhages also appeared in chicks which
  received a daily supplement of cholesterol.
    The low amount of fat in the diet could, apparently, also be ruled out as a


                                VITAMIN K                                     9




     Fig. 1 Chick with subcutaneous hemorrhage due to vitamin-K deficiency.

 cause of the symptom since it was found that linseed oil and triolein could
 not prevent its appearance. It did not seem likely either that the tendency to
 hemorrhage was a manifestation of scurvy, even though the artificial diet
 had not been supplemented with vitamin C. Other authors had already re-
 ported that chicks do not require vitamin C, and daily ingestion of lemon
juice to a few of the chicks also proved to be ineffective.
    In 1931 the hemorrhagic disease in chicks was described by a group of
 Canadian workers, McFarlane and others at the Ontario Agricultural Col-
 lege. They reared chicks on artificial diets in order to examine their require-
 ments of vitamins A and D, and they observed hemorrhages and delayed
 clotting of the blood when identification bands were inserted in the wings.
 The hemorrhages appeared when the diet contained ether-extracted fish or
 meat meal as the source of protein, but not with ordinary fish or meat meal.
 They did not follow these observations further.
    At this stage of the development I had to interrupt the work with chicks
 because of absence from my laboratory in Copenhagen until the fall of 1933.
    In the meantime Holst and Halbrook at the University of California had
 also observed the disease and found that it could be prevented by fresh
 cabbage. They drew the rather sweeping conclusion that the protective
 factor in the cabbage was vitamin C, and that previous claims to the


10                             1943 H.DAM

effect that chicks do not need this vitamin in their diet, were incorrect.
   Shortly thereafter, pure vitamin C became available, and when taking up
the work again, I could easily show that parenteral injections of ascorbic acid
failed to prevent the disease, thus excluding the possibility that the disease
had anything to do with a destruction of vitamin C in or poor absorption of
this vitamin from the intestine under the artificial dietary regime.
   The salt mixture could be varied considerably without influence on the
disease, and wheat germ oil was without protective effect, whereas a high
content of cereals and seeds in the diet prevented the symptom. It was there-
fore safe to announce that the new experimental disease was due to the lack
of a hitherto unrecognized factor in the diet. This was done in 1934.
   Then a number of animal organs and plant material were examined for
their ability to protect against the disease and it was found that green leaves
and hog liver were among the most potent sources. It was also found that the
factor was fat-soluble, and in 1935 it was characterized as a new fat-soluble
vitamin and given the designation vitamin K. The letter K was the first one
in the alphabet which had not, with more or less justification, been used to
designate other vitamins, and it also happened to be the first letter in the
word "koagulation" according to the Scandinavian and German spelling.
   The existence of vitamin K was promptly confirmed by Almquist and
Stokstad at the University of California, Berkeley.
   In the following few years an intense study was carried out in Copenhagen
in order to find out how the new vitamin acted on the blood clotting, how it
could be concentrated and whether it played any role in other animals and in
humans. In this work I was aided by several co-workers.
   Almquist and co-workers also continued their work at Berkeley, mainly
on the concentration of the factor.

The hemorrhages in vitamin K deficiency develop in this way that minute
vascular lesions caused by minor mechanical trauma are not closed by rapid
clotting, as is the case in normal animals. This causes a continuous oozing of
blood from the impaired region.
   According to the accepted theory the process of blood coagulation may be
separated into two stages.




                      Fig. 2. Theory of blood coagulation.


                                 VITAMIN K                                     11

 (1) The activation of a proenzyme, Prothrombin normally present in blood
 plasma, into an enzyme, Thrombin, by the action of Thromboplastin or Throm-
 bokinase as it is also called. Thromboplastin occurs in tissue cells and in blood
 platelets (thrombocytes) and comes in contact with plasma when tissue is in-
jured or when thrombocytes disintegrate through adherence to the surface of
a wound.
    Calcium ions are necessary for this part of the process: the thrombin for-
 mation.
 (2) The conversion of Fibrinogen into Fibrin by the action of thrombin.
    It is easy to show that it is prothrombin and no other component which is
 lacking when vitamin K has been withdrawn from the diet. It can also be
 shown that prothrombin precipitated from blood plasma of normal chicks
 can bring the coagulation power back to normal when added to blood from
 vitamin K deficient chicks. (This was shown by Dam, Schørnheyder and
 Tage-Hansen, 1936.)
    The use of chicks in the study of vitamin K deficiency has the advantage
 that these animals develop the disease very easily and it also simplifies the
 examination of the blood coagulation since in chicks and other birds throm-
 bocytes do not play any important role in furnishing the blood with throm-
 boplastin, as is the case in mammals.
    Thus it is easy to collect a sample of blood from an artery and centrifuge
 and treat it in different ways without risk of spontaneous clotting. The only
 prerequisite is that admixture of tissue juice is carefully avoided.
     In order to produce the disease in chicks it is necessary not only to give
 them a vitamin K free diet, but also to keep them under very clean condi-
 tions so that they do not soil their food and water with feces. Almquist and
  Stokstad were the first to report that vitamin K can be formed by putrefac-
 tion so that even when no vitamin K is present in the diet, the feces of chicks
 will contain it.
     The reason why these animals so easily suffer from the disease when
 deprived of vitamin K may be due to the fact that in chicks the large intestine
 is short as compared to that of rats and rabbits. Vitamin K formed by in-
 testinal bacteria is therefore not absorbed to any great extent in the chick.
     An exact estimation of the clotting power of the blood reveals the fact that
  the vitamin K deficiency disease begins to develop a few days after vitamin
 K has been taken away from the diet, but the full development, i.e. reduction
  of the prothrombin to about I per cent of the normal value, requires a longer
  time, say 14 to 28 days.


12                                  1943 H.DAM




Fig. 3. Relation of prothrombin to the ingestion of a test substance (dried spinach). The
                    substance was given on three days in succession.

   The prothrombin level seldom falls to zero and therefore coagulability is
not completely lost. It is sometimes found that hemorrhages in vitamin K
deficient chicks stop spontaneously and are resorbed without alteration of
the diet and without increase of the prothrombin content.
   Estimation of vitamin K can best be carried out by determining the pro-
thrombin content of blood before and after the ingestion of the substance to
be tested and running a similar experiment with a standard vitamin K prepa-
ration.
   I shall not bother you with a detailed account of the methods for pro-
thrombin determination but just mention a few principles which are or have
been in use.
1. The method of Smith, Warner, and Brinkhous. They first remove the fi-
brinogen from the plasma by addition of a very small amount of purified
thrombin. The excess of added thrombin disappears by itself on standing for
about 15 minutes. Then the prothrombin is converted into thrombin by the
addition of thromboplastin, and finally the activity of the thrombin is meas-
ured against a pure fibrinogen solution. This method is called a two-stage
method because the two stages of the coagulation process: thrombin forma-
tion and fibrin formation are separated. It is believed to be very accurate but
is more cumbersome than the usual clinical method.
2. Quick’s method. This is a one-stage method: you simply add a large
quantity of thromboplastin to the plasma or blood and observe the coagula-
tion time. Under these circumstances the coagulation time is largely deter-


                                 VITAMIN K                                   13
mined by the amount of prothrombin and is therefore called the prothrom-
bin time.
 3. One can also take advantage of the circumstance that within certain
limits low prothrombin can be compensated by using a higher concentration
of thromboplastin. This is the basis of the method which was originally used
in my laboratory in Copenhagen and was first introduced by Schønheyder.
   When these different methods are used for human or mammalian blood
it is necessary to prevent spontaneous clotting of the blood by thromboplastin
set free from the platelets. This is done by adding oxalate or citrate to the
blood thus removing the calcium, and again adding calcium when the con-
version of prothrombin into thrombin shall begin. It is also possible to make
use of heparin.
   The unit for vitamin K activity was originally defined in our laboratory as
that quantity which must be given daily per gram body weight of the chick
in three days in order to bring the prothrombin value up from a very low
level to the normal value. Now when a series of pure substances with high
vitamin K activity are available, it is a natural thing to define the unit by
means of one of these substances or to express the activity in terms of micro-
grams of one of the two natural K-vitamins which I shall mention later.
   In plants vitamin K is found principally in all kinds of green leaves; leaves
which have grown in the dark and therefore have not formed chlorophyll
are poor sources. Tomatoes are a good source, but otherwise most fruits
contain little vitamin K. Ripe cereals, beans and peas contain little. Carrots,
potatoes and beets are practically free from vitamin K. Saprophytes such as
mushrooms contain very little if any. Vitamin K is thus largely associated
with chlorophyll, but it does not necessarily disappear from a plant organ
when the chlorophyll disappears. It remains in tomatoes after they become
red and in leaves after they become yellow in the fall. Yeast does not contain
vitamin K but certain bacteria are very rich in this vitamin. B. coli is much
richer than acidophilus. Its function in these organisms is unknown, but in
the green plant it may have something to do with the photosynthetic process.
It occurs in the same elements of the plant cell as chlorophyll, xantophyll, and
carotene, namely in the chloroplasts. Vitamin K from green plants is called
K 1. Chemically it differs slightly from vitamin K formed by putrefaction
which is called K,. This difference was first noticed by Doisy and co-workers.
    In the animal organism vitamin K does not occur as abundantly as in plants.
In chickens small quantities only are deposited in the different organs or in
the eggs. The mammalian organ which hitherto has been found to contain


14                              1943 H.DAM

most vitamin K is the liver of pigs. Cow’s milk and human milk are rather
poor sources. Feces are rich in vitamin K formed by the putrefaction bacteria
in the large intestine.
    Before I proceed to a more detailed discussion of the mode of action of
vitamin K, it will be convenient to consider briefly the most essential features
of its chemistry.
    Vitamin K1 can be extracted by fat solvents from dried leaves, dried alfalfa
for instance. It can be concentrated by the removal of chlorophyll by selec-
tive adsorption, by chilling of an acetone solution of the remaining material,
whereby crystalline non-active substances are removed, by molecular distilla-
 tion at a pressure of one thousandth of a millimeter mercury and 115-140
degrees centigrade, whereby the vitamin passes up on the condenser, and
final purification by repeated chromatographic adsorption. The preparation
of pure vitamin K from green leaves was first reported by Dam, Karrer, and
co-workers in 1939. The pure vitamin is a yellow oil. It consists ofcarbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen, gives a characteristic color reaction with sodium
 ethylate and shows an absorption spectrum in the ultraviolet.
    The elucidation of its constitution was accomplished by Doisy and co-
workers, and by Fieser and co-workers.
    Doily and co-workers also prepared pure vitamin K2 from putrefied fish-
meal and showed that this substance was crystalline at room temperature. It
melts at 54 degrees centigrade and gives a color reaction and an ultraviolet
spectrum similar to that of K1.
    Both substances are derivatives of 1,4-naphthoquinone. They are easily de-
stroyed by saponification and by light.
    Vitamin K1 is 2-methyl-3-phytyl-1,4-naphthoquinone (phytyl is the rad-
ical of the high-molecular alcohol phytol which also forms a part of the
chlorophyll molecule). Vitamin K2 has a similar structure but the long side
chain is different from phytyl; it is longer and has more double bonds.
    The methyl is essential for activity, but not the phytyl group. In accordance
herewith 2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone has a high activity, as first reported
by Ansbacher and Fernholz, 1939. This substance is now official in the U.S.
Pharm. under the name of "Menadione". The hydroquinones of the natural
K-vitamins as well as of menadione are also active and so are their esters.
 Some of these (artificially prepared) esters are water soluble and useful for
parenteral injection. This applies to the diphosphate "Synkayvite" described
by Lee and Foster, for instance.
    Almquist and Klose reported, 1939, that the orange pigment Phthiocol,


                                  VITAMIN K                                          15




   Fig.4. Structural formulae of vitamins K1 and K2 according to E. A.Doisy et al.

of the tubercle bacillus has some vitamin-K activity. Phthiocol is 2-methyl-
3-hydroxy-1 ,4-naphthoquinone.
   We will now return to the mode of action of vitamin K in the animal
organism.
   When the vitamin is given intravenously, it is possible to study the effect
at different intervals from the moment of introduction into the blood stream.
It is thereby revealed that the action does not set in instantaneously but re-
quires a certain time for its development. If the prothrombin content is about
1 per cent of the normal value at the starting-point, it takes about 5 hours to
raise it to 50-100%, assuming that a sufficient amount of vitamin K is injected.
   The prothrombin level is normal on the day after injection, thereafter it
again returns to low values.
   When vitamin K is added in vitro to the blood from a K-free animal, no
improvement of the prothrombin content is observed, even when the vita-
min has remained in contact with the blood for many hours at body temper-
ature before the clotting power is tested. This observation suggests that the
action of the vitamin takes place within the tissue cells.
   Andrus, Lord, and Moore, 1939, excised the liver in normal dogs and
studied the prothrombin level with and without ingestion of vitamin K and
bile salts. They found that the blood prothrombin decreased in both in-
stances, indicating that the liver is necessary for the action of vitamin K.
    Several other observations also show that the liver is the organ concerned
with prothrombin formation. Thus Warner found (1938) that removal of 5
of the liver in rats resulted in a decrease of prothrombin. Intoxications in-


16                                   1943 H.DAM




Fig. 5. Prothrombin of chicks at different intervals after intravenous injection of vita-
 min-K, emulsions. (Short duration of experiment.) (From H.Dam & J.Glavind,
                          Z.Vitaminforsch., 10 (1940) 71.)

                           Ordinate: 100/R. Abscissa: hours.
            A  -A    0.05 unit K1 per g body weight (Chicken No. 6366).
             O -O    0.5 unit K1 per g body weight (Chicken No. 5511).
                     1    unit K per g body weight (Chicken No. 5509).
                                 1

                     5    units K1 per g body weight (Chicken No. 5681).
                    50    units K1 per g body weight (Chicken No. 6368).

volving severe damage to liver tissue also lead to a fall in prothrombin. This
is found, for instance, after the intake of chloroform (Smith, Warner, and
Brinkhous, 1937). Vitamin K does neither prevent nor cure hypoprothrom-
binemia of this origin.
   Further it is known that vitamin K does not alleviate the prothrombin
deficiency in patients whose liver parenchyma is severely damaged.
   On this stage I shall mention briefly the substance dicoumarol which is
formed in so-called "spoiled" sweet clover hay, and is now prepared syn-
thetically. Dicoumarol causes low prothrombin probably by reducing enor-
mously the prothrombinogenic action of vitamin K in the liver.
   As to the manner in which vitamin K affects the formation of prothrom-
bin, two alternatives may be considered. The first is whether vitamin K is a
constituent of prothrombin. Prothrombin is a protein. It accompanies the
 globulins in many precipitation reactions and does not dialyse. Therefore,
 and because of the time factor in the development of the action, vitamin K
 cannot be identical with prothrombin. But one could imagine that vitamin


                                     VITAMIN K




Fig. 6. Prothrombin of chicks at different intervals after intravenous injection of vita-
min-K, emulsions. (Longer duration of experiment. ) (From H. Dam & J. Glavind,
                           Z. Vitaminforsch., 10 (1940) 71.)
                        Ordinate: 100/R. Abcissa: hours.
           O   -O
                0.065 unit K1 per g body weight (Chicken No. 5276).
                0.11 unit K1 per g body weight (Chicken No. 6180).
                0.4 unit K1 per g body weight (Chicken No. 6166).
               2 . 5 units K1 per g body weight (Chicken No. 6207).
           A-A 50     units K1 per g body weight (Chicken No. 6368).
K might enter the prothrombin molecule as a prosthetic group, just as heme
does in hemoglobin. However, this is not very likely. If vitamin K were
present in the prothrombin molecule, one would expect prothrombin itself
to act as vitamin K, so that the per-oral ingestion of prothrombin would cure
the prothrombin deficiency of K-free animals. Experiments in which we
precipitated prothrombin from large amounts of normal hen’s plasma (at
pH 5.3) and gave it to small chicks living on a vitamin-K-free diet, did not
show any definite vitamin K activity. The most likely explanation therefore
is that vitamin K merely enables the liver cells to produce prothrombin.
   The mechanism of this action is unknown. It is possible that the redox prop-
erties of the quinone groups play a role in an enzyme system which has to
do with the formation of prothrombin.
   The presence of a vitamin-K-like substance in thrombin has been claimed
by Lyons (1945) but this is still unconfirmed.


15                              1943 H.DAM

   As to vitamin K deficiency in different species of animals the following may
be said: While the disease is most easily and regularly developed in chicks,
young geese, and ducks, by giving them a vitamin-K-free diet, some rats may
become just as ill as chicks, while in a group of rats many individuals may be
resistant for a very long period of time. This is probably due to individual
differences in the supply of vitamin K from bacteria in the large intestine.
Incorporation of a large amount of mineral oil in the diet of rats will mini-
mize the absorption of vitamin K and thus facilitate the development of the
deficiency disease.
   Rabbits have been observed to develop the disease only to a moderate
degree. These animals as well as rats eat feces directly from the anus dur-
ing the night and thereby partially protect themselves against vitamin K
deficiency.
   The absorption of vitamin K from the intestine is a point of considerable in-
terest. Several investigators have observed hemorrhages in dogs and rats in
which the flow of bile into the intestine had been cut off by ligature of the
bile duct or by a complete bile fistula through which the bile is made to flow
 steadily out of the body (Hawkins and Whipple, 1935; Vadsten, 1936;
Greaves and Schmidt, 1937). Hawkins and Brinkhous (1936) showed that the
 bleeding tendency of bile-fistula dogs is due to a low prothrombin level.
Greaves and Schmidt (1937) showed that the deficiency in blood coagulation
resulting from bile fistula in rats could be eliminated by giving these rats a
 diet very rich in vitamin K. Such experiments suggest the importance of bile
for the proper absorption of vitamin K. In my laboratory in Copenhagen we
have ligated the ductus choledochus in chicks and cured the resulting coagu-
lation deficiency by intravenous injection of vitamin K. It could be shown
 that the effect of a given dose of vitamin K is quantitatively the same whether
 the vitamin K deficiency had been developed by means of a K-free diet or by
ligature of the choledochus.
    The first time that a hemorrhagic disease in man was recognized as a K-avita-
 minosis was in connection with the cholemic bleeding tendency. This bleed-
 ing tendency formerly constituted a great danger in operations on patients
 suffering from obstructive jaundice, say from gall-stones or a tumor. This was
 found independently by Warner, Brinkhous, and Smith, by Butt, Snell, and
 Osterberg, and by Dam and Glavind in the early part of 1938. Since then, the
 practical utilization of vitamin K in surgery has been tried by a large number
 of surgeons and its value has been fully established. It is possible, by suitable
 vitamin K treatment to eliminate completely the risk of bleeding in such


                                 VITAMIN K                                    19
patients, provided, of course, that the case is not complicated by severe dam-
age of the liver so that vitamin K cannot act.
   The bile acids are the constituents of bile which aid in the absorption of all
fat-soluble substances. If the treatment of such patients is carried out with
natural fat-soluble vitamin K given by mouth, it is necessary to give bile
acids, say desoxycholic acid, simultaneously with the vitamin in order to
secure the absorption of vitamin K. It is easier to use one of the more or less
water-soluble vitamin K active substances, which can be absorbed without
bile or may be given by parenteral injection (10 mg vitamin K the day be-
fore operation, repetition several times during the first two weeks after the
operation).
   Overdosage with vitamin K does not afford the danger of a too high
coagulability of the blood since vitamin K cannot raise the larothrombin
content much above the normal value. The fact that vitamin K cannot act
when the liver parenchyma is sufficiently damaged, forms the basis of a liver
function test.
   A bleeding tendency due to reduced absorption of vitamin K from the in-
testine can also be observed in certain intestinal diseases, where profuse diar-
rhoea occurs and the intestinal mucosa is damaged. This has been found in
cases of sprue, for instance, where the absorption of fat is greatly diminished
(Hans Hult, 1939; Mayo Clinic, 1939), or in ulcerative colitis.
   The purely alimentary K-avitaminosis in man, that is, a lack of vitamin K
due to an insufficient amount of the vitamin in the diet, is a rare disease on
account of some vitamin K being supplied by intestinal bacteria. Experiments
with a completely K-free diet have not been made with humans, but a
moderate prothrombin deficiency which could be treated with vitamin K
has been reported in some patients living on a very restricted diet - coffee and
 doughnuts, for instance (Kark and Lozner, Harvard University and Boston
 City Hospital, 1939).
   A rather interesting occurrence of vitamin K deficiency is that of the nev-
 born infant.
   Low coagulation power of the blood of newborn babies was occasionally
reported many years ago. Whipple described such cases in 1912 and found
low prothrombin in a case of melaena neonatorum. The fact that a low pro-
 thrombin level which may be raised by treatment with vitamin K regularly
 occurs in newborn infants in the first week after birth was first recognized by
 Waddell and co-workers at Virginia University Hospital and independently
found by several other workers - also at the University of Copenhagen.


20                               1943 H.DAM

This finding has been further studied by a large number of investigators.
   Fig. 7 shows the coagulation time found by means of a particular micro-
method for 191 apparently normal and 21 hemorrhagic babies. The abscissa
represents days after birth. The points indicated by circles are the cases with
actual bleeding. There is a marked prolongation of the coagulation time
right at birth, but the prolonged clotting times are seen most frequently on
the third day. Thereafter they decline toward normal values.
   Fig. 8 shows the same over a longer time; the abscissa represents months.
   The frequency of cases with bleeding is said to be about I per cent of ail
newborn babies, but this represents only the number of cases with easily
detectable bleeding. A closer examination for hemorrhages reveals a much
higher figure.
   The bleeding may come from the umbilicus, the intestinal tract, the skin,
or the cerebral vessels.
   Treatment with vitamin K raises the prothrombin to approximately nor-
mal values in 24 hours (Fig. 9).




        Fig. 7. Ordinate: Prothrombin time in seconds. Abscissa: Age in days.
                    l normal infants; O infants with hemorrhages.
            (From P.Plum & H.Dam; Ugeskrift Læger, 102 (1940) 1029.)


                               VITAMIN K                                     21

   Fig. 11 shows the effect of giving parturient mothers vitamin K some hours
before delivery. Fig. 10 represents a similar experiment without vitamin K
treatment.
   The treatment does not result in completely normal prothrombin levels




           (From P.Plum & H.Dam, Ugeskrift Læger, 102 (1940) 1029.)




     Fig.9. Ordinate: Prothrombin time in seconds. Abscissa:   = 24 hours.
            (From P.Plum & H.Dam, Ugeskrift Læger, 102 (1940) 1029.)


22                1943                 H.DAM

in all cases, but the values lie always between 20 and 100 per cent of the
normal value for adults, that is, above the danger zone.
   How important the treatment with vitamin K is in preventing death




Fig. 10. Ordinate: Prothrombin time of the newborn in seconds. Abscissa: Age in days.
           (From E. H. Larsen & P. Plum, Ugeskrift Lager, 102 (1940) 1038.)




                                                                         Age in days

Fig. 11. Ordinate: Prothrombin time of the newborn in seconds. Abscissa: Age in days.
           (From E.H.Larsen & P.Plum, Ugeskrift Læger, 102 (1940) 1038.)


                                 VITAMIN K                                    23
among the newborn, during or shortly after birth, appears from statistics pre-
sented, for instance, by Beck in Brooklyn and Hellman at Johns Hopkins
Hospital, according to which the treatment of mothers has cut the total death
 rate among the newborn from 4.6 percent without treatment down to 1.8 per
 cent in the treated groups.
   We will now consider the cause of the lack of vitamin K in the infant.
   The investigations of Tage-Hansen and of Thordarson in Denmark have
shown that the mother’s prothrombin content is increased at the end of
pregnancy; the increase may amount to 50 to 100 per cent of the value
before pregnancy. This does not suggest that the mothers lack vitamin K.
Nevertheless, the newborn child is K-deficient. The simplest explanation of
this is that the placenta does not let natural fat-soluble vitamin K pass freely
into the circulation of the fetus.
   That the prothrombin level decreases further during the first days after
birth is not surprising because the supply of vitamin K is low. This is due to
the initial sterility of the large intestine and to the low intake of milk in the
first few days.
   The reason why the prothrombin level normally rises again in the course
 of some days is to be sought in the increasing bacterial flora together with the
increasing volume of the contents of the large intestine, whereby the bacteria
have more substrate to act upon.
   Milk itself contains only little vitamin K but the daily vitamin K require-
ment of the baby is very low (about 1 to 10 gamma per day), so that it may
be that the low vitamin K content of the milk nevertheless has some impor-
tance.
   There are some other fields where vitamin K therapy may become nec-
essary. Thus in treatment with sulfa drugs the intestinal flora may become
 so reduced that the supply of vitamin K from this source is largely cut off. If
the diet does not contain enough vitamin K, bleeding tendency may arise.
   Excessive and uncontrolled intake of mineral oil may interfere with the
absorption of vitamin K.
    Salicylate treatment may lead to a hypoprothrombinemia which can be
compensated by vitamin K. The mechanism of the action of salicylates on
the prothrombin level has not yet been elucidated.
   It has been claimed by some authors that hemoptysis in patients with pul-
monary tuberculosis is associated with low prothrombin and should be
treated with vitamin K. I believe that this is wrong. An investigation of this
question was undertaken in Copenhagen by some of my associates (Gyntel-


24                                1943 H.DAM

berg; Plum and Poulsen), and it was not possible to find either hypopro-
thrombinemia or any beneficial effect of vitamin K treatment of such cases.
It is also difficult to understand why there should be vitamin K deficiency in
this disease.
   A. Palladin (1945) has claimed that vitamin K acts in almost any kind of
hemorrhagic disease; but this claim seems not to be substantiated by con-
trolled experiments.
    Menadione, the official substitute for vitamin K has been reported to inter-
fere with the bacterial formation of lactic acid from carbohydrates, and it has
been suggested that it might counteract dental caries when incorporated in
chewing gum. Other quinones inhibit lactic acid formation by bacteria,
without having vitamin K activity. It therefore seems unlikely that vitamin
K as such should play any rôle in the prevention of caries.
    As matters stand at present it is safe to say that vitamin K therapy is rele-
vant against diseases which incur bleeding tendency due to low prothrombin
whereas its use against other hemorrhagic diseases is lacking a secure foun-
 dation.




The literature cited is listed in H. Dam: Vitamin K, its Chemistry and Physiology
Advan. Enzymol., 2 (1942) 285, and H. Dam: Medical Aspects of Vitamin K, Lancet, 63
(1943) 353. See also: A. Palladin, Am. Rev. Soviet Med., 2 (1945) 267, and R. N. Lyons,
Avstralian J. Exptl. Biol. Med. Sci., 23 (1945) 131.
