                          H   ERBERT   S . GA S S E R


                     Mammalian nerve fibers
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1945



In this review of the classification of nerve fibres the discussion will be re-
stricted to mammalian fibers, as the most recent work on the subject in my
laboratory has been turned in that direction. The later experiments were
performed against the background of the earlier experiences with frog and
mammalian nerve fibers, in the long and happy collaboration with Professor
Erlanger; and much of what I will have to say is based directly on findings in
our joint investigations. During the early period it became evident that the
action potential (i.e. the variation during activity of the potential difference
between two electrodes in contact with the nerve) was characterized not
only by the initial rapid negative deviation which was called the "spike", but
also by a subsequent sequence of low potential changes which were called the
"after-potentials". The latter in their standard form consist in a negative
after-potential followed by a positive after-potential. And, as we shall see
later, their existence has shown itself to be useful in fiber classification.
    Interest in mammalian fibers extended beyond the fibers as such to the
 consideration that any detailed analysis of central nervous system activity
 would involve a thorough knowledge of the properties of the units of which
it is constructed. And this consideration in turn imposed the condition that
the fibers must be studied in a state as close as possible to that obtaining in
their natural position in the body. The spike potential is not easily disturbed,
but the after-potentials are extremely labile. They are particularly sensitive to
 asphyxia, pH changes, ionic content of the surrounding medium, and to
 previous states of activity. The manner in which they are modified by the
 first three of these factors was beautifully worked out by Dr. Jörgen Leh-
 mann. In the routine technique the nerves were examined after as rapid
 transfer as possible to an atmosphere of 5% carbon dioxide in oxygen, fully
 saturated with water vapor, and maintained at body temperature.
    How well the natural conditions were imitated in the artificial environ-
 ment was a question that had to be answered. Previous experience had dem-
 onstrated that there is a correlation between two sets of measurements of
 nerve activity: the potential changes and the excitability changes. As the


                       MAMMALIAN NERVE FIBERS                                     35
potential cycle is made up of the spike, the negative after-potential, and the
positive after-potential, so what we have called the excitability cycle is made
up of the refractory period, the supernormal period, and the subnormal pe-
riod (described by H. T. Graham). And the temporal correspondence be-
tween the steps is excellent. It was argued that, if the potential cycle recorded
from the isolated nerve matched the excitability cycle measured on the nerve
with its natural perfusion of blood in the body, the technique was adequate.
Experiments of this sort were performed by Dr. Grundfest and the necessary
assurance was obtained.
   For designation of fiber groups it has been necessary to invent names. Only
a detailed history of the growth of information about the fiber constitution
of nerves, its shadows as well as its lights, could fully elucidate the evolution
of the terminology. The latter started before all the groups were known;
and it now survives with the minimum of adjustment necessary to cover the
extensions and clarifications. When all uncertainties will have been elim-
inated it may be desirable to invent a completely new terminology. At pres-
ent, however, it seems more practical to adhere to the system as it has grown
up, with the addition of definition where it is necessary for precision of
meaning.




Fig. 1. (Left): Spikes of unit axons of the A-, B-, and C-groups. (Right): Spikes and
      afterpotentials of the A-, B-, and C-groups in multiple fiber preparations.


36                             1944 H.S.GASSER

   Distinctly different sets of constants clearly point to the existence of three
main groups of fibers. These have been named A, B, and C. Differences have
been found as between both the spikes and the after-potentials. The dura-
tions of the spikes measured in presumably single axons may be given,
omitting random variations, as 0.45 msec for A, about 1.2 msec for B, and
about 2.0 msec for C (Fig. 1). For technical reasons the accuracy cannot be
as great for the very small fibers as for the larger ones.
   The after-potentials are smallest in the A-fibers; and in low-gain records
taken so that the spike may be seen at the same time, as in Fig. 1, they are
scarcely visible. There is a negative after-potential ending (in the saphenous
nerve of the cat) at about 12-15 msec, followed by a positive after-potential
ending at about 70 msec. At its maximum the latter has a value equivalent
to 0.1-0.4 per cent of the spike height. B-fibers normally have no visible
negative after-potential; though one may be developed by special proce-
dures. The potential curve as seen in the records drops promptly to a level of
positivity equivalent to 1.5-4 per cent of the spike height, and then returns
to the base line over a period of 100-300 msec. In the C-fibers of visceral
nerves there is again a well-developed negative after-potential. It lasts 50-80
msec, and is followed by a positive after-potential larger than in A-fibers
but not so large as in B-fibers. Its maximum is equivalent to about 1.5 per




              Fig. 2. Recovery of excitability after a single response.


                       MAMMALIAN NERVE FIBERS                                   37
  cent of the spike height and it is traceable for 1 to 2 seconds. About the after-
  potentials in C-fibers of dorsal root origin little is known.
     As would be expected from the configurations of the action potentials the
  excitability cycles are equally distinctive. After an absolutely refractory pe-
  riod commensurate with the spike duration the subsequent course of the
  excitability follows the curves set forth in Fig. 2. A return to normal through
  supernormality followed by subnormality holds for the A- and C-fibers,
  though on quite different time scales. In B-fibers without a negative after-
  potential refractoriness merges into subnormality without an intervening
  rise of excitability to or above the resting level.
     Thus far no mention has been made of the difference between nerve fibers
  that is the most obvious of them all: the velocity of conduction. Over the
  range of the three groups all velocities are known between 115 and 0.6 m.p.s.
  (meter per second). Within each of the three groups the variations are 115
  m.p.s. to about 10 m.p.s. for A, 15 m.p.s. to about 3 m.p.s. for B, and 2+
  m.p.s. to about 0.6 m.p.s. for C.
     The possibility that velocity is a function of fiber size was first proposed
  by Göthlin in 1907, long before means for testing it became available. With
the advent of the modern methods, the fruitfulness of the idea soon became
  apparent; but the answer to the central question - what function of fiber size
  - was not directly to be forthcoming. The conclusion from our first exper-
  iments, which as far as it goes is still deemed to be correct, namely that
  velocity is in approximately linear relationship with the fiber diameter, was
  derived from an analysis of what was later learned to be an incomplete
  listing of the fibers in the A-group. After the catalogue of the three groups
  was completed it became apparent that the system of analysis that had been
  used was not adequate to establish the conclusion as valid even for the A-
  group alone. To find what the source of the difficulty might be was the
  object of the more recent experiments.
     The approximate validity of the linear diameter-velocity relationship was
  shown by Hursh. He checked the maximal velocity with the size of the
  largest fiber in mammalian nerves selected to yield a wide range of maximal
  velocities. When these velocities, with values from 8 to 117 m.p.s., were
  plotted against the fiber diameters the points could best be connected by a
  calculated regression line with a slope of 6.
     Encouraged by this observation, the original method pursued with Dr.
  Erlanger, which is a very sensitive test of the merits of a postulated velocity-
  size relationship, was reexamined with the collaboration of Dr. Grundfest.


38                             1944   H.S.GASSER

 The method consists in mapping the distribution of the fiber sizes, plotting
 for a given conduction distance the potentials contributed by the fibers of
 each size at the times fitting the velocities assigned to them, summing the
 potentials, and comparing the result with the recorded action potential from
 the same nerve at the conduction distance in question. Because the method is
 sensitive it is exacting. An error of a fraction of a micron in the size of a small
 fiber will throw the potential contributed by the fiber badly out of position,
 on account of the rapid dispersion at low velocities. But it is the method that
 must be adopted if ability to predict the form of the action potential from
 the histology be set as the solution of the problem.
    In the revision of the procedure the principle innovation was to enter the
 potential contributed by each fiber as proportional to the diameter, inasmuch
 as the spike height of single axons had been shown to be proportional to the
 velocity (Erlanger and Blair for frog fibers, Zotterman and then ourselves
 for mammalian fibers), and the velocity in turn was known to be closely
 related to the diameter. In this way the necessary area was obtained for the
 late part of the action potential. With the innovation the action potentials
 constructed on the basis of a linear diameter-velocity relationship were now
 close enough in configuration to the recorded action potentials to justify the
slight shifting of the velocities necessary to cause the fibers to make their
 proper contributions to the potential form. An empirical velocity-diameter
 curve was thereby derived which had a characteristic serpentine deviation
 from linearity. The initial concavity (Fig. 3) was traced to the variation in
 the axon-diameter/fiber-diameter ratio to which attention had been called
 by Arnell; and it could in the greater part be removed by using the axon
 diameter as the reference parameter.
    On account of the identifiable features in its action potential a sensory
 nerve, as the saphenous, is the most favorable material for constructions of
 the action potential from the distribution of fiber sizes. The end result for
 one saphenous nerve of a cat is shown in Fig. 3, together with the fiber anal-
 ysis of the nerve, and the axon-diameter velocity curve, alongside of two
 similar curves from other nerves. As the correspondence between the derived
 and the recorded potential form is close, the interest centers on the correla-
 tion curves. Collectively their principal deviation from linearity is a slight
 concavity downwards; that is, on the basis of a strictly linear relationship the
 potentials would be dispersed slightly too rapidly. To define the curve more
 closely will require much greater refinements and a mathematical treatment
 of conduction. For practical purposes a surprisingly good result can be ob-


                        MAMMALIAN NERVE FIBERS




Fig. 3. In the upper-right graph the continuous line gives the action potential (saphen-
ous nerve of the cat) recorded at 6 cm of conduction; the dots give the summation
of the triangles. The location of the potentials according to fiber size is indicated under
the construction. In the curve in the inset there is reported the velocities assigned to the
fibers in terms of diameter. Curve 2 in the lower graph gives the relationship of the
assigned velocities in terms of the axon diameters. Curves 1 and 3 represent the results
of two other constructions of action potentials of the saphenous nerve: (1) cat; (3) rabbit.
                                 (Gasser and Grundfest.)

tained simply by using a constant times the axon diameter. And the approx-
imate action-potential form for human nerves can be derived with some
assurance from the published fiber analyses. As yet fiber analyses have not
been extended beyond the A-group. However, the variation in fiber sizes is
undoubtedly great enough to account for the range of velocities in the B-
and C-groups.
   In the foregoing presentation it was tacitly assumed that the A-fiber sys-
tem is homogeneous except for size. To question the assumption is to call up
for review the whole system of classification into three groups. The specific
 question is: within a group are there other variables than the size of the fibers.


40                               1944 H.S.GASSER

Outstanding among the properties to be considered is the spike duration.
Extrapolation back to zero time of the saphenous action potential reveals a
constancy of duration of the spikes of all components (Fig. 4); and the collec-
tion of single-fiber A spikes in Fig. 5 shows durations falling between 0.4
msec and 0.5 msec without a systematic difference with respect to velocity.




Fig. 4. Projection of the events in the action potential of the saphenous nerve of the
cat, as recorded at the conduction distances indicated in millimeters on the ordinates,
to zero conduction distance. The alpha and delta elevations subtend the same time on
                          the abscissas. (Gasser and Grundfest;)
Fig. 5. Unitary axon spikes in fibers with velocities indicated in Fig. 4 in m.p.s. (Gasser
            and Grundfest). A spike of a 90 m.p.s. fiber is shown in Fig. 1.


However, Hursh recorded definitely mounting spike durations in kitten A-
fibers conducting at less than 20 m.p.s. Furthermore there is an increase in
the period of absolute refractoriness in the fibers with slow conduction as
compared with the fibers of fast conduction, just as Blair and Erlanger found
in frog fibers. If these findings cannot be traced to technique or to fiber


                      MAMMALIAN NERVE FIBERS                                  41
dimensions then the possibility must be entertained of a continuous series
with change occurring abruptly only among the small fibers. Information
about variation in the B-group is too meagre to be introduced into the
argument.
   In a continuous series the inference would be that all properties would be
tied to the velocity; and the inference cannot be supported. Overlapping is
described of velocities associated in one case with A properties, and in the
other cases with B properties. The fibers in both groups are myelinated, and
there is no method of differentiating them histologically. Moreover, the sizes
of fibers known to give B potentials in visceral nerves correspond to the
smallest sizes in the saphenous nerve which are A. No transitions have been
seen in the after-potential configuration and the accompanying excitability
cycle. The after-potentials in the fibers forming the last elevation in the A
series conform to the group type, while the B after-potentials are quite dif-
ferent. For the refractory period the abruptness of transition was vividly
shown by Bishop and Heinbecker in visceral nerves, where proximity in
velocities can cause fibers of the two groups to contribute to the same el-
evation. The separateness of the contributions could readily be demonstrated
by the refractory periods. Indeed, this observation was one of their reasons
for their original differentiation of B from an elevation in A-fibers now
known as delta. In a similar situation the change in the positive after-potential
has been shown by Grundfest.
    C-fibers stand apart not only because of the constants that have been de-
scribed but also on account of their unmyelinated structure and their relative
resistance to asphyxia, which holds in spite of their small size. The B-fibers
most adjacent in size and velocity are more sensitive to asphyxia than are A-
fibers. B is more closely related to A than to C. But the balance of evidence
 is in favor of regarding them as a group separate from A rather than a focal
point of interest in a continuous transition. Consequently the original clas-
sification into A-, B-, and C-groups still seems to be the most practical one.
But one should not lose sight of the fact that further classification on the basis
 of criteria not here considered is on the way. These forms of differentiation
 have not been included in my own experiments.
    In the A-group another terminology has grown up from the designation
 of the features of the frog action potential by Greek letters at the time when
 all the known fibers were within the compass of what is now known as the
A-group. As extended to mammalian nerves it has little significance beyond
 convenience of designation of the elevations, which are very constant in their


42                             1944 H.S.GASSER

appearance in the action potentials of a given nerve. The elevations do not
represent blocks of fibers consistently recognizable as such from nerve to
nerve: and there is but little correlation of them with function. Somatic sen-
sory, motor, and mixed nerves regularly have a first high elevation called
alpha. But even this does not in each case represent the same fibers, as can be
seen in Fig. 6 which is prepared from records of the action potentials of the
saphenous and peroneal nerves of the cat obtained under the same conditions
at 4 cm of conduction. The two alpha elevations end at about the same time;
but the one from the peroneal nerve starts earlier, with a maximal velocity
of 101 m.p.s., as compared with 85 m.p.s. for the saphenous nerve, because
of the inclusion in the former of larger motor and afferent fibers to muscle.
While in the saphenous nerve there follow after alpha, three other elevations
that have been named beta, gamma, and delta, they cannot be identified in
the peroneal nerve except for a delta difficult to discern the amplification




                           P




Fig. 6. Action potentials of the saphenous and perineal nerves from the same cat,
recorded under identical conditions. Conduction distance, 4 cm. Upper peroneal rec-
                 ord like the lower except for greater amplification.


                      MAMMALIAN NERVE FIBERS                                 43
used for recording. An elevation in the delta position can be identified in all
somatic nerves. It is prominent in sensory nerves; and nerves to muscle con-
tain both sensory and motor nerves with this velocity.
   When the prominent delta elevation in sensory nerves was first described
it was confused with B, largely because there is a B in a similar position in
the action potentials of frog nerves; and in the earlier publications it was
labelled B. After Bishop and Heinbecker, through studies of visceral nerves,
identified a B analogous to the frog B, and showed the saphenous elevation
was of dorsal root origin, the B designation had to be abandoned. The el-
evation is now called delta. In records of the dorsal roots, where all the fibers
are involved, no elevation of like prominence appears. Nevertheless the pres-
ence of delta fibers in the roots is readily demonstrable. When the roots are
stimulated the action potential pattern appearing in a-sensory nerve is typ-
ically that obtained on stimulation of the nerve itself. Most probably the
explanation of the appearance is in the selection of fibers for distribution in
the skin. In sensory nerves about one-half of the medullated fibers are in-
volved in and about the delta peak. The importance of the peak is out of
proportion to its height.
    If B-fibers occur at all in mammalian somatic nerves there can be but few
of them. No elevation recognizable as B has been seen in the action potential
of any nerve, and the evidence for their presence is limited to the irregular
appearance of a potential in the B position when the gray rami are stim-
 ulated. The subject needs a thoroughgoing reinvestigation, with proof that
the potentials observed really belong to B-fibers. In visceral nerves the B
potential, as it is seen in most records, appears as a single elevation. At long
distances of conduction, Bishop and Hembecker, and Eccles, find that it
breaks up into closely approximated peaks with components relaying with
 different sets of postganglionic fibers.
    The exact configuration of the C elevation has been but little examined.
 Among the somatic nerves the elevation appears most prominently in the
sensory nerves to the skin. Compared with the C elevation in muscle nerves
it is found to be of the order of ten times as high, as related to the preceding
 A elevation. Ranson and Davenport found after sympathectomy a ratio of
 the unmyelinated to the myelinated fibers of 3.7 to 1 in the saphenous nerve
 of the cat as opposed to a ratio of 0.4 to 1 in a muscle nerve. It is this dif-
 ference, uncompensated by the higher proportionality in the muscle nerves
 of unmyelinated fibers of sympathetic origin to those of dorsal root origin,
 that must account for the difference between the action potential heights.


44                                1944 H.S.GASSER

   The recording of the C complex is fraught with technical difficulties of a
degree out of all proportion to those holding for the A complex. There is no
way of getting a monophasic lead. Killing the nerve between the leads does
not remove the second phase. It merely obliterates its features, and makes
the locus of origin of the potential uncertain. In the face of this difficulty the
best procedure, as long as one cannot eliminate the second phase, has been
to use it. A convenient method is, for example, to set the two leads at two
and four centimeters of conduction. The beginning of the potential distribu-
tion is obtained from the first lead and the end from the second lead. Then
by making the necessary corrections for conduction, the form of the whole




Diphasic leads at 2 and 4 cm conduction distances. The dots aid the identification of
the events in the second phase with those in the first. (Below) : Attempt at derivation of
       the monophasic form of the action potential after 4 cm of conduction.


                      MAMMALIAN NERVE FIBERS                                    45
picture can be estimated with little error as to time, but with considerable
uncertainty as to the magnitude of the components.
   In some recent estimations of this sort the observations have yielded poten-
tial pictures which, though they lack the machine-like reproducibility of the
A potential, still are consistently in agreement in having a basic pattern with
only secondary variations. A fair sample is shown in Fig. 7. There is a large
first component made up of action potentials conducted at velocities be-
tween 2 m.p.s. and 1 m.p.s., and this is followed by a smaller one with veloc-
ities between 0.9 m.p.s. and 0.6 m.p.s. The first component regularly divides
at conduction distances long enough to permit the dispersion into two el-
evations with the second one starting at about 1.5 m.p.s. These three eleva-
tions are also seen in the action potentials of the dorsal roots. In the latter the
C potential is much smaller than it is in the skin nerves as the ratio of the
unmyehnated fibers to myelinated fibers is smaller (1.2-2.1 to 1, according
to Ranson and Davenport), and the centrally directed unmyelinated branches
of the dorsal root ganglion cells are finer than the peripherally directed ones.
The fineness shows itself physiologically in that the velocities must be mul-
tiplied by a factor of about 1.7 to obtain the velocities of the corresponding
components in peripheral nerves.
   There is little danger of overestimating the importance of the C-fibers in
sensory nerves. As compared with A-fibers, they are far more numerous,
and there is a similar variation in the relative velocities. Equivalent variation
in A-fibers would necessitate inclusion of the velocities from 15 to 60 m.p.s.;
and this range is believed to take care of the mediation of a great deal of the
detailed information about peripheral states. Whatever may be the proper
interpretation of the groupings in the A-fibers, the problem appears to be
repeated in the C-fibers.
   Progress in the determination of the participation of sets of fibers in the
carrying of sensory messages is retarded for want of a directly objective
method. Much of the present information is precariously based on compar-
isons of what observers say they feel with neural events recorded under anal-
ogous conditions in animals. My principal contact with the functional prob-
lem has been to view the observations of others in relation to the order in
which fibers are blocked by cocaine and by asphyxia. Cocaine blocks the C-
fibers first, then the A-fibers in the order of their size, beginning with the
 smallest ones. The precision of the order is not perfect, however. Asphyxia,
on the contrary, blocks the A-fibers first, with the order within the group
the same as that holding for cocaine, while the C-fibers are the most resist-


46                            1944 H.S.GASSER

ant. A brief account will now be given of how the reports of observers
working with these agents on their own nerves appear from this viewpoint.
   One finding stands out in bold outline, and the conclusion from it is amply
supported otherwise: pain messages are carried both by A- and C-fibers.
The part of the A-group most often associated with pain is the delta el-
evation because of several lines of converging evidence: reflexes evoked
through sensory nerves stimulated under oscillographic control, histological
findings as notably Sjoqvist’s analysis of the trigeminal bulbospinal tract,
stimulation of human nerves with shocks of controlled strength (Bishop,
Heinbecker, and O’Leary), and the single axon potentials set up by stimuli
that would be painful to man (Adrian, Zotterman). With this point in mind
let us now examine the order in which deficits in sensation appear following
the asphyxiation of nerves under a sphygmomanomegr cuff (Zotterman,
Lewis, and Pochin). The first effect is numbness and with it come in rapid
succession a rise in threshold of stimulation with the von Frey hair, and
impairment of the responses to stimulation of the temperature spots and of
fast pain. When a sensory nerve, the action potential of which is being re-
corded, is similarly asphyxiated the fibers in the delta elevation are the first
to be blocked; and the block comes at a similar time. Hence, there is strong
reason for assuming that all four modalities may be represented in the delta
complex.
   Due weight is not generally given to the experimental support for the
representation of touch among the small fibers. Interpretation to this effect
follows directly from the findings in asphyxia, and the view is supported by
the single fiber delta spikes recorded by Adrian and by Zotterman following
stimuli for light touch. To entertain this view in no way negates the involve-
ment of large fibers also well supported by single fiber experiments, and by
 the fact that touch is the last sensation to be blocked by cocaine.
   Experiments with cocaine theoretically reveal the relative upper limits of
the velocities at which the several modalities are conducted. They tell nothing
about the absolute position of the limits. The same relative limits should be
revealed in the asphyxia experiments; but, as they do not appear even when
the survival of the C-fibers is discounted, the subject will be passed over.
There remain, however, two inferences that may be worthy of mention.
 One is that, inherent in the findings in both the asphyxia and the cocaine
 experiments, there is a warning against setting too low an upper velocity
limit to the conduction of pain impulses. The other is that it is difficult to
 account for the long survival of the temperature senses in asphyxia without


                      MAMMALIAN NERVE FIBERS                                  47
postulating the mediation of these modalities by C-fibers. Goldscheider de-
scribed double cold and double warm, but the phenomenon is nowhere
nearly as vivid as that of double pain. In my own experience double cold
seemed to be recognizable. It would be valuable to have the reports of more
observers.
   From the foregoing review it appears that attempts to identify modalities
with definite segments of the velocity spectrum have not been very success-
ful. We are left faced with evidence for conduction of single modalities at
very different velocities, and inclusion of a number of modalities within a
narrow band of fibers.
   What then is the significance of the wide velocity range? Is it timing?
Reflection on this, the most obvious interpretation of all, causes it to loom
progressively larger. One need but consider the speed with which posture is
controlled in preparation for the reception of oncoming detailed informa-
tion and the adjustment of fine movement; or again the mode of transmis-
sion of excitation through any central ganglion. The more one sees of the
exquisite precision with which events take place in the central nervous sys-
 tem the more one is impressed by it. The more the idea of timing grows in
meaning content the more it becomes a directive for future exploration. Dif-
 ferential axonal velocities must play their part in the mechanism. Be this their
only contribution to integration, it is still a large one.
