                            H   U G O   THEORELL


The nature and mode of action of oxidation enzymes
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1955



Practically all chemical reactions in living nature are started and directed in
their course by enzymes. This being the case, Man has of course since time
immemorial seen examples of what we now call enzymatic reactions, e.g.
fermentation and decay. It would thus be possible to trace the history of
enzymes back to the ancient Greeks, or still further for that matter. But it
would be rather pointless, since to observe a phenomenon is not the same
thing as to explain it. It is more correct to say that our knowledge of en-
 zymes is essentially a product of twentieth-century research.
    Enzymes are a sort of catalyzers, and in this connection a reminder of the
 origin of the concept catalysis may be in place. It was put forward by a
school fellow of mine from Linköping High School. I never had the honour
 of meeting him, as he was 124 years older than I. It was one of the founders
 of Karolinska Institutet and the Swedish Medical Society, Jöns Jacob Berze-
 lius, who in 1835. wrote in his yearbook:
     "This is a new force producing chemical activity and belonging as well to
 inorganic as organic nature, a force which is undoubtedly more widespread
 than we have hitherto imagined, and whose nature is still concealed from us.
 When I call it a new force I do not thereby mean to say that it is a capacity
 independent of the electrochemical relations of matter, on the contrary, I
 cannot but presume it to be a particular manifestation of these, but as long
 as we cannot understand their reciprocal connections it will facilitate our
 researches to regard it for the time being as an independent force, just as it
 will facilitate our discussion thereof if it be given a name of its own. I shall
 therefore, to use a derivation well-known in chemistry, call it the catalytic
force of bodies, decomposition through this force catalysis, just as with the
 term analysis we describe the separation of the constituent parts of bodies
 by means of ordinary chemical affinity. The catalytic force appears actually
 to consist therein that through their mere presence, and not through their
  affinity, bodies are able to arouse affinities which at this temperature are
 slumbering..."
     Enzymes are the catalyzers of the biological world, and Berzelius’ descrip-


                          OXIDATION        ENZYMES                           481
 tion of catalytic force is surprisingly far-sighted - one is tempted to say
 prophetic. Especially is one struck by his expressly refusing to believe that
 other than chemical forces are here in play; no, if one could once understand
 the mechanism it would doubtless prove that the forces of ordinary chem-
 istry would suffice to explain also these as yet mysterious reactions.
     Almost a hundred years were to pass before it became clear that Berzelius
 had been right. The year 1926 was a memorable one. The German chemist
 Richard Willstitter gave a lecture then in Deutsche Chemische Gesellschaft,
 in which he summarized the experiences gained in his attempts over many
 years to produce pure enzymes. Through various adsorption methods he had
 removed more and more of the impurities in some enzymes; especially had
 he worked with a so-called peroxidase, an enzyme of general occurrence in
 the vegetable kingdom. Finally, there was so little substance left that on
  ordinary analysis for e.g. protein, sugar, or iron, the solutions gave negative
  results. But the "catalytic" enzyme effect was still there. Willstätter drew the
  conclusion that the enzymes could contain neither protein, carbohydrate nor
  iron and that they did not belong to any known class of chemical substances
  at all, and he was inclined to believe that the effects of the enzymes derived
from a new natural force, thus taking the view that 90 years earlier Berzelius
  had dismissed as improbable.
     That same year, through an irony of fate, the American researcher J. B.
  Sumner published a work in which he claimed to have crystallized in pure
  form an enzyme, urease, from "jack-beans". It splits urea into carbon di-
  oxide and ammonia. Sumner had got his crystals in rather considerable quan-
  tities with the help of much simpler methods than those applied by Will-
  stätter in purification experiments on other enzymes. Sumner´s crystals
  consisted of colourless protein. In the ensuing years J. H. Northrop and his
  collaborators crystallized out a further three enzyme preparations, pepsin,
  trypsin, and chymotrypsin, like urease, hydrolytic enzymes that split linkages
  by introducing water.
      If these discoveries had been undisputed from the outset it would probably
   not have been 20 years before Sumner, together with Northrop and Stanley,
   received a Nobel Prize. But it was not so easy to show that the beautiful
   protein crystals really were the enzymes themselves and not merely an in-
   active vehicle for the actual enzymes. Both Sumner and Northrop adduced
   many probable proofs that what they had produced really were pure en-
   zymes, but no absolutely conclusive experiment could be brought forward,
   and as a matter of fact this was at that time probably not possible, for the


482                           1955 H.THEORELL

 simple reason that their preparations appeared to consist of only colourless
 protein. At that time, and even today, for that matter, the methods of
 separation and analysis were scarcely sufficiently refined definitely to exclude
 the occurrence of small quantities of impurities in a protein preparation.
 From many quarters, accordingly, objections were raised to Sumner’s and
 Northrop’s results, and for obvious reasons especially the Willstatter school
 made itself heard in this connection.




  When in 1933 I went on a Rockefeller fellowship to Otto Warburg’s insti-
  tute in Berlin, Warburg and Christian had in the previous year produced
  a yellow-coloured preparation of an oxidation enzyme from yeast. It was
  obviously very impure in respect of the high-molecular constituent parts,
  which consisted chiefly of polysaccharides. The yellow colour was of partic-
  ular interest: it faded away on reduction and returned on oxidation with e.g.
  oxygen, so that it was evident that the yellow pigment had to do with the
  actual enzymatic process of oxido-reduction. It was possible to free the yel-
low pigment from the high-molecular carrier substance, whose nature was
  still unknown, for example by treatment with acid methyl alcohol, where-
  upon the enzyme effect disappeared. Through simultaneous works by War-
   burg in Berlin, Kuhn in Heidelberg and Karrer in Zurich the constitution of
   the yellow pigment (lactoflavin, later riboflavin or vitamin B,) was deter-
   mined.
      It was here for the first time possible to localize the enzymatic effect to a
   definite atomic constellation: hydrogen freed from the substrate (hexose
   monophosphate) is, with the aid of a special enzyme system (TPN-Zwischen-
   ferment) whose nature was elucidated somewhat later, placed on the nitro-
   gen atoms of the flavin (1) and (10), giving rise to the colourless leucoflavin.
   This is reoxidized by oxygen, hydrogen peroxide being formed, and may
   afterwards be reduced again, and so forth. This cyclic process then continues
   until the entire amount of substrate has been deprived of two hydrogen
   atoms and been transformed into phosphogluconic acid; and a corresponding
   amount of hydrogen peroxide has been formed. At the end of the process the
   yellow enzyme is still there in unchanged form, and has thus apparently, as
   Berzelius expressed himself, aroused a chemical affinity through its mere
   presence.


                         OXIDATION ENZYMES                                 483




                                    Fig.1.

   But there now remained some extremely important questions to elu-
cidate: why was the flavin in free form completely inactive, but active when
it was anchored to a high-molecular carrier? And what was this carrier? In
order to find this out I decided to try to purify the yellow enzyme, using for
the purpose electrophoretic methods worked out by myself. At this time
Tiselius had not yet worked out his technically more perfected electropho-
retic methods, but my own proved surprisingly useful.
   The polysaccharides, which constituted 80-90% of the entire weight, were
completely removed, together with some inactive colourless proteins. After
fractionated precipitations with ammonium sulphate I produced a crystalline
preparation which on ultracentrifuging and electrophoresis appeared ho-
mogeneous. The enzyme was a protein with the molecular weight 75,000
and strongly yellow-coloured by the flavin part. The result of the flavin
analysis was 1 mol flavin per 1 mol protein. With dialysis against diluted
hydrochloric acid at low temperature the yellow pigment was separated
from the protein, which then became colourless. In the enzyme test the flavin
part and the protein separately were inactive, but if the flavin part and the
protein were mixed at approximately neutral reaction the enzyme effect
returned, and the original effect came back when one mixed them in the
molecular proportions 1 : 1. That in this connection a combination between
the pigment and the protein came about was obvious, moreover, for other
reasons: the green-yellow colour of the flavin part changed to pure yellow,
 and its strong. yellow fluorescence disappeared with linking to the protein.
   Developments in the flavin field were at this time (1934), to say the least,


484                          1955 H.THEORELL

hectic. For a while Richard Kuhn believed he was able to resynthesize the
yellow ferment by bringing together lactoflavin and my colourless protein
component; when his work was published, however, we were already aware
in Berlin that his assumption was not correct. The point was that in my
electrophoretic experiments lactoflavin behaved as a neutral body, while the
pigment part separated from the yellow enzyme moved rapidly towards the
anode and was thus an acid. An analysis for phosphorus showed 1 P per mol
flavin, and when after a time (1934) I succeeded in isolating the natural pig-
ment component this proved to be a lactoflavin phosphoric acid ester, thus a
kind of nucleotide, and it was obvious that the phosphoric acid served to
link the pigment part to the protein.
   I will now show some simple experiments with the yellow enzyme, its
coloured part, which we now generally refer to as FMN (flavin mononucleo-
tide), and the colourless enzyme protein.

Exp. 1. A lantern-slide apparatus is furnished with two cuvette-holders and
mirrors, so that a correctly presented image of the cuvettes may be projected
on a white screen. A cuvette with a solution of yellow enzyme and another
 with FMN of the same molar concentration are shown simultaneously. The
ferment-solution is pure yellow, the FMN-solution green-yellow, owing to
 the 1st that the light-absorption band in the blue of the free FMN is dis-
 placed somewhat in the long-wave direction on being linked with the pro-
 tein component. A reducing agent (Na2S 2O 4) is now added to the one cu-
 vette, it is indifferent which. The colour disappears in consequence of the
 formation of leucoflavin. Oxygen-gas is bubbled through the solution: the
 colour comes back as soon as the excess of reducing agent has been consumed.
 The experiment demonstrates the reaction cycle of the yellow enzyme:
 reduction through hydrogen from the substrate side, reoxidation with oxy-
 gen-gas.
Exp. 2. A flask containing FMN-solution so diluted that its yellow colour is
 not descernible to the eye is placed on a lamp giving long-wave ultraviolet
 light. The solution gives a strong, yellow fluorescence which disappears on
 reduction and returns on bubbling with oxygen-gas.
 Exp. 3. Two flasks are placed on the fluorescence lamp. The one contains a
 diluted solution of the free protein in phosphate buffer (pH 7), the other
 phosphate buffer alone. An equal amount of FMN-solution is dripped into
 each flask. In the flask with protein the fluorescence is at once extinguished,
 but in the flask with buffer-solution alone it remains. The experiment


                         OXIDATION       ENZYMES                          485
demonstrates the resynthesis of yellow enzyme, and since the fluorescence is
extinguished by the protein, one may draw the conclusion that some group
in the protein is in this connection linked to the imino-group NH(3) of the
flavin, which according to Kuhn must be free for the fluorescence to appear.

The significance of these investigations on the yellow enzyme may be sum-
marized as follows.
1. The reversible splitting of the yellow enzyme to apo-enzyme + coen-
zyme in the simple molecular relation 1 : 1 proved that we had here to do
with a pure enzyme; the experiments would have been incomprehensible if
the enzyme itself had been only an impurity.
2. This enzyme was thus demonstrably a protein. In the sequel all the en-
zymes which have been isolated have proved to be proteins.
3. The first coenzyme, FMN, was isolated and found to be a vitamin phos-
phoric acid ester. This has since proved to be something occurring widely in
nature: the vitamins nicotinic acid amide, thiamine and pyridoxine form in
an analogous way nucleotide-like coenzymes, which like the nucleic acids
themselves combine reversibly with proteins.
   During the past 20 years a large number of flavoproteins with various
enzyme effects have been produced. Instead of FMN many of them contain
a dinucleotide, FAD, which consists of FMN + adenylic acid.
   During the last few years technical advances have made it possible to at-
tempt a chemical definition of the way in which the linkage between coen-
zyme and enzyme takes place. The now so-called "old" yellow ferment has
in this connection once more proved to be an excellent object. We con-
structed a very sensitive apparatus to record changes in the intensity of the
fluorescence, and were thus able to follow the rapidity with which the flu-
 orescence diminishes when FMN and protein are combined, or increases
 when they are split. Under suitable conditions the speed of combination is
very high. Thanks to the great sensitivity of the fluorescent method my
Norwegian collaborator Agnar Nygaard and I were able to make accurate
determinations of the speed-constant simply by working in extremely di-
luted solutions, where the speed of combination is low because an FMN-
molecule so seldom happens to collide with a protein-molecule.
   We now determined the reaction speeds under different conditions: we
varied the degree of acidity, ionic milieu and temperature, and we treated
 the protein with a large number of different reagents which affect in a known
way different groups in proteins. In this way we succeeded with a rather high


486                          1955 H.THEORELL

degree of certainty in ascertaining that phosphoric acid in FMN is linked to
primary amino-groups in the protein, and the imino-group (3) in FMN to
the phenolic hydroxyl group in a tyrosine residue, whereby the fluorescence
is extinguished.
   We still do not quite understand how through its linkage to the coenzyme
the enzyme-protein "activates" the latter to a rapid absorption and giving off
of hydrogen. But something we do know. The so-called oxido-reduction
potential of the enzyme is in any case of great importance, and it is deter-
mined by a simple relation to the dissociation constants for the oxidized and
for the reduced coenzyme-enzyme complex. The dissociation constants are
in their turn functions of the velocity constants for the combination between
coenzyme and enzyme and for the reverse process, and these velocity con-
stants we have been able to determine both in the yellow ferment and in a
number of enzyme systems. Without going into any details I may mention
that the linkage of coenzyme to enzyme was found to have surprisingly big
effects upon the potential of the former. In a number of cases the effect is
strongly dependent upon variations in the salt content. Here we may suspect
physiologically significant relations.




I may now mention something concerning our work on the alcohol dehy-
drogenases, though I will here be relatively brief, as they are not well suited
for experimental demonstrations in this lecture.
   These enzyme systems, like the flavoproteins, consist of colourless protein
in reversible combination with a coenzyme, which in the present case is the
diphosphopyridinenucleotide, earlier generally referred to as cozymase, now
"DPN", which has been elucidated in works by Hans von Euler, Karl Myr-
back, Ragnar Nilsson and others in Stockholm, and by Otto Warburg and
Walter Christian in Berlin. It contains as active atomic group nicotinic acid
amide, which analogously with the flavin in the yellow enzyme functions by
taking up hydrogen from one direction and giving it off in another. It con-
tains, further, ribose, phosphoric acid and adenine.
   Alcohol dehydrogenases occur in both the animal and the vegetable king-
doms, e.g. in liver, in yeast, and in peas. They are colourless proteins which
together with DPN may either oxidize alcohol to aldehyde, as occurs chiefly
in the liver, or conversely reduce aldehyde to alcohol, as occurs in yeast.


                          OXIDATION        ENZYMES                            487
   The yeast enzyme was crystallized by Negelein & Wulf (1936) in War-
burg’s institute, the liver enzyme (from horse liver) by Bonnichsen & Was-
sén at our institute in Stockholm in 1948.
   These two enzymes have come to play a certain general rôle in biochem-
istry on account of the fact that it has been possible to investigate their kinet-
ics more accurately than is the case with other enzyme systems. The liver
enzyme especially, we have on repeated occasions studied with particular




thoroughness, since especially favourable experimental conditions here pre-
sented themselves. For all reactions with DPN-system it is possible to follow
the reaction DPN + + 2 H        DPNH + H+ spectrophotometrically, since
DPNH has an absorption-band in the more long-wave ultraviolet region, at
340       and thousands of such experiments have been performed all over
the world. A couple of years ago, moreover, we began to apply our fluores-
cence method, which is based on the fact that DPNH but not DPN fluo-
resces, even if considerably more weakly than the flavins. Asregards the liver
enzyme there is a further effect, which proved extremely useful for certain
spectrophotometrical determinations of reaction speeds; together with Bon-
nichsen I found in 1950 that the 340     band of the reduced coenzyme was
displaced, on combination with liver alcohol dehydrogenase, to 325        and
together with Britton Chance we were thus able with the help of his ex-
tremely refined rapid spectrophotometric methods to determine the velocity
constant for this very rapid reaction.
   I shall not go into further details, but simply point out that extremely
complicated reactions result from the fact that we are here dealing with a
 three-body problem containing the enzyme protein, the coenzyme and the


488                          1955 H.THEORELL

substrate, where, furthermore, both the coenzyme and the substrate occur in
both oxidized and reduced forms.
   A more or less complete system may be written thus that only after g steps
does the enzyme become free to begin a new cycle; the net result is that the
alcohol has given two of its hydrogen atoms to the coenzyme. Even this
simplified schema means that one must determine 18 rate constants, two
for each part-reaction, which is of course a formidable task. We have suc-
ceeded, however, in determining some of them as regards the yeast enzyme.
   The kinetics of the liver enzyme is quite other than that of the yeast en-
zyme. Here we have to do with a simpler reaction process which can be ex-
pressed with only three equations and six velocity constants.
    We have here been able to determine all the six constants at different
degrees of acidity and with different salt concentrations, so that the reaction
velocities of this enzyme system are probably at present the best known of
 all (Theorell, Bonnichsen, Chance, Nygaard).
    The differences between the yeast and liver enzymes indicated here, ex-
plain why the yeast enzyme produces alcohol from aldehyde, while the liver
enzyme does the contrary.
    It is a curious whim of nature that the same coenzyme which in the yeast
 makes alcohol by attaching hydrogen to aldehyde also occurs in the liver to
 remove from alcohol the same hydrogen, so that the alcohol becomes alde-
 hyde again, which is then oxidized further.
    When we had studied the kinetics of the alcohol dehydrogenases it was
 a simple matter to use these to determine alcohol quantitatively, e.g. in blood
 samples. This so-called "ADH"-method is about as accurate as Widmark’s
 method, only more sensitive and above all practically specific for ethyl al-
 cohol. It is now legally introduced in forensic chemical practice in Sweden
 and in West Germany.




Even before going to Berlin in 1933 I had become interested in a close relative
of hemoglobin, the myochrome or, as it was afterwards called, the myoglobin
discovered spectroscopically by K. A. H. Mörner in 1897, and had crys-
tallized it in 1932.
   After my return home I set about purifying another hemin proteid, viz.
cytochrome c, one of the "histohematins" or "myohematins" observed by


                         OXIDATION ENZYMES                                 489
the Irishman Mac Munn in his home-made spectroscope at the end of the
1880’s. Mac Munn’s "hematins", after a period of obscure existence in petit
type in larger textbooks, had been brought out into the light again by David
Keilin in Cambridge in 1925. In 1936 we had obtained the cytochrome ap-
proximately 80% pure, and in 1939 close to 100%.
   It is a beautiful red, iron-porphyrin-containing protein which functions as
a link in the chain of the cell-respiration enzymes, the iron atom now taking
up and now giving off an electron, and the iron thus alternating valency
between the 3-valent ferri and the 2-valent ferro stages. It is a very pleasant
substance to work with, not merely because it is lovely to look at, but also
because it is uncommonly stable and durable. From 100 kg heart-meat of
horse one can produce 3-4 grams of pure cytochrome c. The molecule
weighs about 12,000 and contains one mol iron porphyrin per-mol.

Exp. 4. Two cuvettes each contain a solution of ferricytochrome c. The
 colour is blood-red. To the one are added some grains of sodium hydrosul-
 phite: the colour is changed to violet-red (ferrocytochrome). Oxygen is
 now bubbled through the ferrocytochrome-solution: no visible change oc-
curs. The ferrocytochrome can thus not be oxidized by oxygen. A small
 amount of cytochrome oxidase is now added: the ferricytochrome colour
 returns.

From this experiment we can draw the conclusion that reduced cytochrome
c cannot react with molecular oxygen. In a chain of oxidation enzymes it
will thus not be able to be next to the oxygen. The incapacity of cytochrome
to react with oxygen was a striking fact that required an explanation. Anoth-
er peculiarity was the extremely firm linkage between the red hemin pig-
ment and the protein part; in contradistinction to the majority of other
hemin proteids, the pigment cannot be split off by the addition of acetone
acidified with hydrochloric acid. Further, there was a displacement of the
light-absorption bands which indicated that the two unsaturated vinyl
groups occurring in ordinary protohemin were saturated in the hematin of
the cytochrome. In 1938 we succeeded in showing that the porphyrin part of
the cytochrome was linked to the protein by means of two sulphur bridges
from cysteine residues in the protein of the porphyrin in such a way that the
vinyl groups were saturated and were converted to a-thioether groups. The
firmness of thelinkage and the displacement of the spectral bands were here-
with explained. This was the first time that it had been possible to show the


490                         1955 H.THEORELL

 nature of chemical linkages between a "prosthetic" group (in this case iron
 porphyrin) and the protein part in an enzyme. Karl-Gustav Paul has since
 found an elegant method whereby to split the sulphur bridges with silver
 salts, and he has with organic chemical methods conclusively confirmed the
 constitution in this respect.
    The light-absorption bands of the cytochrome showed that it is a so-called
 hemochromogen, which means that two as a rule nitrogen-containing
 groups are linked to the iron, in addition to the four pyrrol-nitrogen atoms
 in the porphyrin. From magnetic measurements that I made at Linus Pau-
 ling’s institute in Pasadena and from amino-acid analyses, titration curves
 and spectrophotometry together with Å. Åkeson it emerged (1941) that the
 nitrogen-containing, hemochromogen-forming groups in cytochrome c
 were histidine residues, or to be more specific, their imidazole groups.
    Recently we have got a bit farther. Tuppy & Bodo in Vienna began last
 year with Sanger’s method to elucidate the amino-acid sequence in the hem-
 in-containing peptide fragment that one obtains with the proteolytic
 breaking down of cytochrome c, and succeeded in determining the se-
 quence of the amino acids nearest the hemin. The experiments were contin-
 ued and supplemented by Tuppy, Paléus & Ehrenberg at our institute in
Stockholm with the following result:




                                    Fig. 3.


   The peptide chain 1-12 ("Val") = the amino acid valine, "Glu" = glut-
 amine, "Lys" = lysine, and so forth) is by means of two cystein-S-bridges
 and a linkage histidine-Fe linked to the hemin.
   When in 1954 Linus Pauling delivered his Nobel Lecture in Stockholm he
 showed a new kind of models for the study of the steric configuration of


                            OXIDATION ENZYMES                                       491
peptide chains, which as we know may form helices or "pleated sheets" of
various kinds. It struck me then that it would be extremely interesting to
study the question as to which of these possibilities might be compatible
with the sulphur bridges to the hemin part and with the linkage of nitrogen-
containing groups to the iron. Pauling was kind enough to make me a pres-
ent of his peptide-model pieces, which I shall show presently. This is thus the
second time they figure in a Nobel Lecture.




Fig. 4. Steric model of the hemopeptide remaining after pepsin-digestion of cyto-
chrome c, constructed of metal parts representing the atomic distances and valency-
directions. In the figure the peptide chain is disposed by means of hydrogen bonds as a
left-twisting α-helix, seen at right angles to the longitudinal axis. Both the sulphur
bridges (S) and the imidazole group (IM) of the histidine then fit their correct linkage-
positions, and the peptide chain becomes parallel with the hemin plate (the light, poly-
   gonal metal plate at the bottom of the picture). Acta Chem. Scand., 9 (1955) 1193.


  Anders Ehrenberg and I now made a hemin model on the same scale as
the peptide pieces and constructed models of hemin peptides with every
conceivable variant of hydrogen bonding. It proved that many variants
could be definitely excluded on steric grounds, and others were improbable
for other reasons. Of the original, at least 20 alternatives, finally only one


492                                1955    H.THEORELL




Fig. 5. The model seen in the longitudinal direction of the α-spiral. For the sake of
survey-ability the side-chains have been fitted only to the amino acids Lys (3), Cy (4),
                Cy (7), and His (8). Acta Chem. Scand., 9 (1955) 1193.

remained - a left-twisting a-helix with the cysteine residue no. 4 linked to the
porphyrin side-chain in 4-position, and cysteine no. 7 to the side-chain in 2-
position. The imidazole residue fitted exactly to linkage with the iron atom.
The peptide spiral becomes parallel with the plane of the hemin disc.
   I think it may be said that it was of considerable interest to have Pauling’s
and Corey’s most important spiral confirmed with purely chemical meth-
ods, which in our case of course was possible thanks to the unique cir-
cumstance that we had a short peptide linked at no fewer than three places to
a rigid structure, the hemin. After we had sent this work to the printer’s there
arrived from Arndt & Riley in England an X-ray-crystallographic confirma-
tion that cytochrome c contains left-twisting α-helices.
   Through calculations on the basis of the known partial specific volume of
the cytochrome we now consider it extremely probable that the hemin plate
in cytochrome c is surrounded by peptide spirals on all sides in such a way
that the hemin iron is entirely screened off from contact with oxygen; here
is the explanation of our experiment in which we were unable to oxidize
reduced cytochrome c with oxygen-gas. The oxygen simply cannot get at


                            OXIDATION ENZYMES                                       493




Fig. 6. Hypothetical section through a cytochrome-c molecule. (Whole-drawn lines):
the hemopeptide. (Dashed lines): parts of the natural molecule split off with pepsin. The
region between the outer and inner circles is taken up by the lateral chains of the amino
acids. The four peptide chains surround the iron atom (Fe), making it inaccessible to
                     oxygen. Acta. Chem. Scand., 9 (1955) 1193.


the iron atom. There is, on the other hand, a possibility for electrons to pass
in and out in the iron atom via the imidazole groups.
   One sixth of the entire steric structure of the cytochrome molecule is here-
with elucidated, and we glimpse further possibilities of gradually elucidating
the rest. It strikes us as interesting that even at this stage the special mode of
reacting of the cytochrome is beginning to be understood from what we
know of its chemical constitution.




These, according to what we now know, are hemin proteids, thus close
relatives of hemoglobin and cytochromes. Their effects were observed as
early as in the 19th century, as regards the catalases already at the beginning,
as regards the peroxidases in the middle. It was almost inevitable that the
first to produce hydrogen peroxide, the Frenchman Thenard, should also
discover the catalase effect; as soon as hydrogen peroxide is brought into
contact with the majority of native biological materials the hydrogen perox-
ide is broken down with development of gas to oxygen + water. That the


494                            1955   H.THEORELL

catalases contain hemin as active group was made probable by Zeile & Hell-
Ström at Hans von Euler’s institute in 1930, and the first catalase, from cow’s
liver, was crystallized by Sumner & Dounce in 1937.

Exp. 5. To 3% H2O 2 in phosphate buffer pH 7 is added 0.2 mg catalase. A
vehement formation of gas is observed. When the bubbling has abated the
contents are poured out and fresh H 2O 2 + buffer is added. The bubbling
continues in consequence of minimal amounts of remanent catalase.

The peroxidases are of general occurrence in the vegetable kingdom. When
in 1941 we crystallized a peroxidase for the first time, from horse-radish, it

as carbohydrate and hemin, thus iron. The reason why Willstatter was un-
able to show the presence of any of these in his diluted solutions, which were
nonetheless still active, was simply that Willstätter had happened upon a quite
unusually strongly active enzyme. One thousandth of a milligram in one liter
of solution still gives a distinct effect. The peroxidases do not break down
hydrogen peroxide directly, but "activate" it to oxidize quite a number of
hydroquinones, anilines or even nitrite.

Exp. 6. To H2O2 in acetate buffer, pH 4.6, is added a trace of peroxidase: no
effect. Benzidine is now added: blue colouring.

Peroxidases occur here and there in animal material, e.g. leucocytes (verdo-
peroxidase, isolated in pure form by Kjell Agner 1941) and in milk (lacto-
peroxidase, isolated by myself and Åkeson a year or so later).
   In the living cells both catalases and peroxidases function in the same way
by using the hydrogen peroxide arising in connection with the reaction of
oxygen with a number of autoxidable substances, such as Slavins, ascorbic
acid, etc., to oxidize otherwise difficultly combustible substrates. Especially
interesting is Agner’s observation that the verdoperoxidase in the leucocytes
+ H2O2 can detoxify for example tetanus and diphteria toxins, which would
of course explain one of the main functions of the leucocytes.
   Catalases and peroxidases both give, with H2O2, first greenish complex
compounds and then reddish ones. The study of these has presented im-
mensely intricate problems, where we have had to use combinations of spec-
trophotometric and now very refined magnetic methods to try to elucidate
the mechanism; Our American colleague Britton Chance, who in 1946-1948


                           OXIDATION ENZYMES                                   495
 worked at the Nobel Institute, has successfully carried investigations still
 further in this field.
   To conclude: what is the final goal of enzyme research? The first stage is
to investigate the entire steric constitution of all enzymes - a nice little job!
So far we know the most easily accessible sixth part of the smallest enzyme
molecule, cytochrome c.
   In the second stage it is a matter of deciding how the enzymes are arranged
in the cell-structures. This implies, as a matter of fact, the filling of the yawn-
ing gulf between biochemistry and morphology.
