DNA ENDS: JUST THE BEGINNING

Nobel Lecture, December 7, 2009
by
JACK W. SZOSTAK
Harvard Medical School; Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA, U.S.A.




The contributions of my laboratory to our understanding of telomere
function and maintenance by telomerase were made over a limited period
of time early in the development of this story, from 1980 to 1989. What I
would like to discuss here are some of the problems that we had to overcome,
especially the preconceptions we had about models for telomere function
and how hard it was to let go of those models. Fortunately the evidence we
uncovered was strong enough to bring us to the right conclusions! Then,
since I left the telomere field fairly early on, I would like to take this oppor-
tunity to briefly review some of the work that we’ve done since, primarily to
show students who are just entering science that it is not only possible but
really fun to address very different questions in different fields during one’s
career.
   There were two well-known and long-standing puzzles associated with the
nature of eukaryotic chromosome ends, or telomeres: the problem of the
stability of the ends of chromosomes, and the problem of complete replication.
My first introduction to these issues came when I was an undergraduate
student at McGill University in Montreal. The first of those two problems, the
reactivity of chromosome ends, had been a puzzle for many decades, ever
since the pioneering work of Hermann Muller1 and Barbara McClintock2
in the 1930s. Muller used X-rays to create breaks in DNA, while McClintock
used cytogenetic tricks to break chromosomes. But both came to the same
conclusion, which is that the ends of broken chromosomes are very reactive
and do things that normal chromosome ends never do. This is dramatically
illustrated by the famous breakage-fusion-bridge cycle explored by
McClintock (Figure 1). The basic observation is that the replication of a
chromosome with a broken end results in two ends that can join together,
generating a chromosome with two centromeres. When those centromeres
are pulled towards opposite poles of the spindle during cell division, the
chromosome is broken again, regenerating chromosomes with broken
ends. This results in continuing cycles of fusion and breakage, a conse-
quence of which is the formation of cells that have lost important parts of
chromosomes. Not surprisingly many dead cells are generated in this
process.


                                                                             333


The contributions of my laboratory to our understanding of telomere
function and maintenance by telomerase were made over a limited period
of time early in the development of this story, from 1980 to 1989. What I
would like to discuss here are some of the problems that we had to overcome,
especially the preconceptions we had about models for telomere function
and how hard it was to let go of those models. Fortunately the evidence we
uncovered was strong enough to bring us to the right conclusions! Then,
since I left the telomere field fairly early on, I would like to take this oppor-
tunity to briefly review some of the work that we’ve done since, primarily to
show students who are just entering science that it is not only possible but
really fun to address very different questions in different fields during one’s
career.
   There were two well-known and long-standing puzzles associated with the
nature of eukaryotic chromosome ends, or telomeres: the problem of the
stability of the ends of chromosomes, and the problem of complete replication.
My first introduction to these issues came when I was an undergraduate
student at McGill University in Montreal. The first of those two problems,
the reactivity of chromosome ends, had been a puzzle for many decades,
ever since the pioneering work of Herman Müller1 and Barbara McClintock2
in the 1930s. Müller used X-rays to create breaks in DNA, while McClintock
used cytogenetic tricks to break chromosomes. But both came to the same
conclusion, which is that the ends of broken chromosomes are very reactive
and do things that normal chromosome ends never do. This is dramatically
illustrated by the famous breakage-fusion-bridge cycle explored by
McClintock (Figure 1). The basic observation is that the replication of a
chromosome with a broken end results in two ends that can join together,
generating a chromosome with two centromeres. When those centrom-
eres are pulled towards opposite poles of the spindle during cell division,
the chromosome is broken again, regenerating chromosomes with broken
ends. This results in continuing cycles of fusion and breakage, a conse-
quence of which is the formation of cells that have lost important parts of
chromosomes. Not surprisingly many dead cells are generated in this process.
Normal chromosomes never do this, so it was clear that there was something
very special and different going on at the ends of normal chromosomes that
prevents end-to-end joining. But at the time of this work it wasn’t even known
that DNA was the genetic material, so they had no way to think in molecular
terms about what was going on.




334


Figure 1. The chromosomal breakage-fusion-bridge cycle explored by Barbara McClintock.
Left: After the replication of a broken chromosome, the two broken ends join together,
creating a dicentric chromosome. When the two centromeres are pulled to opposite poles
of the dividing cell, the chromosome breaks, and the new broken chromosomes continue
the cycle. Right: micrograph of a dicentric chromosome bridging the two poles of a mitotic
spindle.


Much later on, long after it was recognized that DNA was the genetic
material in chromosomes, an additional problem was discussed by Watson3
and by Olovnikov4, who recognized that the replication of the very ends of
DNA molecules posed a special problem (Figure 2). When a replication
fork heads towards the end of the chromosome, the leading strand can go
all the way to the end, but the lagging strand cannot since it is generated by
the extension of an RNA primer by DNA polymerase. If this RNA primer is
generated at an internal site, any distal DNA will remain unreplicated; even if
the RNA primer was made at the very end, after the RNA primer is degraded,
a short region of unreplicated DNA would remain. In the absence of some
compensatory mechanism, the ends should get shorter and shorter, and
since that doesn’t happen, there must be some unknown process to counter-
balance the necessarily incomplete replication.




Figure 2. The end-replication problem as posed by Watson (3) and by Olovnikov (4). When
a replication fork reaches the end of a chromosome, the lagging strand will necessarily be
incomplete as a result of the removal and potentially internal location of the last primer
generated by primase.


                                                                                     335


Although I learned about these problems as a student, I can’t say that they
made a very big impression on me and I didn’t really think about them very
much until years later, when I began working on the molecular reactions
engaged in by broken pieces of DNA. This was work that I started as a post-
doc at Cornell with Ray Wu, working in collaboration with my friend and
colleague, Dr. Rodney Rothstein. Means for introducing DNA molecules
into yeast cells, a process referred to as yeast transformation, had just been
discovered down the road from our lab at Cornell in Gerry Fink’s lab5. The
ability to do this opened up a huge number of interesting experiments. Rod
and I started to examine some variations on the initial procedure, such as
cutting the circular DNA molecules before putting them into yeast. Shortly
thereafter, when I moved to Boston and was setting up my lab at the Sidney
Farber Cancer Institute, we continued this collaboration with the additional
participation of my first graduate student, Terry Orr-Weaver6,7.
  In the course of our experiments on transformation and recombination,
we observed a process that is analogous to the fusion events studied by
McClintock in maize decades earlier (Figure 3). We began with a circular
DNA molecule that was able to replicate as a circular DNA plasmid in yeast
because it contained a yeast origin of DNA replication8,9. Intact circular DNA
of that plasmid yielded a high frequency of yeast transformants, because
chromosomal integration was not required for plasmid maintenance. When
we made a cut in the DNA with a restriction enzyme, in a region of the DNA
that is not found in any yeast chromosome, we recovered many fewer trans-
formants. When we analyzed the few transformants that we did recover, the
cut DNA ends had been joined back together, presumably by the action of
the enzyme DNA ligase7. In many cases some DNA was lost as the ends were
chewed back by exonucleases before being joined together by ligase. As with
McClintock’s much earlier results, these DNA reactions are very different
from anything that would happen at the ends of natural chromosomes.




Figure 3. Non-homologous end-joining in yeast. A circular plasmid, cut with a restriction
enzyme in a region of DNA that is not homologous to any yeast chromosomal DNA adja-
cent to the cut site may be degraded prior to ligation of the ends.



336


Figure 4. Double-strand breaks in DNA stimulate recombination. Intact circular DNA
lacking a replication origin yields few transformants, because recombination events
leading to chromosomal integration are rare. The same plasmid, when cut within a region
of homology to a yeast chromosome, yields many more integrated transformants.


Terry, Rod and I actually spent most of our effort looking at what happened
when we made cuts in regions of plasmid DNA that were homologous to a
segment of a yeast chromosome (Figure 4). When a circular DNA molecule
containing a region of homology with a chromosome is used to transform
yeast, the occasional recombination event will occur, resulting in the plasmid
becoming integrated into the yeast chromosome. This was the pathway found
in the Fink lab in their early studies of transformation. What Terry, Rod and
I found was that cutting the DNA in this region of homology led to a greatly
increased frequency of such recombination events6. We continued to follow
this up by studying the reactions that broken DNA ends undergo (Figure 5).
If a DNA molecule is broken by cutting with a restriction enzyme, then in
the cell the ends can be chewed back by nucleases, and exonucleases can
generate single-stranded ends that can invade a homologous sequence.
Strand invasion allows repair synthesis to begin using DNA polymerases, and
Holliday junctions can be formed which can branch migrate. After repair
synthesis, the Holliday junctions can be resolved by special enzymes called
resolvases, to yield crossover or non-crossover configurations. This work
eventually led us to propose, along with Frank Stahl, that cells entering
meiosis engage in the programmed breakage of their chromosomal DNA as
a means of initiating meiotic recombination by double-strand-break repair10.
So broken DNA ends do a lot of things, but they are all things that don’t
happen with normal chromosome ends. I mention them here because these
are the reactions I was thinking of before I entered the telomere field.




                                                                                  337


Figure 5. The double-strand break repair model for recombination. Two homologous
chromosomes (red and blue) recombine when one is broken. The initial cut is further
processed by nucleases, exposing single-stranded DNA, which invades the homologous
duplex. Repair synthesis and branch migration generate Holliday junctions, the resolution
of which generates recombinant DNA products.


In the summer of 1980, I attended the Nucleic Acids Gordon Conference
and heard, for the first time, Elizabeth Blackburn talk about her
amazing work on the stable DNA ends from Tetrahymena thermophila11. This
unicellular organism is very divergent from metazoans, and has an unusual
cell biology characterized by the presence of both a micronucleus with
normal chromosomes and a macronucleus in which the chromosomal DNA
has been chopped into thousands of small fragments, many of which become
highly amplified. Liz talked about the very simple repetitive sequences, just
stretches of a GGGGTT repeats, that she had found at the ends of these very
abundant short DNA molecules in the large macronucleus of Tetrahymena
(Figure 6). It was incredibly striking that these little pieces of DNA were
stable ends, and were apparently fully replicable, i.e. they seemed to behave
just like normal chromosomal telomeres. They clearly behaved completely
differently from the DNA ends that we were studying in my lab, in yeast
cells. After Liz’s talk I sought her out to discuss these experiments, and we
realized that there was a really simple and potentially very interesting experi-
ment that we could do to see if the telomeric ends from Tetrahymena would
work as stable telomeric ends in yeast cells. Neither of us thought that the
experiment was very likely to work, because Tetrahymena and yeast are so very
distantly related. On the other hand, we had all the necessary bits and pieces
and technically the experiment was quite trivial, so we decided to go ahead.
Liz sent me some DNA that she had painstakingly purified from Tetrahymena,

338


and I took this little restriction fragment from the end of the ribosomal DNA
of Tetrahymena and put it into yeast to see how it would function.




Figure 6. Telomeres from Tetrahymena. Left: DNA from the macronuclear fragments end
in a series of tandem repeats of the hexanucleotide GGGGTT. These DNA ends are stable
and fully replicated. Right: Image of Tetrahymena, showing the large macronucleus (blue).


There is an amazing aspect of this piece of DNA from Tetrahymena that I
would like to comment on before describing the yeast experiment (Figure
7). Right next door to the telomere sequence, just a couple of kilobases in,
is the primary ribosomal RNA transcript of Tetrahymena. In that transcript
there is a little intron, just over 400 bases long, and that intron is the first self-
splicing intron ever discovered12, in the work for which Tom Cech was
awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1989. A very nice piece of DNA
indeed!




Figure 7. A very special piece of DNA. The Tetrahymena ribosomal DNA fragment from the
macronucleus is a symmetrical dimer. The ends are telomeres and consist of GGGGTT
repeats. Close to the ends is a region of the rRNA genes coding for a self-splicing intron.


                                                                                      339


Returning to the experimental test of Tetrahymena telomere function in
yeast, what we really wanted to do was to test the idea that the biochemi-
cal machinery underlying telomere function might have been very highly
conserved. If that turned out to be true, then the mechanisms that were
being learned about in Tetrahymena might apply broadly to eukaryotic
organisms, which would make the whole process much more significant. This
was the motivation for the experiment that Liz Blackburn and I collaborated
on. What we had available at that time, in my lab, were circular DNA plasmids
containing yeast genes13,14 so that we could select for yeast transformants,
i.e. cells that had taken up the DNA. These plasmids also contained origins
of replication (known then as autonomous replication sequences or ARS
elements8,9) so that they could replicate independently of integration into
the chromosome. When intact circular plasmid DNA of this type is used to
transform yeast cells, many transformants are recovered and they almost
all contain replicating circular DNA molecules. As I explained above, if the
plasmid DNA is cut with a restriction enzyme (in a region that is not
homologous to yeast genomic DNA) so as to generate linear DNA with
‘broken ends’, those ends do not function as stable telomeric ends and as a
result very few transformants are recovered.
   The critical experiment was to take the little pieces of telomeric
Tetrahymena DNA ending in G4T2 repeats, and ligate them onto each end
of the linearized plasmid DNA (Figure 8). I carefully purified the ligated
DNA, put that into yeast, and recovered transformants. I was then able to
ask whether the plasmid DNA was replicating as a linear molecule, which
would mean the telomeres were working, or whether I had only recovered
standard replicating circular plasmids. I distinguished between linear and
circular DNA forms by preparing DNA from a dozen or so transformants, and
analyzing the DNA by gel electrophoresis. When DNA molecules are
separated by gel electrophoresis, circles generate a series of bands
corresponding to monomers and multimers, and relaxed and supercoiled
forms, leading to a complicated pattern. Linear DNA molecules don’t have any
of those alternative forms, so they migrate as a single band. The two possible
results of the DNA analysis were therefore quite distinct. When I analyzed
the DNA from the transformants that I had recovered, about half of them
contained plasmid DNA that migrated as a single band on the gel. This was
perhaps the most clear-cut experiment I have ever done. It was immediately
obvious that the experiment had worked, and that the Tetrahymena ends were
able to act as functional telomeres in yeast15. We therefore knew immediately
that the underlying biochemical machinery must be very broadly conserved
because these two organisms were so distantly related to each other. It also
meant that we could now use all of the tools of yeast genetics and molecular
biology to study telomeres in yeast.




340


Figure 8. Moving Tetrahymena telomeres into yeast. A yeast plasmid vector containing se-
lectable markers and an origin of replication was linearized by digestion with a restriction
enzyme. Tetrahymena telomeres were ligated onto both ends, and the ligated DNA was puri-
fied and used to transform yeast cells. The resulting transformants contained replicating
linear plasmids.

One of the first things that I wanted to do with the new linear plasmid with
two Tetrahymena ends was to use it as a vector for cloning natural telomeres
from the ends of yeast chromosomes. That experiment was extremely simple
conceptually (Figure 9). I began with yeast chromosomal DNA, and cut it
up with restriction enzymes into lots of pieces. Most of them were internal
fragments, but the occasional fragment from the end of a chromosome
would have one restriction cut end and one end derived from a yeast
telomere. I then took our vector DNA, the linear plasmid with two
Tetrahymena ends, cut off one end, and carefully purified the resulting DNA.
This DNA molecule, which had one functional telomeric end and one
non-functional ‘broken’ end, could not be maintained in yeast cells. The
yeast telomere cloning experiment then simply involved joining the yeast
DNA fragments and the purified vector DNA together using DNA ligase.
Every now and then, this would result in a molecule with a Tetrahymena
telomere at one end and a normal yeast telomere at the other end, and those
rare molecules were expected to be able to replicate as linear molecules
in yeast cells. I did recover some transformants with the expected linear
structure15, and I was able to confirm through a variety of tests that one end
was indeed a yeast telomeric DNA fragment. This allowed us to start look-
ing at the structures found in normal yeast telomeres, including the DNA
sequences characteristic of yeast telomeres. We didn’t expect the repeat
sequences to be the same, since the Tetrahymena sequences didn’t cross-
hybridize with yeast DNA. Other hybridization experiments, done in collabo-
ration with Tom Petes16, showed that yeast telomeres contained stretches of
alternating GT repeats. Still, when Janis Shampay, a graduate student in Liz’s
lab, sequenced the yeast telomeres I had cloned, we were all a bit surprised
to see a somewhat irregular sequence, summarized as G1-3T repeats17. This
was independently confirmed in the Tye and Petes laboratories based on the

                                                                                       341


cloning of telomeric ends by hybridization with (GT)n probes18. While yeast
did fit the general finding of a GT rich 3’-terminal strand, the absence of
simple repeats was puzzling, and didn’t seem to fit easily into the prevailing
recombination-based models of telomere replication (19). It was the resolu-
tion of that puzzle that would eventually lead to us to telomerase.




Figure 9. Cloning yeast telomeres. Yeast chromosomal DNA was digested with a restriction
enzyme, as was the linear plasmid with two Tetrahymena telomeres. The purified vector
fragment was ligated to the yeast DNA fragments, and the resulting mixture was used to
transform yeast. A few linear plasmids were recovered, in which one end of the linear
vector was replaced by a yeast telomere.


At this point, I would like to take a little digression to describe how we
used these new telomeric DNA fragments as a tool to study the require-
ments for proper chromosome function in yeast. This work was done by
Andrew Murray, my second graduate student. What we did was to take
an engineering approach to seeing if we really understood the elements
of chromosome structure. With telomeres in hand, we thought that we
had all of the pieces that would be required to generate a fully functional
chromosome. We had centromeric DNA, first cloned in John Carbon’s lab20;
we had various genes such as LEU2 and HIS313,14, and we had origins of
replication, first cloned by Kevin Struhl and Dan Stinchcomb in Ron Davis’s
lab8,9. Those were all of the elements known at the time to be important in
terms of chromosomal function. We thought that it would be interesting to
put them all together and see if we could make something that behaved like
a natural chromosome. To do this we constructed a circular plasmid that
had all of the known chromosomal elements (Figure 10), linearized it so
that it had two telomeric ends, and put it into yeast. Despite the fact that this
DNA molecule had all the pieces (an origin of replication, a centromere,
genes, and telomeres), when we put it into yeast it didn’t behave at all like
a proper chromosome. During mitosis it displayed a very high frequency of
segregation errors, so that instead of being maintained over many cell cycles
it was lost at a high frequency21. This was a very interesting result, because it
said there was something going on that we didn’t understand. What could

342


be missing? What were the potential problems that prevented accurate
inheritance of this mini-chromosome? We tested many possible explanations.
Eventually, Andrew figured out that what was missing was just more DNA21,22.
By simply adding enough non-yeast DNA from phage lambda to our small
artificial chromosomes, he was able to make much bigger DNA molecules
that now exhibited stable inheritance and behaved much more like natural
yeast chromosomes (Figure 11). We considered various models for this, and
based on the observation that the linear centromeric plasmid was much less
mitotically stable than a similar circular centromeric plasmid, we proposed
that the intertwining of DNA after the completion of DNA replication23
played a role in holding sister chromatids together. This was long before
the modern story of cohesin and separase24 and the complex biochemis-
try that underlies the adherence and separation of sister-chromatids after
replication. Our artificial chromosomes were also technically useful, at least
for a little while, in the early days of genomic sequencing because it turns out
that they are very nice vectors for cloning extremely large pieces of DNA, up
to a megabase or two in length25.




Figure 10. Our first attempt to make an artificial chromosome. We constructed a circular
plasmid containing yeast genes, an origin of replication, a centromere, and telomeric DNA
(Tr). This was linearized by cutting between the telomeric sequences, then introduced
into yeast, where the DNA was maintained as a linear plasmid. Unexpectedly, this DNA
molecule did not behave like a normal chromosome – it was mitotically unstable due to a
high frequency of segregation errors.




                                                                                    343


Figure 11. Successful construction of a yeast artificial chromosome. The addition of 50 to
150 kb of non-yeast DNA from phage λ greatly improved the mitotic stability of the DNA
molecule, conferring improved chromosome-like behavior.

Returning once more to the story of telomeres and how they are fully
replicated, all of our early models for thinking about this problem were
based on recombination and the various kinds of reactions known to be
engaged in by DNA ends. A very simple model that seemed quite attractive
after Liz Blackburn’s discovery of the short repetitive sequences of
Tetrahymena telomeres was that recombination between different ends,
perhaps biased in some way, could generate ends that were longer than
either of the input DNA ends (Figure 12)26. Alternatively, strand-invasion
by the 3’ end of one telomere into the repeats of another telomere could
lead to repair synthesis which would result in elongation of that end (Figure
12). Another model that we considered invoked Holliday junction resolu-
tion. This model was based on idea that the very end of telomeric DNA was
actually a hairpin, i.e. the strand loops around at the end. That was attractive
because it meant that there was no actual DNA end, and a hairpin could act
as a relatively inert DNA terminus. Replication would generate an inverted
repeat structure, which could isomerize into a central Holliday junction,
resolution of which by the corresponding recombination enzyme would
generate two new hairpin terminated telomeres (Figure 13). A more
complex variant of this model that originated in Piet Borst’s lab27 was that
internal nicks within the repeats were sites of unpairing followed by gap-
filling synthesis, leading to synthesis of new repeat units. These were the
kinds of recombination based models that we discussed in the early years
of thinking about telomere replication. How did we finally let go of these
models and come to the correct explanation? Remarkably, we were driven to
the answer by analyzing the sequences of Tetrahymena telomeres after their
replication in yeast.




344


Figure 12. A. Telomere lengthening by recombination. B. Telomere lengthening by repair
synthesis.




Figure 13. Telomere replication by Holliday junction resolution. Early models of telomeric
DNA proposed a hairpin terminus. Replication would generate an inverted repeat, which
could isomerize to form a Holliday junction, resolution of which would regenerate the
original structures.



To understand why the replication of Tetrahymena telomeres in yeast was so
important, consider again the linear plasmid with Tetrahymena ends. Those
telomeric ends began as a restriction fragment of a certain size, but we
noticed that after their maintenance in yeast that they had grown longer, by
as much as a few hundred base-pairs, as well as becoming heterogeneous in
size. We didn’t know where this extra DNA had come from, but there were
several possible explanations. It could have been, for example, a result of
recombination between Tetrahymena ends on different molecules, or a result
of strand-invasion and repair synthesis. Eventually, we cloned some of these
lengthened Tetrahymena ends and, in a continuation of the collaboration with
Liz, sent those DNA samples to Liz’s lab where once again Janice Shampay

                                                                                     345


did the actual sequencing. To our complete shock, we found that the actual
structure consisted of G4T2 repeats from the Tetrahymena ends joined directly
to the irregular G1-3T repeats that were characteristic of yeast telomeres
(Figure 14)17. Thus the reason the DNA had become longer was that the
yeast-specific sequence had become appended to the Tetrahymena ends. This
new DNA seemed to have just dropped out of the sky. Such a different and
irregular sequence couldn’t possibly have been generated by any recombi-
national process, so we immediately knew that all of our early models were
wrong. The new sequencing data led directly to the idea that there must be
a specific new enzyme that adds extra DNA to chromosomal ends. Shortly
after these results and our prediction of this new enzyme, of course, Carol
Greider went on to identify the predicted enzyme activity biochemically29.
Characterization of the purified enzyme, later named telomerase, showed
that it is a ribonucleoprotein enzyme that contains an RNA template that
specifies the telomeric repeat sequences, which are synthesized by a reverse
transcriptase component of the enzyme30. We now know that the different
telomeric repeats found in different organisms are specified by the RNA tem-
plates of their particular telomerase enzymes. A great deal of work has been
done to characterize telomerase in many organisms, including Tetrahymena,
yeast and humans, by Elizabeth Blackburn, Carol Greider, Tom Cech and
many other people.




Figure 14. Yeast adds new DNA to Tetrahymena telomeres. Cloning and sequence analysis
of Tetrahymena telomeres after replication in yeast (as the telomeres of a linear plasmid)
revealed the addition of yeast telomeric sequences.

It is interesting to revisit the end replication problem in light of the activity
of telomerase. As mentioned above, one of our early models was that the
actual end was a hairpin structure. Of course that also turned out to be
wrong, and the proper structure is a 3’-end overhang consisting of GT-rich
repeats (Figure 15). This was originally worked out in a different ciliated
protozoan, Oxytricha, in the lab of David Prescott28, and then found to be


346


a universally conserved aspect of telomere structure. If we consider the
replication of DNA with a 3’ overhang, the end-replication problem is
actually a little bit different from that noted earlier by Watson3 and by
Olovnikov4. A replication fork heading towards this kind of end retains the
previously noted problem of incomplete replication of the 3’ end strand, but
a much worse problem in that the leading strand can go to the end, but can’t
regenerate a 3’ overhang. The 3’ overhang will therefore be lost in every cycle
of replication, unless there is a compensatory process. This, of course, is the
role of the telomerase enzyme, which adds extra repeats to telomeric ends
and thereby on average maintains the proper telomeric length and structure.
The regulation of proper telomere length and structure has turned out to
be quite elaborate, and the biochemistry of the corresponding protein-DNA
interactions is remarkably complex and interesting 31.




Figure 15. New model for telomere shortening, and the role of telomerase in telomere
maintenance. When a replication fork reaches the end of a DNA duplex, the leading
strand cannot regenerate the 3’-overhang. This is done by telomerase.



The activity of telomerase and its associated regulatory machinery in
controlling telomere length turns out to have important biological
consequences. Cells with high levels of telomerase activity can divide without
limit, because they maintain functional telomeres. In contrast, cells with
insufficient telomerase activity cannot maintain telomere length, and as a
result have limited division potential. This prediction was initially verified
by Vicki Lundblad, who came to my lab as a postdoc and decided to address
this issue genetically in yeast32. What Vicki did was to set up a large and
actually quite difficult screen for mutants that would be unable to maintain
telomeres at their proper average length. She was able to recover mutants
that had the property we were looking for, namely that telomeres would get
shorter and shorter over an increasing number of cell divisions (Figure 16,
part A). The first mutation with that property was named est-1, for ‘ever shorter
telomeres’. The most interesting property of this mutation (and similar mutations

                                                                                347


recovered later) is that it confers a delayed senescence phenotype, just as
predicted (Figure 16, part B). This phenotype is visually apparent in colonies
of the mutant strain of yeast that have been grown for different numbers
of generations. After 25 generations, the mutant colonies look just like
wild-type colonies. After 46 generations the colonies are a little more
irregular, and there are some small colonies; by 60 to 70 generations they
are quite small and irregular, and after 80 to 90 generations the mutant
strain can hardly grow at all. There are many dead cells in the small colonies,
and there is a very high level of chromosome loss. Because the telomeres
are getting shorter and shorter, eventually proper telomeric structure isn’t
maintained. As a consequence, ends are getting joined together leading to
chromosome breakage and loss, so that cells are generated that are missing
big chunks of their DNA. This was the first experimental demonstration that
an inability to maintain normal telomere length would lead to a senescence
phenotype, and therefore this inability to maintain telomeres might have
an important role in problems of cellular senescence in higher organisms.
At about the same time very similar experiments were done in Liz’s lab,
using Tetrahymena, and led to the same conclusion33. We thought this was a
potential explanation for the senescence seen during repeated passage of
primary cells in tissue culture, and by extension perhaps to problems of ag-
ing related to a gradual decline in tissue renewal, perhaps due to limited cell
division potential. The shortening of telomeres during passage of fibroblasts
was soon demonstrated by Carol Greider34, and the causal role of this
shortening in cellular senescence was later proven35. Of course, this has
turned out to be a very important aspect of our growing understanding of
ageing and age-related diseases36. The complementary aspect of this has
turned out to be very important for our understanding of cancer. In the
vast majority of cancer cells, which have unlimited division potential, the
telomerase gene has been up-regulated and functional telomeres are
maintained indefinitely36,37.




Figure 16. Senescence of yeast EST-1 cells. A: Telomeric yeast DNA fragments from an
EST-1 mutant strain are visualized by Southern blotting. Lanes 1 through 8 represent
increasing numbers of generations of growth. B: A mutant EST-1 strain streaked out on an
agar plate after 25, 46, 67 and 87 generations of prior growth.


348


At that point in my career it became clear that many people would soon be
exploring the roles of telomeres and telomerase in cancer and aging. I felt
that the main questions were clear, and that they would be addressed whether
or not I remained active in the field of telomere biology. I therefore began to
look for other interesting questions that could be addressed experimentally,
but where there were not too many people trying to look at the same issues.
   Even as Vicki was doing her genetic work on telomere maintenance in
yeast, I was already becoming interested in ribozymes, because Tom Cech’s
discovery of the self-splicing introns was very new and exciting12. I thought
there were many interesting questions, and I was surprised that more
people weren’t entering that field. In particular, I was attracted by the RNA
world hypothesis38 and the idea that RNA might be able to catalyze its own
replication without protein enzymes. Since the experiments were largely
molecular biology in nature, I thought that we might be able to make some
contributions to that nascent field. For several years we studied the group
I introns and tried to use various molecular techniques to force them
to catalyze RNA replication reactions. Several of my students including
Jennifer Doudna39 and Rachel Green40 worked on that problem, with some
success. But eventually we came to the conclusion that the ribozymes
available from nature were not good enough. Those ribozymes were doing jobs
that they had evolved to do in modern organisms, and what we were primarily
interested in were questions about what RNA could have done much earlier.
   In the late 1980s we started to think about ways of evolving new RNA
molecules that would do things that we were interested in. The basic idea
was simple: prepare huge collections of random sequences, and then isolate
the rare functional molecules that did what we wanted. The technology
for doing this in vitro selection, or directed evolution, was worked out by
Andy Ellington when he was a postdoc in my lab41, and independently by
Craig Tuerk in Larry Gold’s lab42. We spent most of the 90s applying this
kind of selection technology to the laboratory evolution of RNA and DNA
molecules that could do all kinds of interesting things. For example, an
RNA molecule isolated by Mandana Sassanfar when she was a postdoc in the
lab folds up into a three-dimensional shape that contains a binding site for
ATP (Figure 17)43. Subsequently, we and others were able to show that it is
possible to evolve, in the laboratory, RNA and DNA sequences that will fold into
defined shapes that can bind almost any target molecule of interest. Ongoing
studies in several different labs and companies are aimed at exploring
potential therapeutic uses of these target binding RNA molecules, known
as aptamers, perhaps doing some of the things that we use antibodies to do
today.




                                                                            349


Figure 17. An ATP binding RNA molecule. This RNA was evolved from an initially random
population of sequences. Dark blue: double-helical regions; light blue: folded recognition
loop; stick figure presents bound AMP.


Once we were able to evolve aptamers routinely we turned our attention to
evolving RNA molecules that could catalyze interesting reactions. Dave Bartel,
when he was a graduate student in the lab, isolated a surprisingly intricate
RNA molecule that catalyzes a joining reaction between two adjacent RNAs
aligned on a template (Figure 18)44. It uses the same chemistry that RNA and
DNA polymerases use, i.e. the 3’-prime hydroxyl of one RNA substrate attacks
the α-phosphate of the triphosphate of the other RNA substrate, generating a
new phosphodiester bond. The ribozyme has an intricate folded secondary45
and three-dimensional structure46. This was a very exciting demonstration
that RNA could catalyze the chemistry of RNA replication. Subsequently, in
his own lab at the Whitehead Institute at MIT, Dave Bartel further evolved
this ribozyme into an actual RNA polymerase that can copy RNA templates
using nucleoside triphosphates as substrates47. This is a marvelous ‘proof-of-
principle’ of the plausibility of the RNA world hypothesis. Unfortunately the
current versions of this RNA polymerase are not yet good enough to copy
themselves and exhibit full cycles of replication, so there is plenty of scope
for additional evolutionary optimization.




350


Figure 18. Secondary structure of the class I ribozyme ligase. This ribozyme catalyzes
template-directed RNA-RNA ligation. It was evolved from an initially random population
of RNA sequences.

   More recently we have applied RNA in vitro selection to the analysis of
human genomic sequences, in work done by Kouresh Salahi-Ashtiani and
Andrej Luptak when they were postdocs in my lab (Figure 19)48. Kourosh
began this project by generating a large library of pieces of human DNA.
He then transcribed them into RNA, and selected for molecules that could
cut themselves at a unique site. He recovered four distinct self-cleaving
RNAs or ribozymes. One of these is found in the CPEB3 gene, which has
been implicated in memory49, possibly through a role in controlling local-
ized protein translation at synapses. There are two interesting things about
this self-cleaving human genomic ribozyme. One is that it turns out to have
exactly the same structure as a well known viral ribozyme, the HDV ribozyme
of the hepatitis delta virus. The fact that there is a version of this ribozyme
in the human genome suggests that the viral ribozyme may be derived from
the genomic copy. Another potentially very interesting observation is that
there is a polymorphism in the human population at a position within this
ribozyme that affects its activity. A recent genetic study done by a group
in Switzerland50 has found an association between this polymorphism and
performance on a word-recall memory test. A lot more work needs to be
done on this, but the possibility that a self-cleaving catalytic RNA may play a
role in human memory is fascinating.




                                                                                 351


Figure 19. An HDV ribozyme in the human genome. Top: The self-cleaving ribozyme is
located within the second intron of the CPEB3 gene. The ribozyme sequence is highly
conserved relative to flanking intron sequences. Bottom left: The secondary structures of
the human genomic ribozyme and the HDV ribozyme are virtually identical. Bottom right:
A polymorphism with the ribozyme sequence affects ribozyme activity, and may affect
human memory.

In the 1990s we extended our work on RNA and DNA directed evolution by
developing methods for evolving proteins. Rich Roberts developed a clever
means of tricking the ribosome into chemically linking a nascent peptide or
protein chain to its own mRNA51, so that selection for a functional protein
would also enrich the corresponding coding mRNA. This approach was used
in later work done by Tony Keefe, who isolated a small ATP-binding protein
from a library of completely random protein sequences52. This little protein
domain looks indistinguishable from any natural biological protein domain.
These kinds of laboratory evolution experiments showed that it is relatively
easy to evolve functional RNAs, DNAs, and even proteins out of completely
random collections of sequences.
   The above experiments showed very directly that Darwinian evolution,
applied to populations of molecules, is a powerful means of generating
functional sequences. That led us to deeper questions: how did evolution get
started? How did the transition from chemistry to Darwinian evolution first
happen on the early earth? These are the central questions concerning the
origin of life, and addressing these questions has become the main focus of
my laboratory. The approach that we are taking is essentially a synthetic or
engineering approach. We have a simple model for what we think early cells
might have looked like (Figure 20)53. This is not by any means a universally
accepted model, but it is our view of what a very primitive cell might have
looked like, and we are trying to construct such systems in order to define

352


possible pathways from chemistry to biology. We think that a primitive cell
would have two critical components, the first of which is a cell membrane.
In our experiments we make these membranes out of simple molecules
that might have been around on the early earth, such as fatty acids. The cell
membrane has to be able to grow spontaneously and divide to make
daughter cells. The other important component of a primitive cell would be
a polymer that could mediate the inheritance of genetic information. Here
the big question is whether this could be RNA itself, or is it more likely to be
some simpler progenitor material that was subsequently replaced by RNA?
In either case, this material has to be able to replicate spontaneously without
any of the highly sophisticated evolved machinery that is used by modern
biology. The key question is therefore: how could both cell membranes and
early genetic materials replicate prior to the evolution of complex biological
machinery? The approach that we are taking is to try to divide this big
problem up into simpler pieces that can be addressed separately. I will briefly
describe a few of the experiments that we have done in the last six or seven
years.




Figure 20. Schematic model of a protocell. A simple cell might be based on a replicat-
ing vesicle for compartmentalization, and a replicating genome to encode heritable
information. A complex environment provides nucleotides, lipids and various sources of
energy. Mechanical energy (for division), chemical energy (for nucleotide activation),
phase transfer and osmotic gradient energy (for growth) may be used by the system.


About six years ago Marty Hancyzc, a postdoc, and Shelly Fujikawa, a graduate
student in the lab, became interested in how protocell-like assemblies could
be formed. They found that a common clay mineral, formed from volcanic
ash and seawater, can facilitate this assembly process in a surprising way54.
This clay mineral is well known in the prebiotic chemistry community
because it had been shown several years previously by Jim Ferris and Leslie
Orgel to catalyze the assembly of RNA from activated nucleotides55. Marty
and Shelly showed that the same mineral could catalyze the assembly of
membranes. Moreover, it can bring genetic polymers, such as RNA, into the
vesicles it helps to assemble (Figure 21). Thus a common mineral can help
to make genetic materials, help to assemble membranes, and bring them
together54, all of which is very attractive in terms of the assembly of early
cellular structures.

                                                                                 353


Figure 21. Montmorillonite can bring RNA into vesicles. Fluorescently labeled RNA
(orange) on the surface of a clay particle is trapped inside a large vesicle (green) along
with numerous small vesicles, all assembled as a result of the catalytic activity of the clay
particle.


The replication of protocell-like structures is much more difficult than their
assembly. However, the growth and division of the protocell membrane,
which looked like an almost impossible problem just a few years ago, has
actually turned out to be relatively simple. Our current model for what an
early cell cycle might have looked like with respect to the cell membrane is
based on the work of Ting Zhu, a graduate student in the lab56. We prepare
large multilamellar vesicles, and feed them with new fatty acids. Remarkably,
they grow into long filaments, which are quite fragile; in response to gentle
agitation, such as might result from waves on a pond, they break up into
daughter cells (Figure 22). That generates a robust cycle that can be carried
out indefinitely. Thus, the spontaneous growth and division of membrane
compartments appears to be a relatively straightforward process.




354


Figure 22. Cycles of growth and division of a model protocell membrane. Large multilamel-
lar vesicles grow into long hollow vesicles following the addition of excess fatty acids. The
filamentous vesicles are fragile and fragment in response to mild shear stress. The smaller
daughter vesicles can grow and repeat the cycle.

What about the replication of genetic information? At the moment, this
still seems to be difficult, because we don’t understand how to accomplish
this step. The RNA world hypothesis is based on the idea of RNA catalyzing
its own replication38, but that has turned out to be a harder problem than
we thought. Could genetic replication have begun as a chemical, i.e. non-
enzymatic, process? Almost twenty years ago, Leslie Orgel, one of the giants
of prebiotic chemistry, proposed that chemical means of replicating genetic
polymers should be found fairly easily by chemists, and that the solution to
that problem would be relevant to the origin of life57. That hasn’t happened,
perhaps because it’s a harder problem than anybody thought, but also
perhaps because there are not that many people working on this problem.
I think that makes it a perfect problem to tackle because it is important,
interesting and there are many reasonable experimental approaches. What
we are doing is making synthetic nucleotides that are modified so as to
become more reactive (Figure 23). For example, changing the hydroxyl
nucleophile to an amine results in nucleotides that spontaneously extend a
primer in a template-directed manner, without any enzyme58. We do not yet have a
robust and general replication system, but that is our goal.




                                                                                        355


Figure 23. Typical monomer for spontaneous nucleic acid synthesis and the corresponding
polymer. Left: 2’-5’ linked phosphoramidate DNA. Right: The activated 2’-amino mono-
mer. Note the 2’-amino nucleophile (blue) and the imidazole leaving group (green) on
the 5’-phosphate. The combination of a good nucleophile with a good leaving group
allows for rapid non-enzymatic polymerization of this class of monomer when aligned on
an appropriate template.

There is an interesting aspect of the problem of chemical replication that
we have just recently started to think about, namely, how can the very ends
of our sequences be copied in the absence of telomerase? This turns out to
be very interesting. Chemical replication results in spontaneous template-
directed primer-extension, but once the end of the template is reached,
the reaction slows down but often doesn’t stop entirely. Depending on the
conditions, we sometimes see chemical extension beyond the end of the
template, generating a 3’ overhang (Figure 24)58. Thus complete replication
of a template does not seem to be a problem, and in fact this process
generates new sequences. It is interesting to speculate that this spontaneous
chemical reaction might have something to do with eventual emergence of
genetically encoded catalysts that would control and exploit this process,
eventually leading to the telomerase enzyme that has been the main subject
of my lecture.




356


Figure 24. Origin of telomerase in spontaneous copying chemistry? Under certain
conditions non-enzymatic primer-extension proceeds past the end of the template,
generating a 3’ overhang. Enzymatic control and elaboration of this chemical process
could provide an evolutionary path towards telomerase.


Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all of the many brilliant students, postdocs, friends, and
collaborators who contributed to this work.


References
1.    Muller, H.J., “The remaking of chromosomes,” Collecting Net 13, 181–198 (1938).
2.    McClintock, B., “Cytological observations of deficiencies involving known genes,
      translocations and an inversion in Zea mays,” Missouri Agr. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 163, 4
      (1931).
3.    Watson, J.D., “Origin of concatameric T7 DNA,” Nature New Biol. 239, 197–201
      (1972).
4.    Olovnikov, A.M., “A theory of marginotomy,” J. Theor. Biol. 41, 181–190 (1973).
5.    Hinnen, A., Hicks, J.B. and Fink, G.R., “Transformation of yeast,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      USA 75, 1929–1933 (1978).
6.    Orr-Weaver, T.L., Szostak, J.W. and Rothstein, R.J., “Yeast transformation: A model sys-
      tem for the study of recombination,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78, 6354–6358 (1981).
7.    Orr-Weaver, T.L. and Szostak, J.W., “Yeast recombination: The association between
      double-strand-gap repair and crossing-over,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80, 4417–4421
      (1983).
8.    Struhl, K., Stinchcomb, D.T., Scherer, S. and Davis, R.W., “High-frequency transfor-
      mation of yeast: autonomous replication of hybrid DNA molecules,” Proc. Natl. Acad.
      Sci. USA 76, 1035–1039 (1979).
9.    Stinchcomb, D.T., Struhl, K. and Davis, R.W., “Isolation and characterisation of a
      yeast chromosomal replicator,” Nature 282, 39–43 (1979).
10.   Szostak, J.W., Orr-Weaver, T.L., Rothstein, R.J. and Stahl, F., “The double-strand-break
      repair model for recombination,” Cell 33, 25–35 (1983).
11.   Blackburn, E.H. and Gall, J.G., “A tandemly repeated sequence at the termini of the
      extrachromosomal ribosomal RNA renes in Tetrahymena,” J. Mol. Biol. 120, 33–53
      (1978).
12.   Kruger, K., Grabowski, P.J., Zaug, A.J., Sands, J., Gottschling, D.E. and Cech,
      T.R., “Self-splicing RNA: autoexcision and autocyclization of the ribosomal RNA
      intervening sequence of Tetrahymena,” Cell 31, 147–157 (1982).


                                                                                          357


13.   Ratzkin, B. and Carbon, J., “Functional expression of cloned yeast DNA in Escherichia
      coli,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 487–491 (1977).
14.   Struhl, K. and Davis, R.W., “Production of a functional eukaryotic enzyme in
      Escherichia coli: cloning and expression of the yeast structural gene for imidazole-
      glycerolphosphate dehydratase (his3),” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 5255–5259
      (1977).
15.   Szostak, J.W. and Blackburn, E.H., “Cloning yeast telomeres on linear plasmid
      vectors,” Cell 29, 245–255 (1982).
16.   Walmsely, R., Petes, T.D. and Szostak, J.W., “Is there left-handed DNA at the ends of
      yeast chromosomes?” Nature 302, 84–86 (1983).
17.   Shampay, J., Szostak, J.W. and Blackburn, E.H., “DNA sequences of telomeres
      maintained in yeast,” Nature 310, 154–157 (1984).
18.   Walmsley, R.W., Chan, C.S.M., Tye, B.-K. and Petes, T.D., “Unusual DNA sequences
      associated with the ends of yeast chromosomes,” Nature 310, 157–160 (1984).
19.   Szostak, J.W., “Replication and Resolution of Telomeres in Yeast,” Cold Spring
      Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 47, 1187–1194 (1983).
20.   Clarke, L. and Carbon, J., “Isolation of a yeast centromere and construction of
      functional small circular chromosomes,” Nature 287, 504–509 (1980).
21.   Murray, A.W. and Szostak, J.W., “Construction of artificial chromosomes in yeast,”
      Nature 305, 189–193 (1983).
22.   Murray, A.W., Schultes, N.P. and Szostak, J.W., “Chromosome length controls mitotic
      chromosome segregation in yeast,” Cell 45, 529–536 (1986).
23.   Sundin, O. and Varshavsky, A., “Arrest of segregation leads to accumulation of highly
      intertwined catenated dimers: dissection of the final stages of SV40 DNA replication,”
      Cell 25, 659–669 (1981).
24.   Nasmyth, K., “Segregating sister genomes: the molecular biology of chromosome
      separation,” Science 297, 559–565 (2002).
25.   Burke, D.T., Carle, G.F. and Olson, M.V., “Cloning of large segments of exogenous
      DNA into yeast by means of artificial chromosome vectors,” Science 236, 806–812
      (1987).
26.   Blackburn, E.H. and Szostak, J.W., “The molecular structure of centromeres and
      telomeres,” Ann. Rev. Biochem. 53, 163–194 (1984).
27.   Bernards, A., Michels, P.A., Lincke, C.R. and Borst, P., “Growth of chromosome ends
      in multiplying trypanosomes,” Nature 303, 592–597 (1983).
28.   Klobutcher, L.A., Swanton, M.T., Donini, P. and Prescott, D.M., “All gene-sized DNA
      molecules in four species of hypotrichs have the same terminal sequence and an
      unusual 3’ terminus,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78, 3015–3019 (1981).
29.   Greider, C.W. and Blackburn, E.H., “Identification of a specific telomere terminal
      transferase activity in Tetrahymena extracts,” Cell 43, 405–413 (1985).
30.   Greider, C.W. and Blackburn, E.H., “The telomere terminal transferase of
      Tetrahymena is a ribonucleoprotein enzyme with two kinds of primer specificity,” Cell
      51, 887–898 (1987).
31.   de Lange, T., “How telomeres solve the end-protection problem,” Science 326, 948–
      952 (2009).
32.   Lundblad, V. and Szostak, J.W., “A mutant with a defect in telomere elongation leads
      to senescence in yeast,” Cell 57, 633–643 (1989).
33.   Yu, G.L., Bradley, J.D., Attardi, L.D. and Blackburn E.H., “In vivo alteration of tel-
      omere sequences and senescence caused by mutated Tetrahymena telomerase RNAs,”
      Nature 344, 126–132 (1990).
34.   Harley, C.B., Futcher, A.B. and Greider, C.W., “Telomeres shorten during ageing of
      human fibroblasts,” Nature 345, 458–460 (1990).
35.   Bodnar, A.G., Ouellette, M., Frolkis, M., Holt, S.E., Chiu, C.P., Morin, G.B., Harley,
      C.B., Shay, J.W., Lichtsteiner, S. and Wright, W.E., “Extension of life-span by introduc-
      tion of telomerase into normal human cells,” Science 279, 349–352 (1998).



358


36.   Blackburn E.H., Greider C.W. and Szostak J.W., “Telomeres and telomerase: the
      path from maize, Tetrahymena and yeast to human cancer and aging,” Nat. Med. 12,
      1133–1138 (2006).
37.   Greider, C.W., “Telomerase activation. One step on the road to cancer?” Trends Genet.
      15, 109–112 (1999).
38.   Gilbert, W., “The RNA World,” Nature 319, 618 (1986).
39.   Doudna, J.A. and Szostak, J.W., “RNA catalyzed synthesis of complementary strand
      RNA,” Nature 339, 519–522 (1989).
40.   Green, R. and Szostak, J.W., “Selection of a ribozyme that functions as a superior
      template in a self-copying reaction,” Science 258, 1910–1915 (1992).
41.   Ellington, A.E. and Szostak J.W., “In vitro selection of RNA molecules that bind
      specific ligands,” Nature 346, 818–822 (1990).
42.   Tuerk, C. and Gold, L., “Systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment:
      RNA ligands to bacteriophage T4 DNA polymerase,” Science 249, 505–510 (1990).
43.   Sassanfar, M. and Szostak, J.W., “An RNA motif that binds ATP,” Nature 364, 550–553
      (1993).
44.   Bartel, D.P. and Szostak, J.W., “Isolation of new ribozymes from a large pool of
      random sequences,” Science 261, 1411–1418 (1993).
45.   Ekland, E.H., Szostak, J.W. and Bartel, D.P., “Structurally complex and highly active
      RNA ligases derived from random RNA sequences,” Science 269, 364–370 (1995).
46.   Shechner, D.M., Grant, R.A., Bagby, S.C., Koldobskaya, Y., Piccirilli, J.A. and Bartel
      D.P., “Crystal structure of the catalytic core of an RNA-polymerase ribozyme,” Science
      326, 1271–1275 (2009).
47.   Ekland, E.H. and Bartel, D.P., “RNA-catalysed RNA polymerization using nucleoside
      triphosphates,” Nature 383, 192–198 (1996).
48.   Salehi-Ashtiani, K., Luptak, A., Litovchick, S. and Szostak, J.W., “A genome wide
      search for ribozymes reveals an HDV-like sequence in the human CPEB3 gene,”
      Science 313, 1788–1792 (2006).
49.   Theis, M., Si, K. and Kandel, E.R., “Two previously undescribed members of the
      mouse CPEB family of genes and their inducible expression in the principal cell
      layers of the hippocampus,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 9602–9607 (2003).
50.   Vogler, C., Spalek, K., Aerni, A., Demougin, P., Müller, A., Huynh, K.-D.,
      Papassotiropoulos, A. and de Quervain, D.J.-F., “CPEB3 is associated with human
      episodic memory,” Front. Behav. Neurosci. 3, 1–5 (2009).
51.   Roberts, R.W. and Szostak, J.W., “RNA-peptide fusions for the in vitro selection of
      peptides and proteins,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 12297–12302 (1997).
52.   Keefe, A.D. and Szostak, J.W., “Functional proteins from a random sequence library,”
      Nature 410, 715–718 (2001).
53.   Mansy, S.S., Schrum, J.P., Krishnamurthy, M., Tobé, S, Treco, D. and Szostak, J.W.,
      “Template-directed synthesis of a genetic polymer in a model protocell,” Nature 454,
      122–125 (2008).
54.   Hanczyc, M.M, Fujikawa, S.M. and Szostak, J.W., “Experimental models of primi-
      tive cellular compartments: Encapsulation, growth and division,” Science 2003; 302,
      618–622 (2003).
55.   Ferris, J.P., Hill, A.R., Jr, Liu, R. and Orgel, L.E., “Synthesis of long prebiotic
      oligomers on mineral surfaces,” Nature 381, 59–61 (1996).
56.   Zhu, T.F. and Szostak, J.W., “Coupled growth and division of model protocell
      membranes,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 5705–5713 (2009).
57.   Orgel, L.E., “Molecular replication,” Nature 358, 203–209 (1992).
58.   Schrum, J., Ricardo, A., Krishnamurthy, K., Blain, J.C. and Szostak, J.W.,
      “Efficient and rapid template-directed nucleic acid copying using 2´-amino-2´,
      3´-dideoxyribonucleoside-5´-phosphorimidazolide monomers,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 31,
      14560–14570 (2009).
Portrait photo of Professor Szostak by photographer Ulla Montan.


                                                                                       359
