300




      Immune Checkpoint
      Blockade in Cancer Therapy
      Nobel Lecture, December 7, 2018 by
      James P. Allison
      University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Parker
      Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, CA, USA


      INTRODUCTION
      The idea of using the immune system to fight cancer has been around for
      decades, with multiple false starts along the way. The field of cancer
      immunotherapy had largely been focused entirely on ways in which to
      turn T cells on, with implementation of therapies such as cytokines, for
      example IL-2, or antigenic vaccines. However, our understanding of T
      cells at the time was limited. Our work, together with that of a cadre of
      immunologists dedicated to understanding the fundamental mechanisms
      involved in regulating T cell responses, showed that the process was more
      complicated. These fundamental studies also revealed inhibitory path-
      ways that could be modulated to generate powerful T cell responses with
      subsequent tumor elimination. This led to the successful development of
      immune checkpoint blockade as a potential curative cancer therapy.
         My love for T cells took root during an undergraduate immunology
      course in the 1960s. I was majoring in biochemistry with my thesis pro-
      ject being biochemical and serologic characterization of anti-neoplastic
      bacterial asparaginases, which at the time were showing promise in treat-
      ing childhood leukemias. Professor Bill Mandy, who was primarily a B
      cell/antibody guy, taught the course, and he gave one lecture on T cells,
      which in 1965 had been shown by Max Cooper and Robert Good to be a


                                                        James P. Allison Lecture   301


lineage distinct from antibody generating B cells (1). While B cells and
antibodies are certainly fascinating, T cells were new and little was known
about them beyond the fact that they had the ability to travel all over the
body and recognize and eliminate cells with foreign features, including
viral, transplantation, and possible tumor antigens. I was hooked and
determined to spend my career delving into the secrets of T cells.
   With the help of Bill Mandy and Barrie Kitto, my dissertation advisors
in 1974, I secured a postdoctoral position in Ralph Reisfeld’s laboratory at
the (then) Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation in La Jolla, California.
Scripps was a hotbed of immunological research. My main project in the
Reisfeld lab was to bring my background in protein biochemistry to bear
on structural studies of human histocompatibility antigens. While I was
fairly productive and obtained some of the first amino acid sequence data
on both Class I and Class II antigens, I was somewhat frustrated in that I
was not able to take full advantage of the opportunities available in T cell
biology at Scripps.


THE SCIENCE PARK YEARS
In 1978, as a newly minted assistant professor with a small lab in a pine
forest near Smithville, Texas, at the Science Park campus of the Univer-
sity of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, I remained fascinated by the
complexity of the T cell response, which involved moving through the
body to sample different antigens and then making decisions about when
to proliferate in order to amass an army of cells that would eradicate any
foreign entity. The super hero of our immune system! But, how did T cells
make such complicated decisions? What were the signals that regulated T
cell responses?
   Throughout the 1970s and early 1980s there were remarkable advances
in our understanding of T cell biology, including the clonal nature and
MHC restriction of antigen recognition, and the role of a variety of cell
surface molecules and cytokines in regulation of T cell responses. How-
ever, although many theories existed regarding the nature of the T cell
receptor (TCR), its identification remained elusive and began to be
regarded as the “holy grail” of immunology.
   My first set of experiments to identify the TCR stemmed from a lecture
I heard by Irv Weissman and led me to use a biochemical approach in
identification of the protein structure of the TCR. I should point out that I
was abetted by my relative ignorance of the field and the relative isolation
of the Science Park.
   The basic assumptions were: (1) the T cell antigen receptor, like the
individual idiotypes associated with the B cell receptor, should be detect-
able in a clonotypic fashion as individually specific antigens, which could


302   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      be identified by monoclonal antibodies; (2) the structure detected by
      these antibodies should be on all T cell tumors and normal T cells but not
      on B cells; and (3) the structure from different clones should have both
      tumor specific and shared peptide structures. Thus, I made a monoclonal
      antibody, 124-40, against C6XL, which was in the panel of lymphomas
      that I used in my thesis project on anti-tumor activity of asparaginase.
      The activity of the antibody with C6XL could be detected by flow cytome-
      try and radioimmune assay. None of the other lymphomas in the panel
      reacted with 124-40, nor did normal splenic T cells. Working with Brad
      McIntyre, a summer undergraduate intern, then a research technician and
      ultimately a doctoral student, we carried out a series of immunochemical
      tests of the assumptions. Radioimunoprecipitation using the 124-40 mon-
      oclonal on the original C6XL lymphoma yielded a disulfide-bonded het-
      erodimer with 39 and 41 kDa components. The antibody did not precipi-
      tate anything from other T cell lymphomas, again indicating that the anti-
      gen was clonally-specific (2). Taking the antigen eluted from that anti-
      body, I generated a rabbit polyclonal antibody that interacted with all T
      cells. After reduction, the protein eluted from the antibody could be seen
      clearly on a 2D blot and consisted of α and β heterodimers. Peptide map-
      ping showed that each consisted of both shared and clonally distinct pep-
      tides. We ran the whole cell lysate out on a gel and saw that the rabbit pol-
      yclonal reacted with the same protein on all T cells. The clonally-specific
      candidate receptor was also common to all T cells (3).
         We published these data and proposed that the protein we had identi-
      fied was the elusive TCR. Unfortunately, we had no functional data and
      there was initially skepticism. Luckily, at about the same time, John Kap-
      pler and Pippa Marrack, at the National Jewish Hospital in Denver, had
      developed a clonotypic monoclonal antibody that caused IL-2 release by
      an antigen-specific hybridoma, which was an indication of activation. I
      sent them our antibody and they confirmed that the protein identified by
      both our labs had the same heterodimeric structure (4).
         There were other laboratories with similar antibodies, and others with
      molecular cloning techniques, so there was an intense race to clone the
      genes for the TCR. I decided to go to Irv Weissman’s lab and work with
      Tom St. John to clone the genes, but we were ultimately beaten on that
      front by excellent work from Mark Davis and Steve Hedrick, along with
      Tak Mak, who cloned the beta chain of mouse and human TCR (5–7).


      THE BERKELEY YEARS
      While I was at Stanford trying to clone the TCR genes, I was invited to
      present a seminar on my work at the University of California, Berkeley
      and meet some of the faculty. A few weeks later, I was asked if I was inter-


                                                        James P. Allison Lecture   303


ested in a faculty position. In 1984, after much encouragement by Marion
“Bunny” Koshland, who was the leader of Immunology at Berkeley, and
who also became a close friend and mentor, I decided to accept the offer
and moved to Berkeley. After eight years in the bucolic environment of
Science Park, UC Berkeley was a revelation and initially somewhat scary.
The campus teemed with intellectual and scientific fervor, and new ideas
could be welcomed, but subjected to a healthy and helpful degree of skep-
ticism.
   By the late 1980s, it became clear that the TCR was not the whole story
in T cell activation. For T cell tumors and hybridomas, engagement of the
TCR alone was sufficient for activation. However, as it became possible to
grow and study clones of normal T cells, it was found that TCR engage-
ment alone was not sufficient for T cell activation. Several labs, including
notably that of Ronald Schwartz at the National Institute for Allergy and
Immunological Diseases, showed that additional signals were required
(8). The Schwartz group showed that while antigen presenting cells
(APCs) pulsed with the appropriate antigenic peptide could fully activate
T cell clones, treatment of the pulsed APCs with certain chemical fixa-
tives resulted in loss of T cell activation. Furthermore, T cells exposed to
antigen in this manner were unresponsive when re-exposed to antigen on
unfixed APCs. Thus, the T cells had been rendered anergic. However, if T
cells were exposed to chemically fixed peptide-pulsed APCs in the pres-
ence of unfixed APCs that had not been pulsed with antigen, the T cells
were fully activated. This led to the 2-signal model for T cell activation by
APCs. Signal 1 is provided upon recognition of antigen/MHC complexes
by the T cell antigen receptor. Signal 2, the costimulatory signal, was pro-
vided by an antigen-independent signal engaging an unknown costimula-
tory receptor on the T cell. The race was on to determine the identity of
the receptor/ligand pair that mediated costimulation.
   In the mid 1980s, Hansen, Ledbetter, June, and others in Robert Now-
inski’s group had produced an antibody to human T cells named 9.3 and
showed that it elevated IL-2 production from T cells (9). The target of 9.3
was later shown to be CD28 (10). Enhancement of IL-2 production
seemed to be a property consistent with costimulation but, unfortunately,
the mouse homolog was not known. With the help of Brian Seed at MIT
and Jane Gross, a graduate student in my lab, we succeeded in cloning the
mouse CD28 gene and went on to produce a monoclonal antibody to
mouse CD28 (11). Fiona Harding, a postdoc in the lab, in collaboration
with my colleague, David Raulet, at Berkeley, used this antibody to show
that engagement of CD28 by the antibody was sufficient and necessary to
prevent the induction of anergy in T cell clones by fixed antigen-pulsed
APCs. In addition, we showed that the CD28 antibody, in combination
with antibodies to the T cell antigen receptor, allowed for full activation


304   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      of naïve T cells (12). Thus, CD28 met the criteria for an essential costimu-
      latory receptor.
          Peter Linsley demonstrated that a molecule called B7, which was origi-
      nally found on B cells but also expressed by dendritic cells and other
      hematopoietic cells, was a ligand for CD28 (13). A few years later, several
      groups showed that a second molecule, B7-2, was also a ligand for CD28.
      Thus, it appeared that when a T cell received contemporaneous signals
      through the TCR and CD28 from antigen/MHC complexes and B7 mole-
      cules on an APC, such as a dendritic cell, a program initiated in the T cell
      allows rapid proliferation and acquisition of effector function, which
      results in generation of a T cell army from a small number of relevant T
      cells.
          It was at this point that that there was an unexpected twist to the story.
      In 1988 Pierre Golstein (Marseille) cloned a gene for a T cell molecule he
      named cytotoxic lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) (14). Little was known
      of it except that it was highly homologous to CD28, but was only found on
      T cells after activation. Peter Linsley made a recombinant form of
      CTLA-4 and showed that, like CD28, it bound to both B7-1 and B7-2,
      albeit with much higher avidities. While CTLA-4 was initially thought to
      be another costimulatory molecule, the evidence remained inconclusive.
      Finally, in the mid 1990s both Jeff Bluestone’s lab and Max Krummel, an
      excellent postdoc in my lab, using an antibody that blocked CTLA-4,
      showed conclusively that CTLA-4 negatively regulates T cell activation by
      opposing CD28-mediated costimulation (15, 16). It was a paradigm-shift-
      ing finding, revealing CTLA-4 as the first immune checkpoint. Subse-
      quently, it was shown that mice in which the ctla-4 gene had been inacti-
      vated suffer from a rapid T cell lymphadenopathy and die about 3 weeks
      after birth (17–19). Basically, the T cells in CTLA-4 knockout mice cannot
      stop dividing. This suggests that CTLA-4 is a crucial downregulator of the
      proliferative phase that follows activation of T cells by antigen regulation
      and costimulation. Thus, activation of T cells results in not only the pro-
      liferative phase, but also induction of expression the CTLA-4 gene and
      subsequent events which will terminate proliferation.
          One additional observation that we had made contributed to the devel-
      opment of immune checkpoint therapy. In a series of experiments
      designed with the goal of developing a new strategy for therapeutic vacci-
      nation, we engineered mouse tumor cell lines to express the CD28 ligand
      B7. Sarah Townsend, a postdoc in my lab, showed that tumor cell lines
      that normally grew in mice did not grow after transfection with the B7-1
      gene unless T cells were depleted (20). Thus, the tumors expressed suffi-
      cient antigens for rejection, but were unable to initiate an effective T cell
      response because of the lack of ability to provide the B7 costimulatory
      signal required by CD28. This suggested that arising tumor cells might be


                                                      James P. Allison Lecture   305


invisible to T cells, allowing them to grow uninhibited by immune
responses until reaching a size that results in tumor cell death to cause
inflammation and accumulation of antigen presenting which can phago-
cytize dying tumor cells and presenting tumor antigens in the context of
costimulation and cross-prime naïve T cells. This would lead to T cell
activation and proliferation. This would result in induction of the CTLA-4
pathway, which would perform its normal function of limiting the T cell
response.
   Based on our new data regarding the signals that regulate T cell
responses, I wondered how we could use the information to treat cancer. I
surmised that tumor cells, which do not express B7 molecules, have a
head start against the immune system because T cells could not recognize
the tumor cells initially; however, as tumors got bigger and a few tumor
cells died, APCs would take up the dead tumor cells by phagocytosis and
then present mutated tumor antigens via MHC to T cells. T cells would
interact with APCs, in the context of T cell receptor plus MHC with anti-
gen (signal 1) and CD28 plus B7, which would lead to T cell activation
consisting of proliferation and cytokine production, and forming an army
of activated T cells focused on eradicating tumors. But, this process
would be limited by CTLA-4 (Figure 1). CTLA-4 would halt the T cell
response in order to prevent T cells from continuous proliferation and
cytokine production, which would have pathologic consequences includ-
ing autoimmunity and death. In my mind, it became a race; if CTLA-4
halted T cell responses too soon, before all tumor cells were eradicated,
the tumor would win and the cancer would persist. I considered the pos-
sibility that an antibody to block CTLA-4 would enable T cell responses
to persist long enough to eradicate all tumor cells and perhaps cure at
least some cancers (Figure 2).
   Then, along with Max Krummel and Dana Leach in my lab, I designed
experiments in tumor-bearing mice to test whether anti-CTLA-4 antibody
would lead to tumor rejection. These studies were initially conducted in
1994 and then reproduced in multiple other tumor models before we pub-
lished our findings in 1996. The data were clear and convincing, in the
presence of a CTLA-4-blocking antibody, after a short delay while the
immune system ramped up, tumors simply melted away (21) (Figure 3).
Not only that, those animals then mounted a strong immune response to
rechallenge the same tumors, often completely rejecting them.
   My lab conducted many successful experiments in murine models over
the next several years; however, I desperately wanted to translate my idea
to the clinic. I approached many different pharmaceutical companies but
they were resistant to the idea of developing an immunotherapy agent to
treat cancer. The field of cancer immunotherapy had many failures, and
companies were not interested in pursuing another potential failure.


306   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Figure 1. Dynamic Integration of TCR and Costimulatory Signals (circa 1996). Cartoon
      illustrates the primary cell surface signaling receptors involved in antigen-specific T cell
      activation and cognate ligands on APCs. T cells that are primed through the interaction of
      the TCR with antigen-bound MHCs enter a state of anergy in the absence of co-stimula-
      tion. Interaction of CD28 with B7 on the APC surface fully activates the T cell and initiates
      proliferation, while CTLA-4 on the T cell surface disrupts co-stimulation and inhibits T cell
      proliferation. (represents work performed in my laboratory by Jane Gross, Fiona Harding,
      Max Krummel, Cynthia Chambers, Monika Brunner, Egen and Kuhns).




      Figure 2. CTLA-4 Blockade Enhances Tumor-Specific Immune Responses. CTLA-4 on the
      T cell surface inhibits effective tumor-immune response by reducing T cell proliferation.
      Blockade of CTLA-4 removes inhibition of T cell proliferation and increases the antitumor
      response.


                                                                James P. Allison Lecture   307




Figure 3. Anti-CTLA-4 Induces Regression of Transplantable Murine Tumor. Addition of
CTLA-4 inhibitory antibody results in complete tumor rejection in BALB/c mice injected
with V51BLim10 colon carcinoma cells (21).




    Luckily, my friend Alan Korman was interested in my idea and, with
the encouragement of Nils Lonberg and others, his new job at Medarex
provided him with the opportunity to develop a humanized anti-CTLA-4
antibody in a novel murine model that had been genetically engineered to
express human immune genes.
    The new humanized anti-CTLA-4 antibody was initially called MDX-
CTLA-4 and then was referred to as MDX-010. Medarex designed a Phase
I clinical trial with MDX-CTLA-4 based on input from multiple investiga-
tors, including world-renowned immunologist, Dr. Lloyd Old, and his
post-doctoral fellow at the time, Dr. Padmanee (Pam) Sharma. I had very
little knowledge regarding clinical trials at the time, but I was determined
to learn everything possible.
    A pilot clinical trial with the anti-CTLA-4 antibody at a single dose of
3mg/kg was initiated in patients with metastatic prostate cancer and
reported for the first time at the American Society of Clinical Oncology
(ASCO) in May 2002, with subsequent publication in 2007, which demon-
strated decline in the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) tumor marker by
greater than or equal to 50% in 2 of 14 treated patients (22). In another
clinical trial, MDX-CTLA-4 antibody was given as a single dose of 3mg/kg
to patients with different tumor types, including patients with metastatic


308   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      non-small cell lung cancer, patients with metastatic ovarian cancer,
      patients with acute myelogenous leukemia, and patients with metastatic
      melanoma. Preliminary data from the patients with metastatic melanoma,
      who were enrolled on this clinical trial between November 2000 and
      October 2002, were encouraging based on tumor biopsies demonstrating
      tumor necrosis and T cell infiltration into tumors (23). These data quickly
      led to multiple clinical trials for patients with metastatic melanoma.
      Another clinical trial with MDX-010 in 14 patients with metastatic mela-
      noma reported 3 patients, who either had complete (2 patients) or partial
      regression (1 patient) of their tumors, including regression of brain metas-
      tasis (24).
         Prior to anti-CTLA-4 therapy, patients with metastatic melanoma had
      poor long-term prognosis, with approximately 75% of patients surviving
      less than one year and 5-year mortality rate of 90% (25). The median
      overall survival at the time was approximately 8 months for patients with
      metastatic melanoma (26), and there was typically shorter life span for
      patients with brain metastases (27). At the time, approved therapies for
      patients with metastatic melanoma consisted of the chemotherapeutic
      agent dacarbazine (DTIC) or its oral analogue temozolamide or fotemus-
      tine chemotherapy or biochemotherapy regimens that included cytokine
      therapies with IL-2 or IFN-α, which led to reported responses but, the
      increased response rates observed with these agents did not translate to
      improved overall survival for patients (26–31). In fact, prior to anti-
      CTLA-4 therapy, no agent approved for the treatment of metastatic mela-
      noma had been shown to improve the overall survival of patients in a ran-
      domized, phase III clinical trial.
         The initial studies with anti-CTLA-4 in patients with metastatic mela-
      noma led to multiple phase I and phase II clinical trials with various mon-
      otherapy or combination therapy studies, including combination studies
      with IL-2, gp-100 peptide vaccine, or chemotherapy (32). These studies
      identified toxicities, termed immune-related adverse events (irAEs),
      which were associated with anti-CTLA-4 therapy and confirmed to be
      inflammatory in nature, with increased infiltration of immune cells into
      affected tissues, which was documented by histopathology studies. The
      irAEs were found to be reversible in most cases, especially with cessation
      of anti-CTLA-4 therapy and administration of steroid therapy. Another
      key finding from these clinical trials was related to the unique kinetics of
      responses observed after treatment with anti-CTLA-4. Some patients had
      clinical responses that could be categorized as responding to therapy as
      per the previously established Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tum-
      ors (RECIST) for evaluation of tumor response to therapy, which required
      tumor shrinkage (at least a 30% decrease) without any associated growth
      (defined as greater than or equal to 20% increase in the sum of diameters


                                                       James P. Allison Lecture   309


and at least 5 mm increase) in the existing tumor lesions designated as
target lesions or any development of new tumor lesions (33). However,
some patients had disease progression (with increase in size of the tum-
ors or development of new tumor lesions) before they eventually had
response to anti-CTLA-4 therapy. According to RECIST criteria, these
patients would not be counted as having had a response to anti-CTLA-4
therapy, which would imply that the drug did not work. The clinical ter-
minology and endpoints were foreign to me. I needed to learn more.
   Like in the animal models, it takes some time for patients to initiate a
strong immune response after anti-CTLA-4 checkpoint blockade, and as
such, even in the best responders, tumors often continued to progress for
some time before shrinking and disappearing, which we published in our
animal studies in 1996 (21). Because of this, the traditional RECIST crite-
ria, which rely on definitions that were used for evaluating responses to
chemotherapy agents that directly target tumor cells, as opposed to
immunotherapy agents, which target immune cells to enable activation
and proliferation for subsequent attack on tumor cells, many early studies
underestimated the clinical benefit of anti-CTLA-4 therapy.


THE MSKCC YEARS
Our goal, based on our animal studies, was to eliminate the disease.
When examining overall survival (a more appropriate metric for immuno-
therapy), we saw that patients treated with anti-CTLA-4 were surviving
longer than expected. These observations led me to become involved with
the clinical development of anti-CTLA-4, which meant that I needed to be
working with the clinical teams that were developing the clinical trials. In
2004, I moved from the University of California at Berkeley to Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC), which was leading the phase III
clinical trials for anti-CTLA-4 therapy. I took a faculty position as Chair
of Immunology at MSKCC and became collaborators with the clinical
investigators and the pharmaceutical company, Bristol-Myers Squibb
(BMS), which had entered into collaboration with Medarex to lead the
phase III clinical trials with anti-CTLA-4.
   I quickly learned that clinical trials comprised 3 phases: phase I trials
represented safety studies to evaluate how a drug affected humans, with
various doses and/or schedules of a drug being tested; phase II trials rep-
resented efficacy studies to determine whether an established dose and
schedule of drug could elicit clinical responses in patients; and phase III
trials represented studies comparing the new drug to an established
standard-of-care treatment in order to determine whether the new drug
will become the new standard-of-care treatment. The phase I and phase
II studies highlighted the safety issues and potential clinical benefit of


310   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      anti-CTLA-4 but, the reported response rates as per defined RECIST cri-
      teria were less than 10%, which was not sufficient to lead to FDA
      approval. In addition, a second pharmaceutical company, Pfizer, had
      launched their own anti-CTLA-4 program and their phase III clinical trial
      was declared a failure in 2008.
         BMS started their first phase III clinical trial with anti-CTLA-4 (MDX-
      010, which was subsequently named ipilimumab) in 2003. Based on avail-
      able data at the time, many of us, including myself, Jedd Wolchok, Padma-
      nee Sharma and Lloyd Old, felt strongly that the primary endpoint of the
      trial should be changed to overall survival (OS). We worked closely with
      Rachel Humphrey at BMS and she relayed our concerns to the leadership
      team at BMS, including Elliott Sigal, who was then Chief Scientific Officer
      and President of Research and Development. The phase III clinical trial
      was then amended to change the primary endpoint to OS. In 2010, the
      data was reported at the ASCO annual meeting and, for the first time, a
      randomized phase III clinical trial for patients with unresectable stage III
      or IV metastatic melanoma demonstrated an overall survival benefit, with
      ~45% of patients who received anti-CTLA-4 reported to be alive at 1 year
      and ~23% of patients who received anti-CTLA-4 reported to be alive at 2
      years (34). Subsequent data reported from a cohort of about 5000
      patients treated with anti-CTLA-4 (ipilimumab) on multiple clinical trials
      demonstrated 5-year survival for about 20% of patients (35) (Figure 4).
      The US FDA approved ipilimumab for the treatment of patients with met-
      astatic melanoma in 2011.




      Figure 4. Ipilimumab induces lasting responses in 21% of patients with metastatic melano-
      ma. Graph shows pooled data from 4846 patients with metastatic melanoma treated with
      ipilimumab. The group showed a 3-year overall survival (OS), and patients surviving 3
      years remained tumor-free for 10 years and longer (35).


                                                       James P. Allison Lecture   311


   Clearly, the discovery of immune checkpoint inhibition had set into
motion a line of work with the potential to cure all cancers. The success
of anti-CTLA-4 in the clinic led to research work to identify other
immune inhibitory pathways, with elegant work by other investigators,
including Gordon Freeman, Arlene Sharpe, Lieping Chen and Tasuku
Honjo in deciphering the inhibitory role of the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway and
development of antibodies that block these inhibitory pathways to
improve anti-tumor T cell responses and clinical outcomes (reviewed in
Dr. Honjo’s lecture). More recently, combination therapy with anti-
CTLA-4 (ipilimumab) plus anti-PD-1 antibody (nivolumab) was US
FDA-approved for the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma
(36) and for patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (37).
   Since immune checkpoint therapy (anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1/PD-L1
antibodies) targets immune cells, and specifically T cells, these treatments
may theoretically provide clinical benefit for all cancer patients, regard-
less of tumor type. The clinical data supports this notion since multiple
clinical trials have reported benefit for many different cancer types, which
led the US FDA to approve immune checkpoint therapies for patients
with diagnoses of: melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, bladder cancer, gas-
tric cancer, head and neck cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, Hodgkin’s
disease, and even tumors defined by genetic mutations known as micro-
satellite instability (MSI) as opposed to tumors defined by anatomical
location.


MDACC AND THE FUTURE
Thousands of patients have benefitted from immune checkpoint therapy,
but there are thousands of patients who do not respond to the treatments.
We need dedicated research efforts to evaluate patients’ immune
responses within the tumor microenvironment, both before and while on
treatment, in order to have a better understanding of why some patients
respond to treatment while others do not. The first pre-surgical study to
address this issue was conducted by Dr. Padmanee Sharma and published
in 2006. She designed a clinical trial with anti-CTLA-4 in order to obtain
entire cystectomy samples from patients with bladder cancer who
received anti-CTLA-4 prior to surgery. She designed novel immune moni-
toring assays to evaluate the immune responses in the bladder tumors
and identified T cells expressing inducible costimulator (ICOS) as a criti-
cal component of successful anti-tumor responses (38-41). Clinical trials
are now underway to test the concept of targeting ICOS plus anti-CTLA-4
as a novel combination strategy to improve clinical responses for more
patients. Dr. Sharma pioneered these types of reverse translational stud-
ies, which consist of innovative clinical trials focused on studying human


312   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Figure 5. Improving Survival with Combination Therapy. Traditional cytotoxic therapies,
      seek to improve survival incrementally (horizontal arrow). Immunotherapies such as
      ipilimumab produce long-term responses, resulting in a ‘tail’ (above 1st vertical line) of pa-
      tients that remain cancer-free. Combination therapies seek to ‘raise the tail’ (2nd vertical
      line), provided lasting responses to a larger number of patients.



      immune responses with subsequent development of hypotheses that can
      be tested in the laboratory to generate new data for the next set of clinical
      studies. These studies are the foundation on which we built the Immuno-
      therapy Platform at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. The Immunotherapy
      Platform integrates both clinical trials and laboratory studies to develop
      novel treatments for cancer patients, with the hope of increasing overall
      survival for even more patients (Figure 5).


      ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
      In the course of the work described in this document I have benefited
      from interactions with a large number of individuals, both from the four
      Institutions with which I have had the privilege to be associated, and even
      more that I have encountered in my journey. It is not possible to overesti-
      mate my gratitude for these interactions, whether they be discussions,
      collaborations, arguments, or social interactions. Many of these, too
      many to name, have led to long lasting friendships. These include faculty,
      trainees, and laboratory staff. I have tried to mention those primarily
      responsible for aspects of the work, but it is not possible to mention all,
      and I apologize for any omissions.
         I would like also to thank the National Cancer Institute, the Howard
      Hughes Medical Institute, and the Cancer Prevention and Research Insti-


                                                            James P. Allison Lecture   313


tute of Texas, as well the Cancer Research Institute, the Prostate Cancer
Foundation, the Melanoma Alliance, and the Parker Institute for Cancer
Immunotherapy for supporting my research over the years.
   I would also like to express my gratitude for Medarex and Bristol
Myers-Squibb for having the courage in making it possible to bring my
dream to the clinic, and most of all the patients involved in the clinical tri-
als for the courage to take a chance on a new modality of cancer therapy.
   Finally, I dedicate this Nobel Lecture and my Nobel Prize to my love
and soulmate, Padmanee Sharma, my partner in life and science.




references
1. Cooper MD, Peterson RD, & Good RA (1965) Delineation of the Thymic and
    Bursal Lymphoid Systems in the Chicken. Nature 205:143–146.
2. Allison JP, McIntyre BW, & Bloch D (1982) Tumor-specific antigen of murine
    T-lymphoma defined with monoclonal antibody. Journal of immunology (Balti-
    more, Md.: 1950) 129(5):2293–2300.
3. McIntyre BW & Allison JP (1983) The mouse T cell receptor: structural hetero-
    geneity of molecules of normal T cells defined by xenoantiserum. Cell
    34(3):739–746.
4. Kappler J, et al. (1983) The major histocompatibility complex-restricted anti-
    gen receptor on T cells in mouse and man: identification of constant and varia-
    ble peptides. Cell 35(1):295–302.
5. Yanagi Y, et al. (1984) A human T cell-specific cDNA clone encodes a protein
    having extensive homology to immunoglobulin chains. Nature 308(5955):145–
    149.
6. Hedrick SM, Nielsen EA, Kavaler J, Cohen DI, & Davis MM (1984) Sequence
    relationships between putative T-cell receptor polypeptides and immunoglob-
    ulins. Nature 308(5955):153–158.
7. Hedrick SM, Cohen DI, Nielsen EA, & Davis MM (1984) Isolation of cDNA
    clones encoding T cell-specific membrane-associated proteins. Nature
    308(5955):149–153.
8. Jenkins MK & Schwartz RH (1987) Antigen presentation by chemically modi-
    fied splenocytes induces antigen-specific T cell unresponsiveness in vitro and
    in vivo. J Exp Med 165(2):302–319.
9. Martin PJ, et al. (1986) A 44 kilodalton cell surface homodimer regulates inter-
    leukin 2 production by activated human T lymphocytes. Journal of immunology
    (Baltimore, Md.: 1950) 136(9):3282–3287.
10. Linsley PS & Ledbetter JA (1993) The role of the CD28 receptor during T cell
    responses to antigen. Annu Rev Immunol 11:191–212.
11. Gross JA, Callas E, & Allison JP (1992) Identification and distribution of the
    costimulatory receptor CD28 in the mouse. Journal of immunology (Baltimore,
    Md.: 1950) 149(2):380–388.
12. Harding FA, McArthur JG, Gross JA, Raulet DH, & Allison JP (1992) CD28-me-
    diated signalling co-stimulates murine T cells and prevents induction of anergy
    in T-cell clones. Nature 356(6370):607–609.


314   THE NOBEL PRIZES

      13. Linsley PS, Clark EA, & Ledbetter JA (1990) T-cell antigen CD28 mediates
          adhesion with B cells by interacting with activation antigen B7/BB-1. Proc Natl
          Acad Sci U S A 87(13):5031–5035.
      14. Brunet JF, et al. (1987) A new member of the immunoglobulin superfami-
          ly-CTLA-4. Nature 328(6127):267–270.
      15. Krummel MF & Allison JP (1995) CD28 and CTLA-4 have opposing effects on
          the response of T cells to stimulation. J Exp Med 182(2):459–465.
      16. Walunas TL, et al. (1994) CTLA-4 can function as a negative regulator of T cell
          activation. Immunity 1(5):405–413.
      17. Waterhouse P, et al. (1995) Lymphoproliferative disorders with early lethality
          in mice deficient in Ctla-4. Science 270(5238):985–988.
      18. Tivol EA, et al. (1995) Loss of CTLA-4 leads to massive lymphoproliferation
          and fatal multiorgan tissue destruction, revealing a critical negative regulatory
          role of CTLA-4. Immunity 3(5):541–547.
      19. Chambers CA, Sullivan TJ, & Allison JP (1997) Lymphoproliferation in
          CTLA-4-deficient mice is mediated by costimulation-dependent activation of
          CD4+ T cells. Immunity 7(6):885–895.
      20. Townsend SE & Allison JP (1993) Tumor rejection after direct costimulation of
          CD8+ T cells by B7-transfected melanoma cells. Science 259(5093):368–370.
      21. Leach DR, Krummel MF, & Allison JP (1996) Enhancement of antitumor
          immunity by CTLA-4 blockade. Science 271(5256):1734–1736.
      22. Small EJ, et al. (2007) A pilot trial of CTLA-4 blockade with human anti-
          CTLA-4 in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res
          13(6):1810–1815.
      23. Hodi FS, et al. (2003) Biologic activity of cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated
          antigen 4 antibody blockade in previously vaccinated metastatic melanoma
          and ovarian carcinoma patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100(8):4712–4717.
      24. Phan GQ, et al. (2003) Cancer regression and autoimmunity induced by cyto-
          toxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 blockade in patients with metastatic
          melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100(14):8372–8377.
      25. Korn EL, et al. (2008) Meta-analysis of phase II cooperative group trials in
          metastatic stage IV melanoma to determine progression-free and overall sur-
          vival benchmarks for future phase II trials. J Clin Oncol 26(4):527–534.
      26. Garbe C, Eigentler TK, Keilholz U, Hauschild A, & Kirkwood JM (2011) Sys-
          tematic review of medical treatment in melanoma: current status and future
          prospects. Oncologist 16(1):5–24.
      27. Sloan AE, Nock CJ, & Einstein DB (2009) Diagnosis and treatment of mela-
          noma brain metastasis: a literature review. Cancer Control 16(3):248–255.
      28. Agarwala SS (2010) Novel immunotherapies as potential therapeutic partners
          for traditional or targeted agents: cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 blockade
          in advanced melanoma. Melanoma Res 20(1):1–10.
      29. Eggermont AM & Kirkwood JM (2004) Re-evaluating the role of dacarbazine
          in metastatic melanoma: what have we learned in 30 years? Eur J Cancer
          40(12):1825–1836.
      30. Rosenberg SA (2012) Raising the bar: the curative potential of human cancer
          immunotherapy. Sci Transl Med 4(127):127ps128.
      31. Eggermont AM (2010) Advances in systemic treatment of melanoma. Ann
          Oncol 21 Suppl 7:vii339–344.
      32. Wolchok JD, et al. (2013) Development of ipilimumab: a novel immunothera-
          peutic approach for the treatment of advanced melanoma. Ann N Y Acad Sci
          1291:1–13.


                                                              James P. Allison Lecture   315


33. Eisenhauer EA, et al. (2009) New response evaluation criteria in solid
    tumours: revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1). Eur J Cancer 45(2):228–247.
34. Hodi FS, et al. (2010) Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with met-
    astatic melanoma. N Engl J Med 363(8):711–723.
35. Schadendorf D, et al. (2015) Pooled Analysis of Long-Term Survival Data From
    Phase II and Phase III Trials of Ipilimumab in Unresectable or Metastatic Mel-
    anoma. J Clin Oncol 33(17):1889–1894.
36. Wolchok JD, et al. (2017) Overall Survival with Combined Nivolumab and Ipili-
    mumab in Advanced Melanoma. N Engl J Med 377(14):1345–1356.
37. Motzer RJ, et al. (2018) Nivolumab plus Ipilimumab versus Sunitinib in
    Advanced Renal-Cell Carcinoma. N Engl J Med 378(14):1277–1290.
38. Liakou CI, et al. (2008) CTLA-4 blockade increases IFNgamma-producing
    CD4+ICOShi cells to shift the ratio of effector to regulatory T cells in cancer
    patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105(39):14987–14992.
39. Carthon BC, et al. (2010) Preoperative CTLA-4 blockade: tolerability and
    immune monitoring in the setting of a presurgical clinical trial. Clin Cancer Res
    16(10):2861–2871.
40. Fu T, He Q, & Sharma P (2011) The ICOS/ICOSL pathway is required for opti-
    mal antitumor responses mediated by anti-CTLA-4 therapy. Cancer Res
    71(16):5445–5454.
41. Fan X, Quezada SA, Sepulveda MA, Sharma P, & Allison JP (2014) Engagement
    of the ICOS pathway markedly enhances efficacy of CTLA-4 blockade in can-
    cer immunotherapy. J Exp Med 211(4):715–725.
