320   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      The Little Flies and
      their Genes:
      How Research Exploiting Drosophila has led to
      Prize-wining Advances in Genetic and Biological Knowl-
      edge, all the way to uncovering Mysteries
      of the Circadian Clock

      Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2017 by
      Jeffrey C. Hall
      Cambridge, Maine, ME, USA.



      this essay will pay homage to basic research. Context: The 2017
      Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (P or M). For this, the word “or”
      alludes to the other noun (P) meaning essentially anything biological,
      irrespective of any apparent M relevance. All bio-phenomena, at base, are
      “physiological,” which is so even for genetics (how cellular processes
      mediate replication of the genetic material and transmission of it from
      one generation to another: cellular and parent/offspring).

         The subject matter that follows will have much to do with a subset of
      the basic-research enterprise: genetics, in part from historical perspec-
      tives, both generic and personal. The former adjective alludes to putting
      rhythm-related genetic studies in contexts extending, at times, beyond
      “the little flies;” the latter adjective points to 20th and 21st century devel-
      opmental-, behavioral-, neural-, and molecular-genetic matters revolving
      round the fruit-fly Drosophila melanogaster.


                                                          Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   321


   With regard to the foregoing introductory passages, the 2017 trio of P
or M awardees performed research that was deeply rooted in genetic and
molecular-biological studies of Drosophila. The deep background of
research in those related arenas led to knowledge and materials that were
crucial for establishing and sustaining research enterprises in what came
to be called “chrono-genetics:” studies of daily biological rhythms from
genetic (mutational and molecular) perspectives.
   I invoked the adjective “basic” up-top in order to claim that a Nobel
Prize in the biological field need not necessarily have any practical signifi-
cance, at least early on, such as impacts connected with “Medicine”. That
said, huge numbers of advances made on behalf of basic research (in sci-
entific areas well beyond biology) turned out to be extra-interesting, in
the sense that applications of fundamental findings can be exemplified
and re-exemplified.
   The immediately foregoing remark prompts a mention of “model sys-
tems,” such as the Drosophila one. To decode the phrase just quoted:
Potentially studying something or other in a “lower” organism, for exam-
ple, might be a “model” for elucidating processes manifested other spe-
cies, including “higher” ones such as mammals and us. In this light (or
cynical dark), research-grant-proposal boilerplate often includes passages
about hoped-for relevance of studying whatever in a given model system.
Another point of view: Research findings can be appreciated for their own
sake, involving new knowledge about an Earth-based life form in and of
itself. This attitude belies any necessity that basic-research findings will
somehow be applicable somewhere else, organismically. Thus, with
regard to oh-so-many times I have been asked how and why is Drosophila
a good model system, I eventually came to respond: “The genetics of D.
melanogaster is a fine model system for studying hereditary phenomena in
Drosophila.”
   Studies that purport, in contrast, to point toward practical applications
come under the heading of what is called, nowadays, “translational
research:” Can certain findings be rather quickly translated into scientific
activities that promote human welfare, for example? I cannot claim that
“non-translational” research is just as good, in terms of promoting even
eventual applications. I do claim, with no compunction and high-mind-
edly, that essentially all categories of research have the positive potential
to generate new knowledge per se, whether or not such is quickly (or
ever) perceived to be especially interesting or useful beyond the newness
itself.
   Approaching matters revolving around daily biological rhythms in
Drosophila, studied genetically, I have firm memories of the early days dur-
ing which such research was initiated then limped along for a fair number
of subsequent years. Few, perhaps none, of the relevant researchers could


322   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      have predicted the broadly and deeply based implications of such
      chrono-genetic findings. Such expansions were based in part on ways that
      “non-drosophilists” went to school on the fruit fly factors and phenomena,
      thus extending the ostensible “insect-only” significance of what the 2017
      awardees contributed, by applying Drosophila-based potential to analyze
      non-insect phenomena via genetic and molecular approaches.
         Backing up to elements of my own career and how it connected, how-
      ever loosely, with the history of genetic research performed using
      Drosophila, these endeavors turned out to generate biological findings
      with robust significance for understanding many ways that animals are
      formed, then function. Such accomplishments, harking back to the first
      half of the 20th century and unrelated to yours truly, were even deemed
      worthy of Prize awardings. (Stay tuned.) As for this one of the 2017 awar-
      dees, I began to get my feet wet in Drosophila genetics as an undergradu-
      ate. During about 40% of that stint, I performed a pair of low-level genetic
      projects. They had to with what-I-call “genetic genetics:” studying heredi-
      tary phenomena per se, with essentially zero general biological implica-
      tions. I carried out these projects under the supervision of a Drosophila
      geneticist named Phillip T. Ives. As I learned later, Ives was a direct
      descendant of Thomas Hunt Morgan and Alfred Sturtevant, two of the
      giants in genetic history (Stay tuned.) Accordingly, as I registered in retro-
      spect, Ives not only genetically instructed his handful of undergrad
      charges, he also imbued them with “the lore of Drosophila:” how that sys-
      tem was founded, expanded, and sustained over several decades, meaning
      from about the 1910s to what was then the mid/late 1960s.
         As previewed, Ives performed his PhD-earning research at the Califor-
      nia Institute of Technology (CalTech, a.k.a. C.I.T., Pasadena, CA, U.S.)
      under Prof. Alfred Sturtevant. The latter was an undergraduate then grad-
      uate student under the aforementioned Morgan, whose small lab – then
      at Columbia University, New York City, U.S. − had single-handedly
      founded Drosophila as a system in which one could elucidate genetic fac-
      tors and events. This came down initially during the 1910s; then and later
      Morgan and his students, with them further functioning as alumni, gener-
      ated vast amounts of generally important genetic knowledge. Not for
      nothing, they also discovered and created large numbers of genetic vari-
      ants. Many of them have been maintained ever since, and several of them
      became crucially applicable by subsequent geneticists and bio-geneticists
      (For the latter, again stay tuned.) Owing to all this pioneering research,
      and supervision thereof, Morgan was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1933.
         Several grad students working under him earned their PhDs via fruit-
      fly genetics. A trio of Morgan’s “F1” (genetic jargon) became the best-re-
      membered members of his group at Columbia and then CalTech: Sturte-
      vant, along with Calvin Bridges and Hermann Muller. Who cares? Or why


                                                         Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   323


am I going on about these investigator-based histories? Well, elements of
what Morgan and his F1 achieved turned out to be monumentally relevant
to the performance of many subsequent studies, notably in the aforenoted
area of bio-genetics (taking a genetic approach to study any number of
biological processes), including chrono-genetics. Such instances of histor-
ical significance, catalyzed by Morgan and crew, extended well beyond the
meaning of their genetic-genetic findings, hugely impactful though they
were (e.g., Sturtevant, 1913; Bridges, 1916; Muller, 1927). It was an aspect
of Muller’s genetic career that caused him to be a Prize awardee (1946).
Yet what Sturtevant and Bridges achieved was equally meaningful, at least
in terms of ways that materials they established had whopping heuristic
value down the decades. For example, the latter geneticist and cyto-genet-
icist observed and analyzed the chromosomes (viz. “cyto-”) of D. melano-
gaster and thus established highly-resolved descriptions of those sub-cel-
lular organelles. These findings (e.g., Bridges, 1935) held many drosophil-
ists in good stead later on, as will be exemplified later in a chrono-molec-
ular-genetic context.
   Such chromosome-level observations often occurred in the context of
Muller and his labmates generating genetic variants at, indeed, the chro-
mosomal level. One category of such came to be called “balancer” chro-
mosomes (Lindsley and Grell, 1968a). By definition – yet with apology for
now diving into the cyto-genetic weeds, but importantly so I think – a
balancer (here abbreviated Bal) harbors inverted (In) chromosomal seg-
ments along with a dominant (Dom) marker mutation. Now In’s, over an
homologous chromosome in normal (norm) sequence, block meiotic
recombination between such homologs. Thus, an offspring from a Bal/
norm parent that does not exhibit effects of the Dom marker must carry
the entire “norm” (normal) chromosome. The latter, however, might not
an environmental agent having mutagenic effects (e.g., Muller, 1927; with
other later, germane examples to follow).
   Balancer chromosomes – which are essentially unique to Drosophila –
are far from the only type of chromosome-level anomaly extant in the
fruit fly system. Another example: the “attached-X,” meaning two X chro-
mosomes in a D. melanogaster female attached to one centromere, vs.
standard “free Xs,” each attached to their own centromere. The first case
of an attached-X was discovered, as a spontaneously occurring sport
(read: anomalous organism, possibly a genetic variant) by Thomas Hunt
Morgan’s better half (Morgan, 1922). Owing to principles & practices
established previously by Bridges (1916), attached-X-over-Y females (the Y
chromosome being not sex-determining), mated to standard males (XY),
is a “true-breeding” situation: All live offspring are attached-X/Y females
and XY males. The latter receive their one X from fathers, the reverse of
“criss-cross” inheritance occurring in a standard free-Xs x XY mating (cf.


324   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      Morgan, 1922). Other types of zygotes produced from an attach-X x
      standard-male mating – triple-X and YY – carry lethal genotypes; more
      about those, more generally, later.
          The attached-X deal established a most powerful cyto-genetic tool,
      applied again and again later to initiate various bio-genetic enterprises,
      including a chrono-genetic one. (Stay tuned.) In this regard, Muller him-
      self designed and generated one of the now-classical and hugely-useful
      attached-X “strains.” He published this accomplishment, aimed at estab-
      lishing a particularly stable attached-X type and item, in a tiny research
      note (mid-1940’s, albeit unrelated to the Prize that came his way then; see
      Lindsley and Grell, 1968b). The Mullerian strain in question – formally
      named C(1)DX, y f – got scattered all over the Drosophila community and
      held several subsequent investigators in good stead, as previewed briefly
      above.
          An insert and disclaimer about Drosophila-genetic nomenclature: C
      (previous paragraph) always stands for Compound Chromosome, mean-
      ing 2 usually free chromosome “arms” attached to one centromere; (1)
      refers to the X, that is the first chromosome; DX means double-X; y and f
      are, respectively, abbreviations for the recessive X-chromosomal muta-
      tions yellow (body color) and forked (bristle morphology), with regard to
      which Muller’s attached-X is homozygous (viz. y f / y f). It might be
      believed that there is some method to this nomenclature madness,
      whereby genotypic designators are invoked according to putatively com-
      prehensible norms; those include designating inverted chromosomes in
      part with In, followed by the X or autosome number in question.
          Back to me and early stages of my career. My grad student supervisor
      was Larry Sandler (LS), who like Ives was a superb mentor. Examples: (1)
      I learned from LS how well-regarded a geneticist was Ives. (2) Sandler
      taught his mentees about the deep history of Drosophila genetics, involv-
      ing and specifically invoking the noun “lore”, both in terms of genic vari-
      ants and chromosome-level ones. (3) For the latter genotypes, we were
      informed about not only the properties of chromosome aberrations, but
      also how they were designed, constructed, and analyzed.
          One thing that I learned from Sandler – the academic grandson of
      Sturtevant, by the way – was how well his “grandfather” had analyzed the
      meiotic behavior of inverted chromosomes. Elements of those analyses
      were co-performed by another to-become-famous geneticist. (See below.)
      It was notable that, when Morgan moved from New York to Southern Cal-
      ifornia during the late 1920s, Sturtevant along with Bridges (but not Mul-
      ler) moved with him. This move promoted founding of the “Division of
      Biology” at CalTech, whose ever-enhancing fame was to come, including
      with respect to pioneering chrono-genetics.
          Speaking of the intellectual, research-related “line” at hand, another


                                                          Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   325


student under Sturtevant at CalTech in addition to Phil Ives was Edward
(Ed) Lewis. He is long-remembered in bio-genetic and Nobel Prize win-
ning history (Lewis, 1978, 1995). In order to recite elements of Lewis’s
estimable career, a piece of background information that is on-point
(lore-wise): Back when I was “under” Ives (1960s), he mentioned that his
CalTech labmate Bridges (1930s) had “the best eye” for recognizing novel
sports. One that Bridges detected (1910s, back at Columbia) got named
bithorax (bx), for a posterior-thorax structure was subtly modified in the
direction of a more anteriorly located structure (Lindsley and Grell,
1968c). bx was demonstrated by Bridges and labmates to be a heritable
mutant, hence the italicized name and abbreviation. And the bx single-lo-
cus mutation contributed to establishing an autosomal “linkage group”
(cf. that for the X chromosome, e.g., Sturtevant, 1913). The autosome that
harbors bx is one of the large non-sex chromosomes in D. melanogaster.
This chromosome, number 3, was later realized to contain some of the
all-time famous fruit fly genes (e.g., as a conceit, recounted by Villella and
Hall, 2008). For bithorax’s part, instead of the mutation being applied as a
genetic tool alone, how that mutation changes the fly’s anatomy was
regarded as potentially interesting biologically, as well being genetically
useful.
   After gaining his PhD at CalTech, where Dr. Lewis stayed ever after, Ed
initiated a series of studies involving “complex loci.” Those are chromo-
some sites at which several genetic variants were found to be clustered
closely at and near a given chromosomal site. Typically, the various vari-
ants cause phenotypic changes that are related, e.g., all having to do with
eye morphology. By digging into such loci, and the trio or more genotypic
variants associated with each, Lewis was once again dealing with (I say
again) genetic genetics: here meaning how various combinations of
genetic changes at a given locus were apparently acting and interacting in
– indeed – complex ways. Such Lewisian analyses seemed to consider the
phenotypes – external anatomical changes caused by the heritable vari-
ants – as means to an end, allowing elucidations of the genetic interac-
tions as such. Lewis himself recounted these elements of his career in the
written version of his Nobel Prize Lecture [ See Lewis (1995), if you are
willing to grapple with the many genetic complexities he describes.]
   Professor Lewis spent a fair proportion of his career investigating one
of these complex loci, and his studies took on increasing degrees of bio-
logical significance (Lewis, 1995): how genotypic changes point to ways
that genes materially influence animal development. This brings us back to
the original mutant noticed by Bridges: bithorax (Lindsley and Grell,
1968c). Lewis established several additional genetic variants at the rele-
vant autosomal locus, which became known as the BITHORAX COM-
PLEX (BX-C). A given BX-C-based variant – along with combinations of


326   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      mutations – caused changes in the fly’s external anatomy that were
      regarded as increasingly interesting, phenotypically. Without burdening
      readers with hard genotypic specificity, suffice it say that one of these
      combinations led to development of the famed “4-winged” fly (depicted,
      on behalf of Lewis, by Lakhotia, 1995). This highly anomalous animal had
      a pair of the usual wings, extending from the middle part of the fly’s tho-
      rax, and an additional pair extending from the immediately posterior por-
      tion of this “major body region.” Thus, this BX-C combination caused the
      highly-evolved dipteran insect in question (Drosophila melanogaster) to
      take on attributes like that of a more primitive insect, such as the nor-
      mally 4-winged dragonfly. Another BX-C genotype caused legs to extend
      off an anterior segment of the fly’s abdomen, à la primitive invertebrates
      that possess legs extending from nearly all body segments, e.g., a centi-
      pede or millipede. Such phenotypic changes are arguably more interesting
      than many others known in D. melanogaster, such as those involving
      altered pigmentation, e.g., the already introduced yellow mutant.
         Now some of the mutations mapping to (within) the chromosomal
      locus in question (BX-C) have such severe effects on development as to
      kill the animal during a given pre-adult stage. These lethal BX-C geno-
      types can be exemplified in two ways: (1) Ultrabithorax (Ubx), whereby
      Ubx/Ubx kills developing Drosophila. (2) A deletion of the entire BX-C,
      which once again is a recessively lethal genotype. The latter type of geno-
      typic change, a.k.a. Deficiency (Df), in general has lethal consequences,
      with the proviso that the Df in question removes an appreciable number
      of “chromosomal bands.” To re-introduce the cyto-genetic matter: These
      intra-chromosomal entities, which will come heavily into play in a
      chrono-genetic context later, were described in magnificent detail by
      observing “giant chromosomes” contained within salivary gland cells of
      D. melanogaster larvae (e.g., Bridges, 1935). This genome – again at the
      level of the relevant larval cells – is composed of approximately 5,200
      chromosomal bands. Each of the long chromosomal “arms” (one for the
      X, two each for each of the two large autosomes) harbors ca. 1000 such
      bands. As for deletions, their existence and attributes can be assessed by
      microscopic observations of larvae carrying Df/+ genotypes. Yet if only
      one or two faint bands got removed by a particular Df, that genotypic
      alteration tends to be nearly impossible to resolve microscopically. A very
      short deletion of this type might be a “homozygous-viable” genotype, dif-
      ficult to know if the Df/+ or Df/Df type is “cytologically” unresolvable.
      Empirical fact: A deletion that removes a readily observable number of
      salivary-chromosomal bands (practically meaning a quartet, up to a
      dozen or more) invariably removes at least one vital gene, such that those
      Df/Df genotypes are indeed lethal. One of many such examples: the cyto-
      logically demonstrable Df of BX-C (when homozygous) kills D. melano-


                                                            Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   327


gaster at an early developmental stage. Such animals – to a first approxi-
mation – exhibit embryonic segments that appear to all alike among them
(Lewis, 1995). It is as if this higher insect has been transformed to take on
qualities of a most primitive invertebrate, viz. an annelid. This category of
BX-C-based transformation is analogous to those described above,
whereby viable genotypes change adult-segment qualities in the direction
of evolutionary primitiveness. Implication (of a Nobel Prize winning vari-
ety): Genes of the BX-C, in their normal forms, evolved to suppress the
latent capacities of Drosophila to develop in ways that more primitive
invertebrates do. Yet BX-C genes turned out to be significant way beyond
the invertebrate arena, as will be mentioned later.
   The matter of lethal genotypes brings us back to reconsider multiply
inverted balancer chromosomes (within this article, as a reminder, abbre-
viated Bal). X-chromosomal Bal’s usually do not carry recessive-lethal
marker mutations, allowing X-Bal/Y males to live. Bal/lethal-variant
females − expressing the effect of a non-lethal dominant marker mutation
− are also alive, if the lethal factor carried “under” the Bal is recessive, à la
Muller’s discovery, alluded to above, of lethal genotypes newly induced by
ionizing radiation. How about balancer chromosomes generated on
behalf of the D. melanogaster autosomes? Consider the long “third chro-
mosome,” which harbors the BX-C. This developmentally (and evolution-
arily) important genotype has long been maintained in a Bal(3)/Df-BX-C
“stock.” For this, the balancer (as for all such multiply-inverted auto-
somes in D. melanogaster) was deliberately constructed to contain a domi-
nant marker, whereby Dom/+ causes an conveniently recognizable ana-
tomical change at the level of live flies. Such a stock is true-breeding,
whereby only Bal(3)/Df-BX-C live flies are produced down the genera-
tions because the dominant mutation was deliberately chosen to cause, as
well, recessive lethality. This “strain maintenance” situation allows devel-
oping animals homozygous for Df-BX-C to be “pulled out,” whenever one
wishes, for observations, etc. And the deletion genotype can never be lost
in terms of routine stock preservation, because any live fly manifesting
effects of the balancer’s Dom marker must be heterozygous with Df-BX-C;
this is because the multiple inversions disallow meiotic recombination,
which otherwise would lead to Dom-with-Df-BX-C or “+ +” recombinant
genotypes.
   An insert, with a bit more about inverted chromosomes in Drosophila: I
find it interesting that an eventual Nobel Prize winner – George Beadle,
who came to study biochemical genetics in Neurospora (reviewed by
Dronamraju, 1991) – was a geneticist studying fruit flies in his earlier
days. For example, Beadle analyzed the properties and cellular behavior
of Drosophila inversions, working with Sturtevant (e.g., Beadle and Stur-
tevant, 1935; historically summarized by Hawley and Ganetzky, 2016).


328   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      The Prize just referred to (1958) was co-awarded to the biochemical
      geneticist Edward Tatum, who began his career by studying the genetics
      of bacteria with Joshua Lederberg (e.g., Tatum and Lederberg, 1947). In
      fact, this late 50s Prize was awarded to Lederberg, along with Beadle and
      Tatum. It should go without saying that deconvoluting prokaryotic genet-
      ics – including genetically & molecularly characterized “vectors” that can
      be introduced into bacterial cells – turned out to be quintessential for
      essentially the entire enterprise that can be described as “genetic engi-
      neering” (DNA cloning and molecular manipulations of such macromole-
      cules).
         I should pause to mention that Beadle’s and Tatum’s exploitation of
      Neurospora genetics (e.g., Tatum and Beadle, 1942) was not designed to
      find out all that much about fungal genotypes alone (genetic genetics). By
      later analogy, N. crassa was magnificently utilized, from another biological
      perspective, to analyze bona fide circadian rhythms in that fungus. This
      microbial enterprise was pioneered and sustained by Jerry Feldman, Jay
      Dunlap, Jennifer Loros, and colleagues, who made a highly-successful
      genetic plus molecular assault on “what is the clock?” in this supposedly
      lower eukaryote (summarized, during the rather early days of these
      inquiries, by Dunlap, 1999).
         With regard to a higher eukaryote, the principal genetically based power
      of inversion application as set-up to be possible by the likes of Beadle and
      Sturtevant has to do with – you guessed it – recombination-eliminating
      balancer chromosomes. I provided a primer about such chromosome
      aberrations of the multiply inverted variety and about other types of
      homozygous-lethal genotypes, for reasons extending beyond a tip of the
      hat pointed toward the estimable Professor Lewis. As one of the most
      knowledgeable and proficient drosophilists, ever, he was well aware of the
      power of balancer chromosomes, crucially applied in his case to maintain
      strains of developmentally interesting lethal factors. Now many other
      drosophilists, including bio-geneticists ever emerging as the 1970s
      unfolded, were also astute enough to be aware of (a) pertinent cytogenetic
      tools, e.g., Bal’s, or “the attached-X,” which will re-surface yet again
      below, and (b) how lethal mutations can cause interesting biological
      changes as well as pointing to putatively interesting genes, in terms of
      what such factors are doing on behalf of wild-type development. Two
      such investigators, who began to work together during the 1970s, were
      Christiane (Janni) Nüsslein-Volhard and Eric Wiechaus. They initiated
      their developmental-genetic investigations by treating “normal” males
      from some wild-type stock or the other with a powerfully acting chemical
      mutagen (abbreviated EMS). Its properties and utility had been rattling
      round the fly world as of mid/late 1960s or so, and EMS has been applied
      to generate from-scratch a variety of interesting, novel mutants (see


                                                         Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   329


below.) Lewis himself published a brief research note (Lewis and Bacher,
1968), which described EMS mutagenesis and how conveniently it can be
effected by merely feeding flies on sugar water laced with the mutagen
(thus no need to do something like inject the substance into treated, start-
ing flies).
   So Nüsslein-Volhard and Wieschaus, operating as third or fourth gen-
eration “mutagenizers” (late ‘70s, vis-à-vis a perceivable starting point for
systematic developmental genetics approximately one decade earlier) pro-
ceeded roughly like this: treated the aforenoted starting flies and mated
them to Bal-bearing females contained in a Bal + Dom1/Dom2 stock, again
of the true-breading variety, because each such Dom – here designated
generically as containing 2 different dominant markers – was and is a
recessive-lethal mutation, to repeat a previously introduced point.
Next-generation flies – either Bal/mutagenized autosome (mut) females or
Dom2/mut males – were backcrossed to Bal + Dom1/Dom2 flies. Now any
offspring of a Dom2/mut male that does not display the marker effect of
Dom2 must carry mut, because there is no recombination within meioses
of males in D. melanogaster and thus no need for the Dom2 marker to be
contained within a multiply inverted autosome. Result: Nüsslein-Vol-
hard’s and Wiechaus’s mut chromosomes were contained in next-genera-
tion offspring of both sexes (e.g., Bal + Dom1/mut females and Dom2/mut
males). Question: Will any offspring in the subsequent (ultimate) genera-
tion not express effects of either Dom marker? If not, then mut/mut was a
non-lethal genotype. Yet many of these ultimate matings, for the many
“lines” established by this pair of developmental geneticists, each line
originating from an individual Bal + Dom1/mut female or Dom2/mut male,
displayed only Dom males and females, signifying that the mut in ques-
tion carried at least one newly induced lethal mutation. So I hope the
reader can discern how powerful are applications of balancer chromo-
somes: Observing the Dom marker phenotypes, as outlined briefly above,
unequivocally reveals to the investigator the animal’s genotype. Reality
check: Nüsslein-Volhard and Wieschaus infused additional genetic
“tricks,” which made the genetic side of their screening even more profi-
ciently performable (summarized by Wieschaus, 1995). As usual, these
bio-geneticists tapped into the rich array of extant genetic variants and
the “extra” opportunities afforded by them, beyond usage of standard
Dom markers, for example.
   The developmental(bio)-geneticists in question observed what
amounted to dying embryos, as to which if any might manifest anatomical
anomalies that could suggest the mutationally defined gene at hand to be
involved in “pattern formation:” the insects formative body plan (e.g.,
nature of embryonic segments, segment identities). Thus, Nüsslein-Vol-
hard and Wieschaus discovered mutants and genes − a small but appreci-


330   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      able subset of those pointed to by their newly induced mutations − that
      could mutate to lethality for reasons more bio-interesting than in cases
      where a normally appearing mutant might just grind to a developmental
      halt or begin to generically to disintegrate.
         Here is an ostensibly stray aside (but not really), related to the out-
      comes of Nüsslein-Volhard’s and Wieschaus’s mutant hunting. The matter
      now at hand is known as “genetic saturation”, which will also rear its
      handsome head later. Here, a not-always-appreciated element of these
      investigators’ findings involved numbers of newly induced mutants. This
      quantitative matter was summarized, during the decade subsequent to
      the pertinent Prize winning paper (1980), by Nüsslein-Volhard (1995) and
      Wieschaus (1995). An editorial note: After this pair of biologists published
      their announcement report (1980), in a vanity journal not conducive to
      full disclosures (re page limitations), they followed up with “journal of
      record” reports (cited by Nüsslein-Volhard, 1995) that laid out all aspects
      of their successful hunting, including things like “just how many muta-
      tions” corresponded to a given genetic locus hit by the mutagen. Nowa-
      days, not all out-of-breath “banner” papers put forth full accounts, of
      what was done and found; and usefully dense follow-ups tend minimally
      to appear in the later literature. In any case, the mutant hunters at hand
      documented a huge number of developmental-lethal mutations in
      Drosophila, only a subset of which caused apparent abnormalities of
      embryonic pattern formation. Yet that relatively small proportion of
      “extra interesting genes” was defined by appreciable more independently
      induced mutations than genetic-loci defined, even though some of the lat-
      ter were pointed to by only “one hit” each (summarized by Wieschaus,
      1995). Therefore, it was as if these developmental geneticists could have
      been approaching, but not-yet “at”, a situation of genetic saturation. This
      scenario would have been altogether different if every new mutation turned
      out to define a previously un-identified gene. Certain of the chrono-genetic
      sub-enterprises revealed a similar state of affairs, as we shall see, related to
      number games played in context of # mutations vis-à-vis # genes.
         A fair number of the developmental genes under consideration within
      this portion of the essay implied to the larger “developmental genetic
      community” that such factors could be molecularly operating on behalf of
      regulating other genes, ultimately those immediately underpinning the rel-
      evant anatomical structures. Indeed – and owing to the fact that certain
      mutations in fruit flies and in many other forms not only cause ostensibly
      interesting abnormalities, they also (I say again) identify genetic loci –
      when several of the genes “pointed to” by the Nüsslein-Volhard/
      Wieschaus mutations were identified based on where they were located
      chromosomally, a large proportion of the encoded products − determined
      post-DNA cloning − seemed as if their would be transcription factors


                                                         Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   331


(summarized by Wieschaus, 1995). Again, these outcomes were as gin-
gerly predicted (e.g., Lawrence, 1992). As well, those types of gene prod-
ucts come out of Lewis’s (originally Bridges’s) BX-C. More broadly, a
rather large percentage of “developmental genes” operating in all kinds of
animals on behalf of embryonic pattern formation appeared – via first-
blush “clone and sequence” data – to encode proteins with DNA-binding
capacities. Nucleotide sequencing of the genes’ coding regions divulged
on-paper proteins, several of which harbor “motifs” known to promote
physical associations between such polypeptides and DNA sequences
surmised to possess gene-regulatory functions.
    The ever-expanding significance of the purely bio-genetic discoveries
put forth by the 1995 Prize winners was based in part on molecular genet-
icists, working in a variety of “non-insect” systems, identifying “cog-
nates” of BX-C genes along with several of those pointed to by the
Nüsslein-Volhard/Wieschaus mutations, thereby describing molecularly
interpretable products to emanate from way more than the “fly genes”
alone (reviewed, from a neuro-perspective, by Bellen et al., 2010). It bears
mentioning that the “evo-devo” extravaganza − studying development
from the perspective of homologous genes acting analogously among sep-
arate species − was pioneered by developmentally investigating drosoph-
ilists. They prayerfully wondered whether DNA sequences cloned from
“homeotic” genes, such as within the BX-C, might be applicable to iden-
tify molecular relatives in other species of animal; several such prayers
were answered (beginning with McGinnis et al., 1984a, b, for example;
reviewed by Gehring et al., 2009).
    How about the chrono-genetic enterprise? To ramp up toward recount-
ing that currently important sub-story, it must be first noted that bio-ge-
netics in Drosophila began to leak out a little into the literature several
years before the Prize-wining reports of Lewis (1978) plus Nüsslein-Vol-
hard and Wieschaus (1980). How systematic bio-genetics started can be
exemplified by the developmental-genetic accomplishments of David
Suzuki and co-workers. Back before he became a generic science publi-
cizer (popularizer?) in his native Canada, he began his bio-career at a
small level, doing a bit of Drosophila genetics at Amherst College in Amh-
erst, Massachusetts, under the aforementioned Phil Ives (à la Hall, who
was mentored by Ives later on). Suzuki went on to earn a PhD, studying
aand investigating under a hard-core fruit-fly geneticist, leading the for-
mer on his own to perform early-career studies at the faculty level in
Western Canada in that restricted investigative area. But as of the mid/
late 1960s, Suzuki slipped sideways into performance of bio-genetic stud-
ies: He generated anew and identified developmental mutants that were
temperature-sensitive (TS), e.g., as caused by heat-sensitive lethal muta-
tions (reviewed by Suzuki et al., 1976).


332   THE NOBEL PRIZES


         Remarkably one of the “classic” bithorax mutants (Lindsley and Grell,
      1968d) was found retrospectively to be a TS developmental mutant, e.g.,
      Villee, 1945; Kaufman et al., 1973). Beginning in the early 1970s, Suzuki’s
      group began also to induce and isolate adult-functional mutants. For this,
      these investigators exploited the famed attached-X type of chromosome
      aberration, as follows: Starting flies (genetically normal XY males) were
      treated with the powerful mutagen EMS (as introduced already) then
      crossed to attached-X/Y females. Individual male offspring who had
      inherited a treated X from their father were “backcrossed” to the same
      attached-X type, to created a series of “putant” lines (putative mutants).
      One type of adult-mutant hunting effected by the Suzuki group entailed
      ferreting out “patho-physiological” mutants, viz. post-natal flies that were
      paralyzed at high temperature but OK at lower ones (e.g., Suzuki et al.,
      1971; Poodry et al., 1973).
         One might call the Suzukian enterprise just outline an aspect of
      “behavior genetics,” although it is difficult to pit mutationally-caused TS
      paralysis against a normal phenotype (elementary well-being at relatively
      low temperatures). This issue, if it is one, introduces the matter of bona
      fide behavioral genetics, whereby measurable phenotypes of the normal
      variety can be quantitatively compared with mutationally caused abnor-
      malities or anomalies. In this respect, a key behavioral genetic pioneer was
      Seymour Benzer, who searched for novel behavioral sports in a dedicated
      manner: induction from scratch via application of the same chemical muta-
      gen under consideration here, followed by systematic screening for herita-
      ble variants manifesting adult defects (Benzer, 1967). What Benzer had
      opted to do career-wise was leave the microbial genetic field in which he
      had toiled, notably during the 1950s, to become a higher-eukaryotic bio-­
      geneticist. After treating starting flies with EMS and mating them to – you
      guessed it – Muller’s attached-X, y f, the remainder of Benzer’s genetic tac-
      tic was identical to that already described, Suzuki-wise. Ultimately, groups
      of males from a given putant line – each carrying the same originally muta-
      genized X – were tested for responses to light; this led to several sports that
      manifested subnormal or anomalous “phototaxis” (Benzer, 1967).
         Shortly after the time of the report just cited, a student in Benzer’s
      CalTech lab, Ronald (Ron) Konopka, carried out the precise same genetic
      tactic. In this case, two generations from the start, the lines were screened
      for males that might exhibit abnormalities of daily rhythmicity. Three such
      putant lines were identified, out of some 2000 tries (Konopka and Benzer,
      1971). Usefully, it seemed, the female progeny in these late-60s/early-70s
      operations served as internal controls for the mutant hunting. By-eye
      observations of intra-line offspring were doable even at low resolution,
      because the yellow body-color phenotype is readily observable without
      recourse to a microscope.


                                                         Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   333


   Konopka’s original trio of mutants, each involving mutagen “hits” at
one X-chromosomal locus that got named period (per), arguably displayed
interesting rhythm abnormalities (Konopka and Benzer, 1971): no rhyth-
micity, 19 hour cycle durations in constant darkness, or 29 h cycles in that
condition (the latter two phenotypes being way off the ca. 24 h norm, for
this species of insect and for animals in general). “Interesting” mutant
phenotypes or not − your choice − this search for novel circadian rhythm
mutants (referring to the altered cycle durations, or lack of rhythmicity, in
a constant environmental condition) was clearly successful. It would not
have been, had Konopka been “0 for 2000.” Importantly, I think this
mutant hunting was not hyper-successful, as it could have been perceived
to be if the numerator had been something like 200 or 300. That kind of
outcome could have prompted the following types of questions: Which
among an avalanche of new mutants would one plan to pursue? And
could such a large number (hundreds instead of a tractable trio) imply
that a great many of separate genes feed somehow into rhythm-regulating
processes, many or most of these genic factors causing such effects indi-
rectly? Instead, the one gene defined by the seminal period mutations
allowed Ron and his boss gingerly to surmise that the factor pointed to by
the trio in questions is a “clock gene”: hence the title of Konopka’s and
Benzer’s seminal paper. The assumed product of such a gene would oper-
ate, again hypothetically, somewhere near the “core” of Drosophila’s circa-
dian clock.
   In this regard – perhaps unwittingly allowing for eventual identification
of his period gene at the molecular level – Konopka applied his period
mutations to determine the gene locus’s location at very high intra-chromo-
somal resolution. This nuts and bolts operation (genetic bookkeeping) was
accomplished in conjunction with proving that all three of Ron’s mutations
mapped to one X-chromosomal site (Konopka and Benzer, 1971; Smith and
Konopka, 1981; augmented by elements of Young and Judd, 1978). What
Konopka, who was a fine chronobiologist and geneticist, accomplished
accordingly was to “meiotically map” his period mutations, via application
of Sturtevantian principles and practices (cf. Sturtevant, 1913). As well,
Konopka applied various chromosome aberrations – notably deletions –
that had to involve intra-X-chromosomal sites near per’s map position, to
refine the gene’s location (Konopka and Benzer, 1971; Smith and Konopka,
1981). This chrono-investigator was fortunate that his per gene happened to
be located near the classic white (w) one, mutational identification and
mapping of which led to generating many other types of “near-w” variants
(e.g., Judd et al., 1972; Young and Judd, 1978).
   These genetic practices became the norm, of a sort, when subsequent
rhythm-interested drosophilists went to school on the Konopka
approach. Such successors of Konopka mutagenized starting flies, as


334   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      usual with the workhorse chemical referred to already, or by what is
      known as “transposon mobilization”; then they worked through mating
      schemes strongly analogous to those effected by Nüsslein-Volhard and
      Wieschaus (making, you guessed it, crucial application of dominantly
      marked balancer autosomes). But in this case – three generations after
      the mutagenesis-based starting points – the investigators who set out to
      identify novel rhythm mutants with autosomal etiologies looked for
      “lines” in which mut/mut genotypes, as explained above, segregating out
      of the final-stage matings allowed for adult viability and daily-rhythm
      testings (behaviorally).
         It follows that the post-Konopka chrono-mutant hunters exploiting
      Drosophila-based opportunities were hoping mutationally to define
      rhythm-related genes beyond the X chromosome (cf. Konopka and Ben-
      zer, 1971; Konopka et al., 1991). This “worked out,” as summarized in the
      relatively early days of post-Konopka mutant hunting by Hall (2003). Two
      features of these outcomes: (1) At least a couple dozen novel rhythm-al-
      tering mutations were induced and identified, but they defined only about
      a half dozen novel genes; it follows that “repeat hits” kept being effected
      at previously identified loci, as if still further mutations with clear effects
      on daily rhythmicity were rather unlikely to expand the overall genetic
      horizon toward oblivion, e.g., three dozen mutations defining that many
      genes, implying that “mutation #37 or so” would point to yet another fac-
      tor that would have warranted some sort of ever-broadening analysis; (2)
      As just implied, the genetic loci determined for the new rhythm mutations
      were homed-in-upon by genetic and Df-based mappings, so that these
      genes could be identified and physically isolated at the DNA level (Hall,
      2003).
         Once again, these investigative processes exemplify the “power of for-
      ward genetics” starting with mutants then genetic map positions and sub-
      sequent “positional cloning” (DNA-based identification of interesting
      genes based on their chromosomal locations). Yet it is fair to say that the
      chrono-molecular-genetic investigators coming up with this array of
      mutants and molecular clones could hardly ever predict what kinds of
      protein products would be encoded by a given rhythm-related genes; thus
      a different scenario than in the case of developmental-cum-molecular
      genetics (e.g., Lawrence, 1992; Wieschaus, 1995). As we shall see, “just
      what” a given chrono-molecular “is doing” on behalf of cellular and
      molecular processes – harking back to the initially mysterious PERIOD
      (PER) protein – had to be figured out by down-to-earth empiricism (his-
      tologically and biochemically based lab work).
         I exaggerate a bit, for there were additional rhythm-related factors ini-
      tially identified in their normal forms, by application of various “purely
      molecular” tactics (summarized, again, by Hall, 2003). For example, a


                                                         Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   335


gene inferred to encode a neuropeptide in Drosophila, eventually named
“pigment dispersing factor” (albeit not operating on behalf of any pig-
ment dispersal), was identified and isolated at the DNA level as a molecu-
larly normal factor. This led to establishment of the pdf gene’s chromo-
somal location, by effecting a cyto-molecular procedure requiring no
genetic variant to be in hand (Park and Hall, 1998). These findings allowed
for the possibility of subsequent identification of a pdf-locus mutation,
whose effects on behavioral rhythmicity could be assessed and were
(Renn et al., 1999). This kind of strategy is known as “reverse genetics:”
start with a gene in its normal form, whose significance cannot necessar-
ily be inferred by the encoded product’s attribute “on paper,” viz. “clone
and sequence;” but then come across or deliberately generate mutations
within the relevant loci and ask about their potential effects on the
bio-process of interest.
    I should pause further to exemplify what reverse genetic starting
points have meant in the rhythm arena. One of the new “clock genes”
found by the post-Konopka mutant hunting referred to above was named
Clock (Clk). Why? This was because positional cloning of the Clk-identi-
fied locus in D. melanogaster, followed by DNA sequencing of the gene’s
coding subset (Allada et al., 1998), came up with an on-paper protein
quite similar to that emanating from the Clk gene in mouse, which had
hopefully been named Clock, even though the original variant solely signi-
fied “rhythm mutant,” as opposed to a circadian-pacemaker variant, nec-
essarily. After the murine factor originated by way of a chemically induced
mutation (Vitaterna et al., 1994), à la Konopka, the responsible variant
was fine-level mapped; this allowed for molecular cloning in mouse of Clk
DNA (Antoch et al., 1997; King et al., 1997). The CLK protein’s nature (on
paper) suggested that it could have “something to do with” PER protein
(cf. Allada et al., 1998), as if CLK were indeed operating on behalf of the
circadian clock in mammals.
    Findings of this sort made various investigators wonder whether might
there be per-like genes in such animals. For several years, after period was
cloned in Drosophila, molecular searches for mammalian per’s came up
dry; until 1997, when two separate research groups identified molecular
relatives of fruit-fly per in human and mouse (Sun et al., 1997; Tei et al.,
1997). This suggested reverse-genetic possibilities, whereby the separate
per-like genes in mouse (n=3 per mammalian species) were reverse-genet-
ically mutated (e.g., Bae et al., 2001; reviewed in a broad context by Bućan
and Abel, 2002).
    How about going in the other direction interspecifically? Well, cloning
of mouse Clk made certain chrono-drosophilists imagine that a molecular
relative of mammalian Clk might be identified and isolable in Drosophila.
Yes, as it turned out. This led to manipulations of fly-Clk DNA in its nor-


336   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      mal form, leading to inferences as to how CLK in flies functions as part of
      the insect’s clockworks (e.g., Darlington et al., 1998). But pure reverse
      genetics as such was not necessary here, because fly-Clk was co-identified
      initially by an arrhythmia-inducing mutation (staring with EMS mutagen-
      esis, as noted), which proceeded to forward-genetic elucidation of the
      gene and its product (Allada et al., 1998). This strategy had to include
      overt rhythm significance for Clk gene action in Drosophila (as in mouse),
      because the starting point was a rhythm-defective mutant: behaviorally
      arrhythmic and with the Clk mutation causing per product levels in
      Drosophila to be very low (Allada et al., 1998).
         What was just summarized points, once again, to matters revolving
      round “genetic satutation” of the situation revolving round rhythm-regu-
      lation in animals. First, let it be noted the Jerk mutant (as fly-Clock was
      provisionally named pre-cloning) could have involved “anything” in
      terms of encoded-product quality. Yet what that gene makes in the fly is
      none other than a very similar rhythm-related protein in mammals. As the
      post-Konopka mutant hunting matured, Young’s lab mutationally identi-
      fied a locus (Price et al., 1998) called doubletime (dbt). It turned out to
      encode a known category of kinase enzyme (Kloss et al., 1998), which in
      Drosophila targets PER protein as one of its substrates (e.g., Syed et al.,
      2011). Incidentally, dbt – essentially at the same time it was discovered via
      rhythm mutants – could not have been surmised to be “chrono-specific,”
      because the gene was contemporaneously identified via mutations at the
      self-same locus that cause embryonic lethality (Zillian et al., 1999). Thus
      dbt – unlike per and the Young lab’s famed timeless (tim) gene (originally
      Sehgal et al., 1991, 1994) – is developmentally vital. Therefore, in turn, the
      DBT enzyme must target substrates not limited to the inessential PER
      protein. Mutant fruit-flies with a ruined period gene, or lacking it alto-
      gether, are alive and “seem fine” until one tests them for daily rhythms, as
      will be certified later. So the case of doubletime caused that gene to take
      on expanded biological significance, even though the overall case of clock
      genes in flies and mammals caused the story not to get bloated beyond a
      relatively small number of key “players.”
         More about mammals, to drive home the point just claimed. Within a
      non-murine mammalian species, a dramatic rhythm-affecting mutation
      was run across: a spontaneous sport called tau which, when homozygous,
      causes hamsters to manifest ca. 20-hour cycle durations in constant dark-
      ness (Ralph and Menaker, 1988). Even though forward-genetic possibili-
      ties are minimal for this type of mammal, Joe Takahashi’s research group
      managed to home in upon the relevant genetic locus, in order to clone tau
      DNA from hamster (Lowrey et al., 2000) then reveal that the encoded
      product is none other than a close molecular relative of Drosophila’s DBT
      kinase (cf. Kloss et al., 1998). Once again, TAU could have been anything,


                                                         Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   337


barely predictable pre-cloning; but the outcome was to re-identify an
already appreciated clock-functioning factor.
   These molecular-genetic examples of saturation-signifying claims are
analogous to “more rhythm-affecting mutations than genes pointed to.”
Here, the matter of Clk (née Jerk) in Drosophila, followed by the case of
tau in hamster, could well have identified previously unknown (even
unanticipated categories of) players materially contributing to animal
clockworks. But both such cases got squeezed down to clock factors
already on the “animal-rhythm table.”
   Another intra-fly example, whereby yours truly realizes he keeps get-
ting ahead of the overall sweep of chrono-molecular history: The Konop-
ka-like, but autosomally based, screening for new rhythm mutants
resulted in afore-described Clk and a separate gene (cycle, a.k.a. cyc)
whose category of protein-product co-functions with CLK (Rutila et al.,
1998; cf. Allada et al., 1998). Two additional rhythm-altering mutations
fell out of this screening, beyond those that which eventually were
revealed to generate two independently induced mutations at each of the
Clk and cyc loci.. The additional two − for a total of six − co-mapped with
one another, at an autosomal locus well separated from those of Clk or cyc
(Suri et al., 2000). Now the pair of “extra” mutants could have recognized
a brand-new rhythm-related factor; instead the (non-Clk, non-cyc) muta-
tions at hand turned out merely to re-identify doubletime (Suri et al.,
2000), just as tim was hit by further mutageneses carried out in Young’s
research group (e.g., Rothenfluh et al., 2000) and independently within
the Brandeis-based one (Rutila et al., 1996).
   I have been soft-pedaling the matter of “cloning the first clock gene”:
yes, period in Drosophila. Owing to the 2017 Prize (Physiology or Medi-
cine) being based in part on a trio of lab-heads whose research groups
basically co-identified per at the molecular level, here is some requisite
historical information. First, let it be known that the aforementioned mat-
ter of “genetic saturation” has to do with much more than “lots of
rhythm-affecting mutations defining a much smaller number of genes.”
Thus the saturation issue was in play when reasons for Janni
Nüsslein-Volhard’s and Eric Wieschaus’s anointment as Nobel laureates
were outlined in previous passages. An earlier example from the sub-field
of developmental genetics: A well-defined segment of Drosophila’s X chro-
mosome – near the white gene as noted – was saturated by the research
group of Burke Judd, in terms of loci that can mutate to lethality. Cleverly
applying various genetic tricks (crucially, as usual, dependent on pre-ex-
isting chromosome aberrations), these investigators induced hundreds of
novel mutations, all necessarily confined to a small, near-w region of the
X chromosome, defined by the length of a certain X deletion. But that
many mutations defined only a bit more than one dozen loci; it followed


338   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      that that many “vital genes” were contained within the region (Judd et al.,
      1972). In other words, any further induced lethal mutation would almost
      certainly be yet another repeat hit at a locus already mutated. But these
      investigators wondered whether additional genes might be harbored
      within the region at hand, loci that could not mutate to lethality.
         Now Mike Young (at least) was aware that Konopka had mapped his
      per gene to right smack in the middle of the intra-X segment in question
      (Judd et al., 1972; cf. Konopka and Benzer, 1971). A crucial concern here:
      All of Konopka’s per mutants had to be alive, based on his chrono-screen-
      ing tactic (Konopka and Benzer, 1971); yet this gene could have been a
      vital one, capable of mutating to lethality. If that were so, a set of allelic
      lethals from the “saturation screen” – lethal mutations independently
      mapped to be at least very near per – would fail to “complement” certain
      per mutations: e.g., arrhythmia-inducing per0 “over” given such lethal
      would cause locomotor arrhythmicity, just as Konopka had found Df-per/
      per0 to cause. Yet Young found that all the relevant lethals complemented
      per0: None of the pertinent heterozygous types was arrhythmic, just as
      was known for the strongly rhythmic attributes of per0/+ or Df-per/+
      types (Young and Judd, 1978; cf. Konopka and Benzer, 1971). Thus, Judd
      et al. (1972) had not really “saturated the region” in terms of identifying
      all Drosophila genes contained therein, only for the developmentally vital
      ones. It followed that the period gene in this insect cannot mutate to
      lethality – only, it seemed in terms of most severe mutational effects,
      causing biological arrhythmicity.
         An obvious implication of the foregoing micro-history is that Dr.
      Young’s interest in the period gene harked back to his formative years,
      when he was a graduate student in Judd’s lab. When this investigator
      expanded his horizons on behalf of bio-molecular genetics, he began to
      study a classic “developmental gene” in Drosophila called Notch (N).
      Don’t ask, but register that this factor had long been regarded as poten-
      tially interesting. And fly N is related to strongly analogous factors in
      other animals, of course (reviewed by Bellen et al., 2010), just as are sev-
      eral of the Prize-winning “Lewis/ Nüsslein-Volhard/Wieschaus” genes.
      Well, the N locus is on the X chromosome of D. melanogaster, not all
      that far from w and per. Thus Young’s own research group − once he
      started his lab in New York City after his grad student days and a
      “molecular post doc” in California − aimed to “clone Notch.” He did so
      (e.g., Kidd et al., 1983, 1986) and realized that this afforded the possibil-
      ity of effecting a “molecular chromosomal jump” from the Notch locus
      to the period one. This, too, worked out thanks to clever application of
      the relevant molecular clones and of chromosome aberrations whose
      lesions crucially “touched” both of the pertinent intra-chromosomal
      loci (Bargiello and Young, 1984).


                                                           Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   339


   Contemporaneously, the neighboring Hall and Rosbash Labs: (within
Waltham, Massachusetts) opted to “try and clone per” in competition
with Young and co-workers. Why at Brandeis University? This motivation
harked back to Hall, working with a postdoc C.P. (Bambos) Kyriacou in
the late 1970s, stumbling upon a short-term behavioral rhythm in
Drosophila connected with normal male courtship behavior (Kyriacou
and Hall, 1980). Those two investigators were aware that the only extant
rhythm mutants in this species were Konopka’s period ones. Therefore
Hall, who had long been in touch with his former labmate Konopka, asked
the latter if he would send a trio of stock containers, representing the
famed trio of per mutants. Konopka so transmitted, along with a snail-
mailed note saying words to the effect of “that sounds like a nice experi-
ment.” Hall wondered why Ron would say such a thing: How could one
expect mutations, which by definition affect daily rhythmicities, also to
cause alterations of the one-minute courtship rhythm in question? Yet
each of those three mutations did so affect (Kyriacou and Hall, 1980). Dis-
claimer: Other courtship-involved investigators are skeptical of that study
and related ones that followed, as initially reported in the very early ‘80s. I
will not burden you with this matter, but see the review of Hall and Kyri-
acou (1990); also Alt et al. (1998); Stern (2014); Stern et al., (2017); Kyri-
acou et al. (2017, 2019).
   Because various elements of Drosophila courtship are species-specific,
Kyriacou and Hall asked whether the “one-minute” rhythm displayed by
D. melanogaster males would be the same, different, or non-existent in
other species. They found and reported about five years later that males
of D. simulans (here abbreviated sim) generate the relevant “court-
ship-song” rhythm with a cycle duration of only about 40 seconds, com-
pared with about 60 sec for “mel” males (Kyriacou and Hall, 1986). As was
kind of customary for species-diverging characters, these reproduc-
tive-behavioral investigators generated interspecific hybrids between mel
and sim. Those two Drosophila types are close evolutionary relatives, long
known to generate hybrid progeny when males of one species are coaxed
to mate with females of the other. Yet, it was also known that hybrid
males with a mel X (over a sim Y) are developmentally dead; whereas the
sexually reciprocal type (sim X/mel Y) is alive and behaves OK or better.
In this regard, Kyriacou and Hall were aware of – dare I say again? – the
lore of Drosophila. Thus they applied a mutation in D. simulans known as
Lethal hybrid rescue; contained in a sim male parent, it mated to a stand-
ard mel female, leading to viable mel X/sim Y sons. The reciprocal mating
effected by these investigators was standard sim males x attached-X mel
females; their sons are sim X/mel Y. Yet again (!) the “power of the
attached-X,” applied here to control for “maternal effects” on hybrid
progeny properties, viz. species-specific egg cytoplasm influences


340   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      thereon, putatively not operating in this case, for both female-parent
      types were D. melanogaster. Behavioral results: The reciprocally hybrid
      male types put forth courtship-song rhythms matching the type of X
      chromosome coming in from the dual-species parents (Kyriacou and Hall,
      1986). It followed that the etiology of the species difference in rhythm
      singing mapped to only one chromosome, not the typical outcome infera-
      ble from the behavior of hybrid animals. So, could it be that said etiology
      was harbored within but one genetic locus on that chromosome? It was
      (and is) “the X,” where the period gene is located.
         Well, this question was in-principle answerable, as of the early 1980s:
      (A) Could the period gene be cloned from D. melanogaster? Yes, as exem-
      plified above. This would allow for quick cloning of per from D. simulans,
      which would have to harbor a strongly homologous period gene. Now, a
      pair of Drosophila biologists-cum-molecular geneticists had burst forth
      contemporaneously with the wherewithal to generate routinely “DNA
      transformed” fruit flies (Spradling and Rubin, 1982; Rubin and Spradling,
      1982). The potential for revolutionizing bio-molecular-genetic studies of
      this insect was realized by an endless number of DNA-mediated trans-
      genic types designed and generated by drosophilists, thanks to proficient
      transgenesis doability established by Allan Spradling and Gerry Rubin,
      cited above. What kinds of DNA engineerings could be effected − followed
      by introduction into Drosophila and insertions of the introduced “con-
      structs” into the flies’ chromosomes − seemed limited only by investiga-
      tors’ imaginations. Here is but one example thereby, inserted here as
      something of a conceit. We at Brandeis, working with the research group
      of Steve Kay elsewhere, wondered whether “molecular cycling” of period
      gene products, dealt with historically below, might be monitorable at the
      level of individual live flies. Thus we fused a regulatory region cloned from
      the per locus to a DNA sequence (luc) encoding fire-fly luciferase; and
      when that transgenic type was fed the relevant enzyme substrate, “glow
      rhythms” could indeed be measured all day, and during the next and the
      next (Brandes et al., 1996). This ploy led, for instance, to establishment of
      “molecular-rhythm parameters” that (in contrast) can be mushily appre-
      hendable via sacrificing and extracting-from large numbers of flies “per
      time point.” This “per-luc” transgenic-type was exploited in several ways
      subsequently. For example, Drosophila carrying pre-mutagenized chromo-
      somes and that transgene were screened for novel rhythm mutants, not
      based on behavioral phenotypes; instead upon mutational alterations of
      normal LUC-reported cycling (Stanewsky et al., 1998). This led to identifi-
      cation of a new mutant named cry, along with forward-genetic identifica-
      tion of the corresponding DNA. Not to burden readers with hardly any
      details: Drosophila CRY functions on an “input pathway” involving
      light-induced daily resets of the fly’s circadian clock (e.g., Hall, 2000).


                                                         Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   341


This enterprise within the enterprise exemplifies how certain fruit fly
chrono-geneticists came to study not only core clock functions (via period
and a handful of additional genes), but also the important matter of envi-
ronmental inputs to the clock. Circadian clocks, in general, are not very
accurate; but they are easily reset, daily, and notably by photic stimuli. We
and various other research groups also hoped to tackle the aforemen-
tioned matter of outputs “from the clock” (e.g. Peng et al., 2003; cf. Park
and Hall, 1998; Renn et al., 1999), realizing that a clock at its core does
nothing for the organism, unless key elements of central pacemaker func-
tion “feed forward” into the regulation of revealed rhythmicity.
   Back to the matter of courtship-song rhythmicity. Spradling’s and
Rubin’s transgenically based breakthrough made us at Brandeis realize
one more thing that became doable: Against a backdrop of the interspe-
cific song-rhythm difference summarized earlier, and mapping the etiol-
ogy of this species-specificity to the X chromosome, we could molecularly
transfer per+ DNA from D. simulans into D. melanogaster, whereby that lat-
ter type by itself would be genetically arrhythmic (per0) for both locomo-
tor activity (Konopka and Benzer, 1971) and male singing behavior (Kyri-
acou and Hall, 1980). Specific question: Would such a single-gene inter-
specific transfer bring with it regulation of courtship-song rhythmicity
like that of the donor species (viz. ca. 40-sec cycle duration)? Many years
later – however surprisingly, as just implied, or controversial (as referred
to earlier) – the answer was “yes” (Wheeler et al., 1991).
   Meanwhile, however, we had to get our hands on per DNA cloned from
D. melanogaster. Taking a different tack from that of Young’s lab (outlined
above), I first realized that we at Brandeis could potentially get a running
start with regard to “per region” DNA. How? Well this former Brandeisian
– who routinely tracked the Drosophila literature, no matter how puta-
tively obscure – remembered a then-recent paper, emanating in part from
a university that happens to be located within the Prize awarding coun-
try: University of Lund, southern Sweden; not that important. What was
important was that a research group headed there by Jan-Erik Edström
had initiated a novel tactic for “positional cloning” by scraping DNA out
of a well-defined region of the D. melanogaster genome (!). For this, those
investigators looked at giant salivary-gland chromosomes (aforemen-
tioned) under the microscope and applied a fine-tipped glass needle to an
intra-X segment near the white gene, thus also near the period one (Sca-
lenghe et al., 1981). This subset of the genome was chosen because it had
long been so well characterized as to mutationally defined and cytogenet-
ically mapped loci, as already summarized above in various contexts. Sca-
lenghe and co-workers may or may not have been aware that they could
have “scraped out” per DNA among molecular clones connecting with
nearby loci. In any case, when Hall was at a conference co-attended by


342   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      one of the Edström lab collaborators (Vince, né Vincenzo, Pirrotta, cf.
      Scalenghe et al., 1981), the former asked the latter if a follow-up from the
      original report had identified any “white-region” clones corresponding to
      X subregion “3B1-2.”
         I burden you with that level of detail in context of (i) there being 102
      major regions among the D. melanogaster chromosomes, going back to
      Bridge etc.’s original cytogenetic analyses; each such region is conven-
      tionally subdivided into about a half-dozen lettered sub-regions, which in
      turn are designated by further “sub-numbers” (each of which corre-
      sponds to an individualizable salivary-gland chromosomal band, amount-
      ing to a total of ca. 50 bands per major numbered region); (ii) Konopka
      himself, via his aforementioned fine-mapping endeavor, had localized his
      period gene “down to” 1 or 2 intra-X bands (within region 3), or perhaps
      to a tiny subsegment located between, indeed, bands 3B 1 & 2 (Smith and
      Konopka, 1981). Furthermore, Ron and his then co-worker had mated two
      deletion-bearing types to one another, creating Df-1/Df-2 females (Smith
      and Konopka, 191), against a backdrop of each such Df (here generically
      designated) “uncovering” the arrhythmia-inducing effects of per0; and
      one edge of Df-1 (call it the righthand one) had been pre-designated to
      “just overlap” the relevant edge (lefthand) of Df-2; it was as if this two-de-
      letion heterozygous type removed the period gene altogether (confirmed to
      be so in subsequent molecular analyses by Bargiello and Young, 1984; and
      Reddy et al., 1984). Relevant inferences of the pre-molecular variety were
      buttressed by the fact that the Df-1/Df-2 females were found to be alive
      and arrhythmic (Smith and Konopka, 1981), same as for the behavior of
      per0/per0 females. This cytogenetic ploy once again indicated that the
      period gene is not a vital one.
         Against this background, and with apologies for including a rather
      genetically dense insert, the “DNA-scraper” collaborator whom Hall que-
      ried (Pirrotta) said he would check as to whether any of his and co-work-
      ers’ X region-3 clones might have been found apparently to correspond
      with aforenoted 3B1-2 (owing to such molecular cytogeneticists having
      annealed in-situ their various scraped-out clones, of a labeled variety, to
      salivary-gland chromosomes). That cytogeneticist soon sent a pair of DNA
      clones to Brandeis, surmising that they could be, or be very near, the
      molecular starting-point for cloning per that we were hoping to acquire.
      This wish was realized, via various aspects of subsequent labwork per-
      formed in the collaborating groups of Hall plus Rosbash (Reddy et al.,
      1984). As already noted, Young’s competing group reported similar, ulti-
      mately molecularly converging, findings, about period gene molecular
      genetics (Bargiello and Young, 1984; summarized by Young et al., 1985).
      Some ostensibly “banner” features of these findings, reported during a late
      stage of 1984, were “transgenic rescues” of per0, effected by transform-


                                                             Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   343


ing-in putative per+ DNA (Zehring et al., 1984; Bargiello et al., 1984). It was
these early-days findings that made us at Brandeis realize that doing
essentially the same, but later, introduction of per+ DNA from D. simulans,
had a chance of answering the question about “interspecific genetic etiol-
ogy” for a behavioral variation, cavalierly posed in previous passages.
   Before such an investigative prayer could be put forth (Wheeler et al.,
1991), however, various nuts and bolts characterizations of the molecu-
larly identified and transgenically confirmed period gene DNA were per-
formed after 1984 and during a fair proportion of the mid/late 1980s. For
instance, coding DNA within the per locus was sequenced (reviewed by
Hall, 2003). But these descriptive findings led, for a while, to no meaning-
ful insights as to how the on-paper protein encoded by this ostensible
clock gene might function within cells and tissues.
   ­­Here is a final fillip to this early history, recounted on behalf of divulg-
ing how chronogenetics, then molecular-neurobiological genetics, was –
dare I say – pioneered as a (then) cottage sub-industry. It was operating
back then as a small part of the burgeoning industrial-level research that
the “bio-genetic” system came to be, based conspicuously on Drosophila
research. Speaking of low-level stuff, the Brandeis groups’ “per cloning”
goal was not really met at first, because Reddy et al. (1984) identified
three separate RNA’s to emanate from the tiny intra-X region defined by
Konopka’s two-deletion ploy. Which of that trio was per per se (maybe
more than one transcription unit)? It occurred to us to track expression
of three candidate genes by extracting RNA’s at different timepoints dur-
ing a given daytime, then nighttime. Might one such transcript type mani-
fest systematic fluctuations in its concentration? If so, that RNA might be
transcribed from per. It would have been registered as a gene that can
mutate to alter daily biological rhythms, correlated with the normal form
of this gene making its product to define a daily molecular rhythm. The
answer to this preliminary inquiry was wrong, x 3 or so: The incorrect
third of the gene trio at hand was reported to generate a daily-oscillating
transcript type, whereas what turned out to be per RNA was said not to
fluctuate via whole fly RNA extracts (Reddy et al., 1984; similarly reported
in a summary article by Young et al., 1985). This “wrong-RNA” matter was
corrected later (Lorenz et al., 1989).
   More meaningful than asking at first-blush about per RNA oscillations
were later demonstrations of PER protein cycling, via timed immuno-his-
tochemical assessments of final product levels in “adult head” specimens
(Siwicki et al., 1988; Zerr et al., 1990). Such assessments of temporally
controlled expression of the gene were performed contemporaneously
with re-examination of the “cycling RNA?” matter by Hardin et al. (1990),
based on “head only” extractions of RNAs at a series of timepoints across
24-hour Earth-day cycles.


344   THE NOBEL PRIZES


         An investigative fillip, which refers to one of the overall goals that sus-
      tained the chrono-genetic enterprise: Siwicki (1988), along with Liu et al.
      (1988), took the first meaningful step toward describing where a clock
      gene is expressed in the fly’s nervous system, potentially pointing toward
      the neural substrates of rhythmic behavior. Additional early-days findings
      in this arena were made by Brigitte Frisch, John Ewer, and Maki Kaneko
      (reviewed by Kaneko, 1998). Later, this neuro-genetic sub-enterprise
      expanded into studies made in various other research groups (including
      that headed by Michael Rosbash, e.g., Stoleru et al., 2004).
         I should leave things there, assuming that Professors Rosbash and
      Young will better recount how subsequent investigations during the 1990s
      and 21st century decades have elucidated “what is PER protein, and what
      are co-acting or interacting clock gene products, doing to form and oper-
      ate a circadian clock?” The single-letter adjective italicized shortly above
      alludes to the fact that figuring out a fair amount of “what’s the clock in
      Drosophila?” turned out to be of fine heuristic value for doing so analo-
      gously in studies of many other life forms. At a minimum, daily oscilla-
      tions of clock proteins – in terms of their concentrations, qualitative
      attributes, or both – became the Zeitgeist of many molecular-chrono-ge-
      netic analyses, performed on behalf of investigative systems ranging from
      microbes to mammals. The relevant investigative extravaganza has been
      nicely summarized – as these studies came to the fore and, at least for
      animals, quasi-converged – by Dunlap (1999); Reppert and Weaver
      (2000); Young and Kay (2001); Chang and Reppert (2001); Kondo, 2007);
      and by Cohen and Golden (2015).


      ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
      This author (and anointee) finds it impossible to acknowledge all the
      co-workers, labmates, colleagues, and other associates who contributed
      mightily to studying Drosophila rhythms and the clocks underlying them
      – most valued as these many companions were. There really had to be a
      large overall crew to perform and sustain theses studies, because they
      were multi-faceted: genetics, molecular biology, neurobiology, and behav-
      ior. Suffice it to say here, with regard to my rhythm-related associates,
      that I gratefully acknowledge associations with the other pair of “lab-
      head awardees:” Michael Rosbash and Mike Young and how that pair of
      professors fostered vast numbers of experimentally proficient – as well as
      interesting and enjoyable – interactions among supervisees working
      within the three research groups in question. Again, such students, post-
      doctorals, and other researching labmates – distributed between two
      groups in the Boston area and one located in New York City – have been
      too numerous to acknowledge individually. One exception to this, specifi-


                                                               Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   345


cally with regard to the “Hall lab:” I can never forget, nor fail to appreciate
retrospectively, the first professional-level associate (graduate student)
within my laboratory at Brandeis University in Waltham, Massachusetts.
That was now-Professor Ralph J. Greenspan (University of California at
San Diego). Ralph showed the way with respect to exploiting Drosophila
genetics in order to make that “system” a genuinely deep neuro-genetic
one: hard-core cyto-genetics devoted to elucidating neurochemical, neu-
ro-anatomical, neuro-physiological, and behavioral phenomena, forming
something of a symphony of studies that Ralph made speak vigorously to
one another. It was (now) Dr. Greenspan who, however unwittingly dur-
ing the mid/late 1970s, showed the way whereby initially neuro- and
molecular-neuro-genetic investigations of Drosophila’s “rhythm system”
started us down a path along which mechanistic analyses of the flies’
internal “clockworks” came to the fore in the late 1980s and beyond.




references
Allada, R, White, N.E., So, W.V., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1998). A mutant
   Drosophila homolog of mammalian Clock disrupts circadian rhythms and tran-
   scription of period and timeless. Cell 93: 791–804.
Alt, S., Ringo, J., Talyn, B., Bray, W., and Dowse, H. (1998). The period gene con-
   trols courtship song cycles in Drosophila melanogaster. Anim Behav. 56: 87–97.
Antoch, M.P., Song, E.-J., Change, A.-M., Vitaterna, M.H., Zhao, Y., Wilsbacher,
   L.D., Sangoram, A.M., King, D.P., Pinto, L.H., and Takahashi, J.S. (1997). Func-
   tional identification of the mouse circadian Clock gene by transgenic BAC res-
   cue. Cell 89: 655–667.
Bae, K., Jin, X., Maywood, E.S., Hastings, M.H., Reppert, S.M., and Weaver, D.R.
   (2001). Differential functions of mPer1, mPer2, and mPer3 in the SCN circadian
   clock. Neuron 30: 525–536.
Bargiello, T.A., and Young, M.W. (1984). Molecular genetics of a biological clock in
   Drosophila. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 81: 2142–2146.
Bargiello, T.A., Jackson, F.R., and Young, M.W. (1984). Restoration of circadian
   behavioural rhythms by gene transfer in Drosophila. Nature 312: 752–754.
Beadle, G.W., and Sturtevant, A.H. (1935). X chromosome inversions and meiosis
   in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 21: 384–390.
Bellen, H.J., Tong, C., and Tsuda, H. (2010). 100 years of Drosophila research and
   its impact on vertebrate neuroscience. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11: 514–522.
Benzer, S. (1967). Behavioral mutants of Drosophila isolated by countercurrent dis-
   tribution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. US 58: 1112–1119.
Brandes, C., Plautz, J.D., Stanewsky, R., Jamison, C.F., Straume, M., Wood, K.V.,
   Kay, S.A., and Hall, J.C. (1996). Novel features of Drosophila period transcrip-
   tion revealed by real-time luciferase reporting. Neuron 16: 687–692.
Bridges, C.B. (1916). Non-disjunction as proof of the chromosome theory of hered-
   ity. Genetics 1: 1–52, concluded 1: 107–163


346   THE NOBEL PRIZES

      Bridges, C.B. (1935). Salivary chromosome maps. J. Hered. 26: 60–64.
      Bućan M., and Abel, T. (2002). The mouse: genetics meets behaviour. Nat. Rev.
         Genet. 3: 114–123.
      Chang, D.C., and Reppert, S.M. (2001). The circadian clocks of mice and men.
         Neuron 29: 555–558.
      Cohen, S.E., and Golden, S.S. (2015). Circadian rhythms in cyanobacteria. Micro-
         biol. Molec. Biol. Rev 79: 373–385.
      Darlington, T., Wager-Smith, K., Ceriani, M.F., Staknis, D., Gekakis, N., Steeves, T.,
         Weitz, C., Takahashi, J.S., and Kay, S.A. (1998). Closing the circadian loop:
         CLOCK-induced transcription of its own inhibitors, per and tim. Science
         280,:1599–1603.
      Dronamraju, K.R. (1991). Profiles in genetics: George Wells Beadle and the origins
         of the gene-enzyme concept. J. Hered. 82: 443–446.
      Dunlap, J.C. (1999). Molecular bases for circadian clocks. Cell 96: 271–290.
      Gehring, W.J., Kloter, U., and Suga, H. (2009). Evolution of the Hox gene complex
         from an evolutionary ground state. Curr. Top. Devel. Biol. 88: 35–61.
      Hall, J.C. (2000). Cryptochrome: sensory reception, transduction and clock func-
         tions subserving circadian systems. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 10: 456–466.
      Hall, J.C. (2003). Genetics and molecular biology of rhythms in Drosophila and
         other insects. Adv. Genet. 48: 1–286.
      Hall, J.C., and Kyriacou C.P. (1990). Genetics of biological rhythms in Drosophila.
         Adv. Insect Physiol. 22: 221–298.
      Hardin, P.E., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1990). Feedback of the Drosophila
         period gene product on circadian cycling of its messenger RNA levels. Nature
         343: 536–540.
      Hawley, R.S., and Ganetzky, B. (2016). Alfred Sturtevant and George Beadle untan-
         gle inversions. Genetics 203: 1001–1003.
      Judd, B.H., Shen, M.W., and Kaufman, T.C. (1972). The anatomy and function of a
         segment of the X chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 71: 139–156.
      Kaneko, M. (1998). Neural substrates of Drosophila rhythms revealed by mutants
         and molecular manipulations. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 8: 652–658.
      Kaufman, T.C., Tasaka, S.E., and Suzuki, D.T. (1973). The interaction of two com-
         plex loci, zeste and bithorax in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 75: 299–321.
      Kidd, S., Kelley, M.R., and Young, M.W. (1986). Sequence of the Notch locus of
         Drosophila melanogaster: relationship of the encoded protein to mammalian
         clotting and growth factors. Molec. Cell. Biol. 6: 3094–3108.
      Kidd, S., Lockett, T.J., and Young, M.W. (1983). The Notch locus of Drosophila mel-
         anogaster. Cell 34: 421–433.
      King, D.P., Zhao, Y., Sangoram, A.M., Wilsbacher, L.D., Tanaka, M., Antoch, M.P.,
         Steeves, T.D.L., Vitaterna, M.H., Kornhauser, J.M., Lowrey, P.L., Turek, F.W.,
         and Takahashi, J.S. (1997b). Positional cloning of the mouse circadian Clock
         gene. Cell 89: 641–653.
      Kloss, B., Price, J.L., Saez, L., Blau, J., Rothenflluh, A., and Young, M.W. (1998). The
         Drosophila clock gene double-time encodes a protein closely related to human
         casein kinase Iε. Cell 94: 97–107.

      Kondo, T. (2007). A cyanobacterial circadian clock based on the Kai oscillator.
        Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant Biol. 72: 47–55.
      Konopka, R.J., and Benzer, S. (1971). Clock mutants of Drosophila melanogaster.
        Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S. 68: 2112–2116.
      Konopka, R.J., Smith, R.F., and Orr, D. (1991). Characterization of Andante, a new


                                                                Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   347

   Drosophila clock mutant, and its interactions with other clock mutants. J. Neu-
   rogenet. 7: 103–114.
Kyriacou. C.P., Dowse, H.B., Zhang, L., and Green, E.W. (2019). Computational
   error and restricted use of time series analyses underlie failure to replicate
   period-­dependent son rhythms in Drosophila. Tentatively accepted for publica-
   tions in J. Biol. Rhythms.
Kyriacou. C.P., Green, E.W., Piffer, A., and Dowse, H.B. (2017). Failure to reproduce
   period-dependent song cycles in Drosophila is due to poor automated pulse-de-
   tection and low-intensity courtship. Proc. Natl. Acad Sci U.S. 114: 1970–1975.
Kyriacou, C.P., and Hall, J.C. (1980). Circadian rhythm mutations in Drosophila
   melanogaster affect short-term fluctuations in the male’s courtship song. Proc.
   Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 77: 6929–6933.
Kyriacou, C.P., and Hall, J.C. (1986). Interspecific genetic control of courtship song
   production and reception in Drosophila. Science 232: 494–497.
Lakhotia, S.C. (1995). The 1995 Nobel Prize: a tribute to the power of formal genet-
   ics. Curr. Sci. 69: 797–801.
Lawrence, P.A. (1992). The Making of a Fly: The Genetics of Animal Design, Black-
   well Scientific, Oxford, UK.
Lewis, E.B. (1978). A gene complex controlling segmentation in Drosophia. Nature
   276: 565–570.
Lewis, E.B. (1995). The Bithorax Complex: The first fifty years. Nobel Lectures, pp.
   235–260.
Lewis, E.B., and Bacher, F. (1968). Methods of feeding ethyl methane sulfonate
   (EMS) to Drosophila males. Drosophila Info. Serv. 43: 193.
Lindsley, D.L., and Grell, E.H. (1968a) Genetic Variations of Drosophila melano-
   gaster. Special Chromosomes, Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication
   627, p. 409.
Lindsley, D.L., and Grell, E.H. (1968b) Genetic Variations of Drosophila melano-
   gaster. Mutations, Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication 627, pp. 43–44.
Lindsley, D.L., and Grell, E.H. (1968c) Genetic Variations of Drosophila melano-
   gaster. Inversions, Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication 627, pp. 321–
   346.
Lindsley, D.L., and Grell, E.H. (1968d) Genetic Variations of Drosophila melano-
   gaster. Mutations, Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication 627, p. 44.
Liu, X., Lorenz, L., Yu, Q., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1988). Spatial and temporal
   expression of the period gene in Drosophila melanogaster. Genes Devel. 2: 228–
   238.
Lorenz, L.J., Hall, J.C. and Rosbash, M. (1989). Expression of a Drosophila mRNA
   is under circadian clock control during pupation. Development 107: 869–880.
Lowrey, P.L., Shimomura, K., Antoch, M.P., Yamazaki, S., Zemenidies, P.D., Ralph,
   M.R., Menaker, M., and Takahashi, J.S. (2000). Positional syntenic cloning and
   functional characterization of the mammalian circadian mutation tau. Science
   288: 483–491.
McGinnis, W., Garber, R.L., Wirz, J., Koroiwa, A. and Gehring, W.J. (1984a). A
   homologous protein-coding sequence in Drosophila homeotic genes and its
   conservation in other metazoans. Cell 37: 403–408
McGinnis, W., Hart, C.P., Gehring, W.J., and Ruddle, F.H. (1984b). Molecular clon-
   ing and chromosome mapping of a mouse DNA sequence homologous to
   homeotic genes of Drosophila. Cell 38: 675–680.
Morgan L.V. (1922). Non-criss-cross inheritance in Drosophila melanogaster. Biol.
   Bull. 42: 267–274.


348   THE NOBEL PRIZES

      Muller, H.J. (1927). Artificial transmutation of the gene. Science 66: 84–87.
      Nüsslein-Volhard, C. (1995). The identification of genes controlling development in
         flies and fishes. Nobel Lectures, pp. 273–294.
      Nüsslein-Volhard, C., and Wieschaus, E. (1980) Mutations affecting segment num-
         ber and polarity in Drosophila. Nature 287: 795–801.
      Park, J.H., and Hall, J.C. (1998). Isolation and chronobiological analysis of a neuro-
         peptide pigment-dispersing factor gene in Drosophila melanogaster. J. Biol.
         Rhythms 13: 219–228.
      Peng, Y., Stoleru, D., Levine, J.D., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (2003). Drosophila
         free-running rhythms require intercellular communication. Pub. Lib. Sci. Biol. 1:
         32–40.
      Poodry, C.A., Hall. L., and Suzuki, D.T. (1973). Developmental properties of shibire:
         a pleiotropic mutation affecting larval and adult locomotion and development.
         Devel. Biol. 32: 373–386.
      Price, J.L., Blau, J., Rothenfluh, A., Abodeely, M., Kloss, B., and Young, M.W. (1998).
         double-time is a new Drosophila clock gene that regulates PERIOD protein
         accumulation. Cell 94: 83–95.
      Ralph, M.R., and Menaker, M. (1988). A mutation of the circadian system in golden
         hamsters. Science 241: 1225–1227.
      Reddy, P., Zehring, W.A., Wheeler, D.A., Pirrotta, V., Hadfield, C., Hall, J.C., and
         Rosbash, M. (1984). Molecular analysis of the period locus in Drosophila mela-
         nogaster and identification of a transcript involved in biological rhythms. Cell
         38: 701–710.
      Renn, S.C.P., Park, J.H., Rosbash, M., Hall, J.C., and Taghert, P.H. (1999). A pdf
         neuropeptide gene mutation and ablation of PDF neurons each cause severe
         abnormalities of behavioral circadian rhythms in Drosophila. Cell 99: 791–
         802.
      Reppert, S.M., and Weaver, D.R. (2000). Comparing clockworks: mouse versus fly.
         J. Biol. Rhythms 15: 357–364.
      Rothenfluh, A., Abodeely, M., Price, J.L., and Young, M.W. (2000). Isolation and
         analysis of six timeless alleles that cause short- or long-period circadian
         rhythms in Drosophila. Genetics 156: 665–675.
      Rubin, G.M., and Spradling, A.C. (1982). Genetic transformation of Drosophila with
         transposable element vectors. Science 218: 348–353.
      Rutila, J.E., Suri, V., Le, M., So, W.V., Rosbash, M. and Hall, J.C. (1998). CYCLE is a
         second bHLH-PAS clock protein essential for circadian rhythmicity and tran-
         scription of Drosophila period and timeless. Cell 93: 805–814.
      Rutila, J.E., Zeng, H., Le, M., Curtin, K.D., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1996). The
         timSL mutant of the Drosophila rhythm gene timeless manifests allele-specific
         interactions with period gene mutants. Neuron 17: 921–929.
      Scalenghe, F., Turco, E., Edström J.-E., Pirrotta, V., and Melli, M. (1981). Microdis-
         section and cloning of DNA from a specific region of Drosophila melanogaster
         polytene chromosomes. Chromosoma 82: 205–216.
      Sehgal, A., Man, B., Price, J.L., Vosshall, L.B., and Young, M.W. (1991). New clock
         mutations in Drosophila. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 618: 1–10.
      Sehgal, A., Price, J.L., Man, B., and Young, M.W. (1994). Loss of circadian behavio-
         ral rhythms and per RNA oscillations in the Drosophila mutant timeless. Science
         263, 1603–1606.
      Siwicki, K.K., Eastman, C., Petersen, G., Rosbash, M., and Hall, J.C. (1988). Anti-
         bodies to the period gene product of Drosophila reveal diverse tissue distribu-
         tion and rhythm changes in the visual system. Neuron 1: 141–150.


                                                                 Jeffrey C. Hall Lecture   349

Smith, R.F., and Konopka, R.J. (1981). Circadian clock phenotypes of chromosome
   aberrations with a breakpoint at the per locus. Molec. Gen. Genet. 183: 243–251.
Spradling ,A.C., and Rubin, G.M. (1982). Transposition of cloned P elements into
   Drosophila germ line chromosomes. Science 218: 341–347.
Stanewsky, R., Kaneko, M., Emery, P., Beretta, B., Wager-Smith, K., Kay, S.A., Ros-
   bash, M., and Hall, J.C. (1998). The cryb mutation identifies cryptochrome as a
   circadian photoreceptor in Drosophila. Cell 95: 681–692.
Stern, D.L. (2014). Reported Drosophila courtship song rhythms are artifacts of
   data analysis. BMC Biol.12: 38 [citation format for online-only article]
Stern D.L., Clemens J., Coen P., Calhoun A.J., Hogenesch J.B., Arthur B.J., Murthy
   M. (2017). Experimental and statistical reevaluation provides no evidence for
   Drosophila courtship song rhythms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 114: 9978–9983.
Stoleru, D., Peng, Y., Agosto, J., and Rosbash, M. (2004). Coupled oscillators con-
   trol morning and evening locomotor behavior in Drosophila. Nature 431: 862–
   868.
Sturtevant, A. H. (1913). The linear arrangement of six sex-linked factors in
   Drosophila, as shown by their mode of association. J. Exp. Zool. 14: 43–59.
Sun, Z.S., Albrecht, U., Zhuchenko, O., Bailey, J., Eichele, G., and Lee, C.C. (1997).
   RIGUI, a putative mammalian ortholog of the Drosophila period gene. Cell 90:
   1003–1011.
Suri, V., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (2000). Two novel doubletime mutants alter
   circadian properties and eliminate the delay between RNA and protein in
   Drosophila. J. Neurosci. 20: 7547–7555.
Suzuki, D.T., Grigliatti, T., and Williamson, R. (1971). Temperature-sensitive muta-
   tions in Drosophila melanogaster. VII. A mutation (parats) causing reversible
   adult paralysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 68: 890–893.
Suzuki, D.T., Kaufman, T., Falk, D., and the U.B.C. Drosophila Research Group
   (1976). Conditionally expressed mutations in Drosophila melanognster. In: The
   Genetics and Biology of Drosophila, Vol. la., M. Ashburner, and E. Novitski, Eds.,
   Academic Press, New York, pp. 208–263.
Syed, S., Saez, L., and Young, M.W. (2011). Kinetics of doubletime kinase-depend-
   ent degradation of the Drosophila period protein. J. Biol. Chem. 286: 27654–
   27662.
Tatum, E.L., and Beadle, G.W. (1942). Genetic control of biochemical reactions in
   Neurospora: an “aminobenzoicless” mutant. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 28: 234–
   243.
Tatum, E.L., and Lederberg, J. (1947). Gene recombination in the bacterium
   Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 53: 673–684.
Tei, H., Okamura, H., Shigeyoshi, Y., Fukuhara, C., Ozawa, R., Hirose, M., and
   Sakaki, Y. (1997). Circadian oscillation of a mammalian homologue of the
   Drosophila period gene. Nature 389: 512–516.
Villee, C.A. (1945). Phenogenetic studies of the homeotic mutants of Drosophila
   melanogaster. III. The effects of temperature on the expression of bithorax34e.
   Amer. Nat. 79: 246–258.
Villella, A., and J.C. Hall. 2008. Neurogenetics of courtship and mating in Drosoph-
   ila. Adv. Genet. 72: 67–184.
Vitaterna, M.H., King, D.P., Chang, A.-M., Kornhauser, J.M., Lowrey, P.L., McDon-
   ald, J.D., Dove, W.F., Pinto, L.H., Turek, F.W., and Takahashi, J.S. (1994).
   Mutagenesis and mapping of a mouse gene, Clock, essential for circadian
   behavior. Science 264: 719–725.


350   THE NOBEL PRIZES

      Wheeler, D.A., Kyriacou, C.P., Greenacre, M.L., Yu, Q., Rutila, J.E., Rosbash, M.,
         and Hall, J.C. (1991). Molecular transfer of a species-specific behavior from
         Drosophila simulans to Drosophila melanogaster. Science 251: 1082–1085.
      Wieschaus, E. (1995). From molecular patterns to morphogenesis. The Lessons
         from Drosophila. Nobel Lectures: 302–314.
      Young, M.W., and Judd, B.H. (1978). Nonessential sequences, genes, and the polyt-
         ene chromosome bands of Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 88: 723–742.
      Young, M.W., Jackson, F.R., Shin, H.S, and Bargiello, T.A. (1985). A biological clock
         in Drosophila. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 50: 865–875.
      Young, M.W., and Kay, S.A. (2001). Time zones: a comparative genetics of circa-
         dian clocks. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2: 702–715.
      Zehring, W.A., Wheeler, D.A., Reddy, P., Konopka, R.J., Kyriacou, C.P., Rosbash,
         M., and Hall, J.C. (1984). P-element transformation with period locus DNA
         restores rhythmicity to mutant arrhythmic Drosophila melanogaster. Cell 39:
         369–376.
      Zerr, D.M., Hall, J.C., Rosbash, M., and Siwicki, K.K. (1990). Circadian fluctuations
         of period protein immunoreactivity in the CNS and the visual system of
         Drosophila. J. Neurosci. 10: 2749–2762.
      Zilian, O., Frei, E., Burke, R., Brentrup, D., Gutjahr, T., Bryant, P.J., and Noll, M.
         (1999). double-time is identical to discs overgrown, which is required for cell sur-
         vival, proliferation and growth arrest in Drosophila imaginal discs. Development
         126: 5409–5420.
