                           JO H A N N E S F I B I G E R


      Investigations on Spiroptera carcinoma and the
            experimental induction of cancer
                       Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1927


Ladies and Gentlemen. Now that it is my honour to address the Swedish
Society of Medicine, I should like to begin by expressing the debt of gratitude
I owe to this Society.
   In 1913, some six months after I had published my first work on Spiroptera
carcinoma, the Swedish Society of Medicine did me the honour of making
me its member. This was the first recognition of this kind which came to me
after the appearance of my work, and I would like to mention again today,
here in the home of the Society, the great pleasure which I felt then and
which I still recall with sincere gratitude.
   Before I go on to relate the principal results of my investigations on Spirop-
tera carcinoma and the experimental induction of cancer, I would like to be
allowed to offer the Nobel Foundation and the Staff of Professors of the
Caroline Medio-Surgical Institute my most sincere and humble thanks for
the great honour they have done me by finding my experiments worthy
of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
   It is possible to trace back attempts at supplementing clinical and anatom-
ical studies of cancer by means of experimental work on the disease’s origins,
development and dissemination in the organism over a great number of
years; not only the first, primitive experiments made over 150 years ago,
but many more recent ones met with only negative results up to a short
time ago.
   Reports by Hanau and Morau, published during the years 1889-1894,
contained the earliest description of successful transplantation of cancer from
rats and mice to animals of the same species, but it was only at the dawn of
this century that work done by Loeb, Jensen, Borrel, Bashford, Ehrlich,
Haaland, Murray, and others (especially the classic experiments carried out
by C. O. Jensen) ushered in the first experimental phase in cancer research,
the era of transplantation experiments. From this time on the study of the
cancer diseases could justifiably be said to belong to the field of experimental
pathology.


       SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                        123

   Although a great deal of new and useful experimental work on transplan-
tation has been done and is still being done, it must be admitted that on the
whole it has not come up to early expectations. The development of can-
cerous tumours in one animal to which particles of a cancer which has oc-
curred spontaneously in another have been transferred, is no more than the
continued development of diseased tissue already in being. In fact, the study
of transplanted neoplasms really only provides us with a possibility of closer
investigation of the development, and conditions for development, of ex-
isting cancer tissue; it does not enable us to undertake any of the most im-
portant tasks in cancer research - an explanation of the original causes and
the conditions for the onset of cancer, and of the processes surrounding the
earliest beginnings of the disease. Moreover, the significance of transplanta-
tion experiments has decreased since the successful results of tests on immu-
nization against transplanted cancer have shown themselves to be invalid for
spontaneously developed neoplasms.
   It follows that experimental studies must, for our purposes, necessarily
be carried out on cancer growths which are not transplanted fully estab-
lished from one animal to another, but which are induced experimentally
and then develop in normal tissue in previously healthy animals.
   In other words the problem of inducing cancer would have to be solved
before the disease could be made the subject of the kind of experimental
work which has provided important results in the study of the pathology
of other diseases.
   Recent attempts at solving this problem, which has occupied numerous
workers in vain for a great number of years, have made use of methods
based on the three famous theories of the origins of cancer: Virchow’s irri-
tant theory, Cohnheim’s embryo theory, and the theory which ascribes
cancer to parasites.
   But up to recent times neither the constant application of chemical or
physical irritants, nor the introduction of embryonic tissue, nor the implan-
tation of various kinds of microbes into healthy animals produced any result
at all; it was only around 1910 that there were reports of experiments in
which the development of cancer was observed in isolated animals. Experi-
ments carried out by Clunet, Marie and Raulot Lapointe, for example, pro-
duced sarcoma in two rats which had been exposed to X-radiation; Aska-
nazy had, in isolated cases, observed the development of cancer in rats in-
oculated with embryonic tissue; and finally we must mention the sarcomatous
fowl tumours first described by Fujinami and Inamoto, and by Peyton Rous,


124                             1926 J.FIBIGER

which could be produced by filtrates from tumour tissue, and which have
generally come to be regarded as due to an invisible virus. There was doubt,
however, as to whether these neoplasms could be considered as true cancers,
and were really identical to normal sarcomatous tumours - and this doubt
has still not been finally removed.
   The first method which succeeded experimentally and systematically in
bringing about a true epithelial carcinoma in healthy animals was the intro-
duction of a Nematode, Spiroptera neoplastica or Gongylonema neoplasticum,
into piebald rats, and it is as I mentioned the principal results of these experi-
ments which I now have the honour of describing to, you.
    The starting-point for these studies was my finding in 1907, in the stomach
fundus of three wild rats captured originally in Dorpat, of extensive papillo-
matous tumours which virtually completely filled the stomach and emerged
from the cardiac region which was lined with pavement epithelium (Fig. 1;
cf. normal rat’s stomach, Fig. 2). Under the microscope the epithelium showed
peculiar formations which were reminiscent of a section through egg-con-
taining parasites, particularly Nematodes (Fig. 3), and after reconstruction
and serial section it became possible to prove that the epithelium did in fact
contain such parasites. This was later confirmed definitely by the separation




Fig. 1. Massive papillomata caused by Spiroptera neoplastica in the stomach fundus of
                       a wild rat Gem Dorpat (natural size).


       SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                                125




                    Fig. 2. Normal rat’s stomach (natural size).

of isolated worms. My thoughts naturally turned to the possibility of these
parasites having been the cause of the neoplasm developing - a supposition
which was all the more justified since Borrel had already asserted in 1906,
and subsequently, basing himself upon the presence of Helminthes and other
types of animal parasites found in tumours in rats and mice, that such
macro-parasites should be considered as having considerable significance in
the genesis of the tumours. Haaland, too, had reported observations which
could be used in support of this assumption; but the strongest argument for
the pathological role of Helminthes in the development of cancer lay in the
frequent appearance of cancerous neoplasms during schistosomiasis in the




      Fig. 3. Spiroptera embedded in the fundus epithelium of a brindled rat.


126                           1926 J.FIBIGER

human bladder. There appeared to be proof that in the case of these tumours
the presence of worms in the cancerous tissue was neither coincidental nor
ascribable to a secondary invasion. In order to investigate whether the tu-
mours in the stomach fundus of my three rats were actually due to a Nema-
tode, and to contribute to a discussion whether the transmission of such
parasites could result in the experimental inception of the development of
a cancer, I set up a series of experiments of which I am only able here to
give you the main features.
  An attempt to demonstrate papillomata or worms of the type sought in




                         Fig. 4. Periplaneta orientalis.




                         Fig. 5. Periplaneta americana.


       SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                         127

other rats came to naught, since investigation of the fundus in nearly 1,200
wild rats and laboratory animals gave only negative results. Negative results
were also obtained when I tried to induce neoplasms by means of papilloma
tissue introduced into healthy rats. Not even feeding the rats on tumour
tissue produced positive results, and no tumours developed in rats kept for
protracted periods (up to one year) in uncleaned cages previously occupied
by diseased animals. There seemed, therefore, to be hardly any question of
the direct transmission of Nematodes. This left the possibility of the Nema-
todes being transmitted through an intermediate host, in which the embryo-
containing egg could undergo further development.
   The literature was now found to countain a reference in 1878 to Galeb
having found a Nematode, Filaria rhytipfeuritis, in the stomach of rats. This
had previously been discovered as a parasite in the fatty bodies of the com-
mon cockroach, Periplaneta orientalis (Fig. 4), and after three rats had been
fed on cockroaches infected with this Nematode, Galeb was able to find
worms in their stomachs, although no pathological change was evident.
   Accordingly, I started on experiments in which rats were fed on cock-
roaches of the same species as those used by Galeb; these, too, were unsuccess-
ful, the stomachs of rats captured in the same locality as the cockroaches
containing neither worms nor papillomata. Results were only obtained
when I changed over to experiments on rats which had lived in a sugar
refinery where there were large numbers of Periplaneta americana, a species
cockroach very seldom found in Europe (Fig. 5). Nematodes of the type
under consideration were found in the stomachs of no less than 40 out of 61
wild brown rats from this refinery, and in 18 of these there were signs of
pathological changes in the stomach fundus. In nine cases these were in the
form of very extensive papillomatous neoplasms.
   I began on fresh feeding experiments, now using cockroaches of the Peri-
planeta americana type from the sugar refinery, and these gave positive re-
sults. Nematodes of the type I was seeking appeared in 54 out of 57 rats
fed on this species of cockroach, and of these 37 had stomachs exhibiting
epithelial proliferation and papillomatous changes. Seven of the rats had
large, papillomatous tumours.
   I had thus been successful in tracing Nematodes and papillomatous tu-
mours of the type under consideration in rats, and this had been achieved
by feeding the animals on cockroaches from a given locality so as to infect
healthy rats with Nematodes and to bring about the formation of neoplasms
in their stomachs.


128                            1926 J.FIBIGER




          Fig. 6. Mature eggs of Spiroptera neoplastica (X 280 approx.).




             Fig. 7. Coiled Spiroptera larvae in cockroach muscles.

Further research now showed that the larvae of the Nematodes were not,
like the Filaria of Galeb, contained in the fatty bodies of the cockroaches
but in the cross-striated muscle, and that their development was on the
following pattern: after the infected cockroaches (or only their muscles) are


        SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                        129

eaten by the rats, the larvae are liberated and these invade the upper parts
of the rat’s alimentary canal, which is lined with pavement epithelium - the
mouth lining, tongue, oesophagus and stomach fundus. Here they develop
further, reach maturity and after about 45 days start to lay eggs, which are
surrounded by a double membrane and contain embryos (Fig. 6). The eggs
are evacuated with the rat’s faeces. When a cockroach feeds on rat faeces
containing these eggs, or on the Nematode eggs by themselves, it liberates
the embryos which then penetrate into the cockroach’s muscles and contin-
ue to develop. After 5-6 weeks they appear as Trichina-like, spirally-coiled
larvae encysted in a thin capsule (Fig. 7). This completes the Nematode’s
development in the host and intermediate host.
   Research work carried out by Hjalmar Ditlevsen, a member of the Staff
of the University Zoological Museum, indicated that these Nematodes did
not match the Galeb worm, but had rather to be added to the Spiroptera
as a new species which had not so far been described. It was given the name
Spiroptera neoplustica, which has since been changed to Gongylonema neo-
plasticum. In its fully developed form the male is ½-1 cm long, with a diam-
eter of 0.1-0.16 mm (Fig. 8). The female is 4-5 cm long with a diameter
of 0.2-0.25 mm (Fig. 9).




                 Fig. 8. Spiroptera neoplastica- male (natural size).




                Fig. 9. Spiroptera neoplastica- female (natural size).


130                                1926 J.FIBIGER

   The presence of the Nematode in cockroaches and rats from the sugar
refinery which I have mentioned, which had earlier received consignments
of raw material from the West Indies, suggested that it must be a species
coming originally from the tropics; when tests carried out on rats and
cockroaches gathered in what used to be the Danish West Indies succeeded
in showing the Nematodes, and when research done by others had the same
result, it strengthened me in my belief that their proper habitat is in tropical
countries from which they are brought into Europe with rats or cockroaches.
   A fully developed papilloma in the stomach fundus was not only ob-
served, as I have described, in wild rats from the sugar refinery, but also
in piebald laboratory animals which were fed with Spiroptera-containing
cockroaches in order to induce tumours experimentally. Five of these rats
developed, in addition to papillomata, quite typical invasive squamous-
celled carcinoma (Figs. 10, 11 and 12) which in two of them was accom-
panied by metastases; in one animal this affected the lung (Fig. 13), while
in the other a lymph gland was involved (Fig. 14).
   The way was now open for further research into the possibility of the
planned, systematic inducement and close study of neoplasm and the devel-
opment of cancer, and experiments along these lines were begun in the fol-




Fig. 10. Spiroptera carcinoma in stomach fundus of brindled rat fed on Periplaneta ameri-
                                    cana (natural size).


       SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                               131




Fig. 2. Part of stomach fundus wall of brindled rat fed on Spiroptera, showing Spi-
 roptera and heterotopic and incipient invasive epithelial growth (highly magnified).




Fig. 12. Spiropters carcinoma in fundus of brindled rat fed on P. americana (highly
                                    magnified).


132                               1926 J.FIBIGER




Fig. 13. Lung metastasis from Spiroptera carcinoma of stomach in brindled rat (highly
                                     magnified).




Fig. 14. Metastasis in retroperitoneal lymph gland from Spiroptera carcinoma of stomach
                            in brindled rat (highly magnified).


       S P I R O P T E R A C A R C I N O M A A N D C A N C E R I N D U C TI O N   133

lowing year. Various species of rats and mice were used, most of them being
piebald laboratory animals. The Gongylonema were transmitted partly by
feeding the rats on cockroaches which had been infected by feeding on rat
faeces containing the eggs, partly by feeding them only cockroach muscle
containing larvae, and finally by means of direct injection into the rat’s
stomach of Gongylonema larvae prepared from muscle.
   It was observed that the Gongylonema could not only live parasitically
in rats and mice, but could also be transferred to the pavement epithelium-
lined section of the upper alimentary canal in guinea pigs, rabbits, hedge-
hogs, and squirrels. The common cockroach and the flour-mite, Tenebrio
molitor, may serve as intermediate host as well as P. americana. My tests on
 the Gongylonema were carried out mainly on their natural host, P. ameri-
cana, which were bred at the Institute for this purpose.
   The experiments showed that in the stomach of a rat infected with a
single Gongylonema, or with a small number, only epithelial hyperplasia
 or a slight inflammation occurred. If, on the other hand, the infection in-
volved a large number of Gongylonema, then there was pronounced prolif-
 eration of the epithelium and of the connective tissue of the mucous mem-
 branes, accompanied by heterotopic growth at depth and the formation
 of papillomata. In the most pronounced cases there were deep-seated epi-
 thelial crypts, which might affect the entire stomach wall, and massive papil-
 lomata which could completely block the stomach lumen. In a number of
 animals squamous-celled carcinoma developed as well, typified partly by
 pronounced cornification with atypical cell formation and bulbous epithelial
 formations, partly (and particularly) by invasive growth penetrating the
 mucous membranes and muscularis mucosae and reaching down into - or
 through - the submucosa.
    Desquamative inflammation and epithelial hypcrplasia occurred in the
 mouth, ocsophagus, and on the tongue. Characteristic carcinoma may be
 found on the tongue (Fig. 15, normal tongue; Figs. 16-18, Spiroptera carcinoma
 of the tongue).
    The Spiroptera carcinoma is accompanied by metastases, localized mainly
 in the lungs; here they are, however, frequently only to be found by means
 of microscopic examination of serial sections. Metastases were discovered in
 six out of 33 brindled rats whose lungs were examined in this manner; in
 only one instance have I observed a gland metastasis. The structure of the
 metastases resembles exactly that of the primary growth, they never contain
 either Spiroptera or eggs, and it is only the proliferation of the cells without


134                               1926 J.FIBIGER




any contribution by the parasite which indicates that metastases (in the usual
sense of the term) are involved.
   By and large, the stage of development of the carcinoma is proportional to
the length of life of the rats after the transmission of the Spiroptera. Among
piebald laboratory rats the earliest observation of carcinoma was 45 days later.




                           Fig.15. Normal rat’s tongue.




                    Fig. 16. Spiroptera carcinoma in rat’s tongue.


        SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                               135




                  Fig. 17. Spiroptera carcinoma in rat’s tongue (X 24).




Fig. 18. Spiroptera carcinoma in rat’s tongue, showing encroachment of the carcinoma
                 into the lymphatic space surrounding a nerve (X 130).


136                             1926 J.FIBIGER




  Fig. 19. Primary Spiroptera carcinoma in stomach fundus of white mouse (X 50).

   The transfer of Gongylonema also produced changes in wild rats (M. de-
cumanes), black rats (M. rattus), white mice, grey mice (M. musculus), and
field mice (M. sylvaticus), and these were in most instances of the same type.
In white mice I found instances where the carcinoma had completely pene-
trated the stomach wall (Fig. 19) and in one case had led to its perforation.
In one mouse the lungs contained a metastasis the size of an orange pip,
while in another enormous metastases were found in the peritoneum and in
the abdominal glands (Fig. 20).
    I should finally like to emphasize that Spiroptera carcinoma is transplantable,
this having been done during the study of the disease in a mouse (Figs.21
and 22). It was possible to transplant the tumour through four generations
in the course of a year.
    We may thus summarize the results of the experiments I have described
in the following terms: the carcinoma produced by Gongylonema neoplasti-
cum is, in its structure, a typical epithelioma, or squamous-celled carcinoma;
it is invasive and destructive in its growth, produces metastases and may be
transplanted. Carcinoma of the stomach was produced experimentally in
brindled rats in more than 100 cases, and carcinoma of the tongue in seven
cases. As an illustration of the incidence of carcinoma of the stomach in the
piebald rats, I might mention that out of 102 of these animals which sur-
vived the transmission of Spiroptera by 45 days or longer, more or lesspro-


      SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                                 137

nounced stomach carcinoma developed in 54 - that is to say, rather more
than half.
   I shall return to the appearance of carcinoma in other rats and in mice at
a later stage.
   Before I go on to deal with the results of these experiments in greater
detail, it ought first to be mentioned that this research gave experimental
proof of the correctness of Barrel’s theory that worms, like certain other
animal parasites, possess the ability to produce neoplasms. Research similar
to mine later provided further proof of this. In 1921, for example, the work
of Bullock and Curtis (whose experiments covered a very wide scope)
showed that the sarcoma which Barrel and others had described as occurring
in the liver of rats when it has been a site for the cysticercus of    crassi-
collis may be induced experimentally by feeding rats with the eggs of this
Taxia. It was these experiments which provided us with the possibility of a
systematic, experimental inducement of sarcoma.




       Fig. 20. Peritoneal lymph gland metastasis from the tumour in Fig. 19.


138                           1926 J.FIBIGER




Fig. 21. Mouse with subcutaneously transplanted Spiroptera carcinoma, 84 days after
                         transplantation - 1st generation.


In very recent times (1925) Yokogawa has published details of experi-
ments in Formosa which have led to the discovery of a new type of Gongy-
lonema known as G. orientale, which from the morphology viewpoint close-
ly resembles G. neoplasticum; this, again, lives as a parasite in the stomach of
rats, and makes use of cockroaches (P. americana, P. australasiæ) as an inter-
mediate host during its development. Feeding rats on cockroaches whose
muscles contained the larvae of the parasite showed that these Gongylonema,
too, can bring about stomach carcinomas.
   This therefore removes any shadow of a doubt that the Helminthes must
be included among the causative agents of cancer, and the quite considerable
number of studies and observations in which Nematodes and other Hel-
minthes were shown to be present in various kinds of benign and malignant
neoplasms must now be considered in a rather different light from formerly;
although the possibility of fortuitous coincidence cannot, of course, be en-
tirely ruled out, there are nevertheless grounds for suspecting that in such
cases the parasites can have a pathogenetic significance. It would take too


       SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                             139

 long to go here into all the observations of this kind which have been made,
 and I shall therefore mention only the Helminthes which must be assumed
 to play a greater or lesser role in the development of tumours and cancers
 in human beings.
    As we have already mentioned, Schizortomum hæmatobium’s aetiological
 importance in the development of cancer of the bladder must be considered
 as proven. Nor can it be doubted that other Trematodes, such as Opistorchis
felineus, Schizostomum japonicum and Clonorchis sinensis can, in certain cases,
 bring about primary carcinoma of the liver, and that Schizostomum Mansoni
 can be the cause of polyps and carcinoma in the colon.
    In a number of cases, too, it has been found that the presence of Echino-
 cocci is accompanied by a primary carcinoma of the liver.




         Fig. 22. Transplanted Spiroptera carcinoma-2nd generation (X 50).


140                             1926 J.FIBIGER




    In connection with the significance of the Nematodes, we must mention
 the statement by the American cancer research worker Ewing, that he has
 fairly frequently found Trichina in cases of carcinoma of the tongue; in
 Europe, too, there have been a whole series of reports of carcinoma in organs
 lying close to trichinous muscles in humans suffering from chronic trichi-
 nosis, in particular the breasts.
   So far as can be ascertained, Gongylonema neoplasticum is never found in
humans. On the other hand, four reports from America and one, or possibly
two, from Italy indicate that another type of Gongylonema, probably G.
pulchrum, can live in the mucous membrane of the human lips and tongue;
this type is normally parasitic in the tongue and oesophagus of the pig and
uses dung-beetles (Aphodius and others) as an intermediate host. In all the
patients under observation, however, there were only very slight changes
in the mucous membrane; there were no instances of carcinoma or similar
processes, and there was likewise no cancer of the oesophagus in pigs in-
fected with this Gongylonema.
   This seems therefore to suggest that the Helminthes which must be as-
sumed to result in the development of cancer are quite few in number.
   If we wish to come to a conclusion on this question we must, however,
keep in mind the fact that experiments on Gongylonema neoplasticum have
(as I shall explain later) proved that this parasite may leave the cancer tissue
after producing the carcinoma, which then still continues to grow. In cases
where tumours have been brought about by Helminthes it consequently
cannot always be assumed that these will be present; in such cases the origi-
nal aetiological role of the Hehninthes will be masked. This poses the possi-
bility of a greater number of malignant neoplasms being due to such para-
sites than can be proved to be the case, and the part they play in the onset of
tumours may in fact be greater than appears from our observations.
   Even bearing this possibility in mind, we are nevertheless not justified in
ascribing to the Helminthes any extensive aetiological role in the pathology
of cancer in Man.
   Nor can the endemic appearance of Spiroptera carcinoma among rats coup-
led to our knowledge of the presence and effects of the Gongylonema in
human beings serve as a foundation for the theory, put forward in recent
times, that the comparatively high incidence of cancer in the inhabitants of
districts of buildings infested with rats and cockroaches may be caused by
the transmission of a carcinogenic virus through Gongylonema neoplasticum
or other Nematodes. Research on Spiroptera, again, does not give unqual-


      SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                          141

ified support for the theories that cancer is in general ascribable to macro-
parasites or microbes.
   All things considered, the present state of our knowledge allows us to
allot the Helminthes only a modest place among the causes of neoplasms
among humans, a fact that I stressed in my first work back in 1913.

In the course of the research work on Spiroptera carcinoma, it became possible
for the first time to induce typical, metastasizing carcinomas systematically
and at will. This provided experimental proof that the start of a cancer can,
in agreement with the theory of Virchow, be brought about by external,
exogenic influences, and lent support to experiments on the effects of long-
term irritants of other kinds.
    Experiments of this nature were first undertaken by Yamagiwa and Ichi-
kawa, who chose coal-tar as the irritant; the carcinogenic effects of this had
been observed in clinical practice, but in previous experiments had yielded
only negative results. Works by Yamagiwa and Ichikawa over the years
1915-1918 however, proved, as a principal result, that a monthly application
of coal-tar to the ears of rabbits was able to produce a skin cancer. Tsutsui
reported, in 1918, that painting tar on the skin of the mouse would produce
the same effect, and these experiments were taken further by Fibiger and
Bang who were able, in 1920, to corroborate and supplement Tsutsui’s re-
sults. This laid the foundation for a method of inducing cancer at will which
is now in use in laboratories all over the world.
    As I continue my account of the information which the study of Spiroptera
carcinoma has contributed to our knowledge of the pathology of cancer, I
shall add and compare some of these to the results which came from research
on experimental tar cancer.
    Before doing so, however, I should mention that the effect of the Gongy-
lonema is generally taken to be due to their constant production of toxic
substances; I originally suspected this through the analogy with the well-
known fact that a number of the Helminthes exude pathogenic secretions.
    A continuous excretion of this sort is not, however, essential for a carci-
noma, once it has developed, to continue to grow. As tests showed, the
growth of the fully developed carcinoma continues irrespective of whether
the Gongylonema leave the tumour tissue or not; this is exactly analogous
both with the continued growth of experimental tar cancer after the cessa-
 tion of painting-on the tar, and with clinical observations that the develop-
 ment of chimney-sweep’s cancer and cancers caused by aniline and X-rays


142                            1926 J.FIBIGER

does not come to a halt because the patients are removed from the influences
which have given rise to the disease.
   The fact that in a number of cases the Spiroptera carcinoma could be pro-
duced both on the tongue and in the stomach provided experimental proof
that multiple carcinomas in the alimentary canal can be due to the formation
of a primary cancer in different sites, stemming from the same cause but
otherwise entirely independent. The experiments furthermore made it pos-
sible to confirm that in its earliest stages a carcinoma develops pluricentric-
ally, starting from separate and well-defined small groups of cells or perhaps
even from individual cells, and that its continued development is through
expansive, non-appositional growth, in line with the view put forward earlier
by Ribbert and others to explain the development of a carcinoma.
    No proportional relationship was found between the appearance of carci-
noma and the degree of development of epithelial hyperplasia and heter-
otopic growth at depth. In rats which had survived the transfer of Spiroptera
by a long period the wall of the stomach could be the site of deeply pene-
trating cell masses or large retort-shaped epithelial cysts without a carcinoma
having developed, and contrariwise carcinoma might develop in other ani-
mals starting from epithelium exhibiting only moderate and non-heter-
otopic hyperplasia. Again, there was no correlation to be found between the
formation of a carcinoma, the development of inflammation and papillo-
mata. Violent development of papillomata was not necessarily accompanied
 by carcinoma, and carcinoma could develop without papillomata.
    Accordingly neither heterotopic benign epithelial proliferation nor papil-
lomatosis need necessarily be preliminary stages of carcinoma; development
 of carcinoma follows as a characteristic process upon the hyperplastic growth
 of epithelium, irrespective of whether this is slight or pronounced, heter-
 otopic or not, and whether at the same time as the epithelial hyperplasia
there is substantial inflammation, proliferation of connective tissue and pa-
 pillomatous changes, or whether there is no papilloma and only slight in-
 flammation. This is not so say that there is never any relation between in-
 flammation and carcinoma, but only that inflammation is not an essential
 factor in the genesis of the carcinoma and cannot unequivocally be regarded
 as a process which is absolutely essential for the onset of a cancer. If inflam-
 mation is present, it can most probably be seen as an accompanying phenom-
 enon in the development of the cancer or as a secondary process which
 may even, particularly when it is far-developed, be regarded as having a
 defensive character and in its most pronounced forms (e.g. in mixed infec-


        SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                         143

tion) can bring the cancer to decompose almost completely; this may be
observed in cases of experimental tar cancer in the mouse. As you will know,
Murphy and other workers even regard the lymphocyte reaction during
 cancer as being a significant part of the processes involved in general in the
resistance to cancer. This is, however, a problem which can hardly be con-
sidered as finally resolved.
   The disproportion between heterotopic epithelial hyperplasia, inflamma-
tion and papilloma formation on the one hand and the development of car-
cinoma on the other appeared especially clearly in the effects of the Gongy-
lonema upon wild rats (M. decumanus and M. rattus), white mice, domestic
mice (M. musculus) and field mice (M. sylvaticus). These can all survive the
transfer of Spiroptera for as long a period as the brindled laboratory rats,
and frequently even longer. The development and biological state of the
Gongylonema, furthermore, seem to be entirely unaltered during their para-
sitic existence in these various rodents, in whose stomachs they give rise to
substantial changes of exactly the same sort as those observed in brindled rats,
and sometimes more extensive still.
   Nevertheless Spiroptera carcinoma develops much less frequently in these
animals than in the brindled rats, among whom - as I have said - stomach
cancers developed in more than half of those who survived the transfer of
Spiroptera by 45 days or longer. During experiments undertaken in collab-
oration with C. Krebs carcinoma was found in the stomach on only one
out of 38 black rats (M. rattus) and only 11 out of 34 brown rats (M. decu-
manus). Among 56 white mice who, like all these rats, survived the infection
with the parasites for at least 75 days and often very much longer, only
three were found to have carcinomas. Despite numerous attempts, it was
not possible to induce Spiroptera carcinoma in field mice and domestic mice.
   Thus the development of a cancer following the same exogenic influence,
and under the same conditions, does not always occur within the same
period of time in all animals of the same species; what is more, it occurs
with varying frequency among animals of different, though closely related,
species.
   This gave an experimental indication of a varying individual-and species-
predisposition towards cancer, which was corroborated by later research
on Cysticercus sarcoma and experimentally induced tar cancer. I will content
myself here with mentioning that (so far as I know) it has only been possible
to produce tar cancer on the skin of the rat in one single case, despite
numerous attempts in various laboratories.


144                             1926 J.FIBIGER

   Tests on this made by Paul Møller in my Institute yielded only negative
results, although the tar used for these would produce cancer in all the mice
surviving by one month a q-month course of painting. On the other hand,
all the six most long-lived rats (who died only some 10-15 months after the
course of painting with tar) developed a primary carcinoma of the lung.
   This notion of a predisposition to cancer therefore not only applies to a
differing individual-, race- or species-predisposition to develop the same
form of cancer after the same carcinogenic effect; we must assume that it
can vary within the same species as regards differing carcinogenic factors.
Tar cancer develops quite easily among mice who will only contract Spirop-
tera carcinoma with the greatest difficulty, although both tar and Gongylo-
nema produce a carcinoma of identical structure. The experiments of Spirop-
tera carcinoma also provided an indication of the existence of a varying pre-
disposition among the organs, since, although I was never able to observe
an incipient or extant carcinoma in the oesophagus of either rats or mice,
the epithelium of this organ does not differ from that of the stomach fundus,
and in the majority of the animals it contained numerous Gongylonema and
was often the site of a pronounced and sometimes heterotopic epithelial
hyperplasia. Yokogawa obtained exactly the same results with rats infected
with Gongylonema orientale.
   On the whole it seems, as Bashford had suspected as far back as 1912, that
there may very likely be special predispositions, but no common general
predisposition to all forms of cancer, to cancer in all organs or to all car-
cinogenic influences.
   At the present time it is impossible either to make an overall, confident
assessment of the influences to which these predispositions must be attrib-
uted, or to weigh up the importance of the special factors, the effects of
which upon susceptibility towards cancer are discussed and studied in recent
works: endocrine secretion, the significance of the spleen, the composition
and salt, lipoid or vitamin content of the diet, etc., the effects of pregnancy,
various diseases, the iso-haemagglutinin content of the blood, inherited and
constitutional characteristics of various kinds, and so on.
   I will discuss only one factor: old age, the considerable importance of
which as a generally predisposing characteristic towards all forms of cancer
has long been a universally accepted doctrine. This doctrine has not, how-
ever, found confirmation in a series of experimental works. Even my very
early experiments indicated that Spiroptera carcinoma appeared with the same
facility in both young and old rats, and later work done in my Institute by


       SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                          145

 Fridtjof Bang (as well as experiments carried out elsewhere) proved that
 in like conditions young mice contracted tar cancer just as frequently and
just as rapidly as did old ones. It is possible to point to clinical experience,
 too, which bears out these experiments showing that it is the time at which
 the effect of the carcinogenic influence begins (and the nature, duration, and
 intensity of this effect) which determines the time of life at which cancer
 develops, rather than any particular age-predisposition.
    As you will know, clinical experience of chimney-sweep’s cancer and
 aniline cancer has made it clear that the appearance of a demonstrable and
 morphologically typical cancer need not be the immediate consequence of
 a carcinogenic influence - it may only appear after this has ceased to have
 any effect and after a certain period (which may be quite lengthy) has
 elapsed; conclusive proof of the existence of such a period of latency was
 first provided by research work on tar cancer, and in particular that of
 Fridtjof Bang and of A. Leitch.

I have attempted briefly to outline the most important results obtained from
experiments on Spiroptera carcinoma.
   Of the later methods for the experimental induction and study of cancer,
that of painting mice with tar has so far shown itself to be the most suitable.
We still do not know the specially active ingredient (or ingredients) in this
highly complex substance, but we have incontrovertible proof that all types
of coal-tar possess this property of inducing cancer in rabbits and mice. Tar
has also shown itself, however, to be capable of causing malignant neoplasms
in the lungs, breasts, testes, stomach, and other organs, and it will thus be
possible to make use of the experimental induction of tar cancer in the patho-
logical study of a number of forms of the disease.
   In research on therapy, too, experimental work will provide an invalu-
able, and indeed indispensable, foundation. As an example of this I might
mention a series of experiments carried out by Paul Møller and myself on
the prevention of metastasis in cancer cases.
   These were done on mice suffering from cancer of the skin, induced by
tar painting. As an immunizing measure we employed subcutaneous injec-
tions of an emulsion made from sterile, living skin from a mouse foetus;
earlier transplantation experiments had shown this to be effective in pre-
venting the development of transplanted tumour tissue. The tests covered
in all 293 mice, kept under identical conditions, who had a small area of the
skin of the back treated every other day with the same coal-tar and in the


146                            1926 J.FIBIGER

 same manner over a period of four months. The skin emulsion was injected
 into 156 of these animals from 2-7 times, while the remaining 137 mice
 acted as a control. Skin cancer was contracted by 127 (81%) of the treated
 animals and 102 (74.4%) of the controls, but metastasis occurred in only
 38 (i.e. approx. 30%) of the treated mice as against 59 (about 58%) of the
 control animals.
    This immunization treatment had thus, like earlier results, shown itself
 to be ineffectual in preventing primary cancer formation, although reducing
 the formation of metastases by about 50%.
    There is consequently no doubt that the formation of metastases can be
 inhibited by this method, and I might add that after proper statistical check-
 ing these results have proved quite indisputable. I need not emphasize, there-
 fore, that only further experiments covering a wider scope can show what
 methods can be evolved on the basis of our results, to serve as a therapeutic
 measure to combat cancer in Man. These methods will have to be free of
 the technical difficulties which affected ours; these included the fact that the
 tissue had not only to be homologous and sterile but also living, in order to
 be certain of avoiding the danger of hypersensitivity to cancer development
 which it had been shown could result from the injection of dead tissue. A
 detailed explanation of the processes by which metastasis is inhibited has
 still not been possible.
    Other influences than those I have mentioned here have formed the sub-
ject of research by other workers in recent times, and have proved capable
 of inducing cancer. A point of interest in the study of occupational cancers
 is that it has been proved that carcinoma of the skin in mice can be produced
 not only by tar, but also by other products of the distillation and combustion
 of coal-soot, pitch, the paraffin oils and similar substances. Long-standing
 observations of experimentally induced X-ray sarcoma have been supple-
 mented by recent reports of carcinomas from the same cause. The effect of
 traumata has been proved by tests of various kinds; of special importance is
 research showing the development of cancer in the gall bladder of the guinea-
 pig following on the penetration of gall-stone fragments or other foreign
 bodies into this organ.
    Of even greater interest is the experimental work done by Carrel. I can
 only mention here the most important results of this, which show that by
 means of the inoculation of embryonic fowl tissue into fowls accompanied
 by the injection of extremely dilute solutions of tar, arsenic or indole (benzo-
 pyrrole) it is possible to induce rapidly growing and highly malignant, me-


       SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                             147

tastasizing and transplantable neoplasms identical to the Rous sarcoma; like
the latter, these can be transmitted to healthy fowls by theinoculation of
cell-free filtrates of the tumour tissue. Moreover, the filtrate is able, in vitro,
to bring about the conversion of the blood macrophages into malignant
tumour cells, and it has furthermore been shown by Fischer that a similar
conversion can be brought about by the cultivation of spleen macrophages
in a nutrient medium to which a small quantity of arsenic acid has been
added.
    Carrel’s work has thrown new light on a number of problems. First and
foremost, it is now difficult to uphold the theory that the Rous sarcoma must
be attributed to an invisible virus, since sarcomas of exactly the same type
were seen to be produced during these experiments by the effects of chemi-
 cally unorganized compounds upon embryo tissue. The carcinogenic prop-
 erty of the tissue filtrate must therefore be assumed to depend upon the
 effects of a cellular product, possibly an enzyme.
    These tests also provided support for further studies on the formation of
 malignant tumours following the inoculation of embryo tissue, and can also
 be seen as corroborating Cohnheim’s theory. The conversion of the macro-
 phages into tumour cells also suggests that neoplasms can develop from non-
 differentiated cells as well as embryo cells, and that foreign substances in-
 troduced into the organism can produce tumours in embryonic tissue; finally,
 it indicates that the formation of neoplasms does not depend solely upon local
 factors, but also on others originating from the organism generally.
     It is however difficult at present to know how much importance can be
 attributed as a whole to the results of Carrel’s work on the aetiology and
 pathogenesis of tumours, partly because the neoplasms he induced developed
 only from embryo rather than adult tissue, and that exclusively in fowls,
 and partly because in all instances they belong to the much discussed
 Rous type of sarcoma; the classification of this type alongside the sar-
 comas affecting mammals and human beings is problematical, and it is
 not recognized by many pathologists.
     Recent work done by Askanazy has shown that the effect of arsenic is
  also able in the rat to foster the development of teratoids from inoculated
  embryonic tissue, and that there can be a simultaneous formation of sarco-
  mas. If further experiments on mammals, involving entirely typical sarco-
 mas and carcinomas, make it possible to obtain results matching those
 reached by Carrel, then the experimental study of tumours will have entered
 a new and fruitful era.


148                              1926 J.FIBIGER

I will now close. The limited time at my disposal has permitted me to dis-
cuss only a few of the significant, principal results of modern cancer research,
without mentioning either the vast number of other experiments which
have been carried out, or all of the scientists who are working in this field.
But what I have been able to tell you will have made it clear that the experi-
mental induction of tumours in modern time has made it possible to realize
that the causes of cancer include animal parasites and physical and chemical
influences of various kinds, and that endogenic as well as exogenic factors
must be regarded as playing a part in causing the disease.
   Although even recent works attribute importance to microparasites and
invisible viruses as causes of cancer, there has been no convincing evidence
offered for the microbial origin of cancer in Man, and all theories of this
kind must be regarded as based upon insufficient grounds.
    The term cancer covers diseases of widely differing origins and of many
different kinds, sharing the common feature of an uncontrolled, apparently
autonomous, atypical and invasive growth of the cancer cells, with an
ability to find a fertile site for development after metastasis in widely varying
tissues in the organism. The anatomical and biological changes undergone
by the cells in the course of their conversion into tumour cells, which give
mature cancer cells their characteristic stamp, are far from well enough
known; but the substantial improvements which have been made in the past
few years in the methods of cultivating tissue in vitro have opened up new
possibilities for studies of this kind, and have - as will be evident from what I
have been telling you here - already given promising results. Warburg’s
work on the metabolism of cancer tissue, too, has meant a useful increase
in our knowledge; I would mention only the very great importance which
his experiments have taught us to attribute to glycolysis in the metabolism
 of the cancer cell.
    The study of the manifold problems presented by cancer has, in recent
 years, seemed to offer many more riddles than were previously thought to
 exist; but the history of medicine has never known a period in which
 problems could be attacked in so many different ways as those made acces-
 sible today by the working methods now at our command.


       SPIROPTERA CARCINOMA AND CANCER INDUCTION                                       149
          Publications on Spiroptera carcinoma by Johannes Fibiger
 1. Recherches Sur un nématode et Sur sa faculté de provoquer des néformations papilloma-
    teuses et carcinomateuses dans l’estomac du rat, Académie Royale des Sciences et des
    Lettres de Danemark, 1913.
 2. <<Über eine durch Nematoden (Spiroptera sp. n.) hervorgerufene papillomatöse und
    carcinomatöse Geschwulstbildung im Magen der Ratte>>, Klin. Wochschr., (1913);
     <<Undersøgelser over en Nematode (Spiroptera sp. n.) og dens Evne til at fremkalde
    papillomatøse og carcinomatøse Svulster i Rottens Ventrike1>>, Hospitalstidende,
    (1913).
 3. <<Untersuchungen über eine Nematode (Spiroptera sp. n.) und deren Fähigkeit, pa-
     pillomatöse und carcinomatöse Geschwülste im Magen der Ratte hervorzurufen>>,
    Z.Krebsforsch., 13 (1913).
 4. <<Sur le développement de tumeurs papillomateuses et carcinomateuses dans l’esto-
     mac du rat sous l’action d’un ver nématode>>, Troisième Conférence Internationale
     pour l’Étude du Cancer, Bruxelles, 1913.
 5. In collaboration with Hj . Ditlevsen: <<Contributions to the biology and morphol-
     ogy of Spiroptera (Gongylonema) neoplastica sp. n.>>, Mindeskrift for Japetus Steen-
     strup, (1914).
 6. <<Weitere Untersuchungen über das Spiroptera carcinom der Ratte>>, Z. Krebs-
    forsch., 14 ( 1914) ; <<Fortsatte Undersøgelser over Spiroptera carcinomet hos Rotten>>,
     Hospitalstidende, (1914).
 7. <<Über Disposition der Ratten und Mäuse für die Wirkung der Spiroptera neoplas-
     tica>>, Zentr. Allgem. Pathol. Pathol. Anat., 27 (1916).
 8. <<Undersøgelser over Spiroptera neoplastica’s Indvirkning paa Mus>>, Foredrag paa
     Naturforskermødet i Kristiania, 1916.
 9. <<Investigations on the Spiroptera Cancer, III: On the transmission of Spiroptera
     neoplastica (Gongylonema neoplasticum) to the rat as a method of producing cancer
     experimentally,, Kgl. Danske Videnskab. Sefskab, Biol. Medd., I, 9 (1918).
10. <<Investigations on the Spiroptera Cancer. IV: Spiroptera cancer of the tongue>>,
     Kgl. Danske Videnskab. Selskab, Biol. Medd., I, 10 (1918).
11. <<Investigations on the Spiroptera Cancer. V : On the growth of small carcinomata
     and on predisposition to Spiroptera Cancer in rats and mice>>, Kgl. Danske Videns-
     kab. Selskab, Biol. Medd., I,11(1918).
12. <<Investigations on the Spiroptera Cancer. VI: A transplantable Spiroptera carci-
     noma of the mouse>>, Kgl. Danske Videnskab. Selskab, Biol. Medd., I, 14 (1919).
     <<Sur la transmission aux rats de la Spiroptera neoplastica (Gongylonema neoplasti-
     cum)>>, Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., (1920).
     <<Carcinome spiroptérien de la langue du rat>>, Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., (1920).
      <<Sur l’evolution et la croissance du carcinome spiroptérien>>, Compt. Rend. Soc.
     Biol., (1920).
     <<Recherches sur le carcinome spiropterien de la souris blanche et sur sa transplan-
     tabilité>>, Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., (1920).
13. <<On Spiroptera carcinomata and their relation to true malignant tumours; with
     some remarks on cancer age>>, J. Cancer Research, 4 (1919).


150                                  1926 J.FIBIGER

14. <<Untersuchungen über das Spiropterakarzinom der Ratte und der Maus>>, Z.
    Krebsforsch., 17 (1919).
15. <<Recherches sur la production expérimentale du cancer chez le rat et la souris>>,
    Bull. Assoc. Franc. Etude Cancer, (1921).
16. <<Le cancer spiroptérien et les autres cancers à parasites animaux>>, Bull. Assoc. Franc.
    Etude Cancer, ( 1923 ) .
17. <<Nieuwere onderzoekingen over den kanker>>, Ned. Tijdschr. Geneesk., Eerste
    Helft, No. 14 (1923).
