                           JO S E P H E R L A N G E R


           Some observations on the responses of
                    single nerve fibers
                      Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1947


Dr. Gasser, in his Nobel Lecture delivered here in 1945, restricted his dis-
cussion to a review of the classification of mammalian nerve fibers. His rea-
son for confining himself to that phase of the development of the researches
that have occupied us since 1921, was the fact that after the termination of
our association in St. Louis most of the recent work in his laboratory "has",
to quote him, "been turned in that directions". Similarly, my review will be
restricted largely to a consideration of some of the results that have been
derived through observations on the responses of single nerve fibers, since that
is the main method that has been employed in the continuation of the studies
in my laboratory since 1931. Much of this recent work was conducted in
collaboration with E. A. Blair.
  Before considering any of these results a brief statement is in order regard-
ing the technique which made possible the work on nerve that was begun in
St. Louis by Dr. Gasser and myself. The action potential of nerve, that is, the
electrical manifestation of the nerve impulse, is exceedingly brief; it is so
brief that there were reasons for believing, in 1921, that the details of its
configuration had never been accurately recorded - that, of the physical in-
struments then available, the cathode-ray oscillograph alone would be fast
enough to give true pictures of nerve action potentials. Undoubtedly, many
physiologists had realized the advantages that would accrue to electrophys-
iology through the use of this practically inertialess electrical recording in-
strument, but although this oscillograph was available as early as 1890, the
only statement regarding its possibilities in physiology that had appeared in
print prior to 1921 is to be found in Bernstein’s Electrobiologie, published in
 1912. It reads as follows: "Von Bernstein ist der Vorschlag gemacht worden,
den Kathodenstrahl als Indikator für die Oszillationen der bioelektrischen
Ströme zu benutzen, da dieser mit absoluter Genauigkeit den Stromes-
schwankungen folgen würde. Es ist aber bis jetzt nicht gelungen, Versuch in
dieser Richtung mit Erfolg auszuführen."
   It becomes evident from this statement that Bernstein failed to realize that


                 RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                               51
 the Braun tube did not possess the sensitivity that is requisite for the direct
 recording of nerve action potentials, the smallest of which may be of the
 order of a few microvolts.
    At a meeting of the American Physical Society held in Chicago in 1920,
 J. B. Johnson of the Western Electric Company described a cathode-ray
 oscillograph possessing a greatly increased sensitivity; it was such as to sug-
 gest the possibility that, with the aid of amplification, the Braun tube might
 become available as the perfect instrument for the recording of brief elec-
 trical phenomena of physiological origin. At that time the physiological
 laboratory of Washington University was in the possession of an amplifier
 which had been built by Gasser and Newcomer for the recording, with the
 string galvanometer, of action potentials carried by the phrenic nerve during
  respiration. However, another amplifier was built in older to embody some
 improvements suggested by the experience of those investigators.
     Records of the responses of single axons had previously been made by
  Adrian and collaborators. To secure them they interrupted, through teasing,
  the continuity of all save one of the fibers of a nerve at some point between
  stimulator and lead, and the responses of that fiber were recorded, at first,
with the capillary-electrometer, and later, with the Matthews oscillograph.
  Our method of securing responses of single fiber has consisted of recording
  from a nerve that contains relatively few fibers, the frog’s phalangeal nerve
  or a spinal root, for example. These nerves are apt to contain a fiber of out-
  standing excitability, such that a just threshold stimulus will excite that fiber
  only. An advantage of this method is the assurance it gives that the charac-
  teristics of the responding fiber have not been altered by rough handling in
  preparation. Since of the total electrical response of a fiber, that of the spike
  is relatively stable, it has been unnecessary in this series of experiments to
  supply the nerve with exactly the environment (gaseous and thermal) that
  prevails in the normal animal organism. Environmental conditions were,
  however, kept constant where constancy was a requirement. The temper-
  ature was usually that of the room, about 27ºC
     The observations on the responses of single nerve fibers first became fea-
  sible when, in 1932, the amplification available in the laboratory was in-
  creased from the previous maximum of about 100,000 times, at which a spike
  of about 27 microvolts produced a deflection of 1 mm on the screen of the
  oscilloscope, to a maximum of about 2,000,000 times, an increase of about 20
  in sensitivity. The noise level then, was of the order of 5 microvolts.
     The first phenomenon to be revealed by this higher amplification and


52                              1944 J.ERLANGER




Fig. 1. (1) Contact print of 40 successive half-maximal spikes of the sciatic nerve, to
show the superimposability of successive multifibered-conducted action potentials. The
           sweep is slower than in records 2 to 9, and the amplification less.
(2-8) Successive contact prints all obtained under exactly comparable conditions to
show the spontaneous variations in the response of the sciatic to shocks, uniform as
above, but just threshold; the records are mounted so that the time from the stimulus
is the same for all.
(9) A sweep without stimulation, showing the noise level for 2-8.
        (These records were made before better techniques became available.)

thinner preparations was an instability of a fiber’s reactivity. With low am-
plification but the maximum originally available, the conducted multifibered
action potential elicited from a large mixed nerve by half maximal stim-
ulation has a constant, smooth configuration, as may be seen in 1 of Fig.1.
This is a record made by 40 successive superimposed sweeps during each of
which the nerve was stimulated with a single shock. These 40 half-maximal
alpha spikes match perfectly and give a smooth curve, record 1. In contrast
to the smoothness of this record of superimposed spikes are records 2 to 8,
inclusive. These seven action potentials were secured under the same condi-
tions as those that obtained while making the superimposed half-maximal
records of 1, except that the amplification was maximal and the stimulation
strength threshold. Each of the records, 2 to 8 is that of a single sweep. The
striking feature of these records is their variety. No two are alike. Of this
variability only a very small part is referable to amplifier noise, as may be


                RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                               53
seen in the faint record 9, which was made by a sweep during which the
nerve was not stimulated. Here the irregularities are insignificant in compar-
ison with those seen in records 2 to 8.
    Two factors that account for this variability of the successive pictures are
spontaneous variations in the excitability of the responding fibers and of the
latencies of their responses. That variation in excitability is one of the factors
is clearly demonstrable when a phalangeal nerve preparation happens to
contain, say, two fibers of approximately the same outstanding excitabilities
and approximately the same conduction velocities, but spike potentials
which, through fortuitous circumstances, differ appreciably in appearance,
so that the spikes of each of the fibers can be identified. Under such cir-
cumstances threshold shocks, all of the same strength, elicit responses that
shift to and fro on the screen of the oscilloscope, and come and go, in a
wholly unpredictable manner. Thus, both of the fibers may respond to one of
the shocks, only one of them to the next, the other only to a third, or neither
 axon may respond, and the responses shift their positions irregularly on the
 screen. It is obvious that such behavior cannot be ascribed to fortuitous va-
riations in stimulus strength, for then the two fibers would behave alike.
Rather, as has been said, the uncertainty of a response to a threshold stimulus
 must be referable to spontaneous, independent variations in the excitabilities
 of the two fibers.
    A measure of the range of these fluctuations in the excitability can be
 gained by determining the change in the ratio of the number of responses
 to the number of stimuli as the strength of the shocks is increased in small
 steps while stimulating at a regular rate - say, 30 shocks per minute. As the
 shock strength is gradually increased from subthreshold level, a strength will
 be reached at which the fiber at first responds only rarely, say, once in 20
 stimulations. (Twenty stimulations is the number commonly employed in
 such determinations.) To increase this low probability of response to a high
 probability, where, for example, the shock strengthis such that it fails to attain
 the fiber’s threshold in the same ratio, that is, 1 in 20, it may be necessary to
 increase the strength of the shock through about 2 to 4% of the threshold. On
 account of these spontaneous fluctuations in the threshold of a fiber it has
 been necessary to adopt as threshold the strength of current that stimulates
 half of the times it is applied.
    The temporal shift of the successive responses might be due to fluctuation
 of conduction velocity and to latency of the response to the threshold stimuli.
 Since, however, the shifts are equally prominent with both unconducted and


54                              1944 J.ERLANGER

conducted spikes, fluctuations in the latency of the responses alone would be
sufficient to account for them. An example of the shift in latency of uncon-
ducted spikes is seen in Fig.2. Here A, B, and C are responses of a fiber to
successive "just threshold" brief induction shocks of identical strength. Con-
duction has been eliminated by using the proximal electrode as both the lead
into the amplifier and the cathode of the stimulating shock. The shock artifact
therefore badly distorts the records; its form is given, however, by S - C, a
response that resulted when one of the equally strong shocks failed to elicit
a spike. The latencies of the two responses can be ascertained by subtracting
this shock artifact from the two records, A and B; they are 0.21 and 0.34
msec; the shift, therefore, is 0.13 msec. This, however was not the widest
shift exhibited by this particular axon. The longest shock-spike range we
have encountered has been 0.4 msec. But with stimulation by long rectan-
gular constant currents at rheobasic strength the latency under constant con-
ditions has ranged between 1.61 and 3.05 msec, a shift 1.4 msec or about 10
times that observed when the stimulus is a brief shock such as was employed
in the experiment illustrated by Fig. 2. Since latencies are shortened by in-
creasing the strength of the stimulus it seems probable that their spontaneous
variations are related to the spontaneous variations in the fiber’s excitability.




Fig. 2. Superimposed tracings of serial records obtained from the stimulated locus
(stimulus just threshold) to show fluctuations in response latency. Time in 0.1 msec.


   In an attempt to gain information relative to the basis of the variations in
excitability, determinations were made of the effect on the range of the va-
riations of exposing the fibers to some of the conditions that are known to
influence their reactivity. Anode polarization and cathode polarization,
which respectively decrease and increase excitability, and quite markedly,


                RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                                 55
presumably by varying the stability of the surface membrane, were found to
be without any consistent directional effect on the variations - sometimes in-
creasing them, sometimes decreasing them, but usually within the limit of the
experimental error. Sodium citrate, which is known to increase excitability,
may actually cause fibers to discharge spontaneously, presumably through
the de-ionization of calcium, which increases, though not markedly, the
range of the excitability fluctuations. Decreasing calcium action would result
in an increase in the activity of potassium, and potassium acts in many re-
spects like cathode polarization. For example, it, like cathode polarization,
diminishes the height of the axon spike and eventually blocks the nerve im-
pulse. Since cathode polarization may increase or decrease the range of the
excitability variations whereas sodium citrate increases it, though slightly,
 the possibility suggests itself that this phase of the action of the citrate is
referable to some process that is not mediated by the membrane. Cold, we
among others have shown, lowers excitability, but it has definitely increased
 the range of the excitability variations, commonly by as much as 50%. Cold,
 in our experience, increases the height of the axon spike. It probably modifies
 all of the processes concerned with nerve action.
    But of all of the agents tested in this connection, strychnine has had the
 greatest effect. In a concentration of 1:100,000 it may quadruple the range
 of the excitability fluctuations. It does this despite the fact that it raises some-
 what the threshold of the fiber to electrical stimulation. In concentrations
 that produce these effects it does not alter the action potential appreciably. It
 may be inferred from all of these tests that the surface membrane is not the
 seat of the excitability oscillations, but, further than this, the experiments
 have failed to throw any light on the nature of the mechanism producing
 them.
    It may be of interest to note here that the characteristic action of strych-
nine on central nervous mechanisms is the initiation of "spontaneous" re-
 petitive discharges. Thus Bremer has shown that strychnine convulsions are
 characterized by a regular succession, in all parts of the anterior gray sub-
 stance of the spinal cord, of action potentials at a frequency of 10 to 30 per
 second. And Dusser de Barenne and McCulloch find that the local applica-
 tion of a strychnine solution to the cerebral cortex results in a typical change
 in its electrical activity, the usual brain waves being replaced by large rapid
 voltage fluctuations. It seems not unlikely that this central action of strych-
 nine, leading to a discharge of impulses, is related in some way to the en-
 hancement of the spontaneous variations of excitability that results from the


56                               1944 J.ERLANGER

treatment of nerve fibers with strychnine. It may also be of interest to note
in this connection that cold, which, like strychnine, increases the range of
the excitability variations of nerve fibers, also increases reflex responses of
the spinal cord.

Some manifestations of segmentation in myelinated axons - All nerve fibers of
vertebrates, excepting certain of the very slender ones, are surrounded by a
sheath of myelin that gives to them the appearance of electrically insulated
conductors. The myelin of the peripheral fibers is segmented; in the case of
the larger fibers, such as we have dealt with, the segments range, probably
rather widely, about a length of 1.25 mm. The nodes between the segments
are generally believed to be free or relatively free, of myelin and they have
a width that is about equal to the diameter of the fiber, probably about
in the case of the larger fibers.
   Evidence indicating that applied crystalloids in solution act upon the nerve
fiber primarily via the nodes of Ranvier has been gained through observa-
tions of responses of single nerve fibers. The solutions were so applied to the
nerve that they acted over a length that did not exceed 1 mm. By moving
the applicator, filled with a salt-free isotonic solution of glucose, along the




Fig. 3. Stages in the blocking of transmission in a fiber induced by a 1 mm application
of glucose solution successively at two adjacent loci of highest susceptibility, one
located 1.2 to 1.5 mm central to the lead, at 0,2,3, and 4 seconds after contact (records
A, B, C, and D); the other, 3.0 mm central to the lead, 0,3,5 and 7 seconds after
contact (records E, F, G, and H). I, J, K, made 0, 10 and 16 minutes after contact,
respectively, show that application at an intermediate position does not block within
              that time. (L, the time, 10,000 cycles, applies to all records.)


                RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                                   57
nerve in close proximity to the point from which the record is taken, a locus
can be found from which, within a few seconds of application, a succession
of pictures can be obtained such as are shown in the topmost row of spikes
of Fig. 3. Here A is a typical monophasic axon spike before the application of
the glucose solution to the locus thus found. The time is indicated in 10,000
cycles per second. During the period of only 4 seconds of application, the
picture changed through B and C to D. Then the original picture, that of A,
was restored by washing the treated locus with Ringer’s solution, and then,
with the applicator refilled with the glucose solution, search was made for
the locus next removed centralwards from the recording electrode at which
a similarly quick transformation of the picture developed. This series of
changes, which transpired in 7 seconds, gave the middle row of records. The
two loci of quick action thus found were situated about 1.2 and 3.0 mm
centralwards of the lead. Then recovery was again effected by washing with
Ringer’s solution, and the applicator, filled again with glucose solution, was




Fig. 4. Diagrams of apparatus. (Upper one: simplified.) N is the nerve, one myelinated
axon of which is indicated by the broken line. The records obtained (see Fig. 5)
                      indicate that the part shaded was killed.


58                            1944 J.ERLANGER

placed midway between the two loci from which the upper and middle
rows of records had been obtained. Spikes I, J and K of the third row were
then recorded with intervening lapses of 0, 10 and 16 minutes (not seconds),
respectively. Thus there are located points at which the salt-free solution
rapidly blocks the propagation of the nerve impulses; the spacing of these
loci suggests the inference that they are successive nodes of Ranvier.

Action of applied currents - Similar pictures are obtained when electric cur-
rents are passed through the fibers, indicating that currents, likewise, act upon
the axis cylinder of medullated nerve fibers primarily via nodes of Ranvier.
The upper diagram of Fig. 4 shows a simplified network for the conduct of
a typical experiment. The segmented line represents the one nerve fiber in
the phalangeal preparation whose action potential reaches the recording
leads under the conditions of the experiment. The nerve rests upon two pairs
of electrodes; the pair to the left supplies the shock that initiates the nerve
impulse, which then travels along the fiber in the direction of the arrow; the
pair to the right leads the polarizing current into the nerve, and also the
potential difference determined by the travelling nerve impulse into the re-
cording mechanism, the cathode-ray oscillograph, through the amplifier.
The lower diagram presents the actual arrangement.

Anode polarization - When the proximal recording electrode is also the anode
of the polarizing current, as was the case in this experiment, and the current
strength is gradually increased, the propagated axon-action potential as it
approaches the lead passes through a series of changes in configuration, the
critical stages of which are seen in the retraced records of Fig. 5. These, like
those of Fig. 3, are monophasic records; the nerve on the distal lead has
been killed in order to stop the nerve impulse there. As the strength of the
polarizing current is increased, the normal action potential, A, increases in
height and also in duration; it grows to the height seen in B. (The time
is in milliseconds.) As it grows, a notch appears on the ascending limb; it
deepens, until at a critical polarization strength, the part of the action po-
tential above the notch abruptly disappears leaving a considerably lower
action potential, shown as the underlying curve of B. With continuing in-
crease in current strength this process repeats itself, as in C, and again as in D.
Each of these pictures, A, B, C, and D, was obtained with conditions mo-
mentarily constant, including the strength of the polarizing current. The
two action potentials, upper and lower, in B, C, and D, each resulted because


                RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                                     59
of spontaneous variations in the excitability of the fiber at a time when the
polarization strengths were at the critical stages. That the first of these defec-
tions, the one pictured in B, results from the blocking of the nerve impulse
is proved by pictures that are obtained from preparations in which the nerve
impulse is permitted to travel to the distal lead. The normal action potential
then records diphasically; it becomes monophasic with the first of the sudden
deflections (like that in B) and remains so with further increase in polariza-
tion. The upper diagram of Fig. 4 supplies a clue to what may be taking
place in this experiment. The diagram is constructed on the assumption that
the cross-hatched portion of the fiber is coextensive with the part that was
killed in order to obtain monophasic recording, and that, under the condi-




         Fig. 5. Deflections obtained from the nerve diagrammed in Fig. 4.
A, B, and C, traced from records; D, seen but not recorded. A, normal axon potential
in unpolarizednerve. B, C, and D, three critical stages ofincreasing anode polarization.
  The lower curve in each case is what remains of the action potential after deflection
of the part above the notches, 4, 3, and 2, in B, C and D, respectively. Time in msec.


60                              1944 J.ERLANGER

tions of the experiment, the potential, extending electrotonically ahead of
the active locus, records perceptibly through a distance about equal to that
subtended by three internodes - a distance of perhaps 4 mm. It is assumed in
other words that when, under normal conditions, internode I becomes ac-
tive there would result a scarcely perceptible difference in potential between
the two leads into the oscillograph - that it records as the lower deflection in
D of Fig. 5, that this difference in potential increases logarithmically with
the decrease in the distance from the proximal lead as the successive inter-
nodes 2, 3 and 4 become active. In the same sense it is assumed (these as-
sumptions were made in 1934) that the effect of anode polarization on spike
height falls off logarithmically along the fiber from the position of the
anode. With zero polarization, i.e. under normal conditions, the recorded
potential differences contributed by the numbered segments might have the
magnitudes that are indicated roughly by the corresponding numbers on




Fig. 6. Typical changes in the configuration of a monophasic axon spike produced by
                   anode polarization at the proximal recording lead.
(A) The normal spike.
(B) The spike under anode polarization just strong enough to block at the most
accessible node. Spontaneous variations in the fiber’s excitability cause the block to
fluctuate between one that is just not complete (the notched spike) and one that is just
complete (the unnotched lower spike).
(C) Further increase in the polarizing current to the next critical strength converts
the unnotched spike of B into the notched spike of C, and when the latter blocks again,
it records as the unnotched, lower spike of C. The time is linear and may be estimated
from the time to maximum of A, which is 0.37 msec.


               RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                                61

record A of Fig. 5, segment 1 contributing practically nothing to the height
of the normal spike, 2 a trace, 3 a bit more, and segment 4 all of the rest. At
the degree of anode polarization obtaining when block is apt to appear at the
node between segments 3 and 4, all of the contributions will have increased
in height, but mainly those from 3 and, particularly, from 4. With the block-
ing out of the contribution from 4, all above 4 in record B would drop out
leaving the action potential beneath 4. Next, the contribution from segment
 3 would be the one mainly affected; its contribution would grow in height
and then disappear, and so on. The process probably continues as the anode
polarization is further increased but the spike at this stage becomes impercep-
tibly low. In Fig. 6 are reproduced actual records made at the critical stages
in another similar preparation, again, with monophasic recording.
   The fact that under the conditions of these experiments it is regularly pos-
sible to record three successive blocks as the strength of the polarizing cur-
rent is increased, and the fact that three internodes subtend the length of
nerve through which an electrotonic extension of the potential of a spike
would produce a visible deflection, exclude any fortuitous factors, such as cut
branches or lack of linearity of the fiber, as the basis of the successive anode
blocks. These experiments, then, indicate that applied currents gain access to
the reactive part of the nerve fiber primarily via nodes of Ranvier, just as has
been shown in the previous section to be the case with applied solutions. Our
result, it should be added, is consistent with the observation of Kubo and
 Ono that the threshold to electrical stimulation of a fiber is lowest at nodes
 of Ranvier.

Cathode polarization - It has long been known that cathode polarization re-
duces the height of the compound action potential and finally blocks trans-
mission. Fig. 7 shows the transformation of the conducted spike of a single
fiber action potential as cathode polarization is increased*. In addition to the
gradual reduction in the height of the negative, the upward directed, phase
of the action potential it can be seen (in record C) that a notch appears, first
at, or slightly beyond, the peak of the spike. This notch and the peak fol-
lowing it (they correspond with the part above 4 in B of Fig. 5) may then
move slightly downward along the descending limb of the spike and at a
critical applied voltage they abruptly disappear (in record D) and the im-
pulse ceases to be conducted beyond the proximal lead (and cathode), as
evidenced by the conversion of the diphasic into a monophasic record.
* These records were made recently (1947); similar records were published in 1934.


63                              1944 J.ERLANGER




Fig. 7. Action of cathode polarization on the conducted diphasic spike of a fiber. The
                         records are from the polarized locus.
  (A) normal; (B-E) polarization increasing, block occurring in D. Time approxi-
                                    mately in msec.


   With further increase in current strength the height of this blocked spike
continues to decrease (record E). If, with continuing increase in polarization
strength, this blocking process repeats itself at the node next removed from
the polarizing (and recording) electrode, this cannot be ascertained, owing
to the approximation of the spike height to the noise level of the amplifier.
  It has been assumed up to this point that the steplike changes in the height
of the spike that are observed during local polarization of a fiber are the
result of blocks developing at successive nodes of Ranvier. There is, how-
ever, another hypothesis that seems to fit the facts. It may be that progression
of the impulse along fibers that are covered with segmented myelin is
saltatory in character (to use a term introduced by Lillie) that the fiber seg-
ments, acting as units, respond in succession to stimulation by eddy currents
issuing from the adjacent active segment. All of our observations seem to fit
into this hypothesis also, as do also the more recent observation of Tasaki
and of Pfaffmann.

Experiments bearing on the mechanism of transmission of the nerve impulse - In
1872 Hermann expressed the view that at each locus of a nerve fiber the
action potential of the excitation wave acts in turn as the stimulus to the
adjacent locus, so that the propagation of excitation can be regarded as of
the nature of an electrical restimulation. This view is now known as the local
circuit theory of impulse propagation. An alternative theory, proposed by
Bernstein attributing conduction to some propagated chemical reaction has
never, however, been completely abandoned. Recently a combination of the


                RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                                      63
two views has been suggested according to which stimulation releases a sub-
stance, acetylcholine, which then, by breaking down the membrane resist-
ance, permits a local current to flow which in turn releases acetylcholine at
adjacent loci. The consensus of opinion, however, seems to be that this view
is based on premises that are in need of substantiation.
   Some of our observations on single fibers have shed light on the role
played by the action potential in the propagation of the nerve impulse. Take,
for example, the experiment from which Fig. 8 was derived*. The figure




Fig. 8. Diagram showing the probable relation of the polarizing and recording elec-
trodes to the nodes of a single fiber that is conducting impulses in the direction of the
arrow. For each of the records, A, B and C, the nerve is stimulated twice, the interval
                               in each case being 3 msec.
(A) normal response; (B) the first impulse, 1-3, is blocked, probably at node d, by
anode polarization, but the 2nd impulse, 1-N, is not; (C) the first impulse, 1-2, is
blocked now at node c as well as d by stronger polarization, but again the 2nd impulse,
                         1-N, is not. The time is in msec.


shows diagrammatically the spikes of the reacting nerve fiber and the relative
positions of the electrodes (the vertical arrows), the middle one serving as the
anode of the polarizing circuit and as the proximal lead into the recording
mechanism. The nerve impulses were made to travel from the left in the
direction of the arrow, D. On the basis of what has gone before it may be
assumed that the normal impulse (1-N) is made up of potentials contrib-
uted by segments 1 to N +; that segment 4 contributes the largest part and
segments 3, 2 and 1 parts that are smaller in the order mentioned. The seg-
* This figure is from a later paper but is identical in import with a figure published in
1936.


64                             1944 J.ERLANGER

ments between 4 and N and beyond N also make their contributions in
rotation, those close to N determining the downward directed portion of
the diphasic action potential.
   Record A shows two impulses arriving at the lead in quick succession, the
interval between them being about 3 msec. (The time is indicated in msec.)
Both of these spikes are diphasic, signifying that both impulses are travelling
past the two recording leads. The second of these two spikes is slightly lower
than the first because it is travelling in the latter part of the relatively refrac-
tory period of the first. Record B shows the result of the first critical stage
of anode polarization at the proximal lead. The first spike of the pair is
reduced in height and is monophasic. This, as has been explained, is the result
of block at the anode. Here the block presumably is at a node occupying the
relative position of d, since at d the polarizing current lines would be densest.
This assumption implies that segments 1 to 3, inclusive alone enter into the
make-up of this spike. The second spike, however, records diphasically and
is as high as the first spike in A: the second spike obviously is not blocked,
and this despite the continuance of the blocking current. In explanation of
this lifting of the block it may be assumed that the local current, the electro-
tonic current, determined by the first action potential flows across the block
through the fiber beyond - that is, from prefiber to postfiber - and acts as a sub-
threshold stimulus to the segment (segment 4) beyond the block; that then,
while the excitability thus increased there has not yet subsided, the current
eddying ahead of the second of the two impulses can, through temporal
summation, attain the threshold of the postfiber and so initiates in segment
4 an action potential which then travels on through the preparation. The
result pictured in C was obtained after a further increase in the strength of
the polarizing current. The first spike, 1-2, of the pair of action potentials
here has undergone another of the steplike reductions in amplitude in-
dicating that the first impulse of the pair now is blocked at the next node
anteriorly, namely, c. Nevertheless, the second spike again regains the char-
acteristics of the first spike of A. Here, presumably, we are dealing with the
 temporal summation of two subthreshold stimuli: the current eddying ahead
of the blocked, the first, action potential is raising to such a level the excit-
ability of the fiber a distance of two internodes ahead of the block, that a
second similar spread of current from an action potential arriving at the block
 3 msec later can attain the threshold of the fiber beyond the block and so
initiates an impulse there. By correlating many observations on single fibers
in different preparations subjected to varying degrees of polarization in-


               RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                               65
formation has been obtained indicating that the summating effects of the
two action potentials across the block attain a maximum when the interval
between them is 2 to 4 msec, and that the summating effects then decline
slowly through 80 to 100 msec.
   That the threshold of the segments beyond the block is lowered by the
blocked impulse was demonstrated directly through the employment of a
rather complicated procedure that need not be described in detail here. Suf-
fice it to say that for these experiments the responses of several fibers, not of
a single fiber, were employed as a measure of the excitation. The blocking
current was set at a strength that blocked all save 3 of the fibers. The degree
of excitation at the blocked region was then determined by applying testing
shocks at various time intervals after the arrival there of impulses conducted
into the blocked region from afar. The intervals between the two shocks
were gradually reduced and it was found that when they became about 20
msec the number of the fibers responding to the testing shocks began to
increase, and the increase continued as the interval between the stimuli was
further reduced. It will be noted that the duration of the increased excitability
as determined by the present method, namely, 20 msec, is considerably
shorter than the duration of the temporal summation as determined by the
single fiber method, namely, 80 to 100 msec. The single fiber method, how-
ever, is regarded as the more reliable one. A further difference in the results
given by the two methods is that with the multifibered preparation max-
imum excitability was attained at the minimum separation of the two stim-
ulations, whereas with the single fiber method maximum excitation was
attained, as has been said, when the interval between the arrival of the two
impulses was 2 to 4 msec. With the former method, however, it was nec-
essary to make a correction based on the assumed conduction time, and it is
quite possible that the values chosen were in error in such a direction as to
account for this discrepancy. It should be mentioned here that Wedensky in
 1903 observed that a succession of impulses impinging on a local complete
block may lower the threshold to artificial stimulation of the nerve beyond
the block; he did not, however, describe reactivation.
   It was possible on the basis of two items of information made available in
1934, to form a rough estimate of the rate of decline of the potential with the
distance beyond the block. (1) Data on record indicated that the average
segment length of the fibers with which we were dealing is of the order of
1.25 mm. (2) In our experiments the action potential on the average fell to
approximately one-half its height with each of the successive blockings. In


66                                 1944 J.ERLANGER

other words, the potential determined by the blocked spike fell to half value
with each 1.25 mm of distance.
   If the changes in excitability inaugurated in a fiber beyond a blocked nerve
impulse are determined by currents eddying ahead of the block, one would
expect the sequence of the excitability changes there to be the same as those
initiated by any subthreshold current of comparable duration. The excita-
bility changes inaugurated by subthreshold currents of brief duration have
frequently been investigated. They were studied by us in 1931 in multifibered
preparations. The stimulating shocks for the most part were very brief in
duration, perhaps not longer than 0.1 msec. The usual result obtained from
the sciatic of the frog by methods employed at that time is seen in Fig. 9. The
first effect of the subthreshold shock was to raise the excitability above the
normal, the 100%, level for a brief period - the so-called summation interval.
The excitability then fell below the 100% level into what has been termed
the period of post-cathodal depression, and finally returned to normal dur-
ing the course of 2 to 4 msec. With increasing strength of stimulation this
post-cathodal depression approached the curve of relative refractoriness as a
limit (squares). However, the magnitude of the post-cathodal depression
was found to vary greatly from nerve to nerve under conditions that seemed




         Fig. 9. Excitability of sciatic nerve as altered by brief induction shocks.
     Ordinate - strength of testing shocks in % of normal ( = 100).
     Abscissa - intervals between sensitizing and testing shocks in msec.
     (Circles): sensitizing shock subthreshold and relatively weak.
     (Dots): sensitizing shock subthreshold and relatively strong.
     (Squares): curve of relative refractoriness.


                RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                                  67




Fig.10. Sequence of threshold changes in a single fiber subsequent to the delivery of
                           a subthreshold conditioning shock.
Ordinate - strength of testing shock in % of threshold.
Abscissa - interval between conditioning and testing shocks.
(Dotted curve): stimulated locus cathodally polarized.
(Continuous curve): nerve unpolarized (circles), and anodally polarized (triangles).
(Blair).

to be quite comparable. "Occasionally", so we then wrote, "it is so poorly
 developed that it can be scarcely detected."
     On the basis of these earlier results one would hardly expect any temporal
 summation that is induced by action potentials across a block to last much
 longer than 1 to 2 msec. It has just been stated, however, that summation
 resulting from blocked spikes may be demonstrable through a period lasting
 as long as 100 msec. This discrepancy led Blair to reinvestigate the subject of
 temporal summation. This time he used the single fiber technique, which
 provides a far more sensitive test of excitability than does the multifiber tech-
 nique previously employed. This is so because with the former method the
 responses are all-or-nothing, whereas with the latter method they are graded.
 The sequence of the changes in threshold following the delivery of a sub-
 threshold conditioning shock as ascertained by the single fiber technique is
  seen in Fig. 10. The two curves present the changes in threshold under three
  different experimental conditions, namely, with stimulated locus (1) normal
  circles), or polarized either (2) cathodally (dotted curve) or (3) anodally
  (triangles). They show that only the cathodally polarized fiber exhibits a
  period of post-cathodal depression. This depression period, however, is tem-
 porary; after about 4 msec the threshold again falls - the excitability of the
 fiber again becomes greater than normal - and it remains so through, again,


68                             1944 J.ERLANGER

50 or even 100 msec. Indeed, after the depression period seen in the cathodally
polarized fiber the curve of excitability comes to coincide with the curves
derived from the normal and from the anodally polarized fiber, which, dur-
ing recovery, do not pass through a period of post-cathodal depression. The
essential observation here, then, is that though the excitability after the lapse
of a few msec is only slightly greater than normal, roughly about 4%, it
remains so through 50 to 100 msec under all three of the conditions, just as
does the excitability of the postfiber which has been raised by an impinging
blocked nerve impulse.
   In what has gone before, consideration has been given to temporal summa-
tion across a block as effected by a single impinging nerve impulse. It should
be added that it is possible to produce by anode polarization blocks of such a
degree that an action potential is elicited in the postfiber only after the pre-
fiber has conducted two or more impulses to the block. Fig. 11 pictures an




Fig. 11. (A) A degree of anode polarization such that one blocked impulse suffices to
overcome the block. (B) Polarization increased; the block now is overcome by the
                       eighth impulse. Time intervals, 5 msec.

instance, obtained in 1936, in which the temporal summation of seven nerve
impulses was required to initiate an impulse in the postfiber. It may be men-
tioned again that this result goes beyond the facilitation described by We-
densky in that here there is actually restimulation beyond the block.
   Presumably the type of temporal summation that obtains in the fiber be-
yond a block is essentially identical with the phenomenon known as re-
cruitment. This phenomenon was being studied by Gasser while we, inde-
pendently, were occupied with the investigation of the present subject. Gasser
found that a succession of initially subthreshold electrical stimuli applied to
a nerve trunk could eventually attain the thresholds of constantly increasing


                RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                              69
numbers of the constituent fibers through as many as several hundred stim-
ulations delivered at an adequate rate. He, too, noted that the phenomenon
was elicitable even when the stimulation intervals were longer than the then
known summation interval, and he likewise reinvestigated the summation
produced by subthreshold shocks. He found that "the recruitment depends
upon the fact that the excitability curve following a subthreshold shock is
continued after the initial period of latent addition and the subsequent period
of postcathodal depression by a second summation period..." The curve ob-
tained by Gasser agrees in configuration with the one derived by Blair from
a fiber when cathodally polarized (see Fig. 10).
   At the time we were studying temporal summation of impulses blocked
by anode polarization Hodgkin began independently the investigation of the
same subject. His method, however, differed from ours in two respects: (1)
he used cold and pressure as the blocking agents instead of anode polariza-
tion, and (2) the summation of impulses beyond the block was measured
exclusively by direct electrical stimulation there, whereas such electrical stim-
ulation was employed by us merely for the purpose of confirming the
inference that the excitability beyond the block actually is increased by the
blocked impulse.
   The results of both of these researches, where they dealt with related topics
are essentially alike. (1) Thus the general configuration of the curves of the
changes in excitability induced beyond the block are qualitatively alike; there
are, however, some quantitative differences in that in our experiments excit-
ability attains its maximum more rapidly and is more protracted, in these re-
spects conforming more nearly with the excitability changes that are conse-
quent to a brief electrical stimulus as plotted by Blair and by Gasser. (2) An-
other quantitative difference concerns the gradient of the drop of potential
of the blocked impulse extending beyond the block. Hodgkin obtained his
data by direct measurement - and we, as has been stated, (a) mainly through
measurement of the heights of the potentials contributed to the records by
the 2 or 3 segments anterior to the block, upon the assumption that the seg-
ments averaged 1.25 mm in length, but (b) to some extent also by actual
measurement of the excitability. From our data Hodgkin has calculated that
1.8 is the space constant of the gradient of the decline in potential and adds
that this is close to his "average value for the potential spread near a block".
(3) As a third quantitative difference, Hodgkin found in his experiments
that a blocked impulse lowered the threshold by as much as 50 to 90%. In
our experiments the postfiber almost invariably was actually reexcited by


70                              1944 J.ERLANGER

the second impulse to arrive at the block. These differences probably are
referable to differences in the width of the blocks in the two sets of experi-
ments. Thus the cold applicators used by Hodgkin were 3.5 mm in diameter
and, where he employed pressure, it was applied to lengths of 2 to 3 mm,
whereas in our experiments the blocks probably rarely exceeded the length
of a segment or two, that is, 1.25 to 2.5 mm. However, Hodgkin observed,
to quote, "that in fresh nerves block does not occur until ice has formed
over the whole of the cooled section and that it often has to spread for ½ mm
beyond". "It is reasonable to suppose", he goes on to say, "that the whole
of the frozen region is inexcitable..." This would signify that the action
potential can stimulate across a nonresponding stretch measuring somewhat
less than 4.5 mm in length.
   And, finally, Hodgkin states as "the main conclusion... that it is possible
for nervous impulses to be transmitted by the electrotonic currents pro-
duced in activity". "The experiments", he goes on to say, "do not prove
that this is the only process involved in propagation, but the assumption of
an additional mechanism would be unnecessary if all of the properties of the
nervous impulse could be explained in terms of an electrotonic theory". His
"general conclusion is that it is possible for nervous impulses to be trans-
mitted by electronic currents". And we say, "Our observations, therefore,
signify that propagation in nerve is accomplished by a mechanism that is in
part, at least, electrical. It does not seem possible to attribute the summation
to a mechanism involving the liberation of neurohumors."




Fig. 12. Records indicating that the impulse has succeeded in traversing the nerve fiber
despite the failure of at least one intemodal segment to respond. The time is in msec.
                                  Further details in text.


                RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                             71
    Further evidence has been obtained indicating that the nerve impulse can
jump across a nonresponding internodal segment, possibly two of them,
 employing for this purpose a procedure involving simultaneous anode and
 cathode polarization. In this case the relation of the polarizing electrodes to
 the leads was as shown in Fig. 12. The anode and cathode, separated by a
 millimeter or two, were moved along the nerve until they presumably came
 to occupy some such relation to two adjacent nodes of a fiber as is indicated
 in diagram G. A strength of polarizing current can then be found at which
 successive conducted spikes of the axon alter their configurations without
 any apparent rule; yet, from the many configurations can be selected a series
 which permits one to infer the nature of process probably transpiring. Six
 spikes from such a series, all with starts superimposed, are collected in A of
 Fig. 12; and in B to F pairs from the series are superimposed which, we be-
 lieve, show the successive stages of the phenomenon. The records of B are
 characteristic of developing anode block at a node. Among the multitude of
 other records not included in the figure every transition between the con-
 figurations of 1 and 2 can be found. But between 2 and 3 in C there are no
 intermediate stages, and it is necessary to conclude that at the time 3 was
 recording there was complete anode block, presumably at node c and that
 the spike remains diphasic because the fiber has been restimulated beyond
 the block. The remaining pictures are characteristic of developing cathode
 block (cf. Fig. 7), which becomes complete in F, as witnessed by the change
 to monophasicity there (5 to 6). Presumably the cathode block develops at
 node d, the node most accessible to the cathode current. In other words, the
 action potential, though blocked at node c by the anode current, nevertheless
 restimulates the fiber at node d and so the impulse continues on its way until
 the cathode current blocks it at d. Here, clearly, conduction is maintained
 the length of the fiber although a segment has failed to respond. In the
 premises the nerve impulse here could not have been propagated chemically.
    In concluding this topic reference should be made to some experiments
 reported by Br. Werigo in 1899. In those experiments different lengths of
 the nerve of a nerve-muscle preparation were treated with chloroform or
 alcohol vapor. When the treated length became less than 5 mm the time
 required for block to develop began to increase very rapidly. Werigo, con-
 sequently, concluded that the nerve impulse is capable of jumping a non-
 responding stretch that does not exceed 5 mm in length and that such jump-
 ing could be effected by electric currents, only. Werigo’s interpretation of
 his data seems never to have been accepted, or else it has been overlooked; it


72                             1944 J.ERLANGER

is abundantly substantiated by the results described above - ours, and those
of Hodgkin - and, in addition, by those of Tasaki.
   From among results that have been derived through experiments on single
nerve fibers brief reference may be made to just a few additional sets of ob-
servations. Fig. 13 shows the relation that obtains between the conduction




Fig. 13. Relation of amplitude of axon spikes to conduction velocity. The points fall
                                about a straight line.


velocity in a fiber and the height of its action potential. Obviously the veloc-
ity is directly proportional to the height of the spike. There is in this relation
indirect evidence in support of the local circuit hypothesis of impulse prop-
agation.
   When a fiber is made to respond rhythmically, as it occasionally will un-
der the influence of a superrheobasic constant current, the regular series of
responses not infrequently is interrupted by gaps. The durations of these
pauses are even multiples of the unit intervals, as if the fiber were the seat of
a continuous series of rhythmical variations in excitability, some of which
failed to attain the fiber’s threshold. Moreover, a series of subthreshold de-
crementing oscillations of excitability has been seen to follow the recovery
of a fiber from stimulation by the make of a constant current.
   The frequency of these oscillations, namely, 200 per second, is the same as
that of the rhythmical discharges observed during the passage of a constant
current.
   By means of records of action potentials of single fibers it has been possible
to show that the chronaxies of fibers do not vary inversely as their diameters,
or, if you will, as the speeds with which they conduct, as had previously been
believed. Instead; there seems to be no simple rule in this respect. In general,


               RESPONSES OF SINGLE NERVE FIBERS                                73
though, the chronaxies diminish slightly through the range of fibers that
conduct, under the conditions of our experiments, at rates ranging between
26 and about 8 to 10 m.p.s. The chronaxies then increase quite rapidly in the
fibers that conduct still more slowly.

Absolutely refractory period - It has been held that the durations of the ab-
solutely refractory period and of the spike of the action potential are alike.
In the frog the refractory period increases as the conduction velocity in the
different fibers decreases, and observation indicates that the spike duration
increases also. This has been confirmed by Tasaki. However, when the dura-
tion of the spike is increased by cooling the nerve the refractory period in-
creases in duration faster than that of the spike, indicating that there is no
necessary relation between these two values. Of the same significance is the
finding by Gasser and Grundfest that whereas in mammals the spike dura-
tions of A fibers are all alike, the absolutely refractory periods are longer in
the more slowly conducting of the fibers.
     In this review I have outlined briefly some of the results that have been
 obtained through the study of the responses of single nerve fibres. The work
is. .being continued because it is felt, as has been said so frequently by others,
that in the investigation of this comparatively simple structure, the nerve
fiber, lies the hope of finding clues to an understanding of the much more
complicated mechanisms that determine the activities of peripheral and cen-
tral nervous mechanisms.
