A RECEPTOR-MEDIATED PATHWAY FOR
CHOLESTEROL HOMEOSTASIS
Nobel lecture, 9 December, 1985

by
MICHAEL S. BROWN AND JOSEPH L. GOLDSTEIN

Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Health Science
Center, Southwestern Medical School, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd. Dallas, Texas,
U.S.A.




In 1901 a physician, Archibald Garrod, observed a patient with black urine.
He used this simple observation to demonstrate that a single mutant gene can
produce a discrete block in a biochemical pathway, which he called an “inborn
error of metabolism”. Garrod’s brilliant insight anticipated by 40 years the one
gene-one enzyme concept of Beadle and Tatum. In similar fashion the chemist
Linus Pauling and the biochemist Vernon Ingram, through study of patients
with sickle cell anemia, showed that mutant genes alter the amino acid se-
quences of proteins. Clearly, many fundamental advances in biology were
spawned by perceptive studies of human genetic diseases (1).
   We began our work in 1972 in an attempt to understand a human genetic
disease, familial hypercholesterolemia or FH. In these patients the concentra-
tion of cholesterol in blood is elevated many fold above normal and heart
attacks occur early in life. We postulated that this dominantly inherited disease
results from a failure of end-product repression of cholesterol synthesis. The
possibility fascinated us because genetic defects in feedback regulation had not
been observed previously in humans or animals, and we hoped that study of
this disease might throw light on fundamental regulatory mechanisms.
   Our approach was to apply the techniques of cell culture to unravel the
postulated regulatory defect in FH. These studies led to the discovery of a cell
surface receptor for a plasma cholesterol transport protein called low density
lipoprotein (LDL) and to the elucidation of the mechanism by which this
receptor mediates feedback control of cholesterol synthesis (2,3). FH was
shown to be caused by inherited defects in the gene encoding the LDL receptor,
which disrupt the normal control of cholesterol metabolism. Study of the LDL
receptor in turn led to the understanding of receptor-mediated endocytosis, a
genera! process by which cells communicate with each other through internali-
zation of regulatory and nutritional molecules (4). Receptor-mediated endocy-
tosis differs from previously described biochemical pathways because it de-
pends upon the continuous and highly controlled movement of membrane-
embedded proteins from one cell organelle to another in a process termed

284


                   A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis    285



receptor recycling (4). Many of the mutations in the LDL receptor that occur
in FH patients disrupt the movement of the receptor between organelles. These
mutations define a new type of cellular defect that has broad implications for
normal and deranged human physiology.
   In this lecture we first discuss the peculiar problem of plasma cholesterol
transport. We then present some historical aspects of FH and the origin of the
LDL receptor concept. Next, we summarize current knowledge of this receptor
and the mechanism by which it functions in cells. Finally, we relate these
findings to the pathogenesis of FH and to the common clinical problem of high
blood cholesterol levels and atherosclerosis in human subjects.

THE PROBLEM OF CHOLESTEROL TRANSPORT
Cholesterol is the most highly decorated small molecule in biology. Thirteen
Nobel Prizes have been awarded to scientists who devoted major parts of their
careers to cholesterol (5). Ever since it was first isolated from gallstones in
1784, almost exactly 200 years ago, cholesterol has exerted a hypnotic fascina-
tion for scientists from the most diverse domains of science and medicine.
Organic chemists have been fascinated with cholesterol because of its complex
four-ring structure. Biochemists have been fascinated because cholesterol is
synthesized from a simple two-carbon substrate, acetate, through the action of
at least 30 enzymes, many of which are coordinately regulated. Physiologists
and cell biologists have been fascinated with cholesterol because of its essential
function in membranes of animal cells, where it modulates fluidity and main-
tains the barrier between cell and environment, and because cholesterol is the
raw material for the manufacture of steroid hormones and bile acids. And
finally, physicians have been fascinated because elevated levels of blood choles-
terol accelerate the formation of atherosclerotic plaques leading to heart
attacks and strokes. The studies of cholesterol therefore embrace almost all
disciplines of modern biology. If the role of cholesterol in biomedicine is to be
elucidated, all of these disciplines must be employed.
   Cholesterol is a Janusfaced molecule. The very property that makes it useful
in cell membranes, namely its absolute insolubility in water, also makes it
lethal. For when cholesterol accumulates in the wrong place, for example
within the wall of an artery, it cannot be readily mobilized, and its presence
eventually leads to the development of an atherosclerotic plaque. The potential
for errant cholesterol deposition is aggravated by its dangerous tendency to
exchange passively between blood lipoproteins and cell membranes. If choles-
terol is to be transported safely in blood, its concentration must be kept low,
and its tendency to escape from the bloodstream must be controlled.
   Multicellular organisms solve the problem of cholesterol transport by esteri-
fying the sterol with long-chain fatty acids and packaging these esters within the
 hydrophobic cores of plasma lipoproteins (Fig. 1). With its polar hydroxyl
group esterified, cholesterol remains sequestered within this core, which is
essentially an oil droplet composed of cholesteryl esters and triglycerides,
solubilized by a surface monolayer of phospholipid and unesterified cholesterol
and stabilized by protein. The small amounts of unesterified cholesterol on the


286                                 Physiology or Medicine 1985




Fig. 1. Structure of plasma LDL (left) and its cholesterol and cholesteryl ester components (right).
LDL is a spherical particle with a mass of 3X l0 6 daltons and a diameter of 22 nanometers. Each
LDL particle contains about 1500 molecules of cholesteryl ester in an oily core that is shielded from
the aqueous plasma by a hydrophilic coat composed of 800 molecules of phospholipid, 500
molecules of unesterified cholesterol, and 1 molecule of a 387,000-dalton protein called apoprotein
B-100 (129). Elevations in blood cholesterol are usually attributable to an increase in the number of
LDL particles.



surface of the particle are maintained in equilibrium exchange with the choles-
terol of cell membranes, but the larger amounts of cholesteryl esters remain
firmly trapped in the core of the particle and leave the particle only as the result
of highly controlled processes.
   The major classes of plasma lipoproteins were delineated in the 1950’s and
1960’s through work in many laboratories, most notably those of Oncley (6),
Gofman (7), and Fredrickson (8). The four major classes are very low density
lipoprotein (VLDL), intermediate density lipoprotein (IDL), low density lipo-
protein (LDL), and high density lipoprotein (HDL). A schematic representa-
tion of LDL, the most abundant cholesterol-carrying lipoprotein in human
plasma, is shown in Fig. 1.
   Packaging of cholesteryl esters in lipoproteins solves the problem of non-
specific partitioning of cholesterol into cell membranes, but it creates another
problem, namely one ofdelivery. Cholesteryl esters are too hydrophobic to pass
through membranes. How then can esterified cholesterol be delivered to cells?
The delivery problem is solved by lipoprotein receptors, of which the prototype
is the LDL receptor (9). Strategically located on the surfaces of cells, these
receptors bind LDL and carry it into the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis.
The internalized lipoprotein is delivered to lysosomes where its cholesteryl
esters are hydrolyzed. The liberated cholesterol is used by the cell for the
synthesis of plasma membranes, bile acids, and steroid hormones, or stored in
the form of cytoplasmic cholesteryl ester droplets. Two properties of the recep-
tor - its high affinity for LDL and its ability to cycle multiple times in and out


                   A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis    287



of the cell - allow large amounts of cholesterol to be delivered to body tissues,
while at the same time keeping the concentration of LDL in blood low enough
to avoid the buildup of atherosclerotic plaques. When LDL receptor function is
inappropriately diminished as a result of genetic defects or in response to
regulatory signals, the protective mechanism is lost, cholesterol builds up in
plasma, and atherosclerosis ensues ( 10).



FAMILIAL HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA:
ORIGIN OF THE LDL RECEPTOR CONCEPT
As a disease, FH has a rich clinical history. It was first described in 1938 by
Carl Müller, a clinician at the Oslo Community Hospital in Norway, as an
“inborn error of metabolism” that produced high blood cholesterol levels and
myocardial infarctions in young people (11). Müller astutely concluded that
FH is transmitted as a single gene-determined autosomal dominant trait. In
the mid 1960’s and early 1970’s, Khachadurian (12) at the American Universi-
ty in Beirut, Lebanon, and Fredrickson and Levy (13) at the National Insti-
tutes of Health showed that FH exists clinically in two forms: the less severe
heterozygous form and the more severe homozygous form.
   FH heterozygotes, who carry a single copy of a mutant LDL receptor gene,
are quite common, accounting for 1 out of every 500 persons among most ethnic
groups throughout the world ( 14). T hese individuals have a two-fold increase
in the number of LDL particles in plasma from the time of birth. They begin to
have heart attacks at 30 to 40 years of age. Among people under age 60 who
suffer myocardial infarctions, about 5% have the heterozygous form of FH, a
25-fold enrichment over the incidence in the general population (15-17).
   The attractiveness of FH as an experimental model stems from the existence
of homozygotes. These rare individuals, who number about 1 in 1 million
persons, inherit two mutant genes at the LDL receptor locus, one from each
parent. Their disease is much more severe than that of heterozygotes. They
have six to ten-fold elevations in plasma LDL levels from the time of birth, and
they often have heart attacks in childhood (12-14). The severe atherosclerosis
that develops in these patients without any other risk factors is formal proof
that high levels of plasma cholesterol can produce atherosclerosis in humans.
 Experimentally, the availability of FH homozygotes permits study of the mani-
festations of the mutant gene without any confounding effects from the normal
gene.
   At the time that our studies began in 1972, it was generally felt that all
important events in cholesterol metabolism-take place in the liver or intestine
 (18). It was obviously impossible to perform meaningful studies in livers of
humans with FH. Our only chance to explain its mysteries depended on the
 mutant phenotype being faithfully manifest in long-term cultured cells such as
skin fibroblasts. Techniques for growing such cells had been established over
the preceding two decades. Moreover, inherited enzyme defects were known to
be expressed in cultured fibroblasts from patients with rare recessive diseases
such as galactosemia, the Lesch Nyhan syndrome, and Refsum’s syndrome. By


288                           Physiology or Medicine 1985


1970, Neufeld’s classic studies of the mucopolysaccharidoses, a form of lysoso-
mal storage disease, were beginning to establish the value of cultured skin
fibroblasts in elucidating complex cellular pathways (19).
   There was some reason to believe that the FH derangement might be
manifest in cultured skin fibroblasts. Studies in the 1960’s by Bailey (20) and
Rothblat (21) had demonstrated that several types of cultured animal cells
synthesize cholesterol and that this synthesis is subject to negative feedback
regulation. When serum was present in the medium, cultured cells produced
little cholesterol from radioactive acetate. When serum lipoproteins were re-
moved from the culture medium, cholesterol synthesis increased.



Regulation of HMG CoA Reductase by LDL in Fibroblasts
We began our work by setting up a micro-assay for 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
coenzyme A reductase (HMG CoA reductase), the rate-determining enzyme of
cholesterol biosynthesis. This assay was used to measure HMG CoA reductase
activity in extracts of cultured fibroblasts (2,22). Earlier studies in rat livers by
Bucher and Lynen (23) and by Siperstein (24) had shown that the activity of
this enzyme was reduced when rats ingested cholesterol and that this reduction
limited the rate of cholesterol synthesis. We soon found that the activity of
HMG CoA reductase was subject to negative regulation in fibroblasts (2,22).
As shown in Fig. 2A, when normal human fibroblasts were grown in the
presence of serum, HMG CoA reductase activity was low. When the lipo-
proteins were removed from the culture medium, the activity of HMG CoA
reductase rose by at least 50-fold over 24 hr period. The induced enzyme was
rapidly suppressed when lipoproteins were added back to the medium
 (Fig. 2B).
   Not all lipoproteins could suppress HMG CoA reductase activity. Of the two
major cholesterol-carrying lipoproteins in human plasma, LDL and HDL, only
LDL was effective (22,25). This specificity was the first clue that a receptor
might be involved. The second clue was the concentration of LDL that was
required. The lipoprotein was active at concentrations as low as 5 µg of protein
per ml, which is less than l0 -8 molar (22,25). A high affinity receptor mechan-
ism must be responsible for enzyme suppression.
   The key to this mechanism emerged from studies of cells from patients with
homozygous FH (2,25). When grown in serum containing lipoproteins, the
homozygous FH cells had HMG CoA reductase activities that were 50 to l00-
fold above normal (Fig. 2A). This activity did not increase significantly when
the lipoproteins were removed from the serum, and there was no suppression
when LDL was added back. Clearly, the genetic defect was expressed in cell
culture (Figs. 2A and 2B).
   The simplest interpretation of these results was that FH homozygotes had a
defect in the gene encoding HMG CoA reductase that rendered the enzyme
resistant to feedback regulation by LDL-derived cholesterol. This working
hypothesis was immediately disproved by the next experiment. Cholesterol,
dissolved in ethanol, was added to normal and FH homozygote cells. When


                        A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis             289



               A. AFTER REMOVAL OF
                   LIPOPROTEINS




Fig. 2. Regulation of HMG CoA reductase activity in fibroblasts from a normal subject (0) and
from an FH homozygote         Panel A: Monolayers of cells were grown in dishes containing 10%
fetal calf serum. On day 6 of cell growth (zero time), the medium was replaced with fresh medium
containing 5% human serum from which the lipoproteins had been removed. At the indicated time,
extracts were prepared and HMG CoA reductase activity was measured. Panel B: 24 hours after
addition of 5% human lipoprotein-deficient serum, human LDL was added to give the indicated
cholesterol concentration. HMG CoA reductase activity was measured in cell free extracts at the
indicated time. (Reprinted from ref. 2.)




mixed with albumin-containing solutions, cholesterol forms a quasi-soluble
emulsion that enters cells passively, apparently by diffusion through the
plasma membrane. When cholesterol was added in this form, the HMG CoA
reductase activities of normal and FH homozygote fibroblasts were suppressed
at the same rate and to the same extent (25).
   Clearly, the defect in the FH homozygote cells must reside in their ability to
extract cholesterol from the lipoprotein, and not in the ability of the cholesterol,
once extracted by the cells, to act. But how do normal cells extract the
cholesterol of LDL? The high affinity of the process suggested that a cell surface
receptor was involved. The existence of cell surface receptors for protein
hormones and other chemical messengers had been known for many years. It
was generally thought that these receptors acted by binding the ligand at the


290                          Physiology or Medicine 1985


surface and then generating a “second messenger” on the intracellular side of
the plasma membrane. The classic second messenger was cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cyclic AMP) (26). Perhaps LDL was binding to a receptor
and generating some second messenger that suppressed HMG CoA reductase.

Delineation of the LDL Receptor Pathway
The existence of an LDL receptor was confirmed when LDL was radiolabeled
with 125 Iodine and incubated with normal and FH homozygote fibroblasts.
These studies showed that normal cells had high affinity binding sites for 1251-
LDL, whereas FH homozygote cells lacked high affinity receptors (3,27). This
seemed to explain the genetic defect in FH, but it did not reveal how LDL
generated the signal that suppressed HMG CoA reductase. The answer came
from studies of the fate of the surface-bound 125 1-LDL. Techniques were
developed to distinguish surface-bound from intracellular 1251-LDL (28), and
these revealed that the receptor-bound LDL remained on the surface for less
than 10 min on average (Fig. 3A). Within this time most of the surface-bound
LDL particles entered the cell; within another 60 min the protein component of
125
    1-LDL was digested completely to amino acids and the 1251, which had been
attached to tyrosine residues on LDL, was released into the culture medium as
125
    1-monoiodotyrosine (27,28). Meanwhile, the cholesteryl esters of LDL were
hydrolyzed, generating unesterified cholesterol which remained within the cell
(29).
   The only cellular organelle in which LDL could have been degraded so
completely and rapidly was the lysosome. Originally described by de Duve
(30), lysosomes were known to contain a large number of acid hydrolases that
could easily digest all of the components of LDL. The hypothesis of lysosomal
digestion of LDL was confirmed through the use of inhibitors such as chloro-
quine (31), which raises the pH of lysosomes and inhibits lysosomal enzymes
(32), and through studies of cultured fibroblasts from patients with a genetic
deficiency of lysosomal acid lipase (29). Cells from the latter patients bound
and internalized LDL but failed to hydrolyze its cholesteryl esters, even though
they were able to degrade its protein component.
   The cholesterol that was generated from LDL within the lysosome proved to
be the second messenger responsible for suppressing HMG CoA reductase
activity. We now know that cholesterol (or an oxygenated derivative that is
formed within the cell) acts at several levels, including suppression of transcrip-
tion of the HMG CoA reductase gene (33) and acceleration of the degradation
of the enzyme protein (34). The LDL-derived cholesterol also regulates two
other cellular processes in a coordinated action that stabilizes the cell’s choles-
terol content. It activates a cholesterol-esterifying enzyme, acyl CoA: choles-
terol acyltransferase (ACAT), so that excess cholesterol can be stored in the
cytoplasm as cholesteryl ester droplets (35). It also suppresses synthesis of
LDL receptors by lowering the concentration of receptor mRNA (36,37). The
latter action allows cells to adjust the number of LDL receptors to provide
sufficient cholesterol for metabolic needs without causing cholesterol overaccu-
mulation (9). Through these regulatory mechanisms, cells keep their level of


                               A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis                                        291




                                  Surface-Bound




Fig. 3. Internalization and degradation at 37°C of          125
                                                                  I - L D L previously bound to the LDL receptor
at 4°C in fibroblasts from a normal subject (Panel A) and from J.D., a patient with the internaliza-
tion-defective form of FH (Panel B). Each cell monolayer was allowed to bind                                 125
                                                                                                                   I-LDL (10 µg
protein/ml) at 4°C for 2 hr, after which the cells were washed extensively. In one set ofdishes, the
amount of   125
                  I-LDL was determined by measuring the amount of               125
                                                                                      1-LDL     that   could          be   released
from the surface by treatment with heparin. Each of the other dishes then received warm medium,
after which they were incubated at 37°C. After the indicated interval, the dishes were rapidly
chilled to 4ºC, and the amounts of surface-bound (heparin-releasable)                    125
                                                                                               1-LDL                internalized
(heparin-resistant)     125
                              I - L D L ( A ) , and degraded (trichloroacetic acid-soluble)            125
                                                                                                             I-LDL           were
measured. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 41.)


292                          Physiology or Medicine I985


unesterified cholesterol remarkably constant despite wide fluctuations in cho-
lesterol requirements and exogenous supply.

Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis of LDL: Binding Coupled to Internalization in Coated
Pits
The rapidity of internalization of receptor-bound LDL and the completeness
with which the protein of LDL was hydrolyzed implied that fibroblasts have a
special mechanism for transport of the lipoprotein from the cell surface to the
lysosome. The likely mechanism was endocytosis, the process by which surface
membranes pouch inward and pinch off to form vesicles that eventually fuse
with lysosomes. Endocytosis was first demonstrated by cinematography of
phagocytic cells in the 1930’s, and its universal occurrence in all cells was
established in the 1950’s by the electron microscopic studies of Palade (38).
Endocytosis was felt to be a nonspecific process that transported bulk fluid and
its contents into cells. There was no precedent for entry of specific receptors
into cells by this route.
   To determine whether endocytosis was involved in LDL uptake, we began in
 1975 a collaboration with Richard G.W. Anderson, a cell biologist at our
medical school in Dallas. Through the use of LDL coupled to electron-dense
ferritin, we found that receptor-bound LDL was internalized by endocytosis.
More important, however, these morphological studies explained the efficiency
of internalization: efficiency was contingent upon the clustering of the LDL
receptors in small pockets on the surface called coated pits (39). Coated pits
had been described in detail by Roth and Porter (40) in 1964 during electron
microscopic studies of the uptake of yolk proteins by mosquito oocytes. These
investigators showed that coated pits pinch off from the surface to form coated
endocytic vesicles that carry extracellular fluid and its contents into the cell.
   The finding that LDL receptors were clustered in coated pits raised the
general possibility that these structures serve as gathering-places for cell sur-
face receptors that are destined for endocytosis (4). Other cell surface proteins,
being excluded from coated pits, could not rapidly enter the cell.
   This interpretation of coated pit function was strengthened by study of
fibroblasts from a unique FH homozygote. Cells from most of these subjects
simply failed to bind LDL. But cells from one FH patient, whose initials are
J.D., bound LDL, but failed to internalize it (Fig. 3B and refs. 41 and 42).
 In collaboration with Anderson, we showed that the receptors in these mutant
cells were excluded from coated pits (43). This was an important finding, for it
established the essential role of coated pits in the high efficiency uptake of
receptor-bound molecules (4).
   Figure 4 summarizes the sequential steps in the LDL receptor pathway as
 deduced from the biochemical, genetic, and ultrastructural studies performed
 between 1972 and 1976. Figure 5 shows the striking “all-or-none” biochemical
differences in the metabolism of LDL and its regulatory actions in fibroblasts
derived from a normal subject and from an FH homozygote with a complete
deficiency of LDL receptors.
   Soon after the initial studies of the LDL receptor pathway, Pearse (44)


                              A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis




Fig. 4. Sequential steps in the LDL receptor pathway of mammalian cells. HMG CoA reductase
denotes 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase; ACAT denotes acyl-CoA: cholesterol acyl-
transferase. Vertical arrows indicate the directions of regulatory effects. (Reprinted from ref. 130.)




Fig. 5. Actions attributable to the LDL receptor in fibroblasts from a normal subject                          and from a
homozygote with the receptor-negative form of FH        incubated with varying concentrations of
125
    I-LDL or unlabeled LDL at 37°C for 5 hr. Assays were performed in growing cells in monolayers
as previously described (128). All data are normalized to 1 mg of total cell protein. The units for
each assay are as follows: Binding, µg of
                                       125
                                           1-LDL bound to cell surface; Internalization µg of                           125
                                                                                                                             1-
LDL contained within the cell; Hydrolysis of apoprotein B-100, µg of 125I-LDL degraded to                              125
                                                                                                                             1-
monoiodotyrosine per hr; Hydrolysis of cholesteryl esters, nmol of [3H]cholesterol formed per hr from
the hydrolysis of LDL labeled with [3H]cholesteryl linoleate; Cholesterol Synthesis, nmol of [14C]ace-
tate incorporated into [ 14 C]cholesterol per hr by intact cells; C h o l e s t e r o l e s t e r i f i c a t i o n , nmol of
[ 14 C]oleate incorporated into cholesteryl [ 14 C]oleate per hr by intact cells. (Reprinted from ref.
130.)


294                            Physiology or Medicine 1985


purified coated vesicles and found that the cytoplasmic coat was composed
predominantly of a single protein that she named clathrin. At the same time,
Cohen and his collaborators performed their elegant studies of the action of
epidermal growth factor (EGF) on cultured fibroblasts (45). They found that
this peptide hormone was internalized by cells in a manner that was indistin-
guishable from that of LDL. Similar observations were made by Terris and
Steiner (46) with insulin in hepatocytes, by Neufeld and coworkers (47) and by
Sly and coworkers (48) with lysosomal enzymes in fibroblasts, and by Ashwell,
Morell, and coworkers (49) with asialoglycoproteins in hepatocytes. Moreover,
Helenius, Simons, and their coworkers (50) showed that several lipid-envel-
oped viruses enter cells by this route. Clearly, receptor-mediated endocytosis
did not exist solely for cholesterol delivery: it was a general process by which
cells internalized and degraded many extracellular molecules (4,51). In all
instances in which adequate morphologic studies were performed, this internal-
ization was attributable to clustering of receptors in coated pits. Indeed, Pastan
and Willingham (51) and Carpentier, et al. (52) showed that receptors for
several different ligands co-localize in the same coated pit.
    The early LDL receptor studies also exposed another feature of receptor-
 mediated endocytosis - namely, that receptors can be recycled (4,28). After
 internalization the receptors dissociate from their ligands. From the work of
 Maxfield (53) and of Helenius and coworkers (54), we now know that such
 dissociation is triggered by a drop in pH within a special class of endocytic
 vesicles called endosomes (discussed below). After dissociation the receptors
 find their way back to the cell surface. The LDL receptor makes one round trip
 into and out of the cell every 10 min for a total of several hundred trips in its 20-
 hr lifespan (4,28).



THE LDL RECEPTOR: STRUCTURE ADAPTED TO FUNCTION
The LDL receptor is a cell surface glycoprotein that contains approximately
two asparagine-linked (N-linked) olig                        chains of the complex type
and approximately 18 serine/threonine-linked (O-linked) oligosaccharide
chains (55,56). About two-thirds of the O-linked sugars are clustered in one
region of the molecule (57). The LDL receptor binds two proteins: 1) apo B-
100, the 387,000-dalton glycoprotein that is the sole protein of LDL (27); and
2) apo E, a 34,000-dalton protein that is found in multiple copies in interme-
diate density lipoprotein (IDL) and a subclass of HDL (58,59). Innerarity and
Mahley (59) demonstrated that lipoproteins which contain multiple copies of
apo E bind to LDL receptors with up to 20-fold higher affinity than LDL,
which contains only one copy of apo B.
    Figure 6 illustrates the circuitous itinerary followed by the LDL receptor
 from its site of synthesis to its site of internalization in coated pits and its site of
recycling in endosomes. The receptor is synthesized in the rough endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) as a precursor (60) that contains high mannose N-linked
carbohydrate chains and the core sugar (N-acetylgalactosamine) of the O -
linked chains (56). The O-linked core sugars are added before the mannose


                        A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis                295




                                                           Recycling
                                                            Vesicle




Fig. 6. Itinerary of the LDL receptor in mammalian cells. The receptor begins life in the endoplas-
mic reticulum from which it travels to the Golgi complex, cell surface, coated pit, endosome, and
back to the surface. HMG CoA reductase denotes 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutary1 CoA reductase;
ACAT denotes acyl-CoA: cholesterol acyltransferase. Vertical arrows indicate the direction of
regulatory effects. (Reprinted from ref. 131 with permission.)




residues of the N-linked chains are trimmed, i.e., while the receptor is still in
the endoglycosidase H-sensitive stage. Thus, the O-linked sugars must be
added either in the ER or in a transitional zone between the ER and the Golgi
apparatus. The receptor precursor migrates on sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as a single band corresponding to an appar-
ent molecular weight of 120,000 (60).
   Within 30 min after its synthesis, the LDL receptor decreases in mobility on
SDS gels. The apparent molecular weight increases from 120,000 to 160,000
(60). This change is coincident with the conversion of the high-mannose N -
linked oligosaccharide chains to the complex endoglycosidase H-resistant form
(56). At the same time, each O-linked chain is elongated by the addition of one
galactose and one or two sialic acid residues (56). The amount of carbohydrate
is not sufficient to account for an increase in molecular mass of 40,000 daltons.
Rather, the decrease in electrophoretic mobility is primarily caused by a
change in conformation of the protein that results from the elongation of the
clustered             sugars (56,57).
   About 45 min after synthesis, LDL receptors appear on the cell surface,
where they gather in coated pits. Within 3 to 5 min of their formation, the
coated pits invaginate to form coated endocytic vesicles. Very quickly, the
clathrin coat dissociates. Multiple endocytic vesicles then fuse to create larger


296                           Physiology or Medicine I985


sacs of irregular contour called endosomes or receptosomes (4,61). The pH of
the endosomes falls below 6.5, owing to the operation of ATP-driven proton
pumps in the membrane (53,54,61). At this acid pH, the LDL dissociates from
the receptor. The latter returns to the surface, apparently by clustering with
other receptors in a segment of the endosomal membrane that pinches off to
form a recycling vesicle. Once it reaches the surface, the receptor binds another
lipoprotein particle and initiates another cycle of endocytosis (4). Each LDL
receptor makes one round-trip every 10 min in continuous fashion whether or
not it is occupied with LDL (4,62). The LDL that dissociates from the receptor
is delivered to a lysosome when the membranes of the endosome and lysosome
fuse. There the protein component of LDL is hydrolyzed to amino acids and
the cholesteryl esters are hydrolyzed by an acid lipase, liberating cholesterol
(discussed above).
   The striking feature of this pathway is that it requires the continuous
movement of a membrane embedded protein from one organelle to another in a
highly ordered fashion. Each time it moves, the receptor must be segregated
from neighboring membrane proteins that do not follow the same route. This
raises a crucial question: What are the signals that direct the highly selective
movement of receptors from one membrane organelle to another? Clearly, the
signals must lie in the structures of the receptors. What do we know about the
structure of the LDL receptor?



The LDL Receptor: A Multi-Domain Protein
The LDL receptor was purified from bovine adrenal cortex by Wolfgang
Schneider in our laboratory (55). A partial amino acid sequence was obtained,
and this sequence was used by David Russell and Tokuo Yamamoto to isolate a
full-length cDNA for the human LDL receptor (37,63). Biochemical studies of
the receptor protein, coupled with the amino acid sequence that was deduced
from the nucleotide sequence of the cDNA, have provided insight into
the structural domains of the LDL receptor (Fig. 7 and refs. 63-65).
   At the extreme NH2-terminus of the LDL receptor, there is a hydrophobic
sequence of 21 amino acids that is cleaved from the receptor immediately after
it is translated. This segment functions as a classic signal sequence to direct the
receptor-synthesizing ribosomes to the ER membrane. Because it does not
appear in the mature receptor, the signal sequence is omitted from the structur-
al domain that is described below. The mature receptor (without the signal
sequence) consists of 839 amino acids (63).
   The first domain of the LDL receptor consists of the NH 2-terminal 292 amino
acids, which is composed of a sequence of 40 amino acids that is repeated with
some variation seven times (65,66). Studies of anti-peptide antibody binding to
intact cells revealed that this domain is located on the external surface of the
plasma membrane (67). Each of the seven 40-amino acid repeats contains six
cysteine residues, which are in register for all of the repeats. The receptor
cannot be labeled with [3H]iodoacetamide without prior reduction, suggesting
that all of these cysteines are disulfide-bonded (65). This region of the receptor


                      A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis                297




Fig. 7. The LDL receptor: a single protein with five domains. The significance of each domain is
discussed in the text. Each black dot in the protein structure denotes the position of a cysteine
residue.




must therefore exist in a tightly cross-linked, convoluted state. This explains
the extreme stability of the binding domain of the receptor; the receptor can be
boiled in strong denaturants and still retain its binding activity as long as the
disulfide bonds are intact (65).
   A striking feature of each cysteine-rich repeat sequence is a cluster of
negatively-charged amino acids near the COOH-terminus of each repeat
(65,66). The charges on these sequences are complementary to a cluster of
positively-charged residues that are believed to occupy one face of a single
helix in apo E, the best studied ligand for the LDL receptor (68). Elegant
studies by Mahley and Innerarity (68) with mutant and proteolyzed forms of


298                           Physiology or Medicine 1985


apo E and with monoclonal antibodies against different regions of apo E
showed that the positively-charged region contains the site whereby this pro-
tein binds to the LDL receptor. It is therefore tempting to speculate that the
negatively-charged clusters of amino acids within the cysteine-rich repeat
sequence of the LDL receptor constitute multiple binding sites, each of which
binds a single apo E molecule by attaching to its positively-charged α-helix
(65).
   The second domain of the LDL receptor, consisting of     400 amino acids, is
35% homologous to a portion of the extracellular domain of the precursor for
epidermal growth factor (EGF) (63,64,69). The EGF precursor is a molecule of
1217 amino acids that appears to span the plasma membrane one time like the
LDL receptor (69-72). Analysis of the amino acid sequence of the EGF
precursor, as revealed from the sequence of the cloned cDNA (70,71), suggests
that EGF, a peptide of 53 amino acids, is liberated from the EGF precursor by
proteolysis. The sequence of EGF is not homologous to the LDL receptor.
Rather, the homology involves a part of the EGF precursor that is on the NH2-
terminal side of EGF itself. The function of this region in either the LDL
receptor or the EGF precursor is unknown.
  The third domain of the LDL receptor lies immediately external to the mem-
brane-spanning domain and consists of a stretch of 58 amino acids that
contains 18 serine or threonine residues (63,66). This domain is encoded within
a single exon (see below). Proteolysis studies reveal that this region contains
the clustered O-linked sugar chains (64).
   The fourth domain consists of a stretch of 22 hydrophobic amino acids that
span the plasma membrane, as demonstrated by proteolysis experiments
(63,64). Comparison of the amino acid sequences of the human and bovine
LDL receptors reveals that the membrane-spanning region is relatively poorly
conserved (65). Of the 22 amino acids in this region, 7 differ between human
and cow, but all of the substitutions retain a hydrophobic character.
   The fifth domain is the cytoplasmic tail. The human and bovine LDL recep-
tors each contain a COOH-terminal segment of 50 amino acids that projects
into the cytoplasm (63,64). L ocalization of this domain to the cytoplasmic side
of the membrane was determined through use of an anti-peptide antibody
directed against the COOH-terminal sequence (64). When inside-out mem-
brane vesicles containing receptor were digested with pronase, the antibody-
reactive material was removed, and the molecular weight of the receptor was
reduced by approximately 5000. The cytoplasmic sequence is strongly con-
served among species. Of the 50 amino acids in this region, only 4 differ
between human and cow, and each of these substitutions is conservative with
respect to charge (65).
   The cytoplasmic domain of the LDL receptor plays an important role in
clustering in coated pits, either through interaction with clathrin itself or with
some protein that is associated with clathrin on the cytoplasmic side of the
membrane (4). This conclusion is based on a molecular analysis of three
naturally-occurring mutations at the LDL receptor locus that produce recep-
tors that bind LDL normally but fail to cluster in clathrin-coated pits. All three


                    A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis     299



of these mutations produce defects in the cytoplasmic tail (discussed below and
refs. 65 and 73).

The LDL Receptor: A Mosaic Gene
The haploid human genome contains a single copy of the LDL receptor gene
(66) on chromosome 19 (74). S e q uences representing almost the entire gene
were isolated from bacteriophage lambda and cosmid libraries by Thomas
Südhof and David Russell (66). The position of each intron within the gene was
mapped, and the sequence of each exon-intron junction was determined.
   The LDL receptor gene spans            45 kilobases and is made up of 18 exons
separated by 17 introns (66). Th    ere  is a striking correlation between the exons
in the gene and the functional domains of the protein (Fig. 8). The first intron
is locatedjust at the end of the DNA encoding the cleaved signal sequence. The
binding domain is encoded by exons 2 to 6. Within this domain (which
contains the seven cysteine-rich repeats), introns occur precisely at the ends of
repeats I, II, V, VI, and VII (Fig. 8). Repeats III, IV, and V are included in one
exon. The binding domain is terminated by an intron at amino acid 292,
the last residue in the seventh repeat. Thus, the binding domain is composed of
a single exon that has been duplicated multiple times to produce seven repeats
of a single 40 amino acid sequence. Each of these seven repeats in the LDL
receptor is strongly homologous with a stretch of 40 amino acids that occurs in
the middle of the C9 component of complement, a plasma protein of 537 amino
acids that participates in the complement cascade (66,75).
   The next eight exons in the LDL receptor gene (exons 7 to 14) encode the
 region that is homologous with the EGF precursor (Fig. 8). The gene for the
EGF precursor contains the same eight exons (69). These exons form a cassette
that has been lifted out of some ancestral gene during evolution and placed in
the middle of the EGF precursor gene and the LDL receptor gene. Three of
 these exons have also been used by another class of genes. These exons encode
 a cysteine-rich sequence of 40 amino acids (labeled A, B, and C in Fig. 8) that is
repeated three times in the LDL receptor and occurs once in several proteins of
the blood clotting system, including factor IX, factor X, and protein C (69,76).
Thus, these exons have been used by members of at least three different gene
families.
   The O-linked sugar domain is also encoded by a single exon (exon 15).
However, not all domains of the protein are encoded by single exons. Thus, the
 membrane-spanning region is encoded by parts of two exons (exons 16 and 17).
 The cytoplasmic tail is also encoded by two exons (exons 17 and 18) (Fig. 8).
   The sharing of exons between the LDL receptor gene and other genes
provides strong evidence to support Gilbert’s hypothesis concerning the nature
and function of introns (77). As originally proposed by Gilbert, introns permit
functional- domains encoded by discrete exons to shuffle between different
proteins, thus allowing proteins to evolve as mosaic combinations of preexisting
functional units. The LDL receptor is a vivid example of such a mosaic protein
 (66,78). It seems likely that other cell surface receptors will also be found to be
 mosaic structures assembled from exons shared with other genes.


300                                 Physiology or Medicine 1985




Fig. 8. Correlation of exon organization with protein domains in the human LDL receptor. The
domains of the protein are delimited by thick black lines and are labeled in the lower portion. The
seven cyst&e-rich, 40-amino acid repeats in the LDL binding domain (Fig. 7) are assigned roman
numerals I to VII. Repeats IV and V are separated b y eight amino acids. The three cysteine-rich
repeats in the domain that is homologous with the EGF precursor are lettered A to C. The positions
at which introns interrupt the coding region are indicated by arrowheads. Exon numbers are shown
between the arrowheads. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 66.)




GENETIC DEFECTS IN THE LDL RECEPTOR
The mutations in the LDL receptor gene in FH patients have helped to
delineate the crucial steps of receptor-mediated endocytosis. At the time of this
writing, we have studied fibroblasts from 110 patients with the clinical pheno-
type of homozygous FH. All of them show evidence of defects in the LDL
receptor, but not all defects are the same. At least 10 different mutations can be
distinguished by structural criteria (65). These fall into four classes as shown in
Fig. 9. Many of the apparent FH homozygotes are actually compound
heterozygotes who inherit different mutant alleles from each parent.

Class I Mutations: No Receptors Synthesized
This is the most common class of mutant alleles, accounting for approximately
half of the mutations so far analyzed. These genes produce either no LDL
receptor protein or only trace amounts as determined by reaction with poly-
clonal or monoclonal antibodies. One of these alleles has been analyzed by
molecular cloning; the gene bears a large deletion that extends from exon 13 to
an AlU repetitive element in intron 15 (79). This deletion is easily recognized on
Southern blots of genomic DNA. We have not found evidence of a similar
deletion in any other individual with the receptor-negative phenotype, so this
particular deletion must be rare.

Class II Mutations: Receptor Synthesized, But Transported Slowly From ER to Golgi
This is the second most common class of mutations. These alleles produce
receptors that are synthesized as precursors whose apparent molecular weights
vary from 100,000 to 135,000. Most have an apparent molecular weight similar
to that of the normal precursor (120,000). These receptors contain high man-
nose N-linked sugars and the core N-acetylgalactosamine of the O-linked
sugars (56,80). However, the N-linked sugars are not converted to the complex
endoglycosidase H-resistant form nor are the O-linked sugar chains elongated.


                        A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis                  301




Fig. 9. Four classes of mutations that disrupt the structure and function of the LDL receptor and
cause FH. Each class of mutation affects a different region in the gene and thus interferes with a
different step in the process by which the receptor is synthesized, processed in the Golgi complex,
and transported to coated pits. Each class of mutation can be further subdivided into different
mutant alleles that are described in detail in ref. 65. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 132.)




These mutant receptors do not appear on the surface of the cell; rather, they
seem to remain in the ER until they are eventually degraded. Some mutations
in this class are complete, i.e., there is no detectable processing of carbohy-
drate. Others are partial, i.e., some of the receptors are processed and move to
the surface at a rate that is one-tenth of normal (80,81). The molecular defect in
this class of mutations has not been determined.


302                                   Physiology or Medicine 1985


Class III Mutations: Receptors Processed and Reach Cell Surface, But Fail to Bind LDL
Normally
In the mature form, these mutant receptors can have a normal apparent
molecular weight of 160,000 or aberrant apparent molecular weights of 140,000
or 210,000 (65). They are all synthesized as precursors that appear to be 40,000
daltons smaller than the mature form. They all undergo normal carbohydrate
processing and reach the cell surface, and they bind a variety of antibodies
directed against the LDL receptor. However, they have a markedly reduced
ability to bind LDL. We suspect that these mutations may involve amino acid
substitutions, deletions, or duplications in the cysteine-rich LDL binding do-
main or the EGF precursor region, but none has yet been fully elucidated at the
molecular level.

Class IV Mutations: Receptors Reach Cell Surface and Bind LDL, But Fail to Cluster in
Coated Pits
Study of these internalization-defective mutations at the cellular level originally
revealed the importance of coated pits in receptor-mediated endocytosis
(42,43). Three of the mutations have now been elucidated in molecular detail.
All involve alterations in the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor, i.e., the 50 amino
 acids at the COOH-terminus that project into the cytoplasm (Fig. 10). The
 mutations have been unraveled through the preparation of genomic DNA
libraries and the subsequent isolation and sequencing of exons 17 and 18,
which encode the cytoplasmic domain. In the most drastic case a tryptophan
codon has been converted to a nonsense (stop) codon at a position that is 2
residues distal to the membrane-spanning region (73). This produces a recep-




Fig. 10. Mutations affecting   the cytoplasmic domain of the LDL receptor in three FH homozygotes
with the internalization-defective form of   FH.


                   A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis     303



tor with only 2 amino acids in the cytoplasmic tail. Another mutation involves
a duplication of 4 nucleotides following the codon for the 6th amino acid of the
cytoplasmic tail (73). This duplication alters the reading frame and leads to a
sequence of 8 random amino acids followed by a stop codon. This receptor has
only 6 of the normal amino acids in the cytoplasmic domain. Protein chemistry
studies have confirmed that these two proteins lack the normal COOH-termi-
nus (73).
   The third mutation is the most informative. In this patient, who was the
original internalization-defective subject to be described (J.D., Fig. 3), a
single base change leads to the substitution of a cysteine for a tyrosine residue
at position 807, which is in the middle of the cytoplasmic tail domain (Fig. 10).
We have recently reproduced this amino acid substitution in the normal LDL
receptor cDNA by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis. When the altered
cDNA was introduced into Chinese hamster ovary cells by gene transfer
techniques, it produced a receptor that bound LDL but did not cluster in
coated pits, confirming that the single base change is responsible for the
internalization defect in J.D.‘s cells (82).
   Inasmuch as all three internalization-defective mutations involve the cyto-
plasmic tail, this region must normally play a crucial role in the clustering of
LDL receptors in coated pits. It is likely that the cytoplasmic tail binds to
clathrin or some other protein that is itself linked to clathrin. The puzzling
feature at the moment is that other cell surface receptors that cluster in coated
pits do not show obvious homology with the LDL receptor in the amino acid
sequences of their cytoplasmic tails (65). T h us, the precise structure that links
receptors to coated pits remains a mystery.
   We have identified several interesting variants of the Class IV mutations in
which the mutant genes produce LDL receptors that are secreted into the
culture medium. In two mutants of this class (each from an unrelated family),
the responsible mutation is a large deletion that results from a recombination
between two repetitive Alu sequences, one in intron 15 and the other in the 3’
untranslated region of exon 18. The deletion joints in the two mutants are
similar but not identical, indicating that the two mutations arose by indepen-
dent events (83 and unpublished observations). In each mutant, the deletion
removes the exons encoding the membrane-spanning region as well as the
cytoplasmic tail. Presumably these prematurely terminated proteins have a
short random sequence of amino acids at the COOH-terminus, owing to read-
through of an unspliced mRNA. The receptors are transported to the surface,
where some of them remain bound to the membrane. The vast majority,
however, are released into the culture medium (83 and unpublished observa-
tions). The few receptors that remain on the surface bind LDL, but do not
migrate to coated pits, thus giving rise to an internalization-defective pheno-
type. These findings emphasize the importance of the membrane-spanning
region in anchoring the LDL receptor to the plasma membrane.
   Figure 11 shows the location of nine mutations in the LDL receptor gene that
have been analyzed at the molecular level. Each FH family examined to date
has had a different mutation, and multiple types of mutational events have


304                                  Physiology or Medicine 1985




Fig. 11. Location of mutations in the LDL receptor gene. To date, nine mutations have been
identified by molecular cloning and DNA sequence analysis or by restriction endonuclease analysis
of genomic DNA. Five of the nine mutations are described in detail in refs. 73, 79, 82, and 83. kb
denotes kilobases; nt denotes nucleotides.




occurred. Of the nine mutations, two involve single base substitutions, two
involve insertions (one small and one large), and live involve large deletions.
Many of the deletion joints occur in Alu repetitive elements.

FUNCTIONS OF THE LDL RECEPTOR IN THE BODY
The LDL receptor was elucidated by an investigative route that is opposite to
the one usually employed to uncover metabolic pathways in animals. These
pathways are usually observed first in intact animals or tissues and then they
are studied in isolated cells. The LDL receptor was first observed in a totally
artificial environment - namely, tissue culture. The question immediately
arose: What tissues express LDL receptors in the body, and how do they work?
We knew at the outset that the receptor must play some role in the body as
evidenced by the devastating consequences of LDL receptor deficiency in FH
homozygotes and the proportionately less severe abnormalities in FH heterozy-
gotes. Clearly, the receptor must be functioning somewhere. But where?

Detection of LDL Receptor Expression In Vivo
The first cells that were demonstrated to have LDL receptor activity in vivo
were circulating blood lymphocytes. In the initial studies carried out with Y.K.
Ho in 1975, we isolated lymphocytes from the bloodstream and incubated them
for 67 hr in vitro in the absence of exogenous cholesterol so as to “derepress”
receptor synthesis (84). U n d er these conditions the lymphocytes expressed
abundant LDL receptors as determined by measurements of the high affinity
uptake and degradation of 1-LDL (Fig. 12A). Lymphocytes from FH homo-
                            125



zygotes did not express detectable LDL receptor activity, and lymphocytes
from FH heterozygotes had an intermediate level consistent with the presence
of only a single functional gene (85). LDL receptors were also detectable on


                             A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis                   305



lymphocytes immediately after their isolation from the bloodstream, although
the level of activity was lower than it was after derepression for 67 hr (85).
Thus, LDL receptors were expressed in at least one cell type in vivo.
    Another early clue to the function of LDL receptors in vivo came from studies
 of the rate of disappearance of intravenously-injected 1251-LDL from plasma
 (Fig. 12B). Such LDL is removed from the circulation more slowly in FH
heterozygotes than it is in normals (86,87). In FH homozygotes the removal
defect is even more profound (87-89). The sluggishness of LDL catabolism in
vivo correlates with the relative deficiency of LDL receptors as determined in
isolated lymphocytes.
     More detailed demonstrations of LDL receptor function in vivo have been
obtained in experimental animals. Together with Sandip K. Basu, we estab-
lished an assay for the binding of 1-LDL to membranes from homogenates of
                                     125



cultured cells and various tissues of the cow and other animals (90). Using this
assay, Petri Kovanen found that most tissues of the cow had detectable high
affinity 1-LDL binding; the adrenal gland and ovarian corpus luteum had
          125



the highest activity on a per gram basis (91). When the weight of the organ was
taken into consideration, the liver was found to produce by far the largest
number of LDL receptors. Similar results were obtained in studies of human
fetal tissues (91). In collaboration with Havel’s laboratory, we showed that
125
    1-LDL was taken up by perfused rat livers by a high affinity receptor-
mediated process that could be markedly accelerated by administration of the
estrogenic hormone,                   estradiol (92).



             A. Isolated Cells




Fig. 12. Measurement of the number of LDL receptors in blood lymphocytes (Panel A) and in living
subjects (Panel B). Panel A: Lymphocytes were isolated from venous blood of 32 normal subjects
    15 FH heterozygotes       and 4 FH homozygotes (0). After incubation for 67 hr at 37°C in
medium containing 10% lipoprotein-deficient serum, LDL receptor activity was assessed by
measurement of the high affinity degradation of 1-LDL at 37°C. (Data replotted from ref. 85).
                                               125



Panel B: In the whole-body assay, a tracer amount of
                                                            125
                                                                  I-LDL was injected intravenously, and the
radioactivity remaining in the circulation over the next 16 days was measured in samples of venous
blood (87,89). The higher the number of LDL receptors on body cells (Panel A), the faster the
removal of   125
                   I-LDL from the blood (Panel B).


306                           Physiology or Medicine 1985


    High levels of hepatic LDL receptors were also observed when radiolabeled
LDL was injected into the circulation of experimental’ animals and its uptake
into various tissues was compared. Steinberg and coworkers (93) and Dietschy
and coworkers (94) showed that approximately 70% of the total-body uptake of
radiolabeled LDL took place in the liver by LDL receptor-dependent path-
ways, but that the highest rates of uptake on a weight basis were seen in the
adrenal gland. Various other tissues also showed receptor-mediated uptake of
 LDL in excess of that seen with nonspecific bulk phase markers such as
 radiolabeled albumin.
    Measurements of receptor-mediated LDL uptake by tissues of animals were
 made more practical as a result of two developments: 1) Steinberg and co-
 workers developed a method to label LDL with radioactive sucrose and later
 with tyramine-cellobiose (95). In contrast to 125 1-labeling of tyrosines, the
 latter methods produced a radioactive marker that remained trapped in lyso-
 somes after uptake and degradation, thus allowing slow rates of uptake to be
 quantified cumulatively over long periods. 2) Shepherd and Packard (96)
 showed that LDL whose arginine residues were modified by reaction with
 cyclohexanedione was cleared from the human circulation much more slowly
 than was native LDL. The rationale for these latter studies lay in previous work
from our laboratory (97) and from Mahley’s laboratory (98), which showed
 that modification of arginine or lysine residues on LDL abolished its ability to
 bind to the LDL receptor. These observations provided a crude estimate of the
fraction of LDL clearance that was attributable to LDL receptors.
    We had earlier estimated the fraction of total LDL clearance that was
 receptor-dependent by comparing the rate of catabolism of intravenously in-
jected 125 1-LDL in normal individuals and in FH homozygotes (99). The
 fractional catabolic rate for LDL, i.e., the fraction of the total plasma pool of
 LDL removed per unit time, was 3-fold higher in normal subjects than in FH
 homozygotes (87). From this observation we reasoned that approximately two-
 thirds of LDL clearance is normally mediated through the LDL receptor (99).
 This conclusion has generally been borne out by a number of studies compar-
 ing the degradation rates for native versus lysine-modified or arginine-modified
 LDL both in normal human subjects and in a wide variety of experimental
 animals ( 100).

The WHHL Rabbit and the Role of the LDL Receptor in Clearance of IDL
One of the most important functions of LDL receptors in vivo was appreciated
only in the past few years as a result of studies performed in Watanabe
Heritable-Hyperlipidemic (WHHL) rabbits. This strain of mutant rabbits was
discovered in the late 1970’s by Yosio Watanabe, a veterinarian in Kobe, Japan
(101). These rabbits have a mutation in the LDL receptor gene that is similar
to the Class II mutations in human FH (81,102). When present in the homozy-
gous form, this mutation gives rise to extremely high LDL-cholesterol levels;
the rabbits develop atherosclerosis early in life (101,102).
   The WHHL rabbits proved invaluable in explaining a previously puzzling
feature of homozygous FH. Kinetic studies of 1251-LDL metabolism by Myant


                                                                                307



and coworkers (88), and by Bilheimer and Grundy (87,89) indicated that FH
subjects have a dual defect. In addition to degrading LDL more slowly, FH
homozygotes and heterozygotes also appeared to overproduce LDL. How does
a genetic defect in the LDL receptor lead simultaneously to overproduction and
reduced degradation of LDL? The answer lies in the complex biosynthetic
pathway for LDL.
   Early studies by Gitlin (103) and later those of Bilheimer, Levy, and Eisen-
berg (104) suggested that LDL is not secreted directly from the liver, but rather
produced in the circulation from a blood-borne precursor, very low density
lipoprotein (VLDL) (Fig. 13A). VLDL is a large, triglyceride-rich lipoprotein
that is secreted by the liver; it transports triglyceride to adipose tissue and
muscle. The triglycerides in VLDL are removed in capillaries by the enzyme
lipoprotein lipase, and the VLDL returns to the circulation as a smaller
particle with a new name, intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL). The IDL
particles have lost most of their triglyceride, but they retain cholesteryl esters.
Some of the IDL particles are rapidly taken up by the liver; others remain in
 the circulation where they undergo further triglyceride hydrolysis and are
converted to LDL. A distinguishing feature of the IDL particles is their content
of multiple copies of apo E in addition to a single copy of apo B-100. The
multiple copies of apo E allow IDL to bind to the LDL receptor with very high
 affinity. When IDL is converted to LDL, the apo E leaves the particle and only
apo B-100 remains. Thereafter, the affinity for the LDL receptor is much
reduced (102).
   With Toru Kita, we showed that the apparent overproduction of LDL in
 WHHL rabbits is due to the failure of IDL to be removed from the plasma
 (102,105) (Fig. 13B). Thus, when 1-VLDL was administered to WHHL
                                       125



rabbits, the resultant IDL was not taken up by the liver, as it was in normal
rabbits (105). Rather it remained in the circulation and was converted in
increased amounts to LDL. These findings strongly suggest that IDL is nor-
mally cleared from plasma by binding to LDL receptors in the liver. Although
experiments of similar detail cannot be carried out in humans, the observations
of Soutar, Myant, and Thompson (106) are consistent with the notion that
enhanced conversion of IDL to LDL also occurs in FH homozygotes, thus
accounting for much of the apparent overproduction of LDL.
   Figure 13A illustrates the dual role of the LDL receptor in LDL metabolism
as determined from the studies of WHHL rabbits. First, the receptor limits
LDL production by enhancing the removal of the precursor, IDL, from the
circulation. Second, it enhances LDL degradation by mediating cellular uptake
of LDL. A deficiency of LDL receptors causes LDL to accumulate as a result
both of overproduction and of delayed removal (Fig. 13B). By this quirk of dual
functionality, LDL receptors become crucially important modulators of plasma
LDL levels in humans and animals.


                                       Physiology or Medicine 1985




      Receptors




Fig. 13. Schematic model of the mechanism by which LDL receptors in the liver control both the
production and catabolism of plasma LDL in normal human subjects (Panel A), in individuals with
FH (Panel B), and in individuals consuming a diet rich in saturated fats and cholesterol (Panel C).
VLDL denotes very low density lipoprotein; IDL denotes intermediate density lipoprotein. (Modi-
fied from ref. 132 with permission.)


                    A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis    309



PERSPECTIVES

Receptor Regulation: Therapeutic Implications
 Knowledge of the fundamental properties of the LDL receptor has important
 implications for the therapy of FH and other hypercholesterolemic states. This
 knowledge also provides fuel for certain speculations about the role of the LDL
 receptor as a protective factor against atherosclerosis in human beings.
    The therapeutic implications of the LDL receptor studies center on strategies
for increasing the production of LDL receptors in the liver, thereby lowering
plasma LDL-cholesterol levels. In FH heterozygotes this goal can be attained
by stimulating the normal gene to produce more than its usual number of LDL
receptors, thus compensating for the defective allele (107). The rationale for
such therapy emerged from studies of cultured fibroblasts, which showed that
the production of LDL receptors is driven by the cell’s demand for cholesterol
 (9,36). When demands for cholesterol are high, the cells have high levels of
mRNA for the LDL receptor. Conversely, when demands for cholesterol are
reduced, excess cholesterol accumulates in cells, and the amount of receptor
mRNA falls (36,37).
    Inasmuch as the liver is the major site of expression of LDL receptors, the
therapeutic problem is reduced to the development of methods to increase
hepatic demands for cholesterol. This can be achieved by two techniques: 1)
inhibition of the intestinal reabsorption of bile acids; and 2) inhibition of
 cholesterol synthesis. These techniques can be used alone or in combination, as
 illustrated in Fig. 14.
    The liver requires cholesterol for conversion into bile acids, which constitute
the major route by which cholesterol is excreted from the body (18). However,
only a fraction of the bile acids secreted by the liver actually leaves the body.
The vast bulk of bile acids are reabsorbed in the terminal ileum and returned to
the liver for reutilization. As a result, the liver converts only a minimal amount
of cholesterol into bile acids (Fig. 14, left). The liver’s demand for cholesterol
can be enhanced by the ingestion of resins that bind bile acids in the intestine
and prevent their reabsorption. Since the liver can no longer re-use old bile
acids, it must continually make new bile acids and the liver’s demand for
cholesterol increases. In order to obtain this cholesterol, the liver makes a dual
response: 1) it synthesizes increased amounts of cholesterol through an increase
in the activity of HMG CoA reductase; and 2) it attempts to take up additional
plasma cholesterol by increasing the production of LDL receptors. The in-
creased LDL receptor activity causes plasma LDL levels to fall (Fig. 14, center).
The problem with bile acid resin therapy (and the physiologically equivalent
procedure of ileal bypass surgery) is that the effects are not profound. The
increase in cholesterol production partially offsets the hepatic demand for
cholesterol-and so there is only a 15 to 20% increase in the synthesis of LDL
receptors and only a 15 to 20% drop in plasma LDL-cholesterol levels.
    The second method for increasing LDL receptor production, namely, inhibi-
tion of hepatic cholesterol synthesis, is much more powerful than bile acid
depletion. The technique emerged from the discovery in 1976 of a class of


310




 Plasma




F i g . 1 4 . Rationale for the use of a bile acid binding resin and an inhibitor of 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl Coenzyme A reductase in the treatment of FH heterozygotes. A detailed discussion
of this figure is presented in the text.



fungal metabolites that inhibit HMG CoA reductase. The original compound,
discovered by Akira Endo at the Sankyo Drug Company in Japan, is called
compactin (108). A more recent version, developed by the Merck, Sharp and
Dohme Research Laboratories in the United States, is called mevinolin (109).
These two agents are potent competitive inhibitors of HMG CoA reductase;
the inhibitory constant is approximately l0-9 molar ( 108).
   When given to experimental animals, compactin or mevinolin initially inhib-
it cholesterol synthesis in the liver, and this triggers a complex regulatory
mechanism that lowers the plasma LDL-cholesterol level. With Kovanen and
Kita, we showed that the inhibition of cholesterol synthesis elicits a dual
compensatory response: 1) hepatocytes synthesize increased amounts of HMG
CoA reductase; and 2) they synthesize increased numbers of LDL receptors
(110). When a new steady state is attained, the increase in HMG CoA reduc-
tase is almost sufficient to overcome the inhibitory effects of compactin. Total
body cholesterol synthesis is only slightly reduced (111). Meanwhile, the
plasma LDL level has fallen as a result of the increase in LDL receptors. The
fall in plasma LDL levels is balanced by the increase in LDL receptors, and so
the absolute amount of cholesterol entering the liver through the receptor
pathway is the same as it was earlier. The difference, however, is that this
delivery is now occurring at a lower plasma LDL level (107).
   When given as a single agent to FH heterozygotes, mevinolin routinely
produces a 30% fall in plasma LDL-cholesterol levels. When given together
with cholestyramine, mevinolin blocks the compensatory increase in cholester-
ol synthesis, and the increase in LDL receptors is even more profound (Fig. 14,
right). Plasma LDL cholesterol levels fall by 50 to 60% (112).
   The important principle to emerge from these studies is that stimulation of
LDL receptor activity lowers the plasma LDL-cholesterol level without grossly
distorting cholesterol delivery (107,111). At present mevinolin and related


                                                                                                311



compounds are in the early stages of clinical testing. Their efficacy in lowering
plasma LDL-cholesterol levels has been well established, but there is no
information regarding long-term toxicity in man. If these drugs turn out to be
non-toxic, they will have an important role in the therapy of FH heterozygotes
and probably of other hypercholesterolemic individuals as well.
   Th e principles applied to treatment of FH heterozygotes cannot, unfortu-
nately, be applied to homozygotes, especially those who have totally defective
LDL receptor genes. These individuals do not respond to the above-mentioned
drugs because they cannot synthesize LDL receptors (113). Current therapy
for these individuals involves removal of LDL from plasma extracorporeally
through repeated plasmapheresis (114). Such procedures, which must be re-
peated every two to three weeks, are technically difficult and are very demand-
ing of patient and physician.
   Recently, a more direct therapeutic approach was taken in an FH homozy-
gote, whose initials are S.J. and who has two mutant genes at the LDL receptor
locus. This six-year-old girl, who is a patient of our colleague David Bilheimer
in Dallas, had a total plasma cholesterol level over 1,000 mg/dl (greater than 6
times above normal limits), and she sustained repeated episodes of myocardial
infarction. After she failed to respond to two coronary bypass procedures plus a
mitral valve replacement, she was subjected to combined heart-liver transplan-
tation by a team of surgeons led by Thomas E. Starzl at the University of
Pittsburgh (115). The liver transplant was designed to provide a source of LDL
receptors. The heart transplantation was necessitated because of the poor
condition of her own heart as a result of the atherosclerotic process.
   Immediately after the operation, S.J.‘s total plasma cholesterol level fell from
 1100 mg/dl to the range of 200 to 300 mg/dl, and it remained in that range for
the succeeding 13 months (Fig. 15A). Th ereafter she was started on the HMG




Fig. 25. LDL metabolism in S.J., a patient with homozygous FH, before and after liver-heart
transplantation. Panel A: Total cholesterol levels in plasma. Panel B: Plasma decay curves of 125 1 -
LDL after intravenous injection of tracer amounts of
                                                      125
                                                          I-LDL before (A) and after (A) liver-heart
transplantation. (Data in Panel B reprinted with permission from ref. 115).


312                           Physiology or Medicine 1985


CoA reductase inhibitor mevinolin, and her cholesterol fell further to the range
of 150-200 mg/dl (Fig. 15A). Liver transplantation not only lowered the
plasma cholesterol level but it also restored responsiveness to mevinolin, which
requires a normal LDL receptor gene in order to act. Lipoprotein turnover
studies performed six months after surgery confirmed that the new LDL
receptors furnished by the transplanted liver were responsible for the dramatic
drop in plasma cholesterol level (Fig. 15B). S.J. remains asymptomatic at the
time of this writing, and her cutaneous xanthomas have resolved. However, she
requires continuous therapy with cyclosporin to prevent rejection of the trans-
planted organs, and her long-term prognosis is uncertain.
   The response to liver transplantation in S.J. underscores the importance of
hepatic LDL receptors in vivo and raises the possibility that other FH homozy-
gotes may respond to similar transplantation procedures. Hopefully, in appro-
priate cases liver transplantation can be performed before heart transplanta-
tion becomes necessary.

Speculations: LDL Receptors and the General Problem of Atherosclerosis
We now leave the realm of solidly established scientific fact and enter the much
more controversial realm of speculation about the relation between cholesterol
levels, LDL receptors, and atherosclerosis in the general population. After all,
FH heterozygotes account for only 5% of myocardial infarctions in patients
under the age of 60. What causes the other 95% of heart attacks?
   Extensive epidemiologic studies performed in many populations in many
countries over the past three decades have pointed strongly to a general
association of high blood cholesterol levels with heart attacks. Among the most
striking examples is the seven-country study of coronary artery disease directed
by Ansel Keys (116). A similar correlation has been observed within a single
population in the extensive studies in Framingham, Massachusetts ( 117).
   These studies have all shown that the incidence of myocardial infarction rises
in proportion to the plasma cholesterol level, more specifically the plasma level
of LDL-cholesterol. When LDL-cholesterol levels are below 100 mg/dl (equiv-
alent to a total plasma cholesterol level of     170 mg/dl), heart attacks are rare.
When LDL-cholesterol levels are above 200 mg/dl (equivalent to a total
plasma cholesterol level of      280 mg/dl), h eart attacks are frequent. Contro-
versy arises over the middle ground, i.e., individuals with plasma LDL-choles-
terol levels between 100 and 200 mg/dl (total plasma cholesterol of 170 to 280
mg/dl). This is the, range in which the vast bulk of heart attacks occur.
Somewhere within this range there is a threshold value of cholesterol at which
heart attacks begin to become more frequent. In this middle ground how much
of the heart attack burden is attributable to plasma cholesterol? There is no
definitive answer. In addition to cholesterol, heart attacks in this group are
aggravated by smoking, hypertension, stress, diabetes mellitus, and poorly
understood genetic factors. However, it seems reasonable to propose that
plasma cholesterol does have something to do with heart attacks in these
subjects, and that the incidence of heart attacks would be reduced if plasma
cholesterol could be lowered (10).


                   A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis    313



   The LDL receptor studies lend experimental support to the epidemiologists’
suggestion that the levels of plasma cholesterol usually seen’ in Western indus-
trialized societies are inappropriately high (9). This support derives from
knowledge of the affinity of the LDL receptor for LDL. The receptor binds
LDL optimally when the lipoprotein is present at a cholesterol concentration of
2.5 mg/dl (28). In view of the 10 to 1 gradient between concentrations of LDL
in plasma and interstitial fluid, a level of LDL-cholesterol in plasma of 25
mg/dl would be sufficient to nourish body cells with cholesterol (118). This is
roughly one-fifth of the level usually seen in Western societies (Fig. 16 and ref.
119). Several lines of evidence suggest that plasma levels of LDL-cholesterol in
the range of 25-60 mg/dl (total plasma cholesterol of 110 to 150 mg/dl) might
indeed be physiologic for human beings. First, in other mammalian species that
do not develop atherosclerosis, the plasma LDL-cholesterol level is generally
less than 80 mg/dl (Fig. 16 and ref. 120). In these animals the affinity of the
LDL receptor for their own LDL is roughly the same as the affinity of the
human LDL receptor for human LDL, implying that these species are designed
by evolution to have similar plasma LDL levels (9,119). Second, the LDL level
in newborn humans is approximately 30 mg/dl (121), well within the range
that seems to be appropriate for receptor binding (Fig. 16). Third, when
humans are raised on a low fat diet, the plasma LDL-cholesterol tends to stay
in the range of 50 to 80 mg/dl. It only reaches levels above 100 mg/dl in
individuals who consume a diet rich in saturated animal fats and cholesterol
that is customarily ingested in Western societies (116,122).
   What is the mechanism for the high levels of plasma LDL that are so
frequent in Western industrialized societies? Extensive evidence implicates two
major factors: diet and heredity. When people habitually consume diets low in
animal fats, their plasma LDL-cholesterol levels generally tend to remain low.
When even moderate amounts of animal fat are introduced into the diet, the
plasma cholesterol level rises ( 116,122). However, the level does not rise
equally in every person. Clearly, genetic as well as dietary factors play a role.
   How might a diet rich in animal fats and cholesterol elevate the plasma
LDL-cholesterol level? Here we believe that two properties of the LDL receptor
play a role - saturation and suppression. As the plasma LDL level rises, the
receptors become saturated. This saturation of receptors sets an upper limit on
the rate at which LDL can be removed efficiently from plasma (123). Each
receptor can handle only one particle of LDL at a time. Once the receptors
become saturated, the rate of removal of LDL can be accelerated only by an
increase in clearance by non-receptor pathways that operate at low efficiency.
In order to drive these alternate pathways, the LDL level must be quite high
(99). At ordinary levels of LDL, the major factor that limits the removal of
LDL from plasma is saturation of the LDL receptor (123).
   Once LDL receptors become saturated, the removal rate of LDL is propor-
tional to the number of receptors. Whenever the number of receptors is re-
duced, plasma LDL levels must rise. Experiments in animals indicate that the
consumption of a high fat diet decreases the number of LDL receptors in the
liver (123, 124). We believe that this mechanism operates through feedback


314                           Physiology or Medicine I985



suppression as described above. That is, when excess dietary cholesterol accu-
mulates in the liver, the liver responds by decreasing the production of LDL
receptors (Fig. 13C). The entry of dietary cholesterol into the liver is mediated
by a receptor, termed the chylomicron remnant receptor, whose activity is
genetically distinct from the LDL receptor (125). The chylomicron remnant
receptor is unaffected by cholesterol accumulation (126), and it causes choles-
terol to accumulate to high levels in liver when the diet contains excess fat.
   The combination of saturation and suppression of hepatic LDL receptors
contributes in a major way to the buildup of LDL in plasma when a diet rich in
saturated fats and cholesterol is ingested. Insofar as such a diet also may
increase production of LDL in the face of a fixed or declining removal capacity,
the LDL level would rise even higher.
   If the LDL receptor does limit the removal of LDL from plasma, then
maneuvers that increase LDL receptor activity might be effective in individuals
who have high plasma LDL-cholesterol levels, but who do not have defective
LDL receptor genes. Such therapy seems feasible with the development of
HMG CoA reductase inhibitors. However, it is still too early to tell whether
such therapy would decrease the incidence of myocardial infarctions in indivi-
duals with moderately elevated plasma LDL-cholesterol levels in the range of
 100 to 200 mg/dl. There is much circumstantial evidence to expect such
improvement (127), but unequivocal data are simply not there. Hopefully, with
the availability of powerful receptor-stimulating drugs, the hypothesis should
be susceptible to testing in the near future.
    In considering the role of diet and drugs in treatment of high cholesterol
levels, physicians and public health authorities must bear in mind the genetic
variability between individuals. This variability exists at three levels: 1) The
degree of increase in plasma cholesterol upon ingestion of a high cholesterol
diet is variable. Not all people develop hypercholesterolemia. Some people,
such as the Pima Indians, maintain low plasma cholesterol levels despite
ingestion of a high fat diet (10). 2) Even when the plasma cholesterol level
becomes elevated, the propensity for atherosclerosis varies. For example, a
substantial proportion of FH heterozygotes (10 to 20%) escape myocardial
infarction until the 8th or 9th decade despite pronounced hypercholesterolemia
from birth (14). 3) Genetic susceptibility to contributory risk factors is variable.
Some people can withstand hypertension and cigarette smoking for decades
without developing atherosclerotic complications; others are highly sensitive.
    In view of this genetic variability in susceptibility, dietary and drug recom-
mendations must be individualized. The family history of the individual must
 be constantly borne in mind, particularly the familial incidence of premature
heart attacks or strokes. An important goal of future research will be to dissect
 this genetic variability. Hopefully, it will become possible to identify the genes
 that determine such predispositions and to analyze them in each individual.
For example, are there alleles that produce subtle defects in the LDL receptor
 that predispose to “garden-variety”, diet-responsive hypercholesterolemia?
Are there subtle abnormal alleles at other loci such as those governing choles-


                       A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis                315



terol absorption, cholesterol synthesis, or bile acid synthesis? It seems likely
that variability at such loci exists; the scientific challenge is to expose it.

Receptor Recycling: A Novel Cellular Pathway
The studies of the LDL receptor have revealed a new process by which
membrane-embedded receptors cycle continuously into and out of cells. The
receptors move from one organelle to another as a result of two sequential
events: 1) segregation from other proteins by lateral movement in the plane of
the membrane, and 2) pinching off of receptor-enriched membranes to form
vesicles that eventually fuse with a different organelle. These receptors have
been designated as “migrant” membrane proteins to distinguish them from
“resident” membrane proteins that do not move in this fashion (4). The
purpose of such intracellular traffic is to integrate the behavior of multiple
organelles to form coherent biochemical pathways. Thus, the movement of the
LDL receptor links the cell surface to the endosome and to the lysosome. The
cholesterol liberated from LDL in lysosomes exerts regulatory effects in two
other organelles, the endoplasmic reticulum and the nucleus. Selective move-
ment of membrane proteins from one organelle to another allows such multi-
organelle regulation to occur.




Fig. 16. Range of LDL levels in “normal” adults in Western industrial societies, indicated by the
hell-shaped curve (127), is compared with the range in adult animals (120) and human infants
(121) and with the levels seen in FH patients (14). Levels in the shaded region of the chart are
above the threshold associated with accelerated atherosclerosis; more than half of the adults have
LDL levels above this threshold. The LDL level is inversely associated with the number of LDL
receptors. (Modified from ref. 10 with permission.)


316                           Physiology or Medicine 1985


  What are the signals that dictate the path that each migrant membrane
protein must follow? We are beginning to obtain some insight into the signals
necessary for LDL receptors to be incorporated into one sorting structure, the
coated pit. However, there is still no information with regard to signals that
cause proteins to leave other organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum and
move to different organelles such as the Golgi complex. Delineation of these
sorting signals is a major challenge facing the field of cell biology.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
In his Nobel Lecture of 1964, Konrad Bloch summarized his brilliant studies
on the biological synthesis of cholesterol. At the end of his talk, Bloch predicted
that the next era in cholesterol research would involve the elucidation of
homeostatic control mechanisms (128). A decade later, in 1973, the LDL
receptor concept was advanced to explain the homeostasis of plasma cholester-
ol and to account for regulatory abnormalities in cholesterol metabolism that
were observed in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia. During the next
12 years, the LDL receptor was transformed from a genetic abstraction to a
well characterized protein whose structural domains have been defined. Stud-
ies of this receptor taught us about receptor-mediated endocytosis and the
novel route by which receptors cycle in and out of cells. We have learned that
receptors contain multiple functional domains that direct each step in this
movement and that these domains are encoded on exons that can be shared
among many proteins. We have learned that genetic defects in the receptor can
cause cholesterol to accumulate in plasma, producing premature atherosclero-
sis. Together with others, we have also learned that the liver is the most
important site of action of LDL receptors and that liver replacement can offer a
successful form of therapy for children with homozygous FH. Finally, we have
learned that regulation of this receptor through drugs and diet can profoundly
change the LDL-cholesterol level and that saturation and suppression of recep-
tors may contribute to the high incidence of hypercholesterolemia in industrial-
ized society. It is hoped that these insights will lead to a deeper understanding
of the biology of cells and thereby to more effective forms of treatment for
diseases such as familial hypercholesterolemia.
   We wish to express our deepest appreciation to Dr. Donald W. Seldin,
chairman of the Department of Internal Medicine at the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical School for more than 30 years and creator of the
intellectual environment that made our work possible. We are grateful for the
contributions of many students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty members who
have advanced this effort over the past 12 years. Finally, we acknowledge the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of the National Institutes of Health,
the Moss Heart Foundation, and the Leland Fikes Foundation for their long-
term financial support.


                       A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis                   317



REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. Garrod, A.E. (1923) Inborn Errors of Metabolism. Oxford University Press, London, 2nd
    edition. pp. l-216; Beadle, G.W. (1959) Genes and chemical reactions in neurospora. Science
    129: 1715-1719; Tatum, E.L. (1959) A case history in biological research. Science 129: 1711-
    1714; Pauling L., Itano H.A., Singer, S.J., and Wells, I.C. (1949) Sickle cell anemia: A
    molecular disease. Science 110: 543-548; Ingram, V.M. (1957) Gene mutations in human
    haemoglobin: The chemical difference between normal and sickle cell haemoglobin. Nature
    180: 326-328.
 2. Goldstein, J.L., and M.S. Brown. (1973) Familial hypercholesterolemia: Identification of a
    defect in the regulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase activity associ-
    ated with overproduction of cholesterol. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 70: 2804-2808.
 3. Brown, MS., and J.L. Goldstein. (1974) Familial hypercholesterolemia: Defective binding of
    lipoproteins to cultured fibroblasts associated with impaired regulation of 3-hydroxy-3-
    methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 71: 788-792.
 4. Goldstein, J.L., R.G.W. Anderson, and M.S. Brown. (1979) Coated pits, coated vesicles, and
    receptor-mediated endocytosis. N a t u r e 279: 679-685; Brown, M.S., R.G.W. Anderson, and
   J.L. Goldstein, (1983) Recycling receptors: The round-trip itinerary of migrant membrane
    proteins. Cell 32: 663-667.
 5. Heinrich O. Wieland (1928), Adolf O.R. Windaus (1928), Leopold Ruzicka (1939), Robert
    Robinson (1947), and Otto P.H. Diels (1950) were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in
    part for work that led to the elucidation of the structure of cholesterol, a brilliant chapter in
    the history of organic chemistry. Konrad Bloch and Feodor Lynen were awarded the Nobel
    Prize in Medicine or Physiology in 1964 for their landmark studies of the cholesterol biosynth-
    etic pathway, a complex sequence involving at least 30 steps. Robert B. Woodward, who
    pioneered the stereochemical synthesis of cholesterol, received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
    in 1965 “for his outstanding achievement in the art of organic synthesis.” Derek H.R. Barton
    and Odd Hassel were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1969 “for developing and
    applying the principles of conformation in chemistry,” which included establishing the a l l
    chair conformation of cholesterol. John W. Cornforth, who collaborated with George Popjak to
    establish the orientation of all of the hydrogen atoms in the cholesterol molecule, received the
    Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1975 “for his work on the stereochemistry of enzyme-catalyzed
    reactions.”
 6. Oncley, J.L. (1956) Lipoproteins of human plasma. Harvey Lect 50: 71-91.
 7. Gofman, J.W., O. Delalla, F. Glazier, N.K. Freeman, F.T. Lindgren, A.V. Nichols, B.
    Strisower, A.R. Tamplin. (1954) The serum lipoprotein transport system in health, metabolic
   disorders, atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease. Plasma 2: 413-484.
 8. Fredrickson, D.S. (1974) Plasma lipoproteins and apolipoproteins. Harvey Lect. 68: 185-237.
 9. Goldstein, J.L., and M.S. Brown. (1977) The low-density lipoprotein pathway and its relation
    to atherosclerosis. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 46: 897-930.
10. Brown, M.S., and J.L. Goldstein. (1984) How LDL receptors influence cholesterol and
    atherosclerosis. Sci. Am. 251: 58-66.
11. Müller, C. (1938) Xanthomata, hypercholesterolemia, angina pectoris. Acta Med. Scand. 89:
    (suppl) 75-84.
12. Khachadurian, A.K. (1964) The inheritance ofessential familial hypercholesterolemia. Am. J.
   Med. 37: 402-407.
13. Fredrickson, D.S., and R.I. Levy. (1972) Familial hyperlipoproteinemia. Chapter 28. In T h e
    Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease. 3rd edition. J.B. Stanbury, J.B. Wyngaarden, and D.S.
    Fredrickson, editors. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York. pp. 545-614.
14. Goldstein, J.L., and MS. Brown. (1983) Familial hypercholesterolemia. Chapter 33. In T h e
    Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease. J.B. Stanbury, J.B. Wyngaarden, D.S. Fredrickson, J.L.
   Goldstein, and M.S. Brown, editors. 5th edition. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York. pp.
   672-712.
15. Goldstein, J.L., H.G. Schrott, W.R. Hazzard, E.L. Bier-man, and A.G. Motulsky. (1973)
    Hyperlipidemia in coronary heart disease. II. Genetic analysis of lipid levels in 176 families


318                                    Physiology or Medicine 1985


      and delineation of a new inherited disorder, combined hyperlipidemia. J. Clin. Invest. 52:
      1544-1568.
16. Patterson, D., and J. Slack. (1972) Lipid abnormalities in male and female survivors of
      myocardial infarction and their first-degree relatives. Lancet i: 393-399.
17. Nikkila, E.A., and A. Aro. (1973) Family study of serum lipids and lipoproteins in coronary
      heart-disease. Lancet i: 954-958.
18. Dietschy, J.M., and J.D. Wilson. (1970) Regulation of cholesterol metabolism. N. Engl. J.
      Med. 282: 1128-1138, 1179-1183, 1241-1249.
19. Neufeld, E.F., and J.C. Fratantoni. (1970) Inborn errors of mucopolysaccharide metabolism.
      Science 169: 141-146.
20. Bailey, J.M. (1973) Regulation of cell cholesterol content. In Atherogenesis: Initiating Factors,
      Ciba Found. Symp. Edited by R. Porter and J. Knight, Vol. 12. Elsevier, Amsterdam. pp.
    63-92.
21. Rothblat, G.H. (1969) Lipid metabolism in tissue culture cells. Adv. Lipid Res. 7: 135-162.
22. Brown, M.S., S.E. Dana, and J.L. Goldstein. (1973) Regulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglu-
      taryl coenzyme A reductase activity in human fibroblasts by lipoproteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      USA 70: 2162-2166.
23. Bucher, N.L.R., K. McGarrahan, E. Gould and A.V. Loud. (1959) Cholesterol biosynthesis
      in preparations of liver from normal, fasting, x-irradiated, cholesterol-fed, triton, or
      cholesten-3-one-treated rats. J. Biol. Chem. 234: 262-267; Bucher, N.L.R., P. Overath, and F.
      Lynen. (1960)                                 coenzyme A reductase, cleavage and condensing
      enzymes in relation to cholesterol formation in rat liver. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 40: 491-501.
24. Siperstein, M.D. (1970) Regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis in normal and malignant
    tissues. Curr. Topics Cell. Reg. 2: 65-100.
25. Brown, MS., S.E. Dana, and J.L. Goldstein. (1974) Regulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglu-
      taryl coenzyme A reductase activity in cultured human fibroblasts: Comparison of cells from a
      normal subject and from a patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. J, Biol.
      Chem. 249: 789-796.
26. Sutherland, E.W. (1972) Studies on the mechanism ofhormone action. Science 177: 401-408.
27: Goldstein, J.L., and MS. Brown. (1974) Binding and degradation of low density lipoproteins
      by cultured human fibroblasts: Comparison of cells from a normal subject and from a patient
      with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. J. Biol. Chem. 249: 5153-5162.
28. Goldstein, J.L., S.K. Basu, G.Y. Brunschede, and M.S. Brown. (1976) Release of low density
      lipoprotein from its cell surface receptor by sulfated glycosaminoglycans. Cell 7: 85-95.
29. Goldstein, J.L., S.E. Dana, J.R. Faust, A.L. Beaudet, and M.S. Brown. (1975) Role of
      lysosomal acid lipase in the metabolism of plasma low density lipoprotein: Observations in
      cultured fibroblasts from a patient with cholesteryl ester storage disease. J. Biol. Chem. 250:
      8487-8495.
30. de Duve, C. (1983) Lysosomes revisited. Eur. J. Biochem. 137: 391-397.
31. Goldstein, J.L., G.Y. Brunschede, and MS. Brown. (1975) Inhibition of the proteolytic
      degradation of low density lipoprotein in human fibroblasts by chloroquine, concanavalin A,
      and Triton WR 1339. J. Biol. Chem. 250: 7854-7862.
32. de Duve, C., T. DeBarsy, B. Poole, A. Trouet, P. Tulkens, and F. Van Hoof. (1974)
      Lysosomotropic agents. Biochem. Pharmacol. 23: 2495-2534.
33. Luskey, K.L., J.R. Faust, D.J. Chin, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1983) Amplification of
      the gene for 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A rcductase, but not for the 53-kDa
      protein, in UT-1 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 258: 8462-8469.
34. Gil, G., J.R. Faust, D.J. Chin, J.L. Goldstein, and M.S. Brown. (1985) Membrane-bound
      domain of HMG CoA reductase is required for sterol-enhanced degradation of the enzyme.
      Cell 41: 249-258.
35. Goldstein, J.L., SE. Dana, and M.S. Brown. (1974) Esterification of low density lipoprotein
      cholesterol in human fibroblasts and its absence in homozygous familial hypercholesterole-
      mia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 71: 4288-4292.
36. Brown, M.S., and J.L. Goldstein. (1975) Regulation of the activity of the low density
      lipoprotein receptor in human fibroblasts. Cell 6: 307-316.


37. Russell, D.W., T. Yamamoto, W.J. Schneider, C.J. Slaughter, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Gold-
    stein. (1983) cDNA cloning of the bovine low density lipoprotein receptor: Feedback regula-
    tion of a receptor mRNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80: 7501-7505.
38. Palade, G.E. (1953) Fine structure of blood capillaries. J. Applied Physic.7 24: 1424.
39. Anderson, R.G.W., J.L. Goldstein, and M.S. Brown. (1976) Localization of low density
    lipoprotein receptors on plasma membrane of normal human fibroblasts and their absence in
    cells from a familial hypercholesterolemia homozygote. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73: 2434-
    2438; Anderson, R.G.W., M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1977) Role of the coated endocy-
    tic vesicle in the uptake of receptor-bound low density lipoprotein in human fibroblasts. Cell
    10: 351-364.
40. Roth, T.F., and K.R. Porter. (1964) Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito A e d e s
    aqypti. L. J, Cell. Biol. 20: 313-332.
41. Brown, M.S., and J.L. Goldstein. (1976) Analysis of a mutant strain of human fibroblasts
    with a defect in the internalization of receptor-bound low density lipoprotein. Cell 9: 663-
    674.
42. Goldstein, J.L., M.S. Brown, and N.J. Stone. (1977) Genetics of the LDL receptor: Evidence
    that the mutations affecting binding and internalization are allelic. Cell 12: 629-641.
43. Anderson, R.G.W., J.L. Goldstein, and M.S. Brown. (1977) A mutation that impairs the
    ability of lipoprotein receptors to localise in coated pits on the cell surface of human
    fibroblasts. Nature 270: 695-699.
44. Pearse, B.M.F. (1976) Clathrin: A unique protein associated with intracellular transfer of
    membrane by coated vesicles. Pror. Natl. Acad. Sri. USA 73: 1255-1259.
45. Carpenter, G., and S. Cohen. (1976)
                                             125
                                                   1-labeled human epidermal growth factor: Binding,
    internalization, and degradation in human fibroblasts. J. Cell BioI. 71: 159-171.
46. Terris, S., and D.F. Steiner. (1975) Binding and degradation of        125
                                                                                 1-insulin by rat hepato-
    cytes. J. Biol. Chem. 2.50: 8389-8398.
47. Neufeld, E.F., G.N. Sando, A.J. Garvin, and L.H. Rome. (1977) The transport of lysosomal
    enzymes. J. Supramol. Struct. 6: 95-101.
48. Gonzalez-Noriega, A., J.H. Grubb, V. Talkad, and W.S. Sly. (1980) Chloroquine inhibits
    lysosomal enzyme pinocytosis and enhances lysosomal enzyme secretion by impairing recep-
    tor recycling. J. Cell Biol. 85: 839-852.
49. Ashwell, G., and J. Harford. (1982) Carbohydrate-specific receptors of the liver. Ann. Rev.
    B i o c h e m . 5 1 : 531-554; Stockert, R.J., D.J., Howard, A.G. Morell, and I.H. Scheinberg.
    (1980) Functional segregation of hepatic receptors for asialoglycoproteins during endocytosis.
    J. Biol. Chem. 255: 9028-9029.
50. Helenius, A., J. Kartenbeck, K. Simons, and E. Fries. (1980) On the entry of Semliki Forest
    virus into BHK-21 cells. J. Cell. Biol. 84; 404-420.
51. Pastan, I.H., and MC. Willingham. (1981) J ourney to the center of the cell: Role of the
    rcceptosome. Science 214: 504-509.
52. Carpentier, J-L., P. Gorden, R.G.W. Anderson, J.L. Goldstein, M.S. Brown, S. Cohen, and
    L. Orci. (1982) Co-localization of
                                        125
                                            1-epidermal growth factor and ferritin-low density
    lipoprotein in coated pits: A quantitative electron microscopic study in normal and mutant
    fibroblasts. J. Cell Biol. 9.5: 73-77.
53. Maxfield, F.R. (1982) Weak bases and ionophores rapidly and reversibly raise the pH of
    endocytic vesicles in cultured mouse fibroblasts. J. Cell. Biol. 95: 676-681.
54. Marsh, M., E. Bolzau, and A. Helenius. (1983) Penetration of Semliki forest virus from acidic
    prelysosomal vacuoles. Cell 32: 931-940.
55. Schneider, W.J., U. Beisiegel, J.L. Goldstein, and M.S. Brown. (1982) Purification of the low
    density lipoprotein receptor, an acidic glycoprotein of 164,000 molecular weight. J. Biol. Chem.
    257: 2664-2673.
56. Cummings, R.D., S. Kornfeld, W.J. Schneider, K.K. Hobgood, H. Tolleshaug, M.S. Brown,
    and J.L. Goldstein. (1983) Biosynthesis of the N- and O-linked oligosaccharides of the low
    density lipoprotein receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 258: 15261-15273.
57. Davis, C.G., A. Elhammer, D.W. Russell, W.J. Schneider, S. Kornfeld, MS. Brown, and J.L.
     Goldstein. (1986) Deletion of clustered O-linked carbohydrates does not impair function of
     low density lipoprotein receptor in transfected fibrob1asts. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 2828-2838.


320                                   Physiology or Medicine 1985


58. Bersot, T.P., R.W. Mahley, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1976) Interaction of swine
      lipoproteins with the low density lipoprotein receptor in human fibrob1asts. J. Biol. Chem. 251:
    2395-2398.
59. Innerarity, T.L., and R.W. Mahley. (1978) Enhanced binding by cultured human fibroblasts
      of apo-E-containing lipoproteins as compared with low density lipoproteins. Biochemistry 17:
      1440-1447.
60. Tolleshaug, H., J.L. Goldstein, W.J. Schneider, and M.S. Brown. (1982) Posttranslational
      processing of the LDL receptor and its genetic disruption in familial hypercholesterolemia.
      Cell 30: 715-724.
61. Helenius, A., I. Mellman, D. Wall, and A. Hubbard. (1983) Endosomes. Trends Biochem. Sci.
      8: 245-250; Pastan, I., and M.C. Willingham. (1983) Receptor-mediated endocytosis: Coat-
      ed pits, receptosomes and the Golgi. Trends Biochem. Sci. 8: 250-254.
62. Brown, M.S., R.G.W. Anderson, S.K. Basu, and J.L. Goldstein. (1981) Recycling of cell
    surface receptors: Observations from the LDL receptor system. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant.
      Biol. 46: 713-721; Basu, S.K., J.L. Goldstein, R.G.W. Anderson, and M.S. Brown. (1981)
      Monensin interrupts the recycling of low density lipoprotein receptors in human fibroblasts.
      Cell 24: 493-502.
63. Yamamoto, T., C.G. Davis, M.S. Brown, W.J. Schneider, M.L. Casey, J.L. Goldstein, and
      D.W. Russell. (1984) The human LDL receptor: A cyst&e-rich protein with multiple Alu
      sequences in its mRNA. Cell 39: 27-38.
64. Russell, D.W., W.J. Schneider, T. Yamamoto, K.L. Luskey, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein.
      (1984) Domain map of the LDL receptor: Sequence homology with the epidermal growth
      factor precursor. Cell 37: 577-585.
65. Goldstein, J.L., M.S. Brown, R.G.W. Anderson, D.W. Russell, and W.J. Schneider. (1985)
      Receptor-mediated endocytosis: Concepts emerging from the LDL receptor system. Ann. Rev.
      Cell Biol. I: l-39.
66. Südhof, T.C., J.L. Goldstein, M.S. Brown, and D.W. Russell. (1985) The LDL receptor gene:
      A mosaic of exons shared with different proteins. Science 228: 815-822.
67. Schneider, W.J., C.J. Slaughter, J.L. Goldstein, R.G.W. Anderson, D.J. Capra, and M.S.
      Brown. (1983) Use of anti-peptide antibodies to demonstrate external orientation of NH 2-
      terminus of the LDL receptor in the plasma membrane of fibroblasts. J. Cell Biol. 97: 1 6 3 5 -
      1640.
68. Mahley, R.W., and T.L. Innerarity. (1983) Lipoprotein receptors and cholesterol homeosta-
      sis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 737: 197-222; Innerarity, T.L., K.H. Weisgraber, KS. Arnold, S.C.
      Rall, Jr., and R.W. Mahley. (1984) Normalization of receptor binding of apolipoprotein E2:
      Evidence for modulation of the binding site conformation. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 7261-7267.
69. Südhof, T.C., D.W. Russell, J.L. Goldstein, M.S. Brown, R. Sanchez-Pescador, and G.I. Bell.
      (1985) Cassette of eight exons shared by genes for LDL receptor and EGF precursor. Science
      228; 893-895.
70. Scott, J., M. Urdea, M. Quiroga, R. Sanchez-Pescador, N. Fong, M. Selby, W.J. Rotter, and
      G.I. Bell. (1983) Structure of a mouse submaxillary messenger RNA encoding epidermal
      growth factor and seven related proteins. Science 221: 236-240.
71. Gray, A., T.J. Dull, and A. Ullrich. (1983) Nucleotide sequence of epidermal growth factor
      cDNA predicts a 128,000-molecular weight protein precursor. Nature 303: 722-725.
72. Doolittle, R.F., D.-F. Feng, and M.S. Johnson. (1984) Computer-based characterization of
      epidermal growth factor precursor. Nature 307: 558-566.
73. Lehrman, M.A., J.L. Goldstein, M.S. Brown, D.W. Russell, and W.J. Schneider. (1985)
      Internalization-defective LDL receptors produced by genes with nonsense and frameshift
    mutations that truncate the cytoplasmic domain. Cell 41: 735-753.
74. Francke, U., M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1984) Assignment of the human gene for the
      low density lipoprotein receptor to chromosome 19: Synteny of a receptor, a ligand, and a
      genetic disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81: 2826-2830.
75. Stanley, K.K., H.-P. Kocher, J.P. Luzio, P. Jackson, and J. Tschopp. (1985) The sequence
      and topology of human complement component C9. EMBO J. 4: 375-382.


                       A Receptor-Mediated Pathway for Cholesterol Homeostasis                     321



76. Doolittle, R.F. (1985) The genealogy of some recently evolved vertebrate proteins. Trends
    Biochem. Sci. 10: 233-237.
77. Gilbert, W. (1978) Why genes in pieces? Nature 271: 501.
78. Gilbert, W. (1985) Genes-in-pieces revisited. Science 228: 823-824.
79. Lehrman, M.A., D.W. Russell, J.L. Goldstein, and M.S. Brown. (1986) Exon-Alu recombin-
    ation deletes 5 kilobases from low density lipoprotein receptor gene, producing null phenotype
    in familial hypercholesterolemia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA In Press.
80. Tolleshaug, H., K.K. Hobgood, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1983) The LDL receptor
    locus in familial hypercholesterolemia: Multiple mutations disrupting the transport and
    processing of a membrane receptor. Cell 32: 941-95 I.
81. Schneider, W.J., M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1983) Kinetic defects in the processing of
    the LDL receptor in fibroblasts from WHHL rabbits and a family with familial hypercholes-
    terolemia. Mol. Biol. Med. I: 353-367.
82. Davis, C.G., M.A. Lehrman, D.W. Russell, R.G.W. Anderson, M.S. Brown, and J.L.
    Goldstein. (1986) The J.D. mutation in familial hypercholesterolemia: Substitution of cys-
    teine for tyrosine in cytoplasmic domain impedes internalization of LDL receptors. Cell 45:
    15-24.
83. Lehrman, M.A., W.J. Schneider, T.C. Südhof, M.S. Brown, J.L. Goldstein, and D.W.
    Russell. (1985) Mutation in LDL receptor: Alu-Alu recombination deletes exons encoding
    transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. Science 227: 140-146.
84. Ho, Y.K., M.S. Brown, D.W. Bilheimer, and J.L. Goldstein. (1976) Regulation of low density
    lipoprotein receptor activity in freshly isolated human lymphocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 58: 1465-
    1474.
85. Bilheimer, D.W., Y.K. Ho, M.S. Brown, R.G.W. Anderson, and J.L. Goldstein. (1978)
    Genetics of the low density lipoprotein receptor: Diminished receptor activity in lymphocytes
    from heterozygotes with familial hypercholesterolemia. J. Clin. Invest. 61: 678-696.
86. Langer, T., W. Strober, and R.I. Levy. (1972) The metabolism of low density lipoprotein in
    familial type II hyper1ipoproteinemia. J. Clin. Invest. 51: 1528-1536.
87. Bilheimer, D.W., N.J. Stone, and S.M. Grundy. (1979) Metabolic studies in familial hyper-
    cholesterolemia: Evidence for a gene-dosage effect in vivo. J. Clin. Invest. 64: 524-533.
88. Simons, L.A., D. Reichl, N.B. Myant, and M. Mancini. (1975) The metabolism of the
    apoprotein of plasma low density lipoprotein in familial hyperbetalipoproteinaemia in the
    homozygous form. Atherosclerosis 21: 283-298.
89. Bilheimer, D.W., J.L. Goldstein, S.M. Grundy, and MS. Brown. (1975) Reduction in
    cholesterol and low density lipoprotein synthesis after portacaval shunt surgery in a patient
    with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. J. Clin. Invest. 56: 1420-1430.
90. Basu, S.K., J.L. Goldstein, and M.S. Brown. (1978) C haracterization of the low density
    lipoprotein receptor in membranes prepared from human fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 253:
    3852-3856.
91. Kovanen, P.T., S.K. Basu, J.L. Goldstein, and M.S. Brown. (1979) Low density lipoprotein
    receptors in bovine adrenal cortex. II. Low density lipoprotein binding to membranes
    prepared from fresh tissue. Endocrinology 104: 610-616; Brown, M.S., P.T. Kovanen, and J.L.
    Goldstein. (1979) Receptor-mediated uptake of lipoprotein-cholesterol and its utilization for
    steroid synthesis in the adrenal cortex. Recent Prog. Hormone Res. 35: 215-257.
92. Chao, Y.S., E.E. Windler, G.C. Chen, and R.J. Havel. (1979) Hepatic catabolism of rat and
    human lipoproteins in rats treated with                 estradiol. J. Biol. Chem. 254: 1 1 3 6 0 -
    11366; Kovanen, P.T., M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1979) Increased binding of low
    density lipoprotein to liver membranes from rats treated with                  estradiol. J. Biol.
    Chem. 254: 11367-11373.
93. Pittman, R.C., T.E. Carew, A.D. Attie, J.L. Witztum, Y. Watanabe, and D. Steinberg.
    (1982) Receptor-dependent and receptor-independent degradation of low density lipoprotein
    in normal rabbits and in receptor-deficient mutant rabbits. J. Biol. Chem. 257: 7994-8000.
94. Spady, D.K., D.W. Bilheimer, and J.M. Dietschy. (1983) Rates of receptor dependent and
    independent low density lipoprotein uptake in the hamster. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 80:
    3499-3503.


322                                    Physiology or Medicine 1985


95. Steinberg, D. (1983) Lipoproteins and atherosclerosis: A look back and a look ahead.
      Arteriosclerosis 3: 283-301.
96. Shepherd, J., S. Bicker, A.R. Lorimer, and C.J. Packard. (1979) Receptor mediated low
    density lipoprotein catabolism in man. J. Lipid Res. 20: 999-1006.
97. Basu, S.K., J.L. Goldstein, R.G.W. Anderson, and MS. Brown. (1976) Degradation of
      cautionized low density lipoprotein and regulation of cholesterol metabolism in homozygous
      familial hypercholesterolemia fibroblasts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73: 3178-3182.
98. Mahley, R.W., T.L. Innerarity, R.E. Pitas K.H. Weisgraber J H Brown and E. Gross. (1977)
      Inhibition of lipoprotein binding to cell surface receptors of fibroblasts following selective
      modification of arginyl residues in arginine-rich and B apoproteins. J. Biol. Chem. 252: 7279-
      7287; Weisgraber, K.H., T.L. Innerarity, and R.W. Mahley. (1978) Role of the lysine
      residues of plasma lipoproteins in high affinity binding to cell surface receptors on human
      fibrob1asts. J. Biol. Chem. 253: 9053-9062.
99. Goldstein, J.L., and M.S. Brown. (1977) Atherosclerosis: The low-density lipoprotein recep-
      tor hypothesis. Metabolism 26: 1257-1275.
100. Brown, M.S. and J.L. Goldstein. (1983) Lipoprotein receptors in the liver: Control signals for
     plasma cholesterol traffic. J. Clin. Invest. 72: 743-747.
101. Watanabe, Y. (1980) Serial inbreeding of rabbits with hereditary hyperlipidemia (WHHL-
      rabbit). Incidence and development of atherosclerosis and xanthoma. Atherosclerosis 36: 261-
     268.
102. Goldstein, J.L., T. Kita, and M.S. Brown. (1983) Defective lipoprotein receptors and athero-
      sclerosis: Lessons from an animal counterpart of familial hypercholesterolemia. N. Engl. J.
      Med. 309: 288-295.
103. Gitlin, D., D.G. Cornwell, D. Nakasato, J.L. Oncley, W.L. Hughes, Jr., and C.A. Janeway.
      (1958) Studies on the metabolism of plasma proteins in the nephrotic syndrome. II. The
      lipoproteins. J. Clin. Invest. 37: 172-184.
104. Bilheimer, D.W., S. Eisenberg, and R. I. Levy. (1972) The metabolism of very low density
      lipoprotein proteins. I. Preliminary in vitro and in vivo observations. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 260:
     212-221.
105. Kita, T., M.S. Brown, D.W. Bilheimer, and J.L. Goldstein. (1982) Delayed clearance of very
      low density and intermediate density lipoproteins with enhanced conversion to low density
      lipoprotein in WHHL rabbits. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79: 5693-5697.
106. Soutar, A.K., N.B. Myant, and G.R. Thompson. (1982) The metabolism of very low density
      and intermediate density lipoproteins in patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia. Athero-
      sclerosis. 43: 217-231.
107. Brown, MS., and J.L. Goldstein. (1981) Lowering plasma cholesterol by raising LDL
      receptors (editorial). N. Engl. J. Med. 305: 515-517.
108. Endo, A., M. Kuroda, and K. Tanzawa. (1976) Competitive inhibition of 3-hydroxy-3-
      methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase by ML-236A and ML-236B fungal metabolites, having
      hypocholesterolemic activity. F.E.B.S. Lett. 72: 323-326; Endo, A. (1985) Compactin (ML-
      236B) and related compounds as potential cholesterol-lowering a g e n t s that inhibit HMG-
      CoA reductase. J. Medicinal Chem. 28: 401-405.
109. Alberts, A.W., J. Chen, G. Kuron, V. Hunt, J. Huff, C. Hoffman, J. Rothrock, M. Lopez, H.
      Joshua, E. Harris, A. Patchett, R. Monaghan, S. Currie, E. Stapley, G. Albers-Schonberg, O.
      Hensens, J, Hirshfield, K. Hoogsteen, J. Liesch, and J. Springer. (1980) Mevinolin, a highly
      potent competitive inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase and cholesterol lowering agent. P r o c .
      Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77: 3957-3961.
110. Kita, T., M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1980) Feedback regulation of 3-hydroxy-3-
      methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase in livers of mice treated with mevinolin, a competitive
      inhibitor of the reductase. J. Clin. Invest. 66: 1094-1100; Kovanen, P.T., D.W. Bilheimer, J.L.
      Goldstein, J.J. Jaramillo, and M.S. Brown. (1981) Regulatory role for hepatic low density
      lipoprotein receptors in vivo in the dog. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78: 1194-1198.
11I. Grundy, S.M., and D.W. Bilheimer. (1984) Inhibition of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA
      reductase by mevinolin in familial hypercholesterolemia heterozygotes: Effects on cholesterol
      balance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81: 2538-2542.


                         A Receptor-Mediated Pathway   for Cholesterol Homeostasis                    323



112. Mabuchi, H. Sakai, T., Sakai, Y., Yoshimura, A., Watanabe, A., Wakasugi, T., Koizumi, J.,
     and Takeda R. (1983) Reduction of serum cholesterol in heterozygous patients with familial
     hypercholesterolemia: additive effects of compactin and cholestyramine. N. Eng1. J. Med. 308:
     609-613; Bilheimer, D.W., S.M. Grundy, MS. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1983) Mevinolin
     stimulates receptor-mediated clearance of low density lipoprotein from plasma in familial
     hypercholesterolemia heterozygotes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 80: 4124-4128; Illingworth,
     D.R. (1984) Mevinolin plus colestipol in therapy for severe heterozygous familial hypercho-
     lesterolemia. Ann. Intern. Med. 102: 598-604.
113. Yamamoto, A., H. Sudo, and A. Endo. (1980) Therapeutic effects of ML-236B in primary
     hypercholesterolemia. Atherosclerosis 35: 259-266.
114. Thompson, G.R., N.B. Myant, D. Kilpatrick, C.M. Oakley, M.J. Raphael, and R.E. Steiner.
     (1980) Assessment of long-term plasma exchange for familial hypercholesterolaemia. Brit.
     Heart J. 43: 680-688.
115. Bilheimer, D.W., Goldstein, J.L., Grundy, S.C., Starzl, T.E., and Brown, M.S. (1984) Liver
     transplantation provides low density lipoprotein receptors and lowers plasma cholesterol in a
     child with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 311: 1658-1664.
116. Keys, A. (1980) Seven countries: A multivariate analysis of death and coronary heart disease. Harvard
     University Press, Cambridge, MA. pp. l-381.
117. Kannel, W.B., W.P. Castelli, T. Gordon, and P.M. McNamara. (1971) Serum cholesterol,
     lipoproteins, and the risk of coronary heart disease: The Framingham Study. Ann. Int. Med.
     74: 1-12.
118. Reichl, D., N.B. Myant, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. (1978) Biologically active low
     density lipoprotein in human peripheral 1ymph. J. Clin. Invest. 61: 64-71.
119. Goldstein, J.L., and M.S. Brown. (1982) Lipoprotein receptors: Genetic defense against
     atherosclerosis. Clin. Res. 30: 417-426.
120. Mills, G.L., and C.E. Taylaur. (1971) The distribution and composition of serum lipoproteins
     in eighteen animals. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 4OB: 489-501; Calvert, G.D. (1976) Mammalian
     low density lipoproteins. In: Low Density Lipoproteins, edited by C.E. Day and R.S. Levy, pp.
     281-319. Plenum Press, New York.
121. Kwiterovich, P.O., Jr., R.I. Levy, and D.S. Fredrickson. (1973) Neonatal diagnosis offamilial
     type-11 hyperlipoproteinaemia. Lancet i: 118-122.
122. Connor, S.J., and W.E. Connor. (1984) The interactions of genetic and nutritional factors in
     hyperlipidemia. In: Genetic Factors in Nutrition, edited by A. Velazquez and H. Bourges.
     Academic Press, Orlando, FL. pp. 137-155; Applebaum-Bowden, D., S.M. Haffner, E.
     Hartsook, K.H. Luk, J.J. Albers, and W.R. Hazard. (1984) Down-regulation of the low-
     density lipoprotein receptor by dietary cholesterol. Amer. J. Clin. Nutrition 39: 360-367.
123. Kovanen, P.T., M.S. Brown, S.K. Basu, D.W. Bilheimer, and J.L. Goldstein. (1981) Satura-
     tion and suppression of hepatic lipoprotein receptors: A mechanism for the hypercholesterole-
     mia of cholesterol-fed rabbits. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78: 1396-1400.
124. Hui, D.Y., T.I., Innerarity, and R.W. Mahley. (1981) Lipoprotein binding to canine hepatic
     membranes: Metabolically distinct apo-E and apo B,E receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 256: 5 6 4 6 -
     5655; Spady, D.K., S.D. Turley, and J.M. Dietschy. (1985) Rates of low density lipoprotein
     uptake and cholesterol synthesis are regulated independently in the liver. J. Lipid Res. 26:
     465-472.
125. Kita, T., J.L. Goldstein, M.S. Brown, Y. Watanabe, C.A. Hornick, and R.J. Havel. (1982)
     Hepatic uptake of chylomicron remnants in WHHL rabbits: A mechanism genetically dis-
     tinct from the low density lipoprotein receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79: 3623-3627.
126. Sherrill, B.C., and J.M. Dietschy. (1978) Characterization of the sinusoidal transport process
     responsible for uptake of chylomicrons by the liver. J. Biol. Chem. 253: 1859-1867.
127. Lipid Research Clinics Program. (1984) The lipid research clinics coronary primary preven-
     tion trial results: I. Reduction in incidence of coronary heart disease. J. Amer. Med. Assn. 251:
     351-364; Lipid Research Clinics Program. (1984) The lipid research clinics coronary prima-
     ry prevention trial results: II. The relationship of reduction in incidence of coronary heart
     disease to cholesterol lowering. J. Amer. Med. Assn. 251: 365-374.
128. Bloch, K. (1965) The biological synthesis of cholesterol. Science 150: 19-28


324                                  Physiology or Medicine I985


129. Deckelbaum, R.J., G.G. Shipley, and D.M. Small. (1977) Structure and interactions of lipids
      in human plasma low density lipoproteins. J. Biol. Chem. 252: 744-754; Elovson, J., J.C.
      Jacobs, V.N. Schumaker, and D.L. Puppione. (1985) Molecular weights of apoprotein B
      obtained from human low-density lipoprotein (apoprotein B-PI) and from rat very low
      density lipoprotein (apoprotein B-PIII). Biochemistry 24: 1569-1578.
130. Brown, M.S., and J.L. Goldstein. (1979) Receptor-mediated endocytosis: Insights from the
      lipoprotein receptor system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76: 3330-3337.
131. Brown, M.S., and J.L. Goldstein. (1985) The LDL receptor and HMG-CoA reductase -
      Two membrane molecules that regulate cholesterol homeostasis. Curr. Topics Cell. Reg. 26: 3 -
      15.
132. Goldstein, J.L., and M.S. Brown. (1984) Progress in understanding the LDL receptor and
      HMG CoA reductase, two membrane proteins that regulate the plasma cholesterol. J. Lipid
      Res. 25. 1450-1461.
