THE HOST DEFENSE OF INSECTS: A PARADIGM
FOR INNATE IMMUNITY

Nobel Lecture, December 7, 2011
by
JULES HOFFMANN
Strasbourg, France.




I grew up in Luxembourg after the Second World War. My father (Figure 1)
was a high school teacher, who spent his spare time collecting and describing
insects in various settings, particularly around brooks and ponds in the coun-
tryside. From early age on, I accompanied him, and by and by participated in
the identification of various insect species. This led me, with his obvious help,
to publish at the age of 17 my first paper on the waterbug (Heteroptera) in
Luxembourg. This period, which I dearly remember to this day, generated
in me a fascination for insects, which represent the most important group of
the present day fauna. It is believed that they make up some 80% of all extant
animal species. They play a considerable role in human health by transmit-
ting microbial pathogens that put close to one third of the human popula-
tion at risk and yearly kill tens of thousands. They also have a strong impact
on the economy: on the positive side through pollination, for instance, and
on the negative side through the destruction of crops. It is estimated that one
third of human crops are destroyed annually by insect pests world-wide.
   After completing high school in Luxembourg, I left for Strasbourg
University where I studied Life Sciences, in particular Zoology and
Physiology. After graduation, I was fortunate to be accepted for Ph.D. studies
by Professor Pierre Joly, the Chair of the Laboratory of General Biology at
the Institute of Zoology (Figure 1). The Joly laboratory was the only group
doing experimental research on insect models in Strasbourg. Their studies
focused on the endocrine and neuroendocrine control of insect develop-
ment and reproduction. The laboratory also had a particular interest in
phase differentiation in grasshoppers (Locusta migratoria), which represented
a major plague in Northern and Western Africa at that time. Professor Joly
proposed to me the study of antimicrobial defences in grasshoppers. In fact,
as he explained, his laboratory had over decades transplanted endocrine
organs and even whole brains from one insect to another without ever tak-
ing antiseptic precautions, but they had never observed the appearance of
opportunistic infections. To Professor Joly, this could only be explained if
efficient antimicrobial defences existed in these insects.
   I was very excited by this project. A survey of the existing literature rapidly
indicated that very little information was available on antimicrobial reactions

                                                                                3


in insects. At the end of the 19th century, Eli Metchnikoff had discovered
phagocytosis in starfish larvae and established its role in water-flea antimicro-
bial defences (“cellular immunity”) (Metchnikoff, 1884). Further, interesting
studies by André Paillot and Rudolf Glaser in the early 20th century had
pointed to the appearance of inducible antimicrobial activities in caterpillars
following a microbial challenge (“humoral immunity”) (Glaser, 1918; Paillot,
1919, 1933). Episodic investigations in a variety of insect species had analysed
melanisation, tissue repair and other defence aspects (reviewed in Jehle,
2009), but in essence no clear-cut picture of these defences had emerged
when I started my thesis work.
   In the mid-sixties, the Joly laboratory was not equipped for biochemical
studies and we relied on experimental biology, classical histology and elec-
tron microscopy to address this research topic. My initial investigations con-
firmed that phagocytosis was an essential arm of grasshopper antimicrobial
defences. Injections of low doses of microbes (we used Bacillus thuringiensis
during the first years of the project) induced a significant protection against
subsequent administrations of higher and even lethal doses. I could correlate
this induced protection with a strongly upregulated production of blood
cells, namely of phagocytes. At that time, I was not able to detect any specific-
ity in this mechanism of induction. The sometimes massive changes in the
hemograms (blood cell counts) following experimental infections raised
the question of the post-embryonic origin of blood cells in these insects.
Hemopoiesis was not well understood in insects at that time, but through the
combination of experimental biology (namely severe bleeding) and histol-
ogy/ultrastructural studies, I eventually identified a well-organised hemopoi-
etic tissue in the vicinity of the dorsal blood vessel in the abdomens of both
larval and adult grasshoppers. Dr Aimé Porte (Figure 1), an exceptional cell
biologist with a strong medical background, was my direct supervisor during
this period and our thorough ultrastructural analysis of the grasshopper he-
mopoietic tissue revealed some unexpected similarities with hemopoiesis in
mammals (Hoffmann et al., 1968, Hoffmann et al., 1970; Hoffmann 1973).
   To establish the functional significance of this newly identified juxtacar-
diac hemopoietic tissue, I went on to submit it to selective X-ray treatment.
The results were spectacular and were to orient the studies of the laboratory
for many years to come. For one, grasshoppers which had their hemopoietic
tissue selectively subjected to X-ray treatment rapidly succumbed to septice-
mia by opportunistic microbes; sham irradiated grasshoppers did not show
a similar phenotype. This result underlined the crucial role of hemopoiesis
in antimicrobial defences, namely through the massive production of phago-
cytes. A second, totally unexpected result was the observation that the endo-
crine control of moulting was upset. In short, grasshopper larvae undergo
five cycles of moulting: it was understood that these cycles were dependent
on a gland, referred to as prothoracic gland, and that this gland released the
moulting hormone ecdysone (ecdysis meaning moult in Greek) at a precise
moment within each larval instar (referred to as a “critical period”). When
the X-ray treatment of the hemopoietic tissue was performed before this

4


critical period within any instar, the
following moults were blocked; if the
treatment was performed after the
critical period, the next moults was
not blocked but subsequent moults
were still suppressed. The moulting
hormone ecdysone, a 27-carbon polar
steroid, had been isolated and char-
acterized by Professor Peter Karlson
in Germany from the butterfly Bombyx
(Butenandt and Karlson, 1954; Karlson
et al., 1965). Professor Joly was par-
ticularly interested in the results of the
X-ray treatment. He arranged for me to spend some time in the Karlson
laboratory to relate our observations with the studies on the synthesis,
blood transport and metabolism of ecdysone which were being under-
taken by Professor Karlson and Dr Jan Koolman at the Institute of Chemical
Physiology of the University of Marburg – a 4 hour drive from Strasbourg.
Meanwhile, he suggested, the antimicrobial defence studies in grasshoppers
should be continued in Strasbourg by my first doctoral student (who actu-
ally was my wife Danièle whom I had met in the Joly laboratory some time
before). For years, our laboratory carried the official CNRS denomination
“Endocrinology and Immunology of Insects” and was renamed only in 1994

                                                                        5


“Immune Response and Development in Insects”. I will not recount here the
fruitful years that we spent with our colleagues from Marburg investigating
the biosynthesis, metabolism, and mode of action of the steroid hormone
ecdysone in grasshoppers. These studies became a hallmark of our labora-
tory for many years, during which we collaborated with the Department
of Organic Chemistry in Strasbourg, and specifically with Professor Guy
Ourisson and Dr Luu Bang. Thanks mainly to the enthusiastic involvement
of Marie Lagueux and Charles Hetru, the “Ecdysone years” allowed our
group to mature in the fields of biochemistry and analytical chemistry, to
invest in appropriate equipment and to recruit talented scientists. Eventually,
we were in excellent condition when we concentrated on the immune studies
in flies from the mid-80s on.
   In spite of strenuous efforts we were not able in the 70s and 80s to get hold
of any significant inducible antimicrobial substances in challenged grasshop-
pers, beyond that of lysozyme. Professor Hans Boman, from Stockholm, was
a member of the Ph.D. defence committee of Danièle Hoffmann (1978) and
he proposed that she join his laboratory for a postdoctoral period. Right
at that time, Boman and his associates were about to identify the induc-
ible antimicrobial peptide cecropin from challenged pupae of the moth
Hyalophora cecropia (Steiner et al, 1981). Danièle joined the Boman laboratory
in 1979 to work with Dan Hultmark on another lepidopteran insect, Galleria
mellonella (D. Hoffmann et al, 1981). Once Danièle was back from
Stockholm, she developed a severe allergy to the dust present on the wings
(elytra) of grasshoppers. There were no real perspectives that we could use
Locusta for genetic studies and we decided that we would shift our studies
on insect antimicrobial defences to dipteran species and abandon grass-
hoppers. Our objectives were to eventually turn to the genetically tractable
Drosophila melanogaster model. In the early 80s the methodologies available
to us still prevented the direct characterisation of inducible antimicrobial
substances from small organisms, like fruit flies. We therefore chose the
large fly Phormia terranovae, which could be mass-raised in our laboratory
and which provided ample amounts of blood for biochemical analysis. The
project was to subsequently characterise inducible antimicrobial substances
in the fruit fly through homology cloning based on the peptide sequences
from the molecules identified in large flies. In retrospect, this was an
excellent decision as we now know that grasshoppers do not rely for their
antimicrobial defences on the massive secretion of antibacterial peptides
into their blood, in contrast to flies, as we shall see below. By that time, the
number of persons in our laboratory working on antimicrobial defences
had significantly increased. In addition to Danièle, we now had Jean-Luc
Dimarcq, Daniel Zachary and Jean-Marc Reichhart working on this topic.
The members working on the endocrine aspects (steroids, neurohormones)
included Marie Lagueux, Christine Kappler, Charles Hetru, Marie Meister
and Maurice Charlet.
   Our efforts directed at identifying inducible antimicrobial peptides in
Phormia eventually led in the late 80s to the characterisation of a glycine-

6


rich 82-residue polypeptide which we named Diptericin (from Diptera,
two-winged insects) (Dimarcq et al, 1988). It had taken 100 ml of blood
from challenged larvae to generate this sequence, indeed a formidable task,
which the spectacular progress of physico-chemical methods in the following
years has fortunately made obsolete. We cloned the corresponding gene and
followed its expression pattern in flies challenged by an injection of a mix of
bacteria (Reichhart et al, 1989). Activity spectra of purified Diptericin showed
that it was particularly active against Gram-negative bacteria. Importantly for
our future studies, we were able to clone a Diptericin homologue in Drosophila
in 1990 (Wicker et al, 1990). From 1990 on, we felt confident that we were
able to directly identify inducible antimicrobial substances from challenged
fruit flies (Figure 2), in spite of their small size. Through the intense work of
Charles Hetru, Jean-Luc Dimarcq, Philippe Bulet and others in the group,




Figure 2.



we actually identified several antimicrobial peptides (Figure 3), namely the
disulphide-bridged Defensin (Dimarcq et al. 1994), whereas our colleagues
in the Boman laboratory cloned genes encoding Drosophila homologues of
the linear polypeptides Cecropins and Attacins, which they had initially iden-
tified in the Cecropia moth (Kylsten et al. 1990, Åsling et al. 1995). Altogether,
there was now evidence that the fruit fly fat body, an equivalent of the
mammalian liver, produces several families of potent antibacterial peptides,
with distinct and sometimes overlapping activity spectra against either Gram-
positive or Gram-negative bacteria. The corresponding genes are transcribed
rapidly after microbial challenge and after translation of the corresponding
mRNAs, the prepropeptides are matured and the mature peptides are
secreted into the blood of the fly at remarkably high concentrations, where
they oppose invading microorganisms via membrane-disruptive mechanisms
(the mode of action is reviewed in Shai, 2002).

                                                                                7


Figure 3.

   As mentioned above (Figure 2), a paramount feature of the antimicrobial
peptides of Drosophila is the rapid inducibility of their expression following
challenge. This rapid induction of a potent antimicrobial activity illustrated
immediately to us the potentials of this experimentally easily amenable sys-
tem for a molecular genetic analysis of the immune induction of the
antimicrobial defences in Drosophila. Further, as described below, once the
genes encoding some of the antimicrobial peptides were cloned, it became
apparent that their promoters contained sequences similar to mammalian
NF-κB binding sites in immune response genes (Sen and Baltimore, 1986). I
had read recently papers from Professor Charles Janeway at Yale University
(Janeway, 1989) and from Professor Alan Ezekowitz (Sastry et al., 1991) at
Harvard and, in June 1992, I visited their laboratories and presented our
data on the inducibility of antimicrobial peptides during the host defence
of Drosophila and the presence of NF-κB binding sites in the promoter of the
Diptericin gene. At that time we knew that these sites were mandatory for the
immune-inducibility of this gene (see below). Both Janeway and Ezekowitz
felt attracted by the fly model, and we decided that we would embark on a
collaboration, with the aim of understanding and comparing sensing and sig-
nalling in mice and flies during infections. In 1993, Charlie Janeway, Shunji
Natori from Tokyo University (working on the fly model Sarcophaga peregrina)
and I organised a conference at Versailles near Paris on the topic of innate
immunity (Figure 4). In retrospect, this may have been the first international
meeting on innate immunity, a term still not in universal use at that time.
We decided with Charlie Janeway, Shunji Natori and Alan Ezekowitz, after
the Versailles meeting to submit a formal grant application to the Human
Frontiers in Science Programme (HFSP), whose General Office is based
in Strasbourg. Fotis Kafatos, who had just been named Director General of
the European Molecular Biology Laboratory at Heidelberg and had started

8


Figure 4.

working on antiparasitic reactions in mosquitoes, also joined our collabora-
tive project. On behalf of our five laboratories, I submitted the project to
HFSP. Much to our delight it was accepted in 1995 and generously funded.
For four years, the five groups met regularly to exchange and discuss results
and ideas. It is through these meetings that I became acutely aware of the
problems raised by the interactions between innate immunity and adaptive
immunity in mammals (Drosophila lacks adaptive immunity) and that our col-
leagues followed the developments of our studies on activation of immune
defences in challenged flies. After termination of this grant in 1998, Alan
Ezekowitz coordinated a follow-up project of our groups, which was funded
by the NIH. A common article in Science, on the Phylogenetic Perspectives of
Innate Immunity, published in 1999, is a testimony to our fruitful and happy
interactions during these pioneering years (Hoffmann et al., 1999).
   Let me turn back to the period of the Versailles meeting. We had by that
time, as already mentioned, found the presence of NF-κB binding sites in
the Diptericin promoter (Reichhart et al., 1992) and shown by site-directed
mutagenesis that they were mandatory for inducibility of this gene by
microbial challenge (Kappler et al., 1993; Meister et al., 1994). In parallel,
Ylva Engström in Stockholm and her colleagues, had obtained similar
results for the Cecropin gene in flies (Engström et al., 1993) (of note, the
presence of NF-κB binding sites had been first reported in the Attacin gene of
Hyalophora cecropia by Ingrid Faye (Sun et al., 1991). NF-κB was known to be
a transcriptional activator responsible for the challenge-induced expression
of many immune and stress proteins in mammals (Sen and Baltimore, 1986),
and the Drosophila genome also contained at least one member of this family,
namely the Dorsal gene (Steward, 1987) (Figure 5). In Drosophila, the ground-
breaking work of Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard (Nüsslein-Volhard et al., 1980)
had shown by unbiased mutagenesis experiments that the Dorsal gene was
involved in dorso-ventral patterning in the early embryo (Figure 6). Further
mutagenesis screens by her laboratory and that of Trudi Schupbach identi-
fied a cascade of genes that direct the nuclear translocation of the Dorsal
protein, which subsequently controls the expression of developmental genes
(reviewed in Belvin and Anderson, 1996). Kathryn Anderson worked out the

                                                                            9


Figure 5.




Figure 6.
role of a key gene in this signalling pathway, namely Toll (Anderson et al.,
1985a, 1985b), which had originally been isolated in the zygotic screens that
won the Nobel Prize for Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard and Eric Wieschaus.
This cascade involves several extracellular serine proteases and culminates in
the cleavage of the cysteine-knot polypeptide Spätzle. Cleaved Spätzle then
activates the type I transmembrane receptor Toll and triggers an intracellular
series of events which result in the phosphorylation of the inhibitor protein

10


Cactus, inducing its dissociation from Dorsal (also reviewed in Belvin and
Anderson, 1996). Although these genes had initially been characterized by
Nüsslein-Volhard and her colleagues because of their maternally expressed
phenotypes, we confirmed that they were also expressed in larvae and
adults, including males, and notably, that their expression was upregulated
by microbial challenge (Reichhart et al., 1993). We also showed, using ap-
propriate antibodies in collaboration with Ruth Steward, that an immune
challenge induces the nuclear translocation of the Dorsal protein in fat body
cells (Reichhart et al., 1993; Lemaitre et al., 1995a). Further, we found that
a microbial challenge induced the appearance in these cells of a protein
complex binding to the NF-κB sites of the Diptericin gene, that this complex
was competed off by excess probe and supershifted by an antibody specific
to Dorsal (Reichhart et al, 1993; Kappler et al., 1993; Georgel et al., 1993).
   For a short moment, I believed that we were close to solving the problem
of the control of antimicrobial gene expression. But then, to my utter dismay,
we found that in loss-of-function mutants for Dorsal, the Diptericin gene was
induced like in wild-type flies (Reichhart et al., 1993; see also Lemaitre et al.,
1995b). We were of course aware at that time of the report by the Levine and
Engström laboratories of the existence of a second NF-κB family member,
namely DIF (for Dorsal related immunity factor) (Ip et al., 1993), but Dif
mutants would only be generated years later (Meng et al., 1999; Rutschmann
et al., 2000a). Several mutants with potentially abnormal defence reactions
were available in the community at that time, namely mbn-2 (Gateff, 1978)
and Black cells (Rizki et al., 1980), which was considered to have a block in the
phenol-oxidase cascade that normally leads to the formation of melanin and
is activated by injury. Bruno Lemaitre, a Drosophila geneticist, who had joined
our group in the fall of 1992, shortly after his Ph.D. defence, and who was to
become a driving force in the Toll saga in the laboratory, analysed the expres-
sion of Diptericin in Black cells mutants and observed that the induction of this
antibacterial peptide gene was blocked. The Black cells mutation had been
created by ethyl methane sulphonate (EMS) mutagenesis by Grell in 1969.
I had shared our preliminary and unpublished results on the effect of the
Black Cells mutation with Professor Michael Levine when I visited his group
in San Diego in 1993. Given that the role of proteolytic cascades in immune
defences had been highlighted by the studies of Professor Sadaaki Iwanaga
at Fukuoka University on immune defences in the horse-shoe crab (reviewed
in Iwanaga, 2002), and that the Black Cells mutation was considered to affect
such a cascade, it was tempting to speculate on the potential similarities
in the induction of the immune responses in the two systems. The Levine
laboratory had had access to a Black Cells mutant line, and they informed us
that they could not reproduce our results on the lack of inducibility of the
antibacterial peptide with that line. Given that both groups were certain of
their data, the only valid explanation that came to our minds was that our
EMS-mutated line carried a second-site recessive mutation. This mutation
would be responsible for the failure of Diptericin induction and be unrelated
to the phenol-oxidase cascade, which had led to the initial isolation of the

                                                                               11


mutant strain. Bruno Lemaitre, Elisabeth Kromer and Marie Meister set
out to isolate the mutant gene and found that it mapped one centiMorgan
away from the Black Cells locus (Lemaitre et al., 1995b). We called this
mutation immune deficiency (imd). This first allele was a weak hypomorph.
Null alleles of the shadok class of alleles that would be generated some years
later by Dominique Ferrandon display a much stronger sensitivity to im-
mune challenges (Gottar et al., 2002). The imd locus resides in a genetically
poorly characterised region. Its identification entailed considerable map-
ping efforts, with the generation of an overlapping set of deletions. The
region corresponding to the relevant deletions was sequenced in 1999 by
our collaborators of Exelixis Inc (San Francisco), as the Drosophila genome
sequence was not yet available. The identification of the correct gene in the
30 kilobases region was facilitated by the detection of three mutations in the
most likely candidate gene in the three alleles of imd that were available at
this time. With Silvia Naitza, Philippe Georgel and other colleagues from our
laboratory and from Exelixis Inc. we found that imd encoded a death domain
protein that shared significant similarities with that of mammalian RIP (TNF-
receptor interacting protein) (Georgel et al., 2001).
   In 1995, then, we understood that the immune induction of the antibacte-
rial peptide Diptericin was dependent on the imd gene and independent of
the Dorsal member of the NF-κB family. Given the biochemical competence
of the laboratory, we considered the possibility of purifying the proteins of
the complex bound to the NF-κB response elements of the Diptericin gene.
For this, Christine Kappler and Emma Langley spent more than a year to
produce massive quantities of spinner cultures of LPS-treated cells and to
purify the nuclear protein extracts by affinity chromatography with multiple
NF-κB binding nucleotide sequences. As a result of these efforts, a faint band
of a size in the range of the Dorsal (or DIF) protein, and an additional one
of higher molecular weight (with hindsight, this might have corresponded to
the Relish NF-κB family member, see below) were detected by gel electropho-
resis in the pooled protein extracts. These samples were further analysed by
mass spectrometry after an “in-gel trypsic digestion” by Andrej Shevchenko
from the group of Mathias Mann at the EMBL in Heidelberg. Unfortunately,
the quantities of the purified proteins were below the resolution limits of
mass spectrometry at that time and in the absence of the genome sequence
of Drosophila, the small fragments of protein that were sequenced were of no
help.
   This was obviously a delicate moment in our efforts. Fortunately, a break-
through then occurred in the laboratory with the discovery of the antifungal
peptide Drosomycin. Let me briefly recount how this came about. The
biochemists in the group had so far isolated antibacterial peptides on the
basis of growth inhibition assays, a classical procedure used by the Boman
laboratory to isolate cecropins and attacins in the early 80s. In 1992 we
decided with Jean-Luc Dimarcq, Philippe Bulet and Charles Hetru to engage
in a massive experiment of comparing chromatographic profiles from several
thousands of individually challenged flies with those of as many naive flies,

12


independently of their potential antimicrobial effects. One objective was
to view the immune response in Drosophila beyond the simple induction
of antimicrobial peptides, and to isolate other types of immune response
polypeptides. In pooled extracts of these flies, we noted the appearance,
following challenge, of a major absorption peak. Upon sequencing of the
peptide contained within this peak, Jean-Luc Dimarcq, Philippe Bulet and
Charles Hetru identified a 5-kDa molecule with four disulphide bridges.
The inducible peptide was inactive, however, against all the bacterial strains
available to us. It was not an inhibitor of circulating proteases either– an
idea which we had favoured at a given moment, given the structure of the
peptide. At a session on antimicrobial peptides at the 1993 meeting of the
Federation of European Biochemical Societies in Stockholm, to which
Hans Boman had invited me, I heard the presentation by Professor Willem
Broeckaert from Leuwen University in Belgium on plant antimicrobial
peptides and was struck by the similarity between one of the peptides from
Raphanus sativus (Rs-Antifungal Peptide 1) and our novel 5-kDa inducible
peptide from challenged fruit flies. We rapidly started collaboration between
our two laboratories and in 1994 we showed that the fly peptide was potently
antifungal against some filamentous fungi, hence the name “Drosomycin”
proposed in our joint paper (Fehlbaum et al., 1994).
   At this point, things began to come together. The Drosomycin gene was
rapidly cloned by Jean-Marc Reichhart and Lydia Michaut. Bruno Lemaitre
then added Drosomycin to the set of probes for RNA blots to study the expres-
sion of this and the other inducible antimicrobial peptide genes in wild-type
and mutant fly lines. The data which he generated were compelling: the
Drosomycin gene was perfectly inducible by immune challenge (bacterial mix)
in imd mutants, but was clearly NOT induced in Toll pathway mutants by the
same challenge. Particularly striking were the results obtained with Cactus-
deficient flies, in which the Drosomycin gene was strongly expressed in the
absence of infection, but not the Diptericin gene (Figure 7). Bruno Lemaitre
went on to probe the immune induction of the characterised antimicrobial




Figure 7.


                                                                           13


peptide genes in all the available mutants affecting the dorsoventral regula-
tory cascade. These studies were published in Cell in 1996 (Lemaitre et al.,
1996). They demonstrated that: (1) essential components of the dorsoventral
pathway, namely the Spätzle/Toll/Cactus gene cassette, control expression
of the gene encoding the antifungal peptide Drosomycin; (2) two distinct
pathways control the expression of the antimicrobial peptide genes (Toll
controlling Drosomycin, IMD driving Diptericin and Drosocin – possibly a com-
bined action of both pathways on Cecropin, Attacin, and Defensin expression);
(3) the induction of all antimicrobial peptide genes is impaired in double
mutant flies for the Toll and imd genes, which excludes the existence of ad-
ditional pathways for this particular aspect of the immune defence; (4) muta-
tions which affect the synthesis of antimicrobial peptide genes dramatically
lower the resistance of flies to infection. More specifically to this point: the
collaboration with the Broeckaert laboratory had led to the introduction of
fungal strains into our laboratory (up to that stage, our studies had focused
on antibacterial defences). Bruno Lemaitre developed comparative survival
tests to bacterial and fungal infections in mutant backgrounds and showed
that the Toll pathway essentially protects against fungal infections, (and, as
later shown by Dominique Ferrandon and Julien Royet, also against some
Gram-positive bacterial infections; Michel et al., 2001; Rutschmann et al.,
2002), whereas the imd gene is mostly involved in fighting Gram-negative
infections (Figure 8) (Lemaitre et al., 19956b; see also below, Lemaitre et al.,
1997)




Figure 8.

   Studies later performed with microarray analysis (De Gregorio et al., 2001;
Irving et al., 2001; De Gregorio et al., 2002; Boutros et al., 2002) indicated
that the Toll pathway and the IMD pathway (which had been largely charac-
terised by that time, see below) each control the expression of hundreds of
genes, with some overlap (De Gregorio et al., 2002).

14


   The results summarised above were obtained in an ebullient context
where several laboratories were searching for the receptors of innate im-
mune cells that would be capable of recognising conserved microbial cell
wall components (“Pattern Recognition Receptors”, Janeway, 1989) and, in
response, activate NF-κB to direct the synthesis of immune-response genes.
In the case of mammals, it was proposed that this would not only lead to
the expression of innate defence genes but would also stimulate adaptive
immune responses (Janeway, 1989). It had been known for some time that in
mammals, lectin-like molecules (Fraser et al., 1998) and scavenger receptors
(Krieger, 1997) were able to recognise the molecular patterns that adorn
bacteria, but the link between recognition and signalling had remained
elusive. The Toll transmembrane receptor, initially cloned in the context of
the dorsoventral patterning system (Hashimoto et al., 1988), contains an ex-
tracellular leucine-rich repeat domain, evocative of that of the LPS-binding
protein CD14 (GPI-anchored and hence incapable of signalling to NF-κB)
(Wright et al.,1990). Its intracytoplasmic domain is highly similar to the intra-
cellular signalling domain of the IL-1 receptor (referred to as TIR domain,
for Toll-Interleukin Receptor), an established activator of NF-κB (Gay and
Keith, 1991; Schneider et al., 1991; Rosetto et al., 1995). I first presented our
data on the immune function of the Toll pathway in flies at our regular HFSP
meeting held in June 1996 in Annisquam and hosted by Charlie Janeway.
I vividly remember the interest and receptiveness they generated with our
colleagues. Although our laboratory in Strasbourg never worked directly on
mammalian models, we were delighted to observe over the following years
the relevance that our work on innate immunity in Drosophila took across
the phylogenetic spectrum. To this day, we remain in close contact with the
community working on mammalian models.
   The sequencing of the Drosophila genome revealed in 2000 that this species
has nine genes encoding Toll receptors (Adams et al., 2000). Jean-Luc Imler
in our group investigated the potential roles of the eight other Toll receptors
and of DmelMyD88 in the control of antimicrobial peptide gene expression
(Tauszig et al., 2000; Tauszig-Delamasure et al., 2002). In spite of an in-depth
analysis, we and others have been unable so far to demonstrate that, with
the marked exception of Toll, any of the other Tolls is involved in an NF-κB
driven expression of these peptides during systemic infections (Ooi et al.,
2002; Yagi et al., 2010; Narbonne-Reveau et al., 2011; Akhouayri et al., 2011).
   In spite of the progress described above, the question remained as to
how Toll is activated during infection, all the more so when it became clear
that the Toll pathway responds both to fungal and Gram-positive bacterial
infection (see above). The spectacular results on the identities of the ligands
activating the various mammalian Toll-like Receptors (reviewed in Kawai
and Akira, 2011) continued to bring up the questions in meetings whether
a similar situation might not prevail, or at least occur, in insects. In 1999,
Elena Levashina, Emma Langley, Jean-Marc Reichhart and colleagues, when
analysing loss-of-function mutants for a gene encoding an inhibitor of serine
proteases, the serpin Necrotic, found that a proteolytic cascade leads to the

                                                                              15


cleavage of Spätzle in the blood of adult flies and can activate Toll (Levashina
et al., 1999). This cascade is different from that which cleaves Spätzle during
embryogenesis, as already noted by Bruno Lemaitre (Lemaitre et al., 1996).
Biochemical analysis by Nick Gay (Cambridge) and Jean-Luc Imler in the
laboratory further showed that proteolytic processing of Spätzle allows its
binding with high affinity to the Toll extracellular domain, thus triggering
the intracellular signalling cascade (Weber et al., 2003). It is of interest here
to mention that Spätzle is a member of a family of neurotrophin-like proteins
that play essential roles in the development of the nervous system (Parker et
al., 2001; Zhu et al., 2008). Of the six members of this family (now referred
to as DNT- Drosophila neurotrophins) only one member, i.e., Spätzle, has con-
clusively been shown to date to activate an immune response – in addition to
its developmental role. Why evolution has selected one Toll member out of a
family of nine, and one Spätzle/DNT out of a family of six to play an immune
function, is one of the intriguing questions in this field.
   Experiments performed by Bruno Lemaitre in 1997 had indicated that
the Drosophila innate immune system is able to discriminate between various
classes of invading microbes (Lemaitre et al., 1997). Expression data of vari-
ous antimicrobial peptide genes in response to various microbial challenges
indeed showed that the IMD pathway is strongly induced by Gram-negative
bacteria and Gram-positive bacilli (which contain a peptidoglycan in their
envelope which is distinct from that of other Gram-positive bacteria, see
below). In contrast, the Toll pathway is stimulated preferentially by fungi
and Gram-positive bacteria, and to a lesser extent by Gram-negative bacteria.
These findings suggested the existence of receptors able to discriminate
between these various classes of microorganisms. When we finally addressed
this question around 2000, the genome of Drosophila had been sequenced
and many candidate genes attracted interest. However, the answers to the
questions regarding the identities of the receptors for microbial ligands with
potential to activate NF-κB, came from unbiased genetic approaches, which
had been initiated in our laboratory by Dominique Ferrandon in 1995 on
the second chromosome and by Louisa Wu and Kathryn Anderson (Wu et
al., 2001) on the third chromosome. In essence, the Ferrandon screen in
Strasbourg was initially based on large-scale EMS mutagenesis using trans-
genic flies expressing distinct reporter genes as read-outs for each pathway
(Jung et al., 2001). These screens and later, additional ones performed by
the Lemaitre (by then at Gif-sur-Yvette) (X chromosome) and Schneider
(Stanford) (P-element insertions) laboratories identified several genes in the
IMD pathway, as described below. The Ferrandon screen as based on the use
of a dual reporter system, also allowed identifying genes involved in the Toll
pathway, for instance the only known Dif point mutants (Rutschmann et al.,
2000a). By applying the unbiased reporter screening approach on the first
chromosome, Julien Royet isolated in 2001 the first mutant fly line in which
the Toll pathway was not activated by Gram-positive bacteria, but was still re-
sponsive to fungal infection (Michel et al., 2001). Upon cloning, the mutated
gene turned out to be Peptidoglycan Recognition Protein-SA, a member of

16


a protein family previously characterised in Lepidoptera (Kang et al. 1998;
Ochiai et al., 1999). Genomic data mining and expression profile studies by
Dan Hultmark, Håkan Steiner and colleagues later established that Drosophila
encodes 13 members of the PGRP family of proteins (Werner et al., 2000).
They are either circulating, intracellular or transmembrane proteins (Figure
9) and have in common a domain (called PGRP homology domain) that is
derived from an evolutionary ancient amidase enzyme, already present in
some bacteriophages. Remarkably, the amidase function is conserved in 7
out of the 13 fly PGRPs whereas the others have lost their catalytic function
and today serve as recognition PGRPs (reviewed in Royet and Dziarski,
2007). Shortly after the identification of PGRP-SA, Dominique Ferrandon
and Julien Royet demonstrated that one of the transmembrane PGRP family
members, that is PGRP-LC, is required for activation of the IMD pathway
and resistance to Gram-negative bacteria (Gottar et al., 2002). The role of
PGRP-LC was independently established, at the same time, in the laborato-
ries of Kathryn Anderson (Choe et al., 2002) and Alan Ezekowitz (Rämet et
al., 2002). Biochemical and structural studies performed by several groups
subsequently established that the PGRP homology domain has a well-defined
groove to which peptidoglycan binds for enzymatic cleavage, or for recogni-
tion (Chang et al., 2004; Chang et al., 2006; Lim et al., 2006). Importantly,
depending on the PGRP member, the groove can selectively bind a Lysine-
type peptidoglycan which is predominant in most Gram-positive bacteria or
alternatively, a diaminopimelic acid form of peptidoglycan which is typical
for Gram-negative bacteria (these amino acids are in position 3 of the stem
peptides linking the two glycan chains of peptidoglycan (Leulier et al., 2003;
Kaneko al., 2004; see also the reviews of Royet and Dziarski, 2007 and Royet
et al., 2011 for PGRPs in general).
   The detection of microorganisms is, however, not restricted to the PGRP




Figure 9.


                                                                           17


family and involves a second family, the GNBP/ßGRP family. Dominique
Ferrandon in the laboratory demonstrated that a circulating protein that
interacts with fungal ß-(1,3)-glucan triggers the proteolytic cascade leading
to the cleavage of Spätzle and the activation of the Toll pathway (Figure 10)
(Gottar et al., 2006; Mishima et al., 2009). This protein, GNBP3, is a member
of a small family of proteins initially characterised in the silkworm Bombyx
mori. The first member was reported to bind Gram-negative bacteria, hence
the name GNBP for Gram-negative binding protein (Lee et al., 1996). The
GNBP3 orthologue of B.mori had originally been identified in the Ashida
laboratory for its ability to bind to ß-(1,3)-glucans and trigger the phenol-
oxidase cascade (Ochiai et al., 1988; see also Ochiai et al., 2000). Of note,
another Drosophila member of the family, GNBP1, appears to function as
a coreceptor of PGRP-SA for the detection of Lys-type peptidoglycan Gram-
positive bacteria, both in Diptera and Coleoptera (Gobert et al., 2003; Filipe
et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2006a; Park et al., 2007).




Figure 10.


   Figure 11 summarizes our view as it had emerged in the early 2000s. Two
essential microbial inducers, i.e. Lys-PGN and ß-Glucan trigger the Toll
pathway by activating an upstream proteolytic cascade upon recognition
by PGRPs or GNBPs respectively. In addition, as shown by Dominique
Ferrandon and Jean-Marc Reichhart, proteases secreted by invading
entomopathogenic fungi, or bacteria, interact with a dedicated circulating
serine-protease (dubbed Persephone by Petros Ligoxygakis, see Ligoxygakis et
al., 2002) which also feeds into the proteolytic cascade upstream of Spätzle
and Toll (Gottar et al., 2006; El Chamy et al., 2008). Thus the systemic
immune response of Drosophila is not only activated by “pattern recogni-
tions receptors” (Janeway, 1989) but also by sensing the catalytic activity of
microbial virulence factors. The IMD pathway, in turn, is activated via a direct

18


interaction of DAP-PGN with the transmembrane PGRP-LC. In this case, no
evidence exists for a circulating amplification cascade, as opposed to the
interaction described above for Toll activation. Studies in several groups
have identified most of the players of the proteolytic cascades upstream of
Spätzle. The ultimate protease, termed Spätzle Processing Enzyme (SPE),
was identified in 2006 by Won-Jae Lee and colleagues (Jang et al., 2006). The
molecular mechanisms that lead from binding of ß-glucans to GNBP-3 or of
Lys-peptidoglycan to PGRP-SA, to activation of the upstream serine proteases
are still under investigation.




Figure 11.


   We and others have devoted many efforts to decipher the intracellular
pathways which lead to the expression of antimicrobial peptide genes
downstream of either the Toll or the PGRP-LC transmembrane proteins.
A simplified picture is presented for both pathways in Figures 12 and 13.
Basically, both pathways direct activation of dormant cytoplasmic NF-κB
family members. These are in the case of the Toll pathway the Dorsal or
DIF proteins in larvae or the sole DIF protein in adults (Meng et al., 1999;
Manfruelli et al. 1999; Rutschman et al., 2000a). Both proteins are retained
in the cytoplasm by their interactions with the ankyrin-repeat inhibitor pro-
tein Cactus. Phosphorylation of Cactus leads to the dissociation from either
Dorsal and/or DIF and to subsequent degradation of the inhibitor by the
proteasome. Upon the ensuing nuclear translocation, Dorsal or DIF control
the expression of hundreds of immune response genes, predominantly but
not exclusively, in fat body cells. Prominent among these is the antifungal

                                                                          19


                                                                      Figure 12.




Figure 13.

peptide Drosomycin and a significant number of small (3-9kDa) peptides
(Uttenweiler-Joseph et al., 1998), the functions of which have eluded analysis
so far. The molecular mechanisms linking the binding of Spätzle to the
phosphorylation of Cactus warrant further investigation. Recent studies
have proposed that the Spätzle-Toll complex is internalised into endocytic

20


vesicles (Huang et al., 2010; Lund et al., 2010). The kinase Pelle, which is
present in the Toll-receptor-adaptor complex together with MyD88 and the
death domain protein Tube, has similarities to mammalian IRAKs (Towb et
al., 2009). Pelle does not appear to act as the Cactus-kinase (Grosshans et al.,
1994), and this kinase still remains to be identified, in spite of many efforts
in the recent past by several laboratories. In the case of the IMD pathway, the
NF-κB family member controlling immune gene expression is called Relish.
This large-sized protein, identified by Dan Hultmark in 1996, carries at its
C-terminus, the inhibitory functions of Cactus (ankyrin repeats) (Dushay
et al., 1996). Activation of Relish consequently occurs via a proteolytic
cleavage roughly in the middle of the protein (Stöven et al., 2000; Leulier
et al., 2000; Stöven et al., 2003; Ertürk-Hasdemir et al., 2009). Cleaved
Relish translocates into the nucleus to control expression of antimicrobial
peptides. As for the Toll intracellular signalling cascade, the IMD pathway
is as yet not completely understood in mechanistic terms. Activation of the
PGRP-LC receptor (which comes in three distinct splice isoforms, Werner
et al., 2000) by binding to DAP-Peptidoglycan (Leulier et al., 2003) leads
to the association of a protein complex involving the adaptor protein IMD
(Choe et al., 2005; Kaneko et al., 2006), the caspase-8 homologue DREDD,
the homologue of mammalian FADD (Naitza et al., 2002; Leulier et al., 2002)
and the inhibitor of Apoptosis DIAP2 (Kleino et al., 2005, Gesellchen et al.,
2005). This complex activates the MAP-3 kinase TAK1 (associated with the
non catalytic protein TAB 2) via an as yet undefined mechanism (Vidal et al.,
2001; Silverman et al., 2003) that in turn phosphorylates both IRD5 (Lu et
al., 2001), a fly homologue of mammalian IKKβ (Silverman et al., 2000) and
the JUN-kinase pathway (Silverman et al., 2003). The IKK beta homologue
IRD5 in turn associates with a homologue of mammalian IKKγ (Kenny)
(Rutschman et al., 2000b) leading to phosphorylation of Relish (Silverman
et al., 2000). Relish is thought to be cleaved by the Caspase DREDD, followed
by the nuclear translocation of the N-terminal, phosphorylated part, and par-
ticipates in the control of gene expression, and namely of the genes encod-
ing Diptericin and Drosocin (Leulier et al., 2000; Stöven et al., 2000; Stöven
et al., 2003; Ertürk-Hasdemir et al., 2009). As is the case for the Toll pathway,
the IMD cascade controls the expression not only of antimicrobial peptides,
but of many hundreds of other immune genes the functions of which remain
mostly poorly understood in the context of the antimicrobial defences. Some
evidence suggests that DIAP2 (in conjunction with its associated proteins
Ue1va and Ubc13) functions as an E3 ligase that K63-ubiquitinates IMD, the
TAB2 protein (associated with TAK1) and the IKKγ homologue Kenny. It is
plausible that polyubiquitin chains bring many of the members of this signal-
ling cascade into close proximity, as suggested recently by Neal Silverman
(Paquette et al., 2010 and references therein). With Hidehiro Fukuyama
in the laboratory, we have recently engaged on a functional analysis of the
interactome of the IMD pathway proteins and detected protein-protein inter-
actions between the eleven canonical members of the pathway described so
far and a total of more than 300 proteins. Functional characterisation of the

                                                                              21


newly-identified genes is currently under way, but RNAi knockdown of many
of them affects IMD signalling. Significantly, half of the proteins yielding a
phenotype under these conditions are conserved between flies and mammals
(Fukuyama et al. in preparation).


CONCLUDING REMARKS AND PERSPECTIVES
Innate immunity was a relatively neglected field of research twenty years ago.
Insects were considered by most immunologists at that time to be too primi-
tive and distant from mammals to represent an interesting model. Indeed,
the second half of the 20th century was a time of ground-breaking discover-
ies on the roles of lymphocytes, the generation of very large repertoires of
antigen receptors, clonal expansion and memory cells. Nevertheless, inverte-
brates, including the extremely large class of insects, represent around
95% of all living species on earth today, and they apparently cope well with
invading microbes by solely relying on innate immunity. A primary incentive
to start our studies was to unravel the mechanisms of this remarkable resist-
ance. It was the physico-chemical identification of the molecules responsible
for the “humoral immunity” observed by Glaser and Paillot, which gave us
an opening into the field, once these methods had been introduced into
our laboratory. The initial identification of the linear antimicrobial peptide
cecropin by Hans Boman in butterflies, and our subsequent characterisation
of disulphide-bridged inducible peptides in fruit flies, were essential steps
that provided us with an easily amenable system to analyse the upstream
mechanisms of this defence. It is now understood that all multicellular or-
ganisms (animals as well as plants) produce antimicrobial peptides for their
defences. Most of these molecules are small-sized, cationic, and membrane-
active. Although they show a great diversity during evolution, some are re-
markably similar between groups. To give just one example, Mihai Netea and
colleagues (Simon et al., 2008) have recently identified an antimicrobial pep-
tide in human skin, which is structurally so close to Drosophila Drosomycin
that they named it Human Drosomycin Like peptide. Whether this similarity
reflects convergent evolution or a common ancestry remains an open ques-
tion. Antimicrobial peptides are mostly expressed in the various zoological
groups on barrier epithelia and in blood cells. In recent insect groups (ho-
lometabolous orders) they are in addition secreted into the blood stream to
oppose microbes that have succeeded in breaching epithelial barriers (Tzou
et al., 2000). We do not yet know how widespread this “systemic response” is
among the various zoological groups, in addition to the common “epithelial
response”.
   Antimicrobial peptide genes are mostly expressed under the control of
the transcriptional activator NF-κB, which has by now been found in nearly
every animal group (an exception is C. elegans, which appears to have lost a
number of pathways). Strikingly, the intracellular signalling cascades that
lead to the activation of NF-κB during immune responses show marked
similarities throughout evolution. These similarities are not only structural,

22


but also functional, as illustrated by the comparison between Drosophila and
mice. Obviously, much of our information on the gene products in these
cascades still relies on data mining of recently sequenced genomes, but as
more and more experimental data become available, they tend to confirm
the assumption of a high degree of functional conservation in the NF-κB
activating cascades during evolution (see for example recent studies on the
sea anemone Nematostella vectensis (Wolenski et al., 2011) (Figure 14).




Figure 14.



   Finally, we now know that Toll transmembrane receptors are present
through evolution from Sponges to Mammals. Tolls are typically associations
between extracellular leucine-rich recognition/interaction domains and in-
tracellular TIR domains which often associate with adaptor proteins to signal
to immune responsive transactivators (and namely to NF-κB). These domains
of Toll show structural variabilities, in particular as regards the extracellular
domains, which can have variable numbers and positions of cysteine clusters.
Phylogenetic trees illustrate the high degree of complexity in the evolution
of the Toll family (Roach et al., 2005). We also have to be aware that in
invertebrates at least, Tolls can have developmental as well as defence roles.
Whether this duality evolved very early in life history and when/why it was
lost, is one of the challenging questions.
   Drosophila is generally credited with having significantly contributed to
a renewed interest in innate immunity and to our present view of a high
conservation of its molecular and cellular mechanisms throughout evolution.
Using a metaphor of which Hans Boman was fond, we may ask here as a

                                                                              23


final reflexion, which are today the Golden Apples of the Hesperides in the
orchard of the studies on fruit fly immune defences?
   A first obvious apple relates to the study of antiviral defences. Drosophila is
under the continuous threat of viral infections and several defence mecha-
nisms have been unravelled over the last decade. Paramount among these is
RNA interference (Galiana-Arnoux et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2006b; van Rij et
al. 2006), but viral infections also induce the expression of genes encoding
polypeptides with poorly understood roles in opposing the development
of viruses (see e.g., Deddouche et al., 2008). Viral infections have also been
shown to induce cytokine productions which lead to some gene reprogram-
ming via the conserved JAK-STAT pathway (Dostert et al., 2005). A possible
role in the fight against viruses of the Toll and IMD pathways discussed above
in the context of antibacterial and antifungal defences, has been proposed.
Further investigations are required to substantiate this involvement and to
define the levels at which genes of these pathways could play a role in the
control of the viral load (reviewed in Imler and Hoffmann, 2012; see also
references therein).
   A second apple in the orchard is the rapidly evolving field of epithelial
immune defences in Drosophila, and namely of the gut and tracheal epithelia.
Significant progress has been made recently in this field and it is now un-
derstood that the IMD, and not the Toll, pathway mediates the induction of
antimicrobial peptide expression in epithelia (Ferrandon et al., 1998, Tzou
et al., 2000; Liehl et al., 2006; Ryu et al., 2006, Nehme et al., 2007). However,
its activation is finely regulated at multiple levels by negative feedback loops,
especially in the intestinal epithelium so as to tolerate commensal microbiota
(Ryu et al., 2008; Lhocine et al., 2008, Ragab et al., 2011). Of note, antimi-
crobial peptide-mediated responses are complemented in the gut by a potent
reactive oxygen species response generated by the dual oxidase enzyme (Ha
et al., 2005).
   A third apple is the deciphering of Drosophila defence reactions in a non-
infectious context. As already pointed out in this text, a series of instances
have been reported in which the IMD pathway (and probably also the Toll
pathway) are activated by endogenous ligands. Our information on the
endogenous inducers and their receptors is almost non-existent. There are
potential parallels here with mammalian responses to so-called “danger
signals” (Gallucci and Matzinger, 2001) and this field of research is bound to
attract much interest in the future. Possibly some, if not many, of the genes
induced by the IMD and Toll pathways, and whose roles we fail to understand
in the present “anti-infectious context”, are functionally related to responses
to endogenous ligands. It remains to be established whether some of these
target genes might be involved in another facet of host defence that has
been referred to initially as tolerance by phytopathologists (Schneider and
Ayres, 2008) (endurance, homeostasis). Briefly, this relates to the ability of
the organism to withstand and repair damage inflicted either by microbial
virulence factors or by the host’s own immune response. This concept is well
illustrated by the proliferation of intestinal stem cells that compensates the

24


loss of apoptotic enterocytes and thus maintains the homeostasis of the intes-
tinal epithelium (Cronin et al., 2009; Jiang et al., 2009; Buchon et al., 2009).
   Insects are the largest group of extant species, as outlined at the begin-
ning of this presentation. Insect immunity can of course not be restricted
to that of Drosophila. At the present time, studies on immune defences
are performed on several species representative of various orders such as
Hymenoptera, Coleoptera, and Lepidoptera. Of particular medical interest
are investigations on disease transmitting insects such as mosquitoes. To give
but one example, the antiparasitic reactions of the vector insect Anopheles
towards Plasmodium species, have been the focus of intense research in a
dozen of groups over the last 20 years. Cellular and molecular analyses of
these reactions have shed significant insights into the mechanisms that the
mosquito uses to oppose invading parasites, and have namely unravelled the
roles of complement-like proteins (thioester containing proteins, TEPs) in
parasite killing – a process not paralleled in Drosophila in which the role of
TEPs is still not well understood (Levashina et al., 2001; Blandin et al., 2004;
Blandin et al., 2009). Mosquitoes also transmit viruses of great impact on
human health, and here the investigations show marked parallels with the
antiviral reactions of fruit flies. In particular, RNA interference and inducible
responses regulated by the JAK/STAT pathways appear to be shared assets of
antiviral host defences in flies and mosquitoes (Fragkoudis et al. 2009).
   In ending this presentation, I would simply like to remind the reader
that it was not intended to be a classical review, but rather a narrative of our
work on innate immunity put into a historical and societal context. Many
aspects of Drosophila antimicrobial defences are therefore understandably not
covered here (for detailed reviews, see e.g. Lemaitre and Hoffmann, 2007;
Ferrandon et al., 2007; Aggarwal and Silverman, 2008).
   My final message will be to young scientists who feel interested in the stud-
ies presented here and who ponder whether or not to engage in this field:
our investigations so far have really only touched the tip of the iceberg of
invertebrate immunity and many important discoveries lie ahead for the next
generation. The methodologies for this type of research have evolved beyond
what I could ever have dreamt of, and our current understanding of the
evolution of the innate immune system warrants that the results that will be
obtained with insect studies will be one way or another relevant throughout
the whole phylogenetic spectrum, including humans (Figure 15).




                                                                              25


Figure 15.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

It goes without saying that the scientific achievements of our laboratory over
the many years, as recounted above, are to be credited to a long list of col-
laborators of high intellectual and human calibre. Many in this list are now
Distinguished Class Professors and Directors of Scientific Departments or
heads of well-recognised groups in the field, in this and in other countries.
I express my deep admiration and warm gratitude to all of them, and in
particular to Marie Lagueux, Charles Hetru, Jean-Marc Reichhart, Jean-
Luc Dimarcq (Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire, Strasbourg), Marie Meister
(Zoological Museum, Strasbourg), Philippe Bulet (Grenoble), Bruno
Lemaitre (EPFL, Lausanne), Elena Levashina (Strasbourg/MPI Berlin),
Jean-Luc Imler, Dominique Ferrandon, Julien Royet (IBDM Marseille) and
Christine Kappler, for their exceptional contributions to our common en-
deavour. I am further indebted to many colleagues from other institutions
in various countries and would like to make a special mention here of Alan
Ezekowitz, who has accepted to do a critical reading of the present text. I
warmly remember very constructive discussions with Charlie Janeway, Fotis
Kafatos and Shunji Natori. Since the early 2000s, we have had a close interac-
tion with Bruce Beutler and Shizuo Akira on the phylogeny of antiviral de-
fences. I would like to warmly thank Charles Hetru, Dominique Ferrandon,
Jean-Luc Imler, Jean-Marc Reichhart, Elena Levashina, Jean-Luc Dimarcq
and Christine Kappler for their dedicated and constructive help in the prepa-
ration of this text and its illustrations. I would also like to acknowledge the
significant contributions of many colleagues from other laboratories world-
wide to the field of insect immunity, and in particular that of the colleagues

26


of the Boman group in Stockholm. Our studies were supported by the
French National Research Agency CNRS, the University of Strasbourg, the
Human Science Frontiers Program, the European Union, the US National
Institutes of Health, the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale and the
companies Rhone-Poulenc, Exelixis and EntoMed.


REFERENCES
Adams, M.D., Celniker, S.E., Holt, R.A., Evans, C.A., Gocayne, J.D., Amanatides, P.G.,
     Scherer, S.E., Li, P.W., Hoskins, R.A., Galle, R.F., et al. (2000), “The genome sequence
     of Drosophila melanogaster,” Science 287, 2185–2195.
Aggarwal, K., Silverman, N. (2008), “Positive and negative regulation of the Drosophila
     immune response,” BMB Rep. 41(4):267–77.
Akhouayri, I., Turc, C., Royet, J., Charroux, B. (2011), “Toll-8/Tollo negatively regulates
     antimicrobial response in the Drosophila respiratory epithelium,” PLoS Pathog.
     7(10):e1002319.
Alder, M.N., Herrin, B.R., Sadlonova, A., Stockard, C.R., Grizzle, W.E., Gartland, L.A.,
     Gartland, G.L., Boydston, J.A., Turnbough, C.L. Jr, Cooper, M.D. (2008), “Antibody
     responses of variable lymphocyte receptors in the lamprey,” Nat Immunol. 9(3):319–
     27.
Anderson, K.V., Bokla, L., Nüsslein-Volhard, C. (1985a), “Establishment of dorsal-ventral
     polarity in the Drosophila embryo: the induction of polarity by the Toll gene product,”
     Cell 42(3):791–8.
Anderson, K.V., Jürgens, G., Nüsslein-Volhard, C. (1985b), “Establishment of dorsal-ventral
     polarity in the Drosophila embryo: Genetic studies on the role of the Toll gene prod-
     uct,” Cell 42(3):779–89.
Åsling, B., Dushay, M.S., Hultmark, D. (1995), “Identification of early genes in the
     Drosophila immune response by PCR-based differential display: the Attacin A gene
     and the evolution of attacin-like proteins,” Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 25(4):511–8.
Belvin, M.P., Anderson, K.V. (1996), “A conserved signaling pathway: The Drosophila Toll-
     dorsal pathway,” Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 12:393–416.
Blandin, S., Shiao, S.H., Moita, L.F., Janse, C.J., Waters, A.P., Kafatos, F.C., Levashina, E.A.
     (2004), “Complement-like protein TEP1 is a determinant of vectorial capacity in the
     malaria vector Anopheles gambiae,” Cell 116(5):661–70.
Blandin, S.A., Wang-Sattler, R., Lamacchia, M., Gagneur, J., Lycett, G., Ning, Y., Levashina,
     E.A., Steinmetz, L.M. (2009), “Dissecting the genetic basis of resistance to malaria
     parasites in Anopheles gambiae,” Science 326(5949):147–50.
Boutros, M., Agaisse, H., Perrimon, N. (2002), “Sequential activation of signaling pathways
     during innate immune responses in Drosophila,” Dev Cell. 3(5):711–22.
Buchon, N., Broderick, N.A., Chakrabarti, S., Lemaitre, B. (2009), “Invasive and indig-
     enous microbiota impact intestinal stem cell activity through multiple pathways in
     Drosophila,” Genes Dev. 23(19):2333–44.
Butenandt, A., and Karlson, P. (1954), “Über die Isolierung eines Metamorphose-
     Hormone der Insekten in kristallisierter Form,”Z. Naturforsch. 9b, 389–391.
Chang, C.I., Pili-Floury, S.S., Herve, M., Parquet, C., Chelliah, Y., Lemaitre, B., Mengin-
     Lecreulx, D., Deisenhofer, J. (2004), “A Drosophila pattern recognition receptor
     contains a peptidoglycan docking groove and unusual l,d-carboxypeptidase activity,”
     PLoS Biol 2, E277.
Chang, C.I., Chelliah, Y., Borek, D., Mengin-Lecreulx, D., Deisenhofer J., (2006),
     “Structure of tracheal cytotoxin in complex with a heterodimeric pattern-recognition
     receptor,” Science 311(5768):1761–4.




                                                                                            27


Choe, K.M., Werner, T., Stöven, S., Hultmark, D., Anderson, K.V. (2002), “Requirement for
     a peptidoglycan recognition protein (PGRP) in Relish activation and antibacterial
     immune responses in Drosophila,” Science 296(5566):359–62.
Choe, K.M., Lee, H., Anderson, K.V. (2005), “Drosophila peptidoglycan recognition pro-
     tein LC (PGRP-LC) acts as a signal-transducing innate immune receptor,” Proc Natl
     Acad Sci USA. 102(4):1122–6.
Cronin, S.J., Nehme, N.T., Limmer, S., Liegeois, S., Pospisilik, J.A., Schramek, D.,
     Leibbrandt, A., Simoes Rde, M., Gruber, S., Puc, U., Ebersberger, I., Zoranovic, T.,
     Neely, G.G., von Haeseler, A., Ferrandon, D., Penninger, J.M. (2009), “Genome-wide
     RNAi screen identifies genes involved in intestinal pathogenic bacterial infection,”
     Science 325(5938):340–3.
De Gregorio, E., Spellman, P.T., Rubin, G.M., Lemaitre, B. (2001), “Genome-wide analysis
     of the Drosophila immune response by using oligonucleotide microarrays,” Proc Natl
     Acad Sci USA. 98(22):12590–5.
De Gregorio, E., Spellman, P.T., Tzou, P., Rubin, G.M., Lemaitre, B. (2002), “The Toll
     and Imd pathways are the major regulators of the immune response in Drosophila,”
     EMBO J. 21(11):2568–79.
Deddouche, S., Matt, N., Budd, A., Mueller, S., Kemp, C., Galiana-Arnoux, D., Dostert,
     C., Antoniewski, C., Hoffmann, J.A., Imler, J.L. (2008), “The DExD/H-box helicase
     Dicer-2 mediates the induction of antiviral activity in drosophila,” Nat Immunol.
     9(12):1425–32.
Dimarcq, J.L., Keppi, E., Dunbar, B., Lambert, J., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, D., Rankine,
     S.M., Fothergill, J.E., Hoffmann J.A. (1988), “Insect immunity. Purification and char-
     acterization of a family of novel inducible antibacterial proteins from immunized
     larvae of the dipteran Phormia terranovae and complete amino-acid sequence of the
     predominant member, diptericin A,” Eur J Biochem. 171(1-2):17–22.
Dimarcq, J.L., Hoffmann D., Meister, M., Bulet, P., Lanot, R., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann,
     J.A. (1994), “Characterization and transcriptional profiles of a Drosophila gene en-
     coding an insect defensin. A study in insect immunity,” Eur J Biochem. 221(1):201–9.
Dostert, C., Jouanguy, E., Irving, P., Troxler, L., Galiana-Arnoux, D., Hetru, C., Hoffmann,
     J.A., Imler, J.L. (2005), “The Jak-STAT signaling pathway is required but not sufficient
     for the antiviral response of Drosophila,” Nat Immunol. 6(9):946–53.
Dushay, M.S., Asling, B., Hultmark, D. (1996), “Origins of immunity: Relish, a compound
     Rel-like gene in the antibacterial defense of Drosophila,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
     93(19):10343–7.
El Chamy, L., Leclerc, V., Caldelari, I., Reichhart, J.M. (2008), “Sensing of ‘danger signals’
     and pathogen-associated molecular patterns defines binary signaling pathways ‘up-
     stream’ of Toll,” Nat Immunol. 9(10):1165–70.
Engström, Y., Kadalayil, L., Sun, S.C., Samakovlis, C., Hultmark, D., Faye, I. (1993), “kappa
     B-like motifs regulate the induction of immune genes in Drosophila,” J Mol Biol.
     232(2):327–33.
Ertürk-Hasdemir, D., Broemer, M., Leulier, F., Lane, W.S., Paquette, N., Hwang, D., Kim,
     C.H., Stöven, S., Meier, P., Silverman, N. (2009), “Two roles for the Drosophila IKK
     complex in the activation of Relish and the induction of antimicrobial peptide
     genes,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 106(24):9779–84.
Fehlbaum, P., Bulet, P., Michaut, L., Lagueux, M., Broekaert, W.F., Hetru, C., Hoffmann,
     J.A. (1994), “Insect immunity. Septic injury of Drosophila induces the synthesis of a
     potent antifungal peptide with sequence homology to plant antifungal peptides,” J
     Biol Chem. 269(52):33159–63.
Ferrandon, D., Jung, A.C., Criqui, M., Lemaitre, B., Uttenweiler-Joseph, S., Michaut, L.,
     Reichhart, J., Hoffmann, J.A. (1998), “A drosomycin-GFP reporter transgene reveals
     a local immune response in Drosophila that is not dependent on the Toll pathway,”
     EMBO J. 17(5):1217–27.




28


Ferrandon, D., Imler, J.L., Hetru, C., Hoffmann, J.A. (2007), “The Drosophila systemic im-
      mune response: sensing and signalling during bacterial and fungal infections,” Nat
      Rev Immunol. 7(11):862–74.
Filipe, S.R., Tomasz, A., Ligoxygakis, P. (2005), “Requirements of peptidoglycan structure
      that allow detection by the Drosophila Toll pathway,” EMBO Rep 6(4): 327–333
Fragkoudis, R., Attarzadeh-Yazdi, G., Nash, A.A., Fazakerley, J.K., Kohl, A. (2009),
      “Advances in dissecting mosquito innate immune responses to arbovirus infection,” J
      Gen Virol. 90(Pt 9):2061–72.
Fraser, I.P., Koziel, H., and Ezekowitz, R.A.B. (1998), “The serum mannose-binding protein
      and the macrophage mannose receptor are pattern recognition molecules that link
      innate and adaptive immunity,” Seminars Immunol 10:363–372.
Galiana-Arnoux, D., Dostert, C., Schneemann, A., Hoffmann, J.A., Imler, J.L. (2006),
      “Essential function in vivo for Dicer-2 in host defense against RNA viruses in dros-
      ophila,” Nat Immunol. 7(6):590–7.
Gallucci, S., Matzinger, P. (2001), “Danger signals: SOS to the immune system,” Curr Opin
      Immunol. 13(1):114–9.
Gateff, E. (1978), “Malignant neoplasms of genetic origin in Drosophila melanogaster,”
      Science 200(4349):1448–59.
Gay, N.J., Keith, F.J. (1991), “Drosophila Toll and IL-1 receptor,” Nature 351(6325):355–6.
Georgel, P., Meister, M., Kappler, C., Lemaitre, B., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A. (1993),
      “Insect immunity: The diptericin promoter contains multiple functional regula-
      tory sequences homologous to mammalian acute-phase response elements,” Biochem
      Biophys Res Commun. 197(2):508–17.
Georgel, P., Naitza, S., Kappler, C., Ferrandon, D., Zachary, D., Swimmer, C., Kopczynski,
      C., Duyk, G., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A. (2001), “Drosophila immune deficiency
      (IMD) is a death domain protein that activates antibacterial defense and can pro-
      mote apoptosis,” Dev Cell. 1(4):503–14.
Gesellchen, V., Kuttenkeuler, D., Steckel, M., Pelte, N., Boutros, M. (2005), “An RNA in-
      terference screen identifies Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein 2 as a regulator of innate
      immune signalling in Drosophila,” EMBO Rep. 6(10):979–84.
Glaser, R.W. (1918), “On the existence of immunity principles in insects,” Psyche 25, 39–46.
Gobert, V., Gottar, M., Matskevich, A.A., Rutschmann, S., Royet, J., Belvin, M., Hoffmann,
      J.A., Ferrandon, D. (2003), “Dual activation of the Drosophila toll pathway by two
      pattern recognition receptors,” Science 302(5653):2126–30.
Gottar, M., Gobert, V., Michel, T., Belvin, M., Duyk, G., Hoffmann, J.A., Ferrandon, D.,
      Royet, J. (2002), “The Drosophila immune response against Gram-negative bacteria
      is mediated by a peptidoglycan recognition protein,” Nature 416(6881):640–4.
Gottar, M., Gobert, V., Matskevich, A.A., Reichhart, J.M., Wang, C., Butt, T.M., Belvin,
      M., Hoffmann, J.A., Ferrandon, D. (2006), “Dual detection of fungal infections
      in Drosophila via recognition of glucans and sensing of virulence factors,” Cell.
      127(7):1425–37.
Grell, R.F. (1969), “New Mutant Report,” D.I.S., 44:46–47
Grosshans, J., Bergmann, A., Haffter, P., Nüsslein-Volhard, C. (1994) “Activation of the
      kinase Pelle by Tube in the dorsoventral signal transduction pathway of Drosophila
      embryo,” Nature 372(6506):563–6.
Ha, E.M., Oh, C.T., Bae, Y.S., Lee, W.J. (2005), “A direct role for dual oxidase in Drosophila
      gut immunity,” Science 310(5749):847–50.
Hashimoto, C., Hudson, K.L. and Anderson, K.V. (1988), “The Toll gene of Drosophila,
      required for dorsal-ventral embryonic polarity, appears to encode a transmembrane
      protein,” Cell 52, 269–279.
Hoffmann, D., Hultmark, D., Boman, H.G. (1981), “Insect immunity – Galleria mellonella
      and other Lepidoptera have cecropia P9 like factors active against Gram-negative
      bacteria,” Insect Biochem. 11, 537–548.




                                                                                          29


Hoffmann, J.A., Porte, A., Joly, P. (1968), “Sur la nature hématopoiétique de l’”organe
      phagocytaire” (Cuénot) de Gryllus bimaculatus (Orthoptère Ensifère),” C.R. Acad.
      Sciences, Paris 267: 776–777.
Hoffmann, J.A. (1970), “Les organes hématopoiétiques de deux insectes Orthoptères
      Locusta migratoria et Gryllus bimaculatus,” Z. Zellforsch. 106:451–472
Hoffmann, J.A. (1973), “Blood-forming tissues in Orthopteran Insects: an analogue to
      Vertebrate hemopoietic organs,” Experientia 29:50–51
Hoffmann, J.A., Kafatos, F.C., Janeway, C.A., Ezekowitz, R.A. (1999), “Phylogenetic per-
      spectives in innate immunity,” Science 284(5418):1313–8.
Huang, H.R., Chen, Z.J., Kunes, S., Chang, G.D., Maniatis, T. (2010), “Endocytic pathway
      is required for Drosophila Toll innate immune signalling,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
      107(18):8322–7.
Imler, J.L., Hoffmann, J.A. (2012), “Antiviral responses in invertebrates,” in Nucleic acid
      sensors and antiviral immunity, eds. T. Fujita & P. Sambhara, Landes Bioscience, Austin,
      2012.
Ip, Y.T., Reach, M., Engström, Y., Kadalayil, L., Cai, H., González-Crespo, S., Tatei, K.,
      Levine, M. (1993), “Dif, a dorsal-related gene that mediates an immune response in
      Drosophila,” Cell 75(4):753–63.
Irving, P., Troxler, L., Heuer, T.S., Belvin, M., Kopczynski, C., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann,
      J.A., Hetru, C. (2001), “A genome-wide analysis of immune responses in Drosophila,”
      Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98(26):15119–24.
Iwanaga, S. (2002), “The molecular basis of innate immunity in the horseshoe crab,” Curr
      Opin Immunol. 14(1):87–95.
Janeway, C.A. Jr. (1989), “Approaching the asymptote? Evolution and revolution in immu-
      nology,” Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 54 Pt 1:1–13.
Jang, I.H., Chosa, N., Kim, S.H., Nam, H.J., Lemaitre, B., Ochiai, M., Kambris, Z., Brun, S.,
      Hashimoto, C., Ashida, M., Brey, P.T., Lee, W.J. (2006), “A Spätzle-processing enzyme
      required for Toll signaling activation in Drosophila innate immunity,” Dev Cell 10,
      45–55.
Jehle, J.A. (2009), “André Paillot (1885–1944): His work lives on,” J Invertebr Pathol.
      101(3):162–8.
Jiang, H., Patel, P.H., Kohlmaier, A., Grenley, M.O., McEwen, D.G., Edgar, B.A. (2009)
      “Cytokine/Jak/Stat signaling mediates regeneration and homeostasis in the
      Drosophila midgut,” Cell 137(7):1343–55.
Jung, A.C., Criqui, M.C., Rutschmann, S., Hoffmann, J.A., Ferrandon, D. (2001),
      “Microfluorometer assay to measure the expression of beta-galactosidase and
      green fluorescent protein reporter genes in single Drosophila flies,” Biotechniques
      30(3):594–8, 600–1.
Kaneko, T., Goldman, W.E., Mellroth, P., Steiner, H., Fukase, K., Kusumoto, S., Harley,
      W., Fox, A., Golenbock, D., Silverman, N. (2004), “Monomeric and polymeric gram-
      negative peptidoglycan but not purified LPS stimulate the Drosophila IMD pathway,”
      Immunity 20(5):637–49.
Kaneko, T., Yano, T., Aggarwal, K., Lim, J.H., Ueda, K., Oshima, Y., Peach, C., Ertürk-
      Hasdemir, D., Goldman, W.E., Oh, B.H., Kurata, S., Silverman, N. (2006), “PGRP-LC
      and PGRP-LE have essential yet distinct functions in the drosophila immune re-
      sponse to monomeric DAP-type peptidoglycan,” Nat Immunol. 7(7):715–23.
Kang, D., Liu, G., Lundstrom, A., Gelius, E., Steiner, H. (1998), “A peptidoglycan recogni-
      tion protein in innate immunity conserved from insects to humans,” Proc Natl Acad
      Sci USA 95, 10078–10082.
Kappler, C., Meister, M., Lagueux, M., Gateff, E., Hoffmann, J.A., Reichhart, J.M. (1993)
      “Insect immunity. Two 17 bp repeats nesting a kappa B-related sequence confer
      inducibility to the diptericin gene and bind a polypeptide in bacteria-challenged
      Drosophila,” EMBO J. 12(4):1561–8.




30


Karlson, P., Hoffmeister, H., Hummel, H., Hocks, P., Spiteller, G. (1965), “Zur Chemie des
      Ecdysons, VI Reaktionen des Ecdysonmoleküls,” Chem. Ber. 98, 2394–2402.
Kawai, T., Akira, S. (2011), “Toll-like receptors and their crosstalk with other innate recep-
      tors in infection and immunity,” Immunity. 34(5):637–50.
Kleino, A., Valanne, S., Ulvila, J., Kallio, J., Myllymäki, H., Enwald, H., Stöven, S., Poidevin,
      M., Ueda, R., Hultmark, D., Lemaitre B., Rämet, M. (2005), “Inhibitor of apoptosis 2
      and TAK1-binding protein are components of the Drosophila Imd pathway.” EMBO
      J. 24(19):3423–34.
Krieger, M. (1997), “The other side of scavenger receptors: Pattern recognition in host
      defense,” Curr Opin Lipidol. 5:275–280.
Kylsten, P., Samakovlis, C., Hultmark, D. (1990), “The cecropin locus in Drosophila; a
      compact gene cluster involved in the response to infection,” EMBO J. 9(1):217–24.
Lee, W.J., Lee, J.D., Kravchenko, V.V., Ulevitch, R.J., Brey, P.T. (1996), “Purification and
      molecular cloning of an inducible gram-negative bacteria-binding protein from the
      silkworm, Bombyx mori,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93(15):7888–93.
Lemaitre, B., Meister, M., Govind, S., Georgel, P., Steward, R., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann,
      J.A. (1995a), “Functional analysis and regulation of nuclear import of dorsal during
      the immune response in Drosophila,” EMBO J. 14(3):536–45.
Lemaitre, B., Kromer-Metzger, E., Michaut, L., Nicolas, E., Meister, M., Georgel, P.,
      Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A. (1995b), “A recessive mutation, immune deficiency
      (imd), defines two distinct control pathways in the Drosophila host defense,” Proc
      Natl Acad Sci USA 92(21):9465–9.
Lemaitre, B., Nicolas, E., Michaut, L., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A. (1996), “The dors-
      oventral regulatory gene cassette spätzle/Toll/cactus controls the potent antifungal
      response in Drosophila adults,” Cell 86(6):973–83.
Lemaitre, B., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A. (1997), “Drosophila host defense: differ-
      ential induction of antimicrobial peptide genes after infection by various classes of
      microorganisms,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94(26):14614–9.
Lemaitre, B., Hoffmann, J.A. (2007), “The host defense of Drosophila melanogaster,”
      Annu Rev Immunol. 25:697–743.
Leulier, F., Rodriguez, A., Khush, R.S., Abrams, J.M., Lemaitre, B. (2000), “The Drosophila
      caspase Dredd is required to resist Gram-negative bacterial infection,” EMBO Rep.
      1(4):353–8.
Leulier, F., Vidal, S., Saigo, K., Ueda, R., Lemaitre, B. (2002), “Inducible expression of
      double-stranded RNA reveals a role for dFADD in the regulation of the antibacterial
      response in Drosophila adults,” Curr Biol. 12(12):996–1000.
Leulier, F., Parquet, C., Pili-Floury, S., Ryu, J.H., Caroff, M., Lee, W.J., Mengin-Lecreulx,
      D., Lemaitre, B. (2003), “The Drosophila immune system detects bacteria through
      specific peptidoglycan recognition,” Nat Immunol. 4(5):478–84.
Levashina, E.A., Langley, E., Green, C., Gubb, D., Ashburner, M., Hoffmann, J.A.,
      Reichhart, J.M. (1999), “Constitutive activation of Toll-mediated antifungal defense
      in serpin-deficient Drosophila,” Science 285(5435):1917–9.
Levashina, E.A., Moita, L.F., Blandin, S., Vriend, G., Lagueux, M., Kafatos, F.C. (2001),
      “Conserved role of a complement-like protein in phagocytosis revealed by dsRNA
      knockout in cultured cells of the mosquito, Anopheles gambiae,” Cell 104(5):709–18.
Lhocine, N., Ribeiro, P.S., Buchon, N., Wepf, A., Wilson, R., Tenev, T., Lemaitre, B.,
      Gstaiger, M., Meier, P., Leulier, F. (2008), “PIMS modulates immune tolerance
      by negatively regulating Drosophila innate immune signalling,” Cell Host Microbe
      4(2):147–58.
Liehl, P., Blight, M., Vodovar, N., Boccard, F., Lemaitre, B. (2006), “Prevalence of local
      immune response against oral infection in a Drosophila/Pseudomonas infection
      model,” PLoS Pathog. 2(6):e56.
Ligoxygakis, P., Pelte, N., Hoffmann, J.A., Reichhart, J.M. (2002), “Activation of Drosophila
      Toll during fungal infection by a blood serine protease,” Science 297(5578):114–6.



                                                                                             31


Lim, J.H., Kim, M.S., Kim, H.E., Yano, T., Oshima, Y., Aggarwal, K., Goldman, W.E.,
      Silverman, N., Kurata, S., Oh, B.H. (2006), “Structural basis for preferential recogni-
      tion of diaminopimelic acid-type peptidoglycan by a subset of peptidoglycan recogni-
      tion proteins,” J Biol Chem. 281(12):8286–95.
Lu, Y., Wu, L.P., Anderson, K.V. (2001), “The antibacterial arm of the drosophila innate
      immune response requires an IkappaB kinase,” Genes Dev. 15(1):104–10.
Lund, V.K., DeLotto, Y., DeLotto, R. (2010), “Endocytosis is required for Toll signaling and
      shaping of the Dorsal/NF-kappaB morphogen gradient during Drosophila embryo-
      genesis,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(42):18028–33.
Manfruelli, P., Reichhart, J.M., Steward, R., Hoffmann, J.A., Lemaitre, B. (1999), “A mosaic
      analysis in Drosophila fat body cells of the control of antimicrobial peptide genes by
      the Rel proteins Dorsal and DIF,” EMBO J. 18(12):3380–91.
Medzhitov, R., Preston-Hurlburt, P., Janeway, C.A. Jr. (1997), “A human homologue
      of the Drosophila Toll protein signals activation of adaptive immunity,” Nature.
      388(6640):394–7.
Meister, M., Braun, A., Kappler, C., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A. (1994), “Insect im-
      munity: A transgenic analysis in Drosophila defines several functional domains in the
      diptericin promoter,” EMBO J. 13(24):5958–66.
Meng, X., Khanuja, B.S., Ip, Y.T. (1999), “Toll receptor-mediated Drosophila immune re-
      sponse requires Dif, an NF-kappaB factor,” Genes Dev. 13(7):792–7.
Metchnikoff, E. (1884). “Untersuchung über die intracellular Verdauung bei Wirbellosen
      Tieren,” Arbeiten aus dem zoologischen Institut der universität zu Wien 2, 241.
Michel, T., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A., Royet, J. (2001), “Drosophila Toll is activated
      by Gram-positive bacteria through a circulating peptidoglycan recognition protein,”
      Nature 414(6865):756–9.
Mishima, Y., Quintin, J., Aimanianda, V., Kellenberger, C., Coste, F., Clavaud, C., Hetru, C.,
      Hoffmann, J.A., Latgé, J.P., Ferrandon, D., Roussel, A. (2009), “The N-terminal do-
      main of Drosophila Gram-negative binding protein 3 (GNBP3) defines a novel family
      of fungal pattern recognition receptors,” J Biol Chem. 284(42):28687–97.
Naitza, S., Rossé, C., Kappler, C., Georgel, P., Belvin, M., Gubb, D., Camonis, J., Hoffmann,
      J.A., Reichhart, J.M. (2002), “The Drosophila immune defense against gram-negative
      infection requires the death protein dFADD,” Immunity 17(5):575–81.
Narbonne-Reveau, K., Charroux, B., Royet, J. (2011), “Lack of an antibacterial response
      defect in Drosophila Toll-9 mutant,” PLoS One. 6(2):e17470.
Nehme, N.T., Liégeois, S., Kele, B., Giammarinaro, P., Pradel, E., Hoffmann, J.A., Ewbank,
      J.J., Ferrandon, D. (2007), “A model of bacterial intestinal infections in Drosophila
      melanogaster,” PLoS Pathog. 3(11):e173.
Nusslein-Volhard, C., Lohs-Schardin, M., Sander, K., Cremer, C. (1980), “ A dorso-ventral
      shift of embryonic primordia in a new maternal-effect mutant of Drosophila,” Nature
      283, 474–476.
Ochiai, M., Ashida, M. (1988), “Purification of a beta-1,3-glucan recognition protein in
      the prophenoloxidase activating system from hemolymph of the silkworm, Bombyx
      mori,” J Biol Chem. 263, 12056–12062.
Ochiai, M., Ashida, M. (1999), “A pattern recognition protein for peptidoglycan : Cloning
      the cDNA and the gene of the silkworm, Bombyx mori,” J Biol Chem. 274, 11854–
      11858.
Ochiai, M., Ashida, M. (2000), “A pattern-recognition protein for beta-1,3-glucan: The
      binding domain and the cDNA cloning of beta-1,3-glucan recognition protein from
      the silkworm, Bombyx mori,” J Biol Chem. 275, 4995–5002.
Ooi J.Y., Yagi Y., Hu X., Ip Y.T. (2002) The Drosophila Toll-9 activates a constitutive antimi-
      crobial defense,” EMBO Rep. 3(1):82–7.
Paillot, A. (1919), “Immunité naturelle chez les insects,” C. R. Acad Sci Paris. 169, 202–204.
Paillot, A. (1933), L’infection chez les insects. Imprimerie G. Patissier, Trévoux, 535p.




32


Paquette, N., Broemer, M., Aggarwal, K., Chen, L., Husson, M., Ertürk-Hasdemir, D.,
      Reichhart, J.M., Meier, P., Silverman, N. (2010), “Caspase-mediated cleavage, IAP
      binding, and ubiquitination: Linking three mechanisms crucial for Drosophila NF-
      kappaB signalling,” Mol Cell 37(2):172–82.
Park, J.W., Kim, C.H., Kim, J.H., Je, B.R., Roh, K.B., Kim, S.J., Lee, H.H., Ryu, J.H., Lim,
      J.H., Oh, B.H., Lee, W.J., Ha, N.C., Lee, B.L. (2007), “Clustering of peptidoglycan
      recognition protein-SA is required for sensing lysine-type peptidoglycan in insects,”
      Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(16):6602–7.
Parker, J.S., Mizuguchi, K., Gay, N.J. (2001), “A family of proteins related to Spätzle, the
      Toll receptor ligand, are encoded in the Drosophila genome,” Proteins 45(1):71–80.
Poltorak, A., He, X., Smirnova, I., Liu, M.Y., van Huffel, C., Du, X., Birdwell, D., Alejos, E.,
      Silva, M., Galanos, C., Freudenberg, M., Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P., Layton, B., Beutler,
      B. (1998), “Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations
      in Tlr4 gene,” Science 282(5396):2085–8.
Ragab, A., Buechling,,T., Gesellchen, V., Spirohn, K., Boettcher, A.L., Boutros, M. (2011),
      “Drosophila Ras/MAPK signalling regulates innate immune responses in immune
      and intestinal stem cells,” EMBO J. 30(6):1123–36.
Rämet, M., Manfruelli, P., Pearson, A., Mathey-Prevot, B., Ezekowitz, R.A. (2002),
      “Functional genomic analysis of phagocytosis and identification of a Drosophila re-
      ceptor for E. coli,” Nature 416(6881):644–8.
Reichhart, J.M., Essrich, M., Dimarcq, J.L., Hoffmann, D., Hoffmann, J.A., Lagueux, M.
      (1989), “Insect immunity: Isolation of cDNA clones corresponding to diptericin, an
      inducible antibacterial peptide from Phormia terranovae (Diptera). Transcriptional
      profiles during immunization,” Eur J Biochem. 182(2):423–7.
Reichhart, J.M., Meister, M., Dimarcq, J.L., Zachary, D., Hoffmann, D., Ruiz, C., Richards,
      G., Hoffmann, J.A. (1992), “Insect immunity: Developmental and inducible activity of
      the Drosophila diptericin promoter,” EMBO J. 11(4):1469–77.
Reichhart, J.M., Georgel, P., Meister, M., Lemaitre, B., Kappler, C., Hoffmann, J.A. (1993),
      “Expression and nuclear translocation of the rel/NF-kappa B-related morphogen
      dorsal during the immune response of Drosophila,” C.R. Acad Sci III. 316(10):1218–
      24.
Rizki, T.M., Rizki, R.M., Grell, E.H. (1980), “A mutant affecting the crystal cells in
      Drosophila melanogaster,” Rouxs Arch. Dev. Biol. 188(2): 91–99.
Roach, J.C., Glusman, G., Rowen, L., Kaur, A., Purcell, M.K., Smith, K.D., Hood, L.E.,
      Aderem, A. (2005), “The evolution of vertebrate Toll-like receptors,” Proc Natl Acad
      Sci USA. 102(27):9577–82.
Rosetto, M., Engström, Y., Baldari, C.T., Telford, J.L., Hultmark, D. (1995), “Signals from
      the IL-1 receptor homolog, Toll, can activate an immune response in a Drosophila
      hemocyte cell line,” Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 209(1):111–6.
Roth, S., Schüpbach, T. (1994), “The relationship between ovarian and embryonic dors-
      oventral patterning in Drosophila,” Development 120(8):2245–57.
Royet, J., Dziarski, R. (2007), “Peptidoglycan recognition proteins: Pleiotropic sensors and
      effectors of antimicrobial defences,” Nat Rev Microbiol. 5(4):264–77.
Royet, J., Gupta, D., Dziarski, R. (2011), “Peptidoglycan recognition proteins: Modulators
      of the microbiome and inflammation,” Nat Rev Immunol. 11(12):837–51.
Rutschmann, S., Jung, A.C., Hetru, C., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A., Ferrandon, D.
      (2000a), “The Rel protein DIF mediates the antifungal but not the antibacterial host
      defense in Drosophila,” Immunity. 12(5):569–80.
Rutschmann, S., Jung, A.C., Zhou, R., Silverman, N., Hoffmann, J.A., Ferrandon, D.
      (2000b), “Role of Drosophila IKK gamma in a Toll-independent antibacterial im-
      mune response,” Nat Immunol. 1(4):342–7.
Rutschmann, S., Kilinc, A., Ferrandon, D. (2002), “Cutting edge: The Toll pathway is re-
      quired for resistance to gram-positive bacterial infections in Drosophila,” J Immunol.
      168(4):1542–6.



                                                                                            33


Ryu, J.H., Ha, E.M., Oh, C.T., Seol, J.H., Brey, P.T., Jin, I., Lee, D.G., Kim, J., Lee, D., Lee,
      W.J. (2006), “An essential complementary role of NF-kappaB pathway to microbicidal
      oxidants in Drosophila gut immunity,” EMBO J. 25(15):3693–701.
Ryu, J.H., Kim, S.H., Lee, H.Y., Bai, J.Y., Nam, Y.D., Bae, J.W., Lee, D.G., Shin, S.C., Ha,
      E.M., Lee, W.J. (2008), “Innate immune homeostasis by the homeobox gene caudal
      and commensal-gut mutualism in Drosophila,” Science 319(5864):777–82.
Sastry, K., Zahedi, K., Lelias, J.M., Whitehead, A.S., Ezekowitz, R.A. (1991), “Molecular
      characterization of the mouse mannose-binding proteins: The mannose-binding pro-
      tein A but not C is an acute phase reactant,” J Immunol. 147(2):692–7.
Schneider, D.S., Hudson, K.L., Lin, T.Y., Anderson, K.V. (1991), “Dominant and recessive
      mutations define functional domains of Toll, a transmembrane protein required for
      dorsal-ventral polarity in the Drosophila embryo,” Genes Dev. 5(5):797–807.
Schneider, D.S., Ayres, J.S. (2008), “Two ways to survive infection: What resistance and tol-
      erance can teach us about treating infectious diseases,” Nat Rev Immunol. 8(11):889–
      95.
Sen, R., Baltimore, D. (1986), “Inducibility of kappa immunoglobulin enhancer-binding
      protein NF-kappa B by a posttranslational mechanism,” Cell 47(6):921–8.
Shai, Y. (2002), “Mode of action of membrane active antimicrobial peptides,” Biopolymers.
      66(4):236–48.
Silverman, N., Zhou, R., Stöven, S., Pandey, N., Hultmark, D., Maniatis, T. (2000), “A
      Drosophila IkappaB kinase complex required for Relish cleavage and antibacterial
      immunity,” Genes Dev. 14(19):2461–71.
Silverman, N., Zhou, R., Erlich, R.L., Hunter, M., Bernstein, E., Schneider, D., Maniatis, T.
      (2003), “Immune activation of NF-kappaB and JNK requires Drosophila TAK1,” J Biol
      Chem. 278(49):48928–34.
Simon, A., Kullberg, B.J., Tripet, B., Boerman, O.C., Zeeuwen, P., van der Ven-Jongekrijg,
      J., Verweij, P., Schalkwijk, J., Hodges, R., van der Meer, J.W., Netea, M.G. (2008),
      “Drosomycin-like defensin, a human homologue of Drosophila melanogaster
      drosomycin with antifungal activity,” Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 52(4):1407–12.
Steiner, H., Hultmark, D., Engström, A., Bennich, H., Boman, H.G. (1981), “Sequence
      and specificity of two antibacterial proteins involved in insect immunity,” Nature
      292(5820):246–8.
Steward, R. (1987), “Dorsal, an embryonic polarity gene in Drosophila, is homologous to
      the vertebrate proto-oncogene, c-rel.,” Science 238(4827):692–4.
Stöven, S., Ando, I., Kadalayil, L., Engström, Y., Hultmark, D. (2000), “Activation of the
      Drosophila NF-kappaB factor Relish by rapid endoproteolytic cleavage,” EMBO Rep.
      1(4):347–52.
Stöven, S., Silverman, N., Junell, A., Hedengren-Olcott, M., Ertürk, D., Engström, Y.,
      Maniatis, T., Hultmark, D. (2003), “Caspase-mediated processing of the Drosophila
      NF-kappaB factor Relish,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100(10):5991–6.
Sun, S.C., Lindström, I., Lee, J.Y., Faye, I. (1991), “Structure and expression of the attacin
      genes in Hyalophora cecropia,” Eur J Biochem. 196(1):247–54.
Tauszig, S., Jouanguy, E., Hoffmann, J.A., Imler, J.L. (2000), “Toll-related receptors and the
      control of antimicrobial peptide expression in Drosophila,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
      97(19):10520–5.
Tauszig-Delamasure, S., Bilak, H., Capovilla, M., Hoffmann, J.A., Imler, J.L. (2002),
      “Drosophila MyD88 is required for the response to fungal and Gram-positive bacte-
      rial infections,” Nat Immunol. 3(1):91–7.
Towb, P., Sun, H., Wasserman, S.A. (2009), “Tube Is an IRAK-4 homolog in a Toll pathway
      adapted for development and immunity,” J Innate Immun. 1(4):309–21.
Tzou, P., Ohresser, S., Ferrandon, D., Capovilla, M., Reichhart, J.M., Lemaitre, B.,
      Hoffmann, J.A., Imler, J.L. (2000), “Tissue-specific inducible expression of antimicro-
      bial peptide genes in Drosophila surface epithelia,” Immunity 13(5):737–48.




34


Uttenweiler-Joseph, S., Moniatte, M., Lagueux, M., van Dorsselaer, A., Hoffmann, J.A.,
     Bulet, P. (1998), “Differential display of peptides induced during the immune re-
     sponse of Drosophila: A matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight
     mass spectrometry study,” Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95(19):11342–7.
van Rij, R.P., Saleh, M.C., Berry, B., Foo, C., Houk, A., Antoniewski, C., Andino, R. (2006),
     “The RNA silencing endonuclease Argonaute 2 mediates specific antiviral immunity
     in Drosophila melanogaster,” Genes Dev. 20(21):2985–95.
Vidal, S., Khush, R.S., Leulier, F., Tzou, P., Nakamura, M., Lemaitre, B. (2001), “Mutations
     in the Drosophila dTAK1 gene reveal a conserved function for MAPKKKs in
     the control of rel/NF-kappaB-dependent innate immune responses,” Genes Dev.
     15(15):1900–12.
Wang, L., Weber, A.N., Atilano, M.L., Filipe, S.R., Gay, N.J., Ligoxygakis, P. (2006a),
     “Sensing of Gram-positive bacteria in Drosophila: GNBP1 is needed to process and
     present peptidoglycan to PGRP-SA,” EMBO J. 25(20):5005–14.
Wang, X.H., Aliyari, R., Li, W.X., Li, H.W., Kim, K., Carthew, R., Atkinson, P., Ding,
     S.W. (2006b), “RNA interference directs innate immunity against viruses in adult
     Drosophila,” Science 312(5772):452–4.
Weber, A.N., Tauszig-Delamasure, S., Hoffmann, J.A., Lelièvre, E., Gascan, H., Ray, K.P.,
     Morse, M.A., Imler, J.L., Gay, N.J. (2003), “Binding of the Drosophila cytokine Spätzle
     to Toll is direct and establishes signalling,” Nat Immunol. 4(8):794–800.
Werner, T., Liu, G., Kang, D., Ekengren, S., Steiner, H., Hultmark, D. (2000), “A family of
     peptidoglycan recognition proteins in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster,” Proc
     Natl Acad Sci USA 97(25):13772–7.
Wicker, C., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, D., Hultmark, D., Samakovlis, C., Hoffmann, J.A.
     (1990), “Insect immunity: Characterization of a Drosophila cDNA encoding a novel
     member of the diptericin family of immune peptides,” J Biol Chem. 265(36):22493–8.
Wolenski, F.S., Garbati, M.R., Lubinski, T.J., Traylor-Knowles, N., Dresselhaus, E., Stefanik,
     D.J., Goucher, H., Finnerty, J.R., Gilmore, T.D. (2011), “Characterization of the core
     elements of the NF-κB signaling pathway of the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis,”
     Mol Cell Biol. 31(5):1076–87.
Wright, S.D., Ramos, R.A., Tobias, P.S., Ulevitch, R.J., Mathison, J.C. (1990), “CD14, a re-
     ceptor for complexes of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and LPS binding protein,” Science.
     249(4975):1431–3.
Wu, L.P., Choe, K.M., Lu, Y., Anderson, K.V. (2001), “Drosophila immunity: Genes on
     the third chromosome required for the response to bacterial infection,” Genetics
     159(1):189–99.
Yagi, Y., Nishida, Y., Ip, Y.T. (2010), “Functional analysis of Toll-related genes in
     Drosophila,” Dev Growth Differ. 52(9):771–83.
Zhu, B., Pennack, J.A., McQuilton, P., Forero, M.G., Mizuguchi, K., Sutcliffe, B., Gu, C.J.,
     Fenton, J.C., Hidalgo, A. (2008), “Drosophila neurotrophins reveal a common mech-
     anism for nervous system formation,” PLoS Biol. 6(11):e284.




                                                                                           35
