DECODING THE LANGUAGE OF THE BEE
Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1973

by
                        †
KARL VON FRISCH
University of Munich, Federal Republic of Germany


Some 60 years ago, many biologists thought that bees and other insects were
totally color-blind animals. I was unable to believe it. For the bright colors of
flowers can be understood only as an adaptation to color-sensitive visitors.
This was the beginning of experiments on the color sense of the bee (I). On
a table outdoors I placed a colored paper between papers of different shades
of gray and on it I laid a small glass dish filled with sugar syrup. Bees from a
nearby hive could be trained to recognize this color and demonstrated their
ability to distinguish it from shades of gray. To prevent too great a gathering
of bees, I instituted breaks between feedings. After these breaks, only sporadic
scout bees came to the empty bowl and flew back home; the feeding table
remained deserted. If a scout bee, however, found the bowl filled and
returned home successfully, within a few minutes the entire forager group was
back. Had she reported her findings to the hive? This question subsequently
became the starting point for further investigations.
   In order that the behavior of foragers could be seen after their return to the
hive, a small colony was placed in an observation hive with glass windows, and
a feeding bowl was placed next to it. The individual foragers were marked with
colored dots, that is, numbered according to a certain system. Now an
astonishing picture could be seen in the observation hive: Even before the
returning bees turned over the contents of their honey sack to other bees, they
ran over the comb in close circles, alternately to the right and the left. This
round dance caused the numbered bees moving behind them to undertake
a new excursion to the feeding place.
   But foragers from one hive do not always fly to the same feeding source.
Foraging groups form: One may collect from dandelions, another from
clover, and a third from forget-me-nots. Even in flowering plants the food
supply often becomes scarce, and a “feeding break” ensues. Were the bees in
the experiment able to alert those very same foragers who were at the bowl
with them? Did they know each other individually?
   To settle the question, I installed two feeding places at which two groups
from the same observation hive collected separately. During a feeding break,
both groups stayed on the honey-comb and mingled with each other. Then
one of the bowls was refilled. The bees coming from the filled bowl alerted by
their dances not only their own group but also bees of the second group,
which responded by flying to their customary feeding place where they
investigated the empty bowl.
   However, the natural stopping places of bees are not glass bowls but flowers.
Therefore, the experiment was modified; one of two groups of bees collected
food from linden blossoms, the other one from robinias. Now the picture
†
Dr Karl von Frisch died in 1982


76


                            Decoding the Language of the Bee                    77



changed. After the feeding break, the bees returning from the linden
blossoms caused only the linden bees to fly out again; the robinia collectors
paid no attention to their dances. On the other hand, when bees returned
successfully from robinia blossoms, the linden bees showed no interest in
their dances, while members of the robinia group immediately ran to a dancer
in their vicinity, following along behind her and then flying out. Some clever
bees also learned to use both sources of food, depending on the occasion.
They would then send out the linden gatherers after returning from the
linden source, and the robinia gatherers after visiting the robinias. Thus, the
bees did not know each other individually. It appeared that the fragrance of
the specific blossom attached to their bodies was decisive. This was confirmed
when essential oils or synthetic scents at the feeding place produced the same
effect.
    When feeding was continuous, new recruits showed up at the food source
next to the old foragers. They, too, were alerted by the dance. But how did they
find their goal?
    Peppermint oil was added to the feeding place next to the hive. In addition,
bowls with sugar syrup were put on small cardboard sheets at various places in
the nearby meadow; some of the sheets were scented with peppermint oil and
the others with other essential oils. The result was unequivocal: A few minutes
after the start of feeding, recruits from the observation hive appeared not only
at the feeding place next to the foraging bees but also at the other peppermint
 bowls posted at some distance in the meadow. The other scented bowls,
 however, remained undisturbed. The smell of lavender, fennel, thyme oil,
 and so forth had no attraction. When the scent at the feeding place was
 replaced by a different one, the goal of the swarming recruits changed
 accordingly. They let themselves be guided by the scent on the dancers.
     Scent is a very simple but effective means of communication. It attains full
 significance, however, only in combination with another condition. If the
 sugar syrup becomes scarce or is offered in weaker concentrations, after a
 certain point the dancing becomes slower and finally stops even though the
 collecting may continue. On the other hand, the sweeter the sugar syrup, the
 more lively and lengthier the various dances. The effect of advertising is
 thereby enhanced, and it is increased further by the scent gland in the
 forager’s abdomen which is activated upon arrival at a good source of supply.
 Thus it signals “Come hither!” to recruits searching in the vicinity. Many
 female insects have scent glands to attract the male. In worker bees, which are
 mere workhorses devoid of any sexual interest, the scent organ is put to the
 service of the community.
     Let us now imagine a meadow in the spring. Various types of plants blossom
 simultaneously, producing nectar of differing concentrations. The richer and
 sweeter its flow, the livelier the dance of the bees that discover and visit one
  type of flower. The flowers with the best nectar transmit a specific fragrance
 which ensures that they are most sought after. Thus, in this simple fashion,
  traffic is regulated according to the law of supply and demand not only to
  benefit the bees but also to promote pollination and seed yield of plant
 varieties rich in nectar. A new and hitherto unknown side of the biological
  significance of flower fragrance is thus revealed. Its great diversity and strict
  species specificity communicate a truly charming scent language.




                                   Decoding the Language of the Bee                               79


required to go through the straight part of the figure - eight dance in each
repeat. This straight stretch is sharply marked by tail-wagging dance movements
and simultaneously toned (in the true meaning of the word) by a buzzing
sound (6, 7). Longer distances are expressed symbolically by longer tail-
wagging times. For distances of 200 to 4500 m, they increase from about 0.5
second to about 4 seconds (6, 8) (Fig. 2).




Fig. 2. Duration of the tail-wagging run for feeding places at various distances; based on film
data.


   The tail-wagging dance not only indicates distance but also gives the
direction to the goal. In the observation hive, the bees that come from the
same feeding place make their tail-wagging runs in the same direction,
whereas these runs are oriented differently for bees coming from other
directions. However, the direction of the tail-wagging runs of bees coming
from one feeding place does not remain constant. As the day advances the
direction changes by the same angle as that traversed by the sun in the
meantime, but in the opposite rotation. Thus, the recruiting dancer shows the
other bees the direction to the goal in relation to the position of the sun (5,
6). Those hours at the observation hive when the bees revealed this secret to
me remain unforgettable. The fascinating thing is that the angle between the
position of the sun and the dancer’s path to the goal is expressed by the dancer
in the darkness of the hive, on the vertical surface of the comb, as an angular
deflection from the vertical. The bee thus transposes the angle to a different
area of sense perception. Figure 3 shows the key to the transposition. If the




Fig. 3. Indication of direction by tail-wagging dance. (Left), the goal is in the direction of the
sun; (right), the goal is      to the left of the sun’s position. Dance figures, enlarged, are on the
bottom left of the pictures.


80                               Physiology of Medicine 1973


goal lies in the direction of the sun, the tail-wagging dance points upward. If
the goal is located 40º to the left of the sun’s position, the dancer shifts the
straight run 40º to the left of the vertical, and so forth (5,6). On the comb,
members of the hive move after the dancer and maintain close contact with
her, especially during the tail-wagging runs, and take in the information
offered. Can they follow it and with what accuracy?
   The indication of direction was tested by us using the following method (9).
At a certain distance from the hive, a feeding place was installed at which
numbered bees were fed on an unscented platform with a sugar solution so
dilute that they did not dance in the hive and therefore did not alert forager
recruits. Only at the start of the experiment did they receive concentrated
sugar solutions slightly scented with (for example) lavender oil. At 50 m closer
to the hive, plates baited with the same scent but without food were placed in
a fan-shaped arrangement. The number of forager recruits arriving at the
plates was an indication of the intensity with which they searched in various
directions. Figure 4 shows, as an example, the result of an experiment in which
the feeding place was located 600 m from the hive.




Fig. 4. Fan experiment. The feeding place (I;) is 600 m from the observation hive. Scented
plates without food are arranged in fan shape 550m from the hive. The numbers indicate the
number of forager recruits arriving during the first 50 minutes of the experiment; Sch, shed.


   Since such fan experiments proved that indication ofdirection was successful,
we made a step-by-step test of distance-indicating procedures. Here, all
scented plates were located in the same direction as the feeding place, from
the hive area to a distance well beyond the feeding place. Figure 5 gives an
example of an experiment in which the feeding place was located 2 kilometers
from the hive. Incoming flights of forager recruits to the feeding site itself
were of course not evaluated because here an additional attractant was
created by the food and the visiting bees (6).
   To sum up, this and preceding experiments taught us that the information
on the direction and distance of the goal was adhered to with astonishing
accuracy - and not only in gathering nectar and pollen. The same dances are
observed on a swarm. Here the scout bees indicate to the waiting bees the
location of the domicile they have discovered. Of greatest interest here is that


                                 Decoding the Language of the Bee                           81


the intensity of the promotional message depends on the quality of the
domicile discovered, that the various groups of scouting bees compete with
each other, and that therefore the decision is finally made in favor of the best
domicile (10).




                                          Distance (m)

Fig. 5. Step-by-step experiment. The feeding place (F) is 2000 m from the observation hive. The
numbers indicate the number of forager recruits that settled on the scented plates (without
food) during the 3-hour observation period.




   While not doubting that direction and distance of the goal can be discerned
from the tail-wagging dances, a group of American biologists led by A. M.
Wenner does not agree that the forager recruits make us of this information.
According to them, these bees find the goal by using their olfactory sense only
(II). This view is incompatible with many of our results (6, 12). It is refuted
by the following experiment, to cite only one.
   Numbered bees from an observation hive collected at a feeding place 230
m from the hive. The hive was turned on its side so that the comb surface was
horizontal; the sky was screened. Under these conditions, the dancers could
orient themselves neither by gravity nor by the sky, and danced confusedly in
all directions. Plates with the same scent as that at the feeding place were
located at various distances in the direction of the feeding place and in three
other directions. They were visited in all directions and in great numbers by
forager recruits (Fig. 6), with no preferences being given to the direction of
the feeding place. The observation hive was now turned back 90º to its normal
position so that the dancers could indicate the direction of the goal on the
vertical comb surface. Within a few minutes, the stream of newly alerted bees
flew out in the direction of the feeding place; the scented plates in this
direction were increasingly frequented, and in a short time no forager recruits
at all appeared at the scented plates in the three other directions (Fig. 7). No
change had occurred at the sources of scent in the open field or in the other


82                                 Physiology or Medicine 1973


external conditions. The change in the behavior of the forager recruits could
be attributed only to the directional dances.

                                          North




Fig. 6. Effect of placing observation hive horizontally. The dances are disoriented. Scented
plates with the scent of the feeding place are visited by great numbers of forager recruits (small
dots) in all few directions: F, feeding place.



                                          North




              7’ south
                of west




Fig. 7. Hive placed vertically after experiment in Fig. 6. The dances now indicate the direction
of the feeding place. Within 10 minutes the stream of forager recruits turns in this direction.
Flights no longer arrive in the three other directions.


                                  Decoding the Language of the Bee                            83


    It is conceivable that some people will not believe such a thing. Personally,
I also harbored doubts in the beginning and desired to find out whether the
intelligent bees of my observation hive had not perhaps manifested a special
behavior. I opened an ordinary hive, lifted up one of the combs and watched
the expected dances. Curious as to what would happen, I turned the comb in
such a way that the dancing area became horizontal. Gravity as a means of
orientation was thus eliminated. However, without any signs of perplexity, the
bees continued to dance and by the direction of their tail-wagging runs
pointed directly to the feeding place, just as we show the way by raising an arm.
When the comb was turned like a record on a turntable, they continued to
adjust themselves to their new direction, like the needle of a compass (13).
    This behavior can be studied at leisure at a horizontal observation hive. It
is basically very easy if we recall that the direction of the tail-wagging run
relates to the sun’s position. During the tail-wagging run on the comb, the bee
has only to set itself at the same angle to the sun as it maintained during its
flight to the feeding place (Fig. 8). Afterward, when the recruits set their line
of flight at the same angle to the sun, they are flying in the direction of the
goal.




Fig. 8. The principle of direction indication during the dance on a horizontal plane. The bee
(right) during the tail-wagging run positions itself in such a way that it views the sun from the
same angle as earlier during its flight to the feeding place (left).


   This type of discretional indication is nothing unusual. Incoming foragers
not infrequently begin to dance facing the sun on the horizontal alighting
board of the hive if they are met here by nonworking comrades. The
transmission ofinformation through horizontal dancing is easier to understand
than that when the angle is transposed to the vertical comb surface. We also
seem to have here the original, phylogenetically older type of directional
indication. In India there still exist several strains of the species Apis. M y
student and co-worker, Martin Lindauer, went there to use them for
“comparative language studies.“ The small honeybee, Apis florea, is on a more
primitive level than our honeybee and other Indian strains. The colony builds
a single comb out in the open on a branch; the comb has a horizontally
extended top edge that serves exclusively as a dancing floor. When these bees
are forced onto the vertical comb surface of the side, they cannot render the
sun’s angle by dancing and their tail-wagging dances become disoriented
(14).
  Let us now return to our own bees and the observation of dances on a
horizontal hive. There can be no doubt that the sun’s position is decisive for


84                           Physiology or Medicine 1973


the direction of their dancing. The sun may be replaced by a lamp in a dark
tent. By changing its position, the bees are made to dance in any desired
direction. But there was one big puzzle. To prevent excessive heating during
most of the experiments, a protective roof was installed over the observation
hive. The dancers were unable to see the sun. Nevertheless their dance was
usually correct. Orientation by heat rays, by penetrating radiation, as well as
other explanations seemed possible and had to be discarded - until I noticed
that a view of the blue sky is the same as a view of the sun. When clouds passed
over the section of the sky visible to the bees, disoriented dances immediately
resulted. Therefore they must have been able to read the sun’s position from
the blue sky. The direction of vibration of polarized blue light differs in
relation to the sun’s position across the entire vault of the sky. Thus, to one
that is able to perceive the direction of vibration, even a spot of blue sky can
disclose the sun’s position by its polarization pattern. Are bees endowed with
this capacity?
    The following test furnished an answer. The observation hive was set
horizontally in a dark tent from which the dancers had a lateral view of a small
area of blue sky. They danced correctly toward the west where their feeding
place was located 200 m away. When a round, rotatable polarizing foil was
placed over the comb in a way as not to change the direction of the vibration
of the polarized light from that part of the sky, they continued to dance
correctly. If, however, I turned the foil right or left, the direction of the bees’
dance changed to the right or the left by corresponding angle values.
    Thus, bees are able to perceive polarized light. The sky, which to our eyes
is a uniform blue, is distinctly patterned to them (13, 15). They use this
extensively and, in their orientation, guide themselves not only by the sun’s
position but also by the resulting polarization patterns of the blue sky. They
also continue to recognize the sun’s position after it has set or when it is
obscured by a mountain. Once again the bees appear to us miraculous. But it
is now clear that ants and other insects, crayfish, spiders, and even octopuses
perceive polarized light and use it for orientation, and that among all these
animals the human being is the unendowed one, together with many other
vertebrates. In one respect, however, bees remain singular: Only they use
polarized light not only for their own orientation but also to communicate to
their colonies the direction to a distant goal (6).
    Thus the language of the bee, which was initially brought to our attention
by the physiology of sense perception, has now led us back to it. It also had
already led to general questions of orientation in time and space. When bees
use the sun as a compass during their own flights as well as to inform their
comrades, one difficulty arises: With the advancing hour of the day, the sun’s
position changes, and one would imagine that it can serve as a geographic
marker for a short time only.
    I had long contemplated an experiment whose execution was postponed
from one year to the next by the feeling that it would not amount to much.
However, in the early morning of a fall day in 1949, we sealed the entrance of
our observation hive standing in Brunnwinkl on the shore of the Wolfgangsee,
 transported it across the lake, and placed it 5 km away in a completely different
 area unknown to the bees (15). Numbered bees from this colony had visited
 a feeding place 200 m to the west on previous days (Fig. 9). From the familiar


                                  Decoding the Language of the Bee                              85




Fig. 9. Observation hive in Brunnwinkl on the Wolfgangsee and line of flight of a group of
numbered bees to feeding place 200 m west.




Fig. 10. The hive in Fig. 9 transported to a scene unfamiliar to the bees. Small feeding platforms
with the familiar scent were placed 200 m from the hive in each of the four directions. The
numbers indicate the numbers of arriving bees in the experimental group.


lakeshore and steep wooded hills they now found themselves in flat meadows;
none of the known landmarks could be seen. Four feeding bowls with the
same scent as at the former feeding place were placed 200 m from the hive
toward the west, east, north, and south, and the entrance was then opened. Of
the 29 marked bees that had visited in the west during the previous afternoon
in Brunnwinkl, 27 found the bowls within 3 hours: 5 in the south, 1 each in the
east and north, but 20 in the west (Fig. 10). Each was captured on arrival and
was thus unable to send others out by dancing in the hive. Only the sun could
have guided those who arrived. It, however, was southeast of the hive, while on
the preceding day during the last foraging flights it had been close to the
western horizon. Bees possess excellent timing, an inner clock, so to speak.
During earlier experiments, by feeding at certain hours only they trained
themselves to arrive promptly at the table at that time - even if the table was
not set. The above trial, repeated in many modifications (6, 15, 16), has now
taught us that they are also familiar with the sun’s daily movement and can,


86                             Physiology or Medicine 1973


 by calculating the hour of the day, use this star as a true compass. The same
 discovery was simultaneously and independently made by Gustav Kramer
 using birds (6).
    During the past few years, an old and persistent question has opened a new
 field of work for bee researchers. In discussing the direction indication, I
 initially kept something from you. The dancers did not always point correctly
 to the food sources. At certain hours they were markedly off to the left or the
 right. However, no inaccuracies or accidental deviation were involved; the
 errors were consistent and, when recorded under the same conditions, time
 and again gave the same curves for a typical daily routine. Thus they could
 correct, for example, for a different spatial position of the comb. Errors arose
 only with transposition of the dancing angle; in horizontal dances there is no
 “incorrect indication of direction.” Observations over many years, made
jointly with my co-worker Lindauer, finally led us to a conclusion which
 seemed acceptable (6). However, it was disproved by Lindauer, who persisted
 in his experiments together with his student H. Martin. They recognized the
 magnetic field of the earth as a cause for incorrect indication of direction. If
 this is artificially screened out, the error disappears; and by artificially altering
 the course of the lines of flux, the incorrect indication of direction was
 changed correspondingly (17). The idea that the magnetic field might play
 a role in the puzzling orientation performance of animals was rejected for a
 long time. During the past years it has been confirmed by new observations,
 especially in birds and insects (18). Nothing so far points to the possibility that
 bees, in their purposeful flights cross-country, are making use of the earth’s
 magnetic field. Unexpectedly, however, it proved equally significant biologically
 but in a different way. When a swarm of bees builds its combs in a hive
 furnished to them by the beekeeper, their position in space is prescribed by
 the small suspended wooden frames. In the natural habitat of the bee,
 perhaps in the hollow of a tree, there are no wooden frames present.
 Nevertheless, thousands of bees labor together and in the course of one night
 achieve an orderly structure of parallel combs; the individual animal works
 here and there without getting instructions from a superintendent. They
 orient themselves by the earth’s magnetic field and uniformly have in mind
 the comb position which they knew from the parent colony (20).
    However, these are problems whose solution is fully underway, and we may
 expect quite a few surprises. By this I do not mean that problems such as
 the perception of polarized light have been conclusively solved. On the
 contrary: A question answered usually raises new problems, and it would be
 presumptuous to assume that an end is ever achieved.
    It was not possible to present more than just a sketchy illustration in this
 lecture and to point out a few important steps in the development of our
 knowledge. To corroborate and extend them requires more time and work
 than the outsider can imagine. The effort of one individual is not sufficient for
 this. Helpers presented themselves, and I must express my appreciation to
  them at this time. If one is fortunate in finding capable students of whom many
 become permanent co-workers and friends, this is one of the most beautiful
 fruits of scientific work.


                                  Decoding the Language of the Bee                               87


REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. K. von Frisch, Zool. Jahrb. Abt. Allg. Zool. Physiol. Tiere 35, 1 (1914-1915).
 2. ___________,ibid. 40, 1 (1923).
 3.___________, Experientia 2 No. 10 (1946).
 4. The threshhold of transition from the round dance to the tail-wagging dance varies with each
     race of honeybees; according to R. Boch [Z. Vergl. Physiol. 40, 289 (1957)], it is about 50 m
     for Apis mellifica carnica, about 30m for A. mellifica mellifica and A. mellifica intermissa, about
     20 m for A. mellifica caucasia and A. mellifica ligustica, and 7 m for A. mellifica fasciala. The
     fact that the strain we used mostly in our experiments, the Carniolan bee, has the largest
     round dance circumference was of benefit in our experiments.
 5. K. von Frisch, Österreich. Zool. Z. 1, I (1946).
 6. _________Tanzsprache und Orientienung der Bienen (Springer-Verlag. Berlin, 1965) (English
     translation: The Dance Language Orientation of Bees (Belknap, Cambridge, Mass., 1967)].
    Further references are found in this book.
 7. H. Esch, Z. Vergl. Physiol. 45, 1 (1961); A. M. Wenner, Anim. Behav. 10, 79 (1962).
 8. K. von Frisch and R. Jander, Z Vergl. Physiol. 40, 239 (1957).
 9. I use the word “us,” since the open-field experiments had assumed such proportions that
    they could no longer be carried out without trained assistants.
10. M. I.indauer, Z Vergl. Physiol. 37, 263 (1955).
11, A. M. Wenner, The Bee Language Controversy: An Experience in Science (Educational Programs
    I m p r o v e m e n t Corp., Boulder, Colo., 1971).
12. K. von Frisch, Anim. Behav. 21, 628 (1973).
13.                ,Naturwissenschaften 35, 12 (1948): ibid., p. 38.
14. M. Lindauer, Z. Vergl. Physiol, 38, 521 (1956).
15. K. von Frisch, Experientia 6, 210 (1950).
16. M. Renner, Z. Vergl. Physiol. 40, 85 (1957); ibid. 42, 449 (1959).
17. M. Lindauer and H. Martin, ibid. 60, 219 (1968); M. I.indauer, Rhein. Westjäl. Akad. Wiss.
     Rep. No. 218 (1971).
18. H. Martin and M. Lindauer, Fortschr. Zool. 21, Nos. 2 and 3 (1973).
