                           K ARL LANDSTEINER


         On individual differences in human blood
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1930



 Owing to the difficulty of dealing with substances of high molecular weight
 we are still a long way from having determined the chemical characteristics
 and the constitution of proteins, which are regarded as the principal con-
 stituents of living organisms. Thus it was not the usual chemical methods
 but the use of serological reagents which led to an important general result in
 protein chemistry, namely to the knowledge that the proteins in individual
 animal and plant species differ and are characteristic of each species. The
 diversity is increased still further by the fact that the different organs contain
 special proteins, and it therefore appears that in living organisms specific
 building materials are necessary for each particular form and function,
 whereas man-made machines, performing a wide variety of operations, can
 be produced from a limited number of substances.
   The problem raised by the discovery of biochemical specificity peculiar
 to a species - the subject of the investigations which we are about to discuss -
 was to establish whether the differentiation extends beyond the species and
 whether the individuals within a species show similar though smaller dif-
 ferences. Since no observations whatever had been made in this direction, I
 selected the simplest experimental arrangements available and the material
 which offered the best prospects. Accordingly, my experiment consisted of
 causing the blood serum and erythrocytes of different human subjects to
 react with one another.
    The result was only to some extent as expected. With many samples there
 was no perceptible alteration, in other words the result was exactly the same
 as if the blood cells had been mixed with their own serum, but frequently a
 phenomenon known as agglutination - in which the serum causes the cells
 of the alien individual to group into clusters - occurred.
    The surprising thing was that agglutination, when it occurred at all, was
just as pronounced as the already familiar reactions which take place during
 the interaction between serum and cells of different animal species, whereas
 in the other cases there seemed to be no difference between the bloods of
 different persons. First of all, therefore, it was necessary to consider whether


           INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN HUMAN BLOOD                             235
 the physiological differences discovered between individuals were in fact
those which were being sought and whether the phenomena, although ob-
served in the case of blood of healthy persons, might not be due to endured
illnesses. It soon became clear, however, that the reactions follow a pattern,
which is valid for the blood of all humans, and that the peculiarities discov-
ered are just as characteristic of the individual as are the serological features
peculiar to an animal species. Basically, in fact, there are four different types
of human blood, the so-called blood groups. The number of the groups
follows from the fact that the erythrocytes evidently contain substances (iso-
agglutinogens) with two different structures, of which both may be absent,
or one or both present, in the erythrocytes of a person. This alone would
still not explain the reactions; the active substances of the sera, the iso-
agglutinins, must also be present in a specific distribution. This is actually
the case, since every serum contains those agglutinins which react with the
agglutinogens not present in the cells - a remarkable phenomenon, the cause
of which is not yet known for certain. This results in certain relationships
between the blood groups, which make them very easy to determine and
which are shown in the following scheme. The groups are named according
to the agglutinogens contained in the cells. (The sign + in the table indicates
agglutination.)




The question now arises whether iso-agglutination by normal serum is
confined to human blood or whether it also occurs in animals. In fact such
reactions are found but are distinct in only a small number of species and are
hardly ever as regular as in man. Only the highest anthropoid apes - whose
blood corpuscles, though scarcely their proteins, differ from those of man -
have blood group characteristics, which, in so far as we have yet been able
to establish, correspond completely to those of man.
  It can be assumed that a comparative examination of a large number of
animal species will help to explain how the groups are formed - a phenom-


236                         1930 K.LANDSTEINER

 enon which is not fully understood. One noteworthy result of the examina-
 tion of animal blood has already been obtained. Very soon after the first
 observations on iso-agglutination had been made, Ehrlich and Morgenroth
 described experiments in which, by means of blood-solvent antibodies (iso-
 lysins), they demonstrated differences in the blood of goats which arose
 when the animals were injected with blood of other individuals of the same
 species. In this case, however, no typical blood groups but, instead, nu-
 merous apparently random differences were found - a result which, except
 possibly for the intensity of the reactions, is roughly what one might have
 expected. Similar investigations, especially those conducted by Todd on
 cattle and chickens (Landsteiner and Miller; Todd) indicated almost com-
 plete individual specificity.
    The apparent contradiction between the observations on man and those
 on animals has recently been resolved. There were already some pointers in
 this direction, and I - working in conjunction with Levine - obtained signifi-
 cant results by using special immune sera which had been produced by in-
jecting human blood into rabbits; these results led to the discovery of three
 new agglutinable factors present in all four groups. Thus, when the break-
down of groups A and AB each into two subgroups (v. Dungern and Hirsz-
 feld; Guthrie et al.) - which had recently been subjected to a thorough study
 at my laboratory and by Thomsen - was taken into account, it was found
 there were at least 36 different types of human blood. In addition it was
 shown that weak iso-reactions (Unger, Guthrie et al.; Jones and Glynn;
 Landsteiner and Levine), which do not follow the group rule and which
 vary in their specificity, are more common than had previously been as-
 sumed - irregular reactions, which can indeed easily be distinguished from
 the typical ones and which in no way affect the validity of the rule of the
 four blood groups. These findings justify the assertion that very numerous
 individual blood differences exist in man, too, and that there are certainly
 other differences which could not yet be detected. Whether each individual
 blood really has a character of its own, or how often there is complete cor-
 respondence, we cannot yet say.
    For the time being, at least, these facts have no importance with regard
 to the therapeutic application of the blood groups, which will be discussed
 later, and yet they probably have a close bearing on an important field of
 surgery, namely the grafting of tissues.
    It had long been known that grafts, for instance of skin, were much more
 successful when the material to be grafted came from the same individual,


           INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN HUMAN BLOOD                             237
 and the results were similar where transplantable tumours were transferred
 to different strains of an animal species - as first described by Jensen. The
 experience of surgeons was confirmed by investigations on animals, among
 which the important series of experiments conducted by L. Loeb merit par-
 ticular mention. Loeb’s experiments consisted in the grafting of different
 tissues taken from an animal’s own body, from related and unrelated animals
 of the same stock, and from members of different varieties and species. The
 success of the grafts was generally speaking in reciprocal relation to the degree
 of affinity, and in the light of the observations as a whole it was possible to
 conclude that the tissues of separate individuals must possess special bio-
 chemical characteristics.
     The agreement between results obtained by two independent methods is
 so striking that the immediate assumption is that the differences which give
 rise, on the one hand, to the individual differences detectable by serum reac-
 tions and, on the other, to the individual-specific behaviour of grafted tissues
 are substantially of the same type. The reason for this assumption is that the
 group features can be demonstrated in the organ cells as well as in the blood.
 However, experiments based on this assumption - tissue grafts with blood
 groups taken into account - gave no clear result. But this is understandable,
 since the blood groups account for only some of the actually existing sero-
 logical differences, and even apparently slight deviations can affect the per-
 manent healing of tissues. This removes the doubt raised by these experi-
 ments, and the most probable assumption is that the two series of phenom-
 ena - the serological difference between individuals and the graft specificity -
 are basically related and rest on chemical differences of a similar kind. Conse-
 quently, the possibility of using the serum reactions for the important work
 of graft therapy can certainly not be ruled out, but existing knowledge
justifies no more than a hope.
     To the question of the chemical nature of the individual-specific sub-
 stances - which I shall now examine - the answer is entirely of a negative
 character but it is nevertheless not without interest. The praecipitin reac-
 tions -mentioned at the beginning of this lecture - which revealed the species
 difference between proteins gave rise to the view that the substrates of all
  serological reactions were proteins or substances closely related to them. At
  first this view was shaken by the study of blood antigens. The solubility
  of specific substances in organic solvents and in particular the investigation
  into the heterogenetic sheep’s blood antigen (which had been discovered by
  the Swedish pathologist Forssman in sheep’s blood and organs of different


238                        1930 K.LANDSTEINER

animals), from which a substance specifically binding but not acting directly
as an antigen can be separated by extraction with alcohol, led me to the view
that the constituents of many cell antigens are not protein-like substances
and only as a result of uniting with proteins become antigens, which are
appropriately called "complex antigens". This theory was strongly support-
ed by the fact that I was able to restore the antigen action of the specific
substance by mixing with protein-containing solutions.
   Analogous results were obtained from a study of certain specific substances
present in bacteria (Zinsser). Whereas in the case of bacteria the chemical
nature of the specifically binding substances (haptens) has been determined
for certain - as being colloidal polysaccharides (Avery and Heidelberger) - a
conclusive result in the case of the animal cell antigens has not yet been ob-
tamed. It can nevertheless be stated that the biochemical individuality of the
animal species rests on the existence of two different classes of species-specific
substances (Landsteiner and Van der Scheer; Bordet and Renaux), which
show basic differences in the nature of their occurrence.
   With regard to the actual subject of this lecture the fact is that group-
specific substances too can be extracted from the blood cells by means of
alcohol, and in this state normally give rise to the formation of antibodies
only in a mixture with antigenic proteins. It can therefore be concluded that
the haptens vary within a species, whereas analogous serological differences
between proteins are, admittedly, suspected but cannot convincingly be
proved. Another peculiarity is the fact that haptens related in their reactions
frequently occur in animal species which are very far apart in the zoological
system. Thus, the iso-agglutinogen A is related serologically to Forssman’s
antigen, which is contained in sheep’s blood, and therefore immune sera
react both with sheep’s blood and with human blood of groups A and AB,
but not with blood of group O or B (Schiff and Adelsberger). Still more
noteworthy is the presence of similar structures in bacteria. This emerges
from the fact that lysins from sheep’s blood and apparently also agglutinins
for blood of group A are present in many antibacterial sera, e.g. immune
sera for paratyphus bacilli, and that a dysentery serum (recently described
by Eisler), which agglutinates human blood, contains antibodies which in-
fluences to a higher degree the one of the two subgroups of group A which
is the less susceptible to iso-agglutinin.
   According to the result of investigations on artificial complex antigens the
genesis of immune iso-antibodies indicating individual differences is prob-
ably due to the fact that as a result of combination with other substances


           INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN HUMAN BLOOD                           239
 proteins peculiar to the species are enabled to induce the formation of anti-
 bodies. If, conversely, haptens identical or closely related with those of the
 animal are injected in association with foreign proteins, it appears that nor-
 mally no antibodies arise. An example is provided by Witebsky’s experi-
 ments, which showed that group-specific immune sera form, following in-
jection of blood of group A, only in rabbits whose organs do not contain
 substances resembling agglutinogen A. However, experiments conducted
 by Sachs and Klopstock on the occurrence of Wassermann’s reaction in rab-
 bits following injection with foreign serum of mixed alcohol extracts of
 rabbit organs showed that the rule does not apply universally.
    Whereas in this case the antibodies react only with organ extracts, O.
 Fischer succeeded - in experiments in which foreign serum of mixed extracts
 of rabbit’s blood was injected - in producing auto-antibodies in rabbits
 which acted upon the intact blood cells but had a haemolytic action only
 after prior cooling, like the haemolysins which I, together with Donath,
 found to be the cause of the dissolution of blood in paroxysmal cold haemo-
 globinuria. This result and the difference between immune sera produced
 from extracts of erythrocytes of group O and group B, on the one hand, and
 from intact cells, on the other, indicate that the nature of the combining of
 the substances contained in the cells also has an influence on the antigen
 properties.
    Following these brief observations on individual differences in blood and
 individual characteristics of the cell antigens I must now discuss the applica-
 tions of the group reactions.
    The relative frequency of the individual blood groups in various races
 has been dealt with in a well-nigh endless number of communications since
 L. and H. Hirschfeld made the noteworthy observation that characteristic dif-
 ferences in this connection are found in different races. Their most important
 finding was that group A is more frequent than B in northern Europeans,
 whereas the position is reversed in several Asiatic races. Another striking
 example is that of the American Indians who, when racially pure, belong
 almost exclusively to group O (Coca; Snyder), from which it is concluded
 that in the few cases where groups A and B do occur this is due to mixing
 of races.
    I am not qualified to discuss the results of anthropological investigations
 on blood groups and the conclusions drawn from them, and in any case vari-
 ous authors differ in their opinions regarding the general principles on which
 interpretation should be based and regarding individual problems. Never-


240                         1930 K.LANDSTEINER

theless, the majority view seems to be that the behaviour of the blood groups
in conjunction with other anthropological features allows us to draw con-
clusions regarding the relationship and origin of human races and is of some
importance to anthropological research.
   One practical application of the group characteristics which immediately
suggested itself was the distinguishing between human blood stains for
forensic purposes. By means of the praecipitin reactions (Kraus; Bordet;
Uhlenhuth) it is not difficult to determine whether a blood stain is of human
or animal origin, but forensic medicine knew no way of distinguishing be-
tween blood stains from different persons. Since the iso-agglutinins and the
corresponding agglutinogens will also keep for a considerable time in a dried
condition, the problem can in certain cases be solved, in particular when the
bloods in question, e.g. that of the accused and that of the victim, belong to
different groups. Reasons for using this method do not of course occur very
often and in your country in particular the occasions for using it are few and
far between, but nevertheless the test - according to a report by Lattes, who
was the first to use it in forensic cases - has proved useful in a number of cases
and has been the basis of court verdicts and of the acquittal of accused
persons.
   To a far greater extent the group reactions have been used in forensic
medicine for the purpose of establishing paternity. The possibility of arriving
at decisions in such cases rests on the studies of the hereditary transmission
of the blood groups; the principal factural results in this field we owe to
the work of von Dungern and Hirszfeld. As a result of their research it
became established that both agglutinogens A and B are dominant hered-
itary characteristics and that transmission of these characteristics follows
Mendel’s laws. The importance of this lies in the fact that in man there is
scarcely any other unequivocally identifiable physiological characteristic
with such simple hereditary behaviour. The genetic theory that there are
two independent pairs of genes, formulated by the above-named authors,
had to be abandoned following a statistical investigation by Bernstein.
Provided that a population is sufficiently mixed the frequency of the inher-
ited characteristics can be calculated on the basis of a certain genetic hypo-
thesis. Bernstein made this calculation and found that the observed figures
were constantly different from the figures calculated on the basis of the theo-
ry put forward by von Dungern and Hirszfeld. Complete agreement, on the
other hand, was found when the calculation was based on the hypothesis
that there are three allelomorphic genes localized at one position in the chro-


            INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN HUMAN BLOOD                           241
 mosome. The assumption also leads to certain consequences regarding the
 children of AB parents, and these consequences - except for a few very
 isolated cases, which, however, may be explained in accordance with Bern-
 stein’s theory - have likewise been proved by experience, as extensive inves-
 tigations by Thomsen, Schiff, Snyder, Furuhata, and Wiener have shown,
 and therefore the new theory is now almost universally accepted.
    As far as the forensic application is concerned the law of dominance of A
 and B is decisive. Thus, paternity can be excluded in all those cases where a
 child belongs to group A or B and where these characteristics are absent in
 the mother as well as in the alleged father. This test is used fairly frequently
 in a number of countries - especially in Germany and Austria, though also
 in Scandinavia. In a survey which appeared last year Schiff reported on some
  5,000 forensic investigations in which paternity was excluded, in more than
 8% of cases, whilst a calculation of cases in which exclusion would have
 been possible gives a proportion of approximately 15 to 100. In favour of the
 method, it can be mentioned that it has also been instrumental in inducing
 some fathers to recognize their illegitimate children.
    It will perhaps be of interest to show how a further development of the
paternity diagnosis might be possible. In the light of preliminary results
 (Landsteiner and Levine) on the transmission of two of the above-men-
 tioned blood characteristics, which are detectable with immune sera and are
  known by the letters M and N, the most probable assumption is that their
  presence is due to a pair of genes of which neither is dominant with respect
  to the other, so that when both are present a mixed type occurs. The
  existence of three phaenotypes M+N-, M-N+, and M+N+ is
  then explained by the fact that the third corresponds to the heterozygous
  form whilst the first and second correspond to the homozygous forms. Ac-
  cordingly the heterozygous form can be recognized directly as a special
  phaenotype. The consequences of this hypothesis can be seen from the fol-
  lowing schematic representation :


242                         1930 K.LANDSTEINER

   Our own observations showed some exceptions to these rules, and this
prevented us from finally accepting the hypothesis. It is possible, however,
that these deviations may have been due to illegitimacy or to imperfections
in the experimental method, which is not so simple as determination of the
group, and in fact Schiff has found complete agreement with expectation in
recently communicated observations on heredity and population statistics.
New, unpublished results by Wiener are almost as good.
   If this hypothesis should further prove correct the possibility of excluding
paternity would be approximately doubled, i.e. a judgment would be pos-
sible in roughly one case in three. Even on the basis of data already available,
however, assertions can be made with a considerable degree of probability.
Use of the subgroups of groups A and B may make possible a further ad-
vance (Landsteiner and Levine; Thomsen), if future experience confirms the
suspected laws.
   More important to practical medicine than the subject with which we
have just been dealing is the use of the blood-group reaction in transfusions.
It would take too long to go into the details of the interesting history of the
transfusion, which goes back for centuries, namely to the time of Harvey’s
discovery of the circulation of the blood. The possibility of carrying out
transfusions had already been debated before this, but the first successful
transfusions, prompted by Harvey’s great discovery, were performed by
Lower on dogs, in 1666 in England, and the next year the first transfusions
of animal blood to humans were carried out by Denys in France, and by
Lower and King in England. Further efforts were then directed to the
inventing of special appliances and led to the experience that there is no
need to transfer the blood from vessel to vessel but that even defibrinated
blood can be used (Bischoff, 1835). The first transfusion with human
blood was probably carried out by Blundell during the first half of the 19th
century.
   How differently the prospects were assessed can be illustrated by two re-
marks, which I quote from Snyder. In a history of the Royal Society, Sprat
(1607) says: "Hence arose many new experiments, and chiefly that of trans-
fusing blood - that will probably end in extraordinary success." Again in a
History of the Royal Society, by Thompson (1812), we find the passage : "The
expected advantages resulting from this practice have long been known to
be visionary." The aim of introducing the method into regular medical
practice was not achieved, despite great efforts and lively discussions of the
question, and the idea was finally abandoned and that because the operation,


            INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN HUMAN BLOOD                           243
though often very useful, sometimes resulted in serious symptoms and even
in the death of the patient.
   With regard to the injection of animal blood the reason for the disasters
followed from the observations of Landois, who as far back as 1875 discov-
ered the phenomena of agglutination and haemolysis, which frequently occur
when blood is brought into contact with serum from an alien species. How-
ever, it remained a mystery why the introduction of human blood into the
circulation may also be dangerous, since it was regarded as obvious that
serum or plasma was an inert medium as far as cells of the same species were
concerned, a conviction which may have been strengthened by the fact that
such sera were used in histological examinations.
   The simple solution to the problem was provided by the discovery of
individual differences in blood, and of the blood groups. Animal experi-
ments and more particularly clinical experiments with cases where mistakes
were made in group determinations have confirmed this connection and
leave no doubt that the transfusion of agglutinable human blood is normally
accompanied by harmful consequences. However, the pathogenesis of trans-
fusion shock has not yet been fully explained.
   The first blood transfusion in which the agglutinin reaction was taken
into account was carried out by Ottenberg, but it was only during the
emergencies of the Great War that the method oftransfusion with serological
selection of donor was widely adopted - a method which has since remained
the normal practice.
   It would be out of place here to go into such details as the sources of error
in group determination, their control by direct comparison of the blood of
the recipient with that of the donor, and the precaution of beginning the
transfusion by injecting small quantities of blood. It should only be men-
tioned that it is not absolutely necessary to use blood of the same group, but
that in stead of this, blood of group O for instance (see Ottenberg), the cells
of which are not affected by the serum of the recipient, can also be used. In
this case, however, care must be taken to exclude donors whose serum has a
high agglutinin content, as this can be dangerous, especially to severely anae-
mic and weakened patients. Use of blood from so-called "universal donors"
belonging to group O or of non-agglutinable blood of any alien group can
be of great value in emergency cases and for recipients belonging to the rare
blood groups.
   The most obvious indication for blood transfusion is acute or chronic
anaemia, e.g. as a result of wounds or lung haemorrhages, in obstetrical cases


244                         1930 K.LANDSTEINER

and in those of gastric and duodenal ulcer. The effect, which in cases of
haemorrhage often means the saving of a patient’s life, is of course primarily
due to the replacement of blood, an important factor here being that the
transferred erythrocytes retain for several weeks their functional capacity in
the circulation. Other important effects are haemostasis due to increased
coagulability and presumably also stimulation of blood regeneration in the
bone marrow, as has been concluded from changes in the histological blood
picture. However, transfusion therapy which used to be widely used for per-
nicious anaemia has now become almost superfluous as the result of the dis-
covery of liver therapy.
   Another wide field of application is shock following severe injury and
operations, and it is assumed that in these cases the introduction
                                                           --         of blood has
a better effect than injection of isotonic solutions, such as the acacia (gum ara-
bic)-containing solution of common salt recommended by Bayliss during the
war. In accordance with this indication transfusions are given, often with great
success, after major operations - not only for the purpose of replacing blood
but also to serve as a stimulant. American surgeons also recommend the treat-
ment before major operations where the patient is in a weakened condition.
 Good results have also been obtained with haemophilia, thrombopenic
purpura and to some extent with agranulocytosis, carbon-monoxide poi-
soning and burns, whereas with a series of other diseases, e.g. septicaemia,
for which transfusion therapy has been tried, the results have been doubtful.
   Some figures which I quoted in a report to the Microbiology Congress in
Paris provide information on the frequency with which transfusions are
given and the relative safety which has been achieved with this method -
though it must be remembered that this success is partly due to the great
advances in surgical methods. There is a slight variation in the statistics, as
some authors in contrast to others still have isolated failures to report. Since
these differences are probably connected with the transfusion technique I
think I am justified in basing my judgment on the favourable reports, pro-
vided that they cover a large number of cases.
   The number of transfusions given is surprisingly large, and it may well
be that use of this technique has been taken too far. According to statistics
which were kindly made available to me by Dr. Corwin of the Academy of
Medicine, some 10,000 transfusions were given in New York during 1929.
In a recently published communication by Tiber from the Bellevue Hospital
in New York, 1,467 transfusions carried out during the three-and-a-half
years up to July 1929 are reported. Among these there were two deaths, one


            INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN HUMAN BLOOD                             245
 due to incorrect blood-group determination, the other - also probably
 avoidable - involving a group-A baby in poor condition which was given a
 transfusion of blood from a so-called "universal donor" of group O. Three
 fatalities which occurred among the 1,036 cases quoted in a report by Pem-
 berton at the Mayo Clinic were caused by errors in blood-group determina-
 tion. At Kiel, as reported to me by Dr. Beck, 2,300 transfusions were carried
 out over a period of about five years without one fatal accident. Mild after-
 effects, such as shivering and pyrexia, were felt by 2-3% of the patients. One
 noteworthy case reported by Beck was that of a patient suffering from per-
 nicious anaemia to whom he gave 87 transfusions within three-and-a-half
 years, without any serious symptoms.
    Good though these results may be, isolated serious and even fatal acci-
 dents - which may not be due to technical errors - as well as frequent slight
 disturbances are still reported as we have already mentioned. It is unlikely
 that the differences in blood indicated by atypical iso-agglutinins were an
 important factor in these cases, and if this is so they could easily have been
 avoided. It has not been established for certain whether, as has been assumed,
 intense pseudo-agglutination has an injurious effect through the serum of the
recipient. Some of the disturbances observed were probably due to allergy
 to nutritive substances present in the injected blood, whilst others were due
 to the action of antibodies which formed as a result of earlier transfusions.
 Another problem which has not yet been investigated sufficiently is whether
 differences exist between individual proteins, and, if so, whether these may
 cause antibodies to form.
    All in all, the results of blood transfusions are already highly satisfactory,
 and we have reason to hope that a thorough study of cases with undesirable
 aftereffects will help us to assess the significance of the suspected causes and
 perhaps reveal unknown causes, and thus finally virtually eliminate the slight
 risks which transfusion still involves.
    Apart from the solution of this practical problem, the subject with which
 we have been dealing can also be developed by a study of the biological
 problem of individual serological differences in general, and in particular by
 the further improvement of techniques for the finer individual differentiation
 of human blood as well as by a continuation of the genetic analysis of serolog-
 ical blood differences in humans and animals. As a result of work already done,
 at least two of the human chromosome pairs - apart from the sexual chromo-
 some - can be regarded as characterized by a specific feature (see also F. Bern-
 stein, in Z. Inductive Abstammungs-Vererbungslehre, 57 (1931) 113).
