ANALOGY AS A SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE
Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1973

by
K O N R A D Z. L O R E N Z

Austrian Academy of Sciences
Institute of Comparative Behaviour Research, Altenberg, Austria




1. T H E C O N C E P T   OF   ANALOGY

In the course of evolution it constantly happens that, independently of each
other, two different forms of life take similar, parallel paths in adapting them-
selves to the same external circumstances. Practically all animals which move
fast in a homogeneous medium have found means of giving their body a
streamlined shape, thereby reducing friction to a minium. The “invention” of
concentrating light on a tissue sensitive to it by means of a diaphanous lens has
been made independently at least four times by different phyla of animals;
and in two of these, in the cephalopods and in the vertebrates, this kind of
“eye” has evolved into the true, image-projecting camera through which we
ourselves are able to see the world.
   Thanks to old discoveries by Charles Darwin and very recent ones by bio-
chemists, we have a fairly sound knowledge of the processes which, in the
course of evolution, achieve these marvellous structures. The student of evolu-
tion has good reason to assume that the abundance of different bodily struc-
tures which, by their wonderful expediency, make life possible for such
amazingly different creatures under such amazingly different conditions, all
owe their existence to these processes which we are wont to subsume under the
concept of adaptation. This assumption, whose correctness I do not propose
to discuss here, forms the basis of the reasoning which the evolutionist applies
to the phenomenon of analogy.


2. D E D U C I N G   COMPARABLE SURVIVAL VALUE FROM SIMILARITY OF FORM

Whenever we find, in two forms of life that are unrelated to each other, a
similarity of form or of behaviour patterns which relates to more than a few
minor details, we assume it to be caused by parallel adaptation to the same
life-preserving function. T he improbability of coincidental similarity is pro-
portional to the number of independent traits of similarity, and is, for n such
characters, equal to         If we find, in a swift and in an airplane, or in a
shark, or a dolphin and in a torpedeo, the striking resemblances illustrated
in Fig. 1, we can safely assume that in the organisms as well as in the man-
made machines, the need to reduce friction has led to parallel adaptations.
Though the independent points of similarity are, in these cases, not very many,


                                                                               97


                               Physiology or Medicine 1973




Fig. 1. Analogy of form due to adaptation to an identical function. Streamlining in
a) a swift, b) a fighter plane, c) a shark, d) a dolphin, e) a torpedo.




it is still a safe guess that any organism or vehicle possessing them is adapted
to fast motion;
   There are conformities which concern an incomparably greater number of
independent details. Fig. 2 shows cross sections through the eyes of a verte-
brate and a cephalopod. In both cases there is a lens, a retina connected by
nerves with the brain, a muscle moving the lens in order to focus, a contractile
iris acting as a diaphragm, a diaphanous cornea in front of the camera and a
layer of pigmented cells shielding it from behind - as well as many other
matching details. If a zoologist who knew nothing whatever of the existence
of cephalopods were examining such an eye for the very first time, he would
conclude without further ado that it was indeed a light-perceiving organ. He
would not even need to observe a live octopus to know this much with cer-
tainty.


3. T H E   ALLEGATION OF   “FALSE   ANALOGY'


Ethologists are often accused of drawing false analogies between animal and
human behaviour. However, no such thing as a false analogy exists: an ana-
logy can be more or less detailed and hence more or less informative. Assidu-
ously searching for a really false analog), I found a couple of technological


examples within my own experience. Once I mistook a mill for a sternwheel
steamer. A vessel was anchored on the banks of the Danube near Budapest.
It had a little smoking funnel and at its stern an enormous slowly-turning
paddle-wheel. Another time, I mistook a small electric power plant, consisting
of a two-stroke engine and a dynamo, for a compressor. The only biological
example that I could find concerned a luminescent organ of a pelagic gas-
tropod, which was mistaken for an eye, because it had an epidermal lens and,
behind this, a high cylindrical epithelium connected with the brain by a nerve
Even in these examples, the analogy was false only in respect of the direction
in which energy was transmitted.


4. T H E   CONCEPT OF HOMOLOGY


There is, in my opinion, only one possibility of an error that might conceivably
be described as the “drawing of a false analogy” and that is mistaking an
homology for an analogy. An homology can be defined as any resemblance
between two species that can be explained by their common descent from an
ancestor possessing the character in which they are similar to each other.
Strictly speaking, the term homologous can only be applied to characters and
not to organs. Fig. 3 shows the forelimbs of a number of tetrapod vertebrates
intentionally chosen to illustrate the extreme variety of uses to which a front
leg can be put and the evolutional changes it can undergo in the service of
these different functions. Notwithstanding the dissimilarities of these functions
and of their respective requirements, all these members are built on the same
basic plan and consist of comparable elements, such as bones, muscles, nerves.
The very dissimilarity of their functions makes it extremely improbable that


                               Physiology or Medicine 1973




Fig. 3. Anterior limbs of vertebrates. 1. Jurassic flying reptile. 2. Bat. 3. Whale. 4. Sea
Lion. 5. Mole. 6. Dog. 7. Bear. 8. Elephant. 9. Man. The humerus and the metacarpal
bones are tinged in black, the carpal bone grey




the manifold resemblances of their forms could be due to parallel adaptation,
in other words to analogy.
   As a pupil of the comparative anatomist and embryologist Ferdinand Hoch-
stetter, I had the benefit of a very thorough instruction in the methodological
procedure of distinguishing similarities caused by common descent from those
due to parallel adaptation. In fact, the making of this distinction forms a great
part of the comparative evolutionist’s daily work. Perhaps I should mention
here that this procedure has led me to the discovery which I personally con-
sider to be my own most important contribution to science. Knowing animal
behaviour as I did, and being instructed in the methods of phylogenetic com-
parison as I was, I could not fail to discover that the very same methods of
comparison, the same concepts of analogy and homology are as applicable to
characters of behaviour as they are in those of morphology. This discovery is
implicitly contained in the works of Charles Otis Whitman and of Oskar
Heinroth; it is only its explicit formulation and the realization of its far-reach-
ing inferences to which I can lay claim. A great part of my life’s work has


                                                                                 101




Fig. 4. Change of function in a pieve of medieval armour which, losing its protective
function, becomes a status symbol of officers.



consisted in tracing the phylogeny of behaviour by disentangling the effects
of homology and of parallel evolution. Full recognition of the fact that be-
haviour patterns can be hereditary and species-specific to the point of being
homologizable was impeded by resistance from certain schools of thought,
and my extensive paper on homologous motor patterns in Anatidae was nec-
essary to make my point.


5.   C   ULTURAL HOMOLOGY


Much later in life I realized that, in the development of human cultures, the
interaction between historically-induced similarities and resemblances caused
by parallel evolution - in other words between homologies and analogies -
was very much the same as in the phylogeny of species and that it posed
very much the same problems. I shall have occasion to refer to these later
on; here I want to illustrate the existence of cultural homology. Fig. 4
illustrates the cultural changes by which the piece of medieval armour that
was originally designed to protect throat and chest was gradually turned, by
a change of function, into a status symbol. Otto Koenig, in his book Kultur-
ethologie, has adduced many other examples of persistent historically-induced
similarity of characters to which the adjective “homologous” can legitimately
be applied.


Fig. 5. Homology of technical products. Characters traceable to the ancestor, the
horse-drawn coach persists,   against the interests of technical progress, in railway
carriages.




   Ritualization and symbolisms play a large role in traditional clothing
and particularly in military uniforms in their historical changes, so that the
appearance of historically-retained similarities is, perhaps, not very surprising.
It is, however, surprising that the same retention of historical features, not
only independently of function, but in clear defiance of it, is observable
even in that part of human culture which one would suppose to be free of
symbolism, ritualization and sentimental conservativism, namely in techno-
logy. Fig. 5 illustrates the development of the railway carriage. The ancestral
form of the horse-drawn coach stubbornly persists, despite the very consid-
erable difficulties which it entails, such as the necessity of constructing a run-
ningboard all along the train, on which the conductor had to climb along,
from compartment to compartment, exposed to the inclemency of the weather
and to the obvious danger of falling off. The advantages of the alternative
solution of building a longitudinal corridor within the carriage are so obvious
that they serve as a demonstration of the amazing power exerted by the fac-
tors tending to preserve historical features in defiance of expediency.
   The existence of these cultural homologies is of high theoretical importance,
as it proves that, in the passing-on of cultural information from one genera-
tion to the next, processes are at work which are entirely independent of ra-
tional considerations and which, in many respects, are functionally analogous
to the factors maintaining invariance in genetical inheritance.


                                                                               103


6.   D EDUCING   FUNCTION   FROM   BEHAVIOURAL   ANALOGIES



Let me now speak of the value of analogies in the study of behaviour. Not
being vitalists, we hold that any regularly observable pattern of behaviour
which, with equal regularity, achieves survival value is the function of a sen-
sory and nervous mechanism evolved by the species in the service of that par-
ticular function. Necessarily, the structures underlying such a function must
be very complicated, and the more complicated they are, the less likely it is,
as we already know, that two unrelated forms of life should, by sheer coin-
cidence, have happened to evolve behaviour patterns which resemble each
other in a great many independent characters.
   A striking example of two complicated sets of behaviour patterns evolving
independently in unrelated species, yet in such a manner as to produce a
great number of indubitable analogies is furnished by the behaviour of human
beings and of geese when they fall in love and when they are jealous. Time
and again I have been accused of uncritical anthropomorphism when
describing, in some detail, this behaviour of birds and people. Psychologists
have protested that it is misleading to use terms like falling in love, marrying or
being jealous when speaking of animals. I shall proceed to justify the use of
these purely functional concepts. In order to assess correctly the vast impro-
bability of two complicated behaviour patterns in two unrelated species being
similar to each other in so many independent points, one must envisage the
complication of the underlying physiological organization. Consider the mini-
mum degree of complication which even a man-made electronic model would
have to possess in order to simulate, in the simplest possible manner, the be-
haviour patterns here under discussion. Imagine an apparatus, A, which is in
communication with another one, B, and keeps on continuously checking
whether apparatus B gets into communication with a third apparatus C, and
which furthermore, on finding that this is indeed the case, does its utmost to
interrupt this communication. If one tries to build models simulating these
activities, for example in the manner in which Grey-Walter’s famous electro-
nic tortoises are built, one soon realizes that the minimum complication of
such a system far surpasses that of a mere eye.
   The conclusion to be drawn from this reasoning is as simple as it is impor-
tant. Since we know that the behaviour patterns of geese and men cannot
possibly be homologous - the last common ancestors of birds and mammals
were lowest reptiles with minute brains and certainly incapable of any com-
plicated social behaviour - and since we know that the improbability of coin-
cidental similarity can only be expressed in astronomical numbers, we know
for certain that it was a more or less identical survival value which caused
jealousy behaviour to evolve in birds as well as in man.
   This, however, is all that the analogy is able to tell us. It does not tell us
wherein this survival value lies - though we can hope to ascertain this by
observations and experiments on geese. It does not tell us anything about the
physiological mechanisms bringing about jealousy behaviour in the two spe-
cies; they may well be quite different in each case. Streamlining is achieved


104                         Physiology or Medicine 1973


in the shark by the shape of the musculature, in the dolphin by a thick layer
of, blubber, and in the torpedo by welded steel plates. By the same token,
jealousy may be - and probably is - caused by an inherited and genetically
fixed programme in geese, while it might be determined by cultural tradition
in man - though I do not think it is, at least not entirely.
   Limited though the knowledge derived from this kind of analogy may be,
its importance is considerable. In the complicated interaction of human social
behaviour, there is much that does not have any survival value and never had
any. So it is of consequence to know that a certain recognizable pattern of
behaviour does, or at least once did, possess a survival value for the species,
in other words, that it is not pathological. Our chances of finding out
wherein the survival value of the behaviour pattern lies are vastly increased
by finding the pattern in an animal on which we can experiment.
   When we speak of falling in love, of friendship, personal enmity or jealousy
in these or other animals, we are not guilty of anthropomorphism. These terms
refer to functionally-determined concepts, just as do the terms legs, wings,
eyes and the names used for other bodily structures that have evolved inde-
pendently in different phyla or animals. No one uses quotation marks when
speaking or writing about the eyes or the legs of an insect or a crab, nor do
we when discussing analogous behaviour patterns.
   However, in using these different kinds of terms, we must be very clear as
to whether the word we use at a given moment refers to a concept based on
functional analogy or to one based on homology, e.g. on common phyletic
origin. The word “leg” or “wing” may have the connotation of the first kind
of concept in one case and of the second in another. Also, there is the third
possibility of a word connoting the concept of physiological, causal identity.
These three kinds of conceptualization may coincide or they may not. To
make a clear distinction between them is particularly important when one is
speaking of behaviour. A homologous behaviour pattern can retain its ances-
tral form and function in two descendants, and yet become physiologically
different. The rhythmical beat of the umbrella is caused by ondogenous stim-
ulus generation in many hydrozoa and in larva (Ephyrae) in other medusae.
In adult Scyphomedusae, however, it is caused by reflexes released through
the mechanism of the so-called marginal bodies. A homologous motor pattern
may retain its original physiological causation as well as its external forms,
yet undergo an entire change of function. The motor pattern of “inciting”
common to the females of most Anatidae is derived from a threatening move-
ment and has the primary function of causing the male to attack the adver-
sary indicated by the female’s threat. It has entirely lost this function in
some species, for instance in the Golden-eyes, in which it has become a pure
courtship movement of the female. Two non-homologous motor patterns of
two related species may, by a change of function, be pressed into the service
of the same survival value. The pre-flight movement of ducks is derived from
an intention movement of flying, an upward thrust of head and neck, while
the corresponding signal of geese is derived from a displacement shaking of
the head. When we speak of “pre-flight movements of Anatidae” we form a


                                Analogy as a Source   of Knowledge                       105


functional concept embracing both. These examples are sufficient to demon-
strate the importance of keeping functional, phylogenetical and physiological
conceptualizations clearly apart. Ethologists are not guilty of “reifications”
or of illegitimate anticipations of physiological explanations when they form
concepts that are only functionally defined - like, for instance, the concept
of the IRM, the innate releasing mechanism. They are, in fact, deeply aware
that this function may be performed by the sensory organ itself - as in the
cricket - or by a complicated organization of the retina - as in the frog - or by
the highest and most complicated processes within the central nervous system.


D   EDUCING   THE   EXISTENCE    OF   PHYSIOLOGICAL          MECHANISMS   FROM   KNOWN

ANALOGOUS      FUNCTIONS

Recognizing analogies can become an important source of knowledge in quite
another way. We can assume with certainty that, for instance, the functions
of respiration, of food intake, of excretion, of propagation, etc., must somehow
be performed by any living organism. In examining an unknown living system,
we are, therefore, justified in searching for organs serving functions which
we know to be indispensable. We are surprised if we miss some of them, for
instance the respiratory tract in some small salamanders which breathe exclu-
sively through their skin.
    A human culture is a living system. Though it is one of the highest level
of integration, its continuance is nevertheless dependent on all the indispens-
able functions mentioned above. The thought obtrudes itself that there is one
of these necessary functions which is insufficient in our present culture, that
of excretion. Human culture, after enveloping and filling the whole globe, is
in danger of being killed by its own excretion, of dying from an illness closely
analogous to uraemia. Humanity will be forced to invent some sort of plane-
tary kidney - or it will die from its own waste products.
    There are other functions that are equally indispensable to the survival of
all living systems, ranging from bacteria to cultures. In any of these systems,
adaptation has been achieved by the process, already mentioned, which hinges
on the gaining of information by means of genetic change and natural selec-
 tion, as well as on the storing of knowledge in the code of the chain molecules
 in the genome.
    This storing, like any retention of information, of knowledge, is achieved by
 the formation of structure. Not only in the little double helix, but also in the
 programming of the human brain, in writing, or any other form of “memory
 bank”, knowledge is laid down in structures.
    The indispensable supporting and retaining function of structure always
 has to be paid for by a “stiffening”, in other words, by the sacrifice of certain
 degrees of freedom. The structure of our skeleton provides an example; a
 worm can bend its body at any point, whereas we can flex our limbs only
 where joints are provided; but we can stand upright and the worm cannot.
    All the adaptedness of living systems is based on knowledge laid down in
 structure; structure means static adaptedness, as opposed to the dynamic pro-


106                          Physiology or Medicine 1973


cess of adaptation. Hence, new adaptation unconditionally presupposes a
dismantling of some structures. The gaining of new information inexorably
demands the breaking down of some previous knowledge which, up to that
moment, had appeared to be final.
   The dynamics of these two antagonistic functions are universally common
to all living systems. Always, a harmonious equilibrium must be sustained
between, on the one hand, the factors maintaining the necessary degree of
 invariance and, on the other, the factors which tend to break up firm struc-
tures and thereby create the degree of variability which is the prerequisite
of all further gaining of information, in other words, of all new adaptation.
   All this is obviously true of human culture as well as of any other living
system whose lifespan exceeds that of the individual, e.g. of any species of
bacteria, plants or animals. It is, therefore, legitimate to search for the mecha-
nisms which, in their harmonious antagonism of preserving and dismantling
structures, achieve the task of keeping a culture adapted to its ever-changing
environment. In my latest book Die Rückseite des Spiegels, I have tried to
demonstrate these two antagonistic sets of mechanisms in human culture.
   The preservation of the necessary invariance is achieved by procedures
curiously reminiscent of genetic inheritance. In much the same manner as the
new nucleotids are arranged along the old half of a double helix, so as to
produce a copy of it, the invariant structures of a culture are passed on,
from one generation to the next, by a process in which the young generation
makes a copy of the cultural knowledge possessed by the old. Sheer imitation,
respect for a father-figure, identification with it, force of habit, love of old
ritualized customs and, last not least, the conservativism of “magical thinking”
and superstition - which as we have seen influences even the construction of
railway carriages - contributes to invest cultural tradition with that degree
of invariance which is necessary to make it inheritable at all.
   Opposed to these invariance-preserving mechanisms, there is the specifi-
cally human urge to curiosity and freedom of thought which with some of us,
persists until senescence puts a stop to it. However, the age of puberty is
typically the phase in our ontogeny during which we tend to rebel against
tradition, to doubt the wisdom of traditional knowledge and to cast about
for new causes to embrace, for new ideals.
   In a paper which I read a few years ago - at a Nobel symposium on “The
Place of Value in a World of Facts” - I tried to analyse certain malfunctions
of the antagonistic mechanisms and the dangers of an enmity between the ge-
nerations arising from these disturbances. I tried to convince my audience
that the question whether conservativism is “good” or “bad”, or whether the
rebellion of youth is “good” or “bad”, is just as inane as the question whether
some endocrine function, for instance that of the thyroid gland, is “good”
or “bad”. Excesses as well as deficiency of any such function cause illness.
Excess of thyroid function causes Basedow’s disease, deficiency myxoedema.
Excess of conservativism produces living fossils which will not go on living for
long, and excess of variability results in the appearance of monsters which are
not viable at all.


                                                                                107



  Between the conservative representatives of the “establishment” on the one
                                          there has arisen a certain enmity
hand and rebelling youth on the other,
which makes it difficult for each of the antagonists to recognize the fact that
the endeavours of both are equally indispensable for the survival of our cul-
ture. If and when this enmity escalates into actual hate, the antagonists cease
                                               to treat each other as different,
to interact in the normal way and begin
hostile cultures; in fact they begin to indulge in activities closely akin to tribal
warfare. This represents a great danger to our culture, inasmuch as it may re-
sult in a complete disruption of its traditions.
