UNRAVELING THE SENSE OF SMELL

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2004
by
Linda B. Buck

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109–1024, USA.




INTRODUCTION
The subject of my lecture is the sense of smell, one of the five senses through
which we perceive the world. Through the sense of smell, humans and other
mammals can perceive a vast number and variety of chemicals in the external
world. It is estimated that humans can sense as many as 10,000 to 100,000
chemicals as having a distinct odor. All of these “odorants” are small, volatile
molecules. However, they have diverse structures and somehow those diffe-
rent structures are perceived as having different odors (Figure 1).
   The sense of smell is mediated by the olfactory system, a system that is char-
acterized by exquisite sensitivity and discriminatory power. Even a slight
change in the structure of an odorant can change its perceived odor. For
example, the close relative of a chemical that is perceived as pear can have
the scent of an apple. In addition to odorants, the olfactory system detects
pheromones, chemicals that are released from animals and act on members
of the same species, stimulating hormonal changes or instinctive behaviors,
such as mating or aggression. The olfactory system also detects predator
odors, which can elicit innate fear responses.
   Over the past 16 years, our work has focused on two questions. First, how
do mammals detect so many different environmental chemicals? And second,
how does the brain translate those chemicals into diverse odor perceptions
and behaviors?
   Odorants are initially detected by olfactory sensory neurons, which are
located in the olfactory epithelium lining the nasal cavity (Figure 2). These
neurons transmit signals to the olfactory bulb of the brain, which then relays
those signals to the olfactory cortex. From there, olfactory information is sent
to a number of other brain areas. These include higher cortical areas thought
to be involved in odor discrimination as well as deep limbic areas of the
brain, which are thought to mediate the emotional and physiological effects
of odors. In contrast to odorants, pheromones are detected primarily in the
vomeronasal organ, or VNO, a separate olfactory structure in the nasal septum.


                                                                             267


Figure 1. Humans and other mammals perceive a vast number of chemicals as having
distinct odors.




Figure 2. The olfactory pathway. Odorants are detected by olfactory sensory neurons in the
olfactory epithelium. Signals generated in those neurons are relayed through the olfactory
bulb to the olfactory cortex and then sent to other brain areas.


268


From VNO neurons, signals are relayed through the accessory bulb to the
medial amygdala and then the hypothalamus, areas implicated in hormonal
and behavioral responses to pheromones.
   The olfactory epithelium contains millions of olfactory sensory neurons. It
also contains supporting cells and a basal layer of stem cells. Olfactory sensory
neurons are short-lived cells that are continuously replaced from the stem
cell layer. At the surface of the epithelium, each neuron extends cilia into the
nasal lumen, allowing it to come in contact with odorants dissolved in the nasal
mucus. Each neuron communicates with the brain via a single axon that it
extends to the olfactory bulb.

ODORANT RECEPTORS
In our initial experiments, Richard Axel and I asked how it is that these neurons
detect odorants. Beginning in 1965 with the work of Robert Gesteland
(Gesteland et al., 1965), numerous electrophysiological studies had shown that
different olfactory sensory neurons are depolarized, or activated, by different
odorants. John Amoore proposed that these neurons had odorant receptor
proteins that varied in their affinity for different odorants (Amoore, 1970;
Amoore, 1977). In the mid 1980s, hints started to emerge about signal transduc-
tion in the cilia of the olfactory neurons. Doron Lancet and Sol Snyder and their
colleagues showed that odorants induce GTP-dependent increases in adenylyl
cyclase activity in the cilia, suggesting the involvement of intracellular G proteins
(Pace et al., 1985; Sklar et al., 1986), and Randy Reed identified Golf, a G pro-
tein that could mediate this response and was highly expressed in olfactory
sensory neurons (Jones and Reed, 1989).
    In 1988, Richard Axel and I embarked on a search for odorant receptors.
The strategy we devised was based on three assumptions. First, odorant
receptors would be selectively expressed in the olfactory epithelium. Second,
since odorants vary in structure, there would be a family of varied, but related
receptors, and those receptors would be encoded by a multigene family. And
third, odorant receptors would be related to other types of receptors that
interact with intracellular G proteins. By 1989, molecular cloning had revealed
the structures of about 20 of these G protein-coupled receptors, or “GPCRs”.
All of these receptors had seven potential transmembrane domains and they
shared a few amino acid sequence motifs.
    On the basis of these assumptions, we set out to search for a family of GPCRs
expressed in the rat olfactory epithelium (Buck and Axel, 1991). To do this, we
first used PCR (the polymerase chain reaction) to look for receptors expressed
in the olfactory epithelium that were related to known GPCRs. We designed 11
degenerate oligonucleotide primers that matched amino acid sequences in
transmembrane domains 2 and 7 of known GPCRs. We then used these primers
in all 30 pairwise combinations to amplify related sequences in cDNA prepared
from rat olfactory epithelium RNA. From the 30 PCR reactions, we obtained 64
different PCR products in the appropriate size range. Each of these appeared as
a distinct band using agarose gel electrophoresis.

                                                                                269


Figure 3. Topology of an odorant receptor in the membrane. Individual amino acid residues
are indicated by balls. Red balls indicate residues that were hypervariable among ten odorant
receptors. Adapted from Buck and Axel, 1991.




   We then asked whether any of the 64 PCR products contained multiple mem-
bers of a multigene family. To do this we cut the DNA in each PCR product with
a restriction enzyme. Most of the bands were cut into a small number of frag-
ments that added up to the original in size. However, one band, #13, was cut into
a large number of fragments, suggesting that it might contain multiple members
of a multigene family. When we cloned and sequenced five of the DNAs in #13,
we found what we had been looking for. All five encoded novel proteins with the
hallmarks of GPCRs. Moreover, all five were related, but each one was unique.
   Using these DNAs as probes, we isolated a series of related cDNAs from an
olfactory epithelium cDNA library. We initially examined the proteins encoded
by ten of the cDNAs. All ten proteins had the seven potential transmembrane
domains characteristic of GPCRs. In addition, they had several amino acid
sequence motifs seen in other GPCRs. However, the ten receptors all shared
sequence motifs not seen in any other GPCRs, indicating that they were
members of a novel receptor family.
   Figure 3 shows a model of one of these receptors in the membrane with
individual amino acids represented as balls. Red balls indicate amino acids
that were especially variable among the ten receptors. Importantly, though
related, the ten olfactory receptors varied extensively in amino acid sequence.
This hypervariability was consistent with an ability of the receptors to interact
with odorants with different structures.
   Consistent with the selective expression of these receptors in the olfactory
epithelium, a mixed olfactory receptor DNA probe hybridized to RNA from the
olfactory epithelium, but not other tissues. Moreover, enriching for olfactory
sensory neurons also enriched for receptor RNAs, suggesting that the receptors
were expressed predominantly or exclusively by olfactory sensory neurons.

270


Figure 4. The chromosomal distribution of human odorant receptor genes. Intact receptor
genes are shown in red and pseudogenes in green. Adapted from Malnic et al., 2004.




   On Southern blots of genomic DNA, single receptor probes hybridized
to multiple bands, and a mixed receptor probe hybridized to a large number
of bands. This further indicated that the receptors we had found were
encoded by a large multigene family. Genomic library screens indicated that
the multigene family contained in excess of 100 members. In later studies,
we obtained evidence for about 1000 different olfactory receptor genes in
mouse.
   On the basis of these results, we concluded that the receptor family we had
identified coded for odorant receptors (ORs) expressed by olfactory sensory
neurons in the nose (Buck and Axel, 1991). Subsequent studies showed that
homologous families of odorant receptors are present in vertebrate species
ranging from fish to humans (reviewed in Mombaerts, 1999). In 1991, after
publishing our work on odorant receptors (Buck and Axel, 1991), I left
Richard Axel's lab to join the faculty of Harvard Medical School.
   A decade later, the sequencing of human and mouse genomes made it
possible to determine the number of OR genes in these species. This was
done by Lancet and Zozulya for human (Glusman et al., 2001; Zozulya et al.,
2001) and by Firestein and Trask for mouse (Young and Trask, 2002; Zhang
and Firestein, 2002), and in my lab it was done for both species by Bettina
Malnic and Paul Godfrey (Godfrey et al., 2004; Malnic et al., 2004). These
studies indicate that humans have about 350 different ORs and mice have
about 1000. This indicates that roughly 1–5% of the genes in the genome are
devoted to the detection of odorants. OR genes are highly distributed across
the genome. In our studies of the human genome, we found OR genes on 21
different chromosomes and at 51 different chromosomal loci, where they are
found singly or in clusters (Figure 4) (Malnic et al., 2004).

                                                                                  271


   In the mid 1990s, two additional families of receptors were found in the
olfactory system. These receptors, called V1Rs and V2Rs, are unrelated to ORs
in protein sequence, but both types have the characteristic seven transmem-
brane structure of GPCRs. V1R and V2R genes are selectively expressed in
the VNO, suggesting that they might be pheromone receptors. Both receptor
families have more than 100 members. The V1R family was identified in 1995
by Dulac and Axel (Dulac and Axel, 1995), and the V2R family was identified
in 1997 by Hiroaki Matsunami in my lab and also by the laboratories of
Catherine Dulac and Nicholas Ryba (Herrada and Dulac; Matsunami and
Buck, 1997; Ryba and Tirandelli, 1997).


ORGANIZATION OF ODORANT RECEPTORS IN THE OLFACTORY
EPITHELIUM
The discovery of odorant receptors explained how the olfactory system
detects a vast array of chemicals in the external world. It also did something
else that was important: it provided a set of molecular tools to explore how
the nervous system translates chemical structures into odor perceptions. This
is what we set out to do in my lab at Harvard.
   In the mouse, we found evidence for as many as 1000 different OR genes.
We first asked how information from different ORs is organized in the olfactory
epithelium (Ressler et al., 1993). In these experiments, Kerry Ressler, a graduate
student in the lab, and Susan Sullivan, a postdoctoral fellow, hybridized labeled
OR gene probes to sections through the mouse nose (Figure 5). These studies
showed that the olfactory epithelium has distinct spatial zones that express
nonoverlapping sets of OR genes (Figure 6). Each OR gene is expressed in
about 1/1000 neurons and those neurons are randomly scattered within one
zone. Similar findings were made in Richard Axel's lab in rat (Vassar et al.,
1993). The OR expression zones form stripes that extend along the anterior
posterior axis of the nasal cavity.




Figure 5. Expression patterns of odorant receptor genes in the mouse olfactory epithelium.
Tissue sections through the mouse nose were hybridized to four different receptor gene
probes. Adapted from Ressler et al., 1993; Sullivan et al., 1996.


272


Figure 6. The organization of odorant receptor inputs in the olfactory epithelium and
olfactory bulb. Sensory neurons expressing the same receptor are scattered within one
epithelial zone, but their axons converge in specific glomeruli in the olfactory bulb.
Adapted from Ressler et al., 1993; Ressler et al., 1994; Sullivan et al., 1996.




   These findings told us two important things. First, input from one type of
OR is highly distributed in the epithelium. Therefore, neurons with receptors
for one odorant, for example a strawberry odorant, must be interspersed with
neurons that have receptors for another odorant, such as a lemon one.
Second, each neuron may express only one OR gene. We later confirmed this
by examining gene expression in single neurons (Malnic et al., 1999). Thus,
in the nose, inputs from different ORs are segregated in different neurons,
and the information that each neuron transmits to the brain is derived from
a single receptor type.

COMBINATORIAL RECEPTOR CODES FOR ODORS
In later studies, we asked how the OR family encodes the identities of differ-
ent odorants. To explore this question, we searched for ORs that recognize
specific odorants (Malnic et al., 1999). This work was done by Bettina Malnic
in the lab in collaboration with Takaaki Sato and Junzo Hirono at the Life
Electronics Research Center in Japan. We first exposed single mouse olfactory
sensory neurons to a series of odorants, using calcium imaging to visualize
their responses. We then isolated each responsive neuron and used RT
(reverse transcriptase)-PCR to determine the OR gene it expressed. In every
case, we identified only one expressed OR per neuron, confirming that each
neuron expresses a single OR gene.
   For test odorants, we used four different classes of n-aliphatic odorants
with different functional groups and carbon chains ranging in length from 4
to 9 carbon atoms. Each neuron was imaged as it was exposed sequentially to

                                                                                 273


Figure 7. Responses of a single olfactory sensory neuron to different odorants. Fluorescence
emission was monitored during sequential exposure of a Fura-2 containing neuron to a
series of odorants (C4-D9). Responses to lower odorant concentrations are shown below.
Adapted from Malnic et al., 1999.




Figure 8. Odorant receptors are used combinatorially to detect odorants and encode their
identities. The recognition profiles of individual odorant receptors to a series of odorants
were determined by calcium imaging and single cell RT-PCR. The sizes of circles reflect
response intensity. Adapted from Malnic et al., 1999.

274


Figure 9. Closely related odorants with different perceived odors are detected by different
combinations of receptors. Adapted from Malnic et al., 1999.




different odorants (Figure 7). If a response was seen, the neuron was retested
with a lower concentration of the same odorant.
   Figure 8 shows the response profiles of 14 neurons and therefore the
recognition properties of the ORs expressed in those neurons. These data
make three important points. First, each OR can recognize multiple odorants,
something previously shown by Stuart Firestein for one rat OR (Zhao et al.,
1998). Second, each odorant can be detected by multiple different ORs. And
finally, and most importantly, different odorants are recognized by different
combinations of ORs.
   These results indicated that ORs are used combinatorially to encode odor
identities (Malnic et al., 1999). Different odorants are detected and thereby
encoded by different combinations of ORs. However, each OR serves as one
component of the codes for many odorants. Different odorants have differ-
ent “receptor codes”. Given the number of possible combinations of 1000
different ORs, this combinatorial coding scheme could allow for the discri-
mination of an almost unlimited number of odorants. Even if each odorant
were detected by only three ORs, this scheme could potentially generate
almost one billion different odor codes.
   These studies also provided insight into several puzzling features of human
odor perception (Malnic et al., 1999). Changing the structure of an odorant
even slightly can alter its perceived odor. Sometimes the change in odor can
be dramatic. The aliphatic acids and alcohols that we used in our studies are
excellent examples of this phenomenon (Figure 9). All of the acids have
unpleasant odors, such as rancid, sour, or sweaty. In contrast, all of the alco-
hols have pleasant odors, such as herbal, woody, or orange. In our studies, pairs
of acids and alcohols that differed by a single functional group invariably had
different receptor codes (Figure 9). This indicates that even a slight change

                                                                                      275


in the structure of an odorant can alter its receptor code, and thereby change
its perceived odor.
    Our studies showed that a change in the concentration of an odorant can
also change its receptor code. At higher concentrations, additional ORs were
invariably recruited into the odor response. This may explain why changing
the concentration of an odorant can alter its perceived odor.


A STEREOTYPED MAP OF ODORANT RECEPTOR INPUTS IN THE
OLFACTORY BULB
These studies indicated that, in the nose, different odorants are detected by
different combinations of ORs and that the different OR combinations ultima-
tely generate different odor perceptions. How is this accomplished? How does
the brain translate an odorant's combinatorial receptor code into a perception?
   Each olfactory sensory neuron in the olfactory epithelium sends a single
axon to the olfactory bulb of the brain. Here the sensory axon enters a spher-
ical structure called a glomerulus, where it synapses with the dendrites of
bulb neurons. The mouse olfactory bulb has about 2000 glomeruli, each of
which receives input from several thousand olfactory sensory neurons. Each
sensory neuron synapses in only one glomerulus. Similarly, each mitral cell in
the bulb receives input from a single glomerulus. Mitral cells are relay
neurons that transmit signals to the olfactory cortex.
   In the bulb, we found something very different from what we had seen in
the nose (Ressler et al., 1994). Here, single OR probes labeled OR mRNA in
sensory axons in only a few glomeruli, and those glomeruli were located at
only two spots, one on either side of the bulb (Figure 10A). We found that
different OR probes labeled different glomeruli, and surprisingly, those
glomeruli had nearly identical locations in different individuals (Figure 10B).
These findings were made by Kerry Ressler and Susan Sullivan in my lab. In
independent experiments in rat, Vassar and Axel obtained similar results,
though individual OR probes generally labeled a larger number of glomeruli at
more locations in the bulb in their studies (Vassar et al., 1994).
   Our studies in mouse indicated that the axons of thousands of sensory
neurons with the same OR converge in only 2-4 glomeruli, each of which is likely
to be dedicated to one OR (Figure 10) (Ressler et al., 1994). They further indi-
cated that sensory information that is broadly organized into 4 zonal sets in the
nose is transformed in the bulb into a stereotyped sensory map (Figure 6). In this
map, inputs from different ORs are targeted to different glomeruli and the bulb
neurons associated with those glomeruli. Remarkably, this map is virtually iden-
tical in different individuals. The olfactory epithelium and bulb have one im-
portant thing in common, however. At both sites, inputs from different ORs are
segregated. Each sensory neuron in the epithelium, and each glomerulus and
relay neuron in the bulb, appears to be dedicated to only one type of OR.
   The structure of the bulb map is likely to be important in at least two
respects. First, it is likely to maximize sensitivity to low concentrations of
odorants. Signals from 5000 or so neurons with the same OR converge on

276


Figure 10. The olfactory bulb has a stereotyped map of OR inputs. A. A single OR gene
probe hybridized to sensory axons in only 1-2 glomeruli on either side of the olfactory
bulb. B. Different OR probes (A16, M50, M71) hybridized to different glomeruli and those
glomeruli had similar locations in six different bulbs.



2–4 glomeruli and about 50 mitral cells, allowing a high degree of signal
integration. Second, the bulb map is likely to be important for the stimulation
of odor memories. Sensory neurons in the epithelium are short lived and are
continuously replaced. However, the bulb map remains constant over time.
Thus the neural code for an odor remains intact, assuring that odorants can
elicit distant memories.

ODOR CODING IN THE OLFACTORY EPITHELIUM AND BULB
Given our finding that each odorant is recognized by a combination of ORs
(Malnic et al., 1999), these results imply that the code for an odor in the nose
is a dispersed ensemble of neurons, each expressing one OR component of
the odorant's receptor code (Figure 11). In the bulb, the code is a specific




Figure 11. Odor coding in the olfactory epithelium and olfactory bulb. In this schematic,
inputs from different ORs that recognize an odorant are indicated by different colors. In the
olfactory epithelium (OE), the code for an odorant is a dispersed ensemble of neurons, each
expressing one component of the odorant's receptor code. In the olfactory bulb (OB), it is a
specific combination of glomeruli whose spatial arrangement is similar among individuals.
Partially overlapping combinations of OR inputs generate distinct odor perceptions.


                                                                                        277


combination of glomeruli that receive inputs from those ORs and have a
similar spatial arrangement in different individuals. This arrangement is
consistent with many studies of odor-induced activity in the epithelium and
bulb, beginning in the 1950s with the studies of Lord Adrian, who discovered
that different mitral cells in the rabbit bulb respond to different sets of
odorants (Adrian, 1950; Adrian, 1956; Buck, 1996).

STEREOTYPY, DIVERGENCE, AND CONVERGENCE IN OLFACTORY
CORTEX
What happens to this information at higher levels of the nervous system to
ultimately generate diverse odor perceptions?
   Mitral cell relay neurons in the bulb extend axons to the olfactory cortex,
a large area that stretches along the ventral lateral part of the brain. The
olfactory cortex is composed of a number of distinct anatomical areas, at least
some of which are likely to have different functions. The largest area is the
piriform cortex, which itself has morphologically distinct anterior and posterior
halves.
   In the 1980s, Lewis Haberly and others showed that a tracer placed in one
small region of this cortex would back-label mitral cells in many parts of the
bulb (Haberly, 1998). This clearly indicated that the organization of sensory
information in the olfactory bulb could not be recapitulated in the cortex.
But how olfactory information is organized in the olfactory cortex was a
mystery.
   We were initially interested in three questions regarding the olfactory cortex.
First, do different areas of the olfactory cortex, which may have different
functions, receive signals derived from different subsets of ORs or, alternatively,
does each area receive input from the entire OR repertoire? Second, is input
from one OR scattered in the cortex, as in the nose, is it targeted to unique,
stereotyped sites, as in the bulb, or is it organized in some other way? And
finally, given that each odorant is recognized by multiple ORs, are inputs
from different ORs combined in individual cortical neurons, or are they
segregated in different neurons as in the nose and bulb?
   To determine how OR inputs are organized in the cortex, we first asked
whether it would be possible to trace neural circuits genetically. In those
studies, Lisa Horowitz, a graduate student in the lab, made transgenic mice
that expressed a plant protein, barley lectin, in all olfactory sensory neurons
in the nose. In those mice, the expression of barley lectin, or BL, was con-
trolled by the promoter of the OMP gene, a gene that is selectively expressed
by olfactory sensory neurons.
   Using BL-specific antibodies, we detected BL in olfactory sensory neurons
in the olfactory epithelium, glomeruli and relay neurons in the bulb, and also
in neurons in the olfactory cortex (Horowitz et al., 1999). This indicated that
BL produced by olfactory sensory neurons in the nose could travel across two
synapses to label connected neurons first in the olfactory bulb and then in
the olfactory cortex.

278


Figure 12. Inputs from one OR are targeted to 2–3 clusters of neurons in the anterior piri-
form cortex. Coronal sections through the anterior piriform cortex of mice in which barley
lectin was expressed in all olfactory sensory neurons (PompBL) or only in neurons
expressing the M5 (M5iBL) or M50 (M50iBL) odorant receptor. Asterisks indicate the
outer limits of the piriform cortex (Pir). Distance from an anterior-posterior landmark is
shown in mm. (Adapted from Zou et al., 2001).




   Having developed a genetic method for charting neural circuits, we were
able to move to the next step. That was to ask how inputs from individual ORs
are organized in the cortex.
   Our goal was to coexpress BL with only one of the 1000 different OR genes.
To do this, Lisa Horowitz and Jean-Pierre Montmayeur in our lab altered
individual OR genes by inserting, just 3’ to their coding regions, an IRES
sequence followed by a BL coding sequence. Using gene targeting in embryonic
stem cells, Zhihua Zou, a postdoctoral fellow in the lab then made “knockin”
mice that contained an altered allele of either the M5 or M50 OR gene (Zou
et al., 2001). In these knockin mice, BL was produced only in neurons that
expressed the M5 or M50 OR.
   In the olfactory cortex, the axons of bulb neurons branch and form
synapses in layer Ia with the dendrites of pyramidal neurons located in layers
II and III. In PompBL mice, which express BL in all olfactory sensory
neurons (Horowitz et al., 1999), we saw labeled neurons in layers II and III
throughout the olfactory cortex (Figure 12). In the M5 and M50 knockin mice,
we also detected labeled cortical neurons, but they were located in distinct
clusters (Figure 12) (Zou et al., 2001). Moreover, the clusters appeared to
have similar locations in different individuals.
   In each knockin strain, we detected 2–3 clusters of labeled neurons in the
anterior piriform cortex (Figure 12). Most of these clusters were bilaterally
symmetrical in the left and right brain. We also found clusters of labeled
neurons in several other areas of the olfactory cortex. In each cluster, the high-


                                                                                      279


Figure 13. The olfactory cortex has a stereotyped map of OR inputs. Organization of inputs
from the M5 (yellow) and M50 (pink) odorant receptors in the olfactory epithelium, bulb,
and cortex. Black lines and abbreviations indicate different areas of the olfactory cortex.
AON, anterior olfactory nucleus; PC, piriform cortex; OT, olfactory tubercle; Amg, olfac-
tory nuclei of amygdala; EC, lateral entorhinal cortex.




est density of labeled neurons was in the center, but even in the center, only
about half of the resident pyramidal neurons were labeled for the BL tracer.
   Detailed analysis of the clusters in the anterior piriform cortex revealed
that they had similar locations and similar dimensions in different individuals
and, in most cases, they were bilaterally symmetrical (Zou et al., 2001). The
clusters had different locations in the two knockin strains, but one of the M5
clusters appeared to partially overlap with one of the M50 clusters.
   These results showed that the olfactory cortex has a stereotyped map of
OR inputs (Figure 13). In this map, signals derived from one type of OR are
targeted to several loose clusters of cortical neurons. The clusters of neurons
that receive input from a particular OR are found at specific locations, which
are virtually identical among individuals.
   These studies clearly indicated that input from one OR diverges to multiple
areas of the olfactory cortex. This divergence of OR inputs may allow a parallel
processing of OR signals in which signals from the same ORs are combined
or modulated in different ways prior to transmission to other brain regions
that have different functions.
   We found that in the anterior piriform cortex, the clusters of neurons that
receive input from one OR occupy about five percent of the total area along
the anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral axes (Zou et al., 2001). In PompBL
mice, which express BL in all olfactory sensory neurons, there were about


280


Figure 14. Schematic diagrams showing the organization of odorant receptor inputs in the
olfactory epithelium (OE), olfactory bulb (OB), and olfactory cortex (OC). Inputs from
different ORs are segregated in different neurons and glomeruli in the OE and OB. In
contrast, it appears that different receptor inputs overlap extensively in the OC (A) and
that single cortical neurons receive signals from a combination of receptors (B).




180,000 BL-labeled neurons in the anterior piriform cortex. If each cortical
neuron received input from only one of 1000 different ORs, one might expect
to see about 180 labeled neurons in this area each knockin mouse. However,
we detected about 4000–6000 BL-labeled neurons in the anterior piriform
cortex in each knockin strain (Zou et al., 2001).
   These results indicated that the map of OR inputs in the olfactory cortex is
markedly different from that in the olfactory bulb. First, while inputs from
different ORs are spatially segregated in different glomeruli in the bulb, they
are likely to overlap extensively in the cortex (Figure 14A). Second, while signals
from different ORs are segregated in different neurons in both the nose and
bulb, each cortical neuron is likely to receive signals derived from multiple
different ORs (Figure 14B). Since each odorant is recognized by a combination
of ORs, this may permit an initial integration of multiple components of
an odorant's receptor code that is critical to the generation of diverse odor
perceptions.
   These findings raise the possibility that neurons in the olfactory cortex func-
tion as coincidence detectors that are activated only by correlated combinatorial
inputs from different ORs. For example, in a simple model, signals from differ-
ent ORs that recognize vanillin would be targeted to partially overlapping loca-
tions in the cortex, but the only neurons activated by vanillin would be those that
receive coincident signals derived from more than one of the vanillin ORs.


                                                                                    281


   In sensory systems, environmental stimuli are deconstructed and then
reconstructed in the brain to create perceptions. The organization of OR
inputs seen in the olfactory cortex may serve as an initial step in the recon-
struction of an odor image from its deconstructed features.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to acknowledge the very talented students and postdoctoral fellows
in my lab who did the experiments that I discussed today. Kerry Ressler and
Susan Sullivan did all of the early studies on OR inputs in the olfactory epit-
helium and bulb. Hiroaki Matsunami identified and characterized the V2R
family of candidate pheromone receptors. Bettina Malnic conducted the studies
of OR specificities in collaboration with Takaaki Sato and Junzo Hirono at the
Life Electronic Research Center in Japan. Bettina and Paul Godfrey
defined the OR gene repertoires of human and mouse. Lisa Horowitz developed
the genetic method for tracing neural circuits. And Zhihua Zou, in collaboration
with Lisa and Jean-Pierre Montmayeur, conducted the studies of OR inputs in
the olfactory cortex.

REFERENCES
Adrian, E. D. (1950). Sensory discrimination with some recent evidence from the olfactory
  organ. Br Med Bull 6, 330–333.
Adrian, L. (1956). The action of the mammalian olfactory organ. J Laryngol Otol 70, 1–14.
Amoore, J. E. (1970). Molecular basis of odor (Springfield, Charles C. Thomas).
Amoore, J. E. (1977). Specific anosmia and the concept of primary odors. Chemical Senses
  and Flavor 2, 267–281.
Buck, L. B., and Axel, R. (1991). A novel multigene family may encode odorant receptors: a
  molecular basis for odor recognition. Cell 65, 175–187.
Buck, L. B. (1996). Information coding in the vertebrate olfactory system. Annu Rev
  Neurosci 19, 517–544.
Dulac, C., and Axel, R. (1995). A novel family of genes encoding putative pheromone
  receptors in mammals. Cell 83, 195–206.
Gesteland, R. C., Lettvin, J. Y., and Pitts, W. H. (1965). Chemical transmission in the nose of
  the frog. J Physiol 181, 525–559.
Glusman, G., Yanai, I., Rubin, I., and Lancet, D. (2001). The complete human olfactory
  subgenome. Genome Res 11, 685–702.
Godfrey, P. A., Malnic, B., and Buck, L. B. (2004). The mouse olfactory receptor gene family.
  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101, 2156–2161.
Haberly, L. B. (1998). The olfactory cortex. In The synaptic organization of the brain, G. M.
Shepherd, ed. (New York, Oxford University Press), pp. 377–416.
Herrada, G., and Dulac, C. (1997). A novel family of putative pheromone receptors in
  mammals with a topographically organized and sexually dimorphic distribution. Cell 90,
  763–773.
Horowitz, L. F., Montmayeur, J. P., Echelard, Y., and Buck, L. B. (1999). A genetic approach
  to trace neural circuits. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96, 3194–3199.
Jones, D. T., and Reed, R. R. (1989). Golf: an olfactory neuron specific-G protein involved
  in odorant signal transduction. Science 244, 790–795.
Malnic, B., Godfrey, P. A., and Buck, L. B. (2004). The human olfactory receptor gene family.
  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
Malnic, B., Hirono, J., Sato, T., and Buck, L. B. (1999). Combinatorial receptor codes for
  odors. Cell 96, 713–723.

282


Matsunami, H., and Buck, L. B. (1997). A multigene family encoding a diverse array of
  putative pheromone receptors in mammals. Cell 90, 775–784.
Mombaerts, P. (1999). Molecular biology of odorant receptors in vertebrates. Annu Rev
  Neurosci 22, 487–509.
Pace, U., Hanski, E., Salomon, Y., and Lancet, D. (1985). Odorant-sensitive adenylate
  cyclase may mediate olfactory reception. Nature 316, 255–258.
Ressler, K. J., Sullivan, S. L., and Buck, L. B. (1993). A zonal organization of odorant
  receptor gene expression in the olfactory epithelium. Cell 73, 597–609.
Ressler, K. J., Sullivan, S. L., and Buck, L. B. (1994). Information coding in the olfactory
  system: evidence for a stereotyped and highly organized epitope map in the olfactory
  bulb. Cell 79, 1245–1255.
Ryba, N. J., and Tirindelli, R. (1997). A new multigene family of putative pheromone
  receptors. Neuron 19, 371–379.
Sklar, P. B., Anholt, R. R., and Snyder, S. H. (1986). The odorant-sensitive adenylate cyclase
  of olfactory receptor cells. Differential stimulation by distinct classes of odorants. J Biol
  Chem 261, 15538–15543.
Sullivan, S. L. Adamson, M. A. Ressler, K. J. Kozak, C. A. and Buck, L. B. (1996) The chromo-
  somal distribution of mouse odorant receptor genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:884–888.
Vassar, R., Chao, S. K., Sitcheran, R., Nunez, J. M., Vosshall, L. B., and Axel, R. (1994).
  Topographic organization of sensory projections to the olfactory bulb. Cell 79, 981–991.
Vassar, R., Ngai, J., and Axel, R. (1993). Spatial segregation of odorant receptor expression
  in the mammalian olfactory epithelium. Cell 74, 309–318.
Young, J. M., and Trask, B. J. (2002). The sense of smell: genomics of vertebrate odorant
  receptors. Hum Mol Genet 11, 1153–1160.
Zhang, X., and Firestein, S. (2002). The olfactory receptor gene superfamily of the mouse.
  Nat Neurosci 5, 124–133.
Zhao, H., Ivic, L., Otaki, J. M., Hashimoto, M., Mikoshiba, K., and Firestein, S. (1998).
   Functional expression of a mammalian odorant receptor. Science 279, 237–242.
Zou, Z., Horowitz, L. F., Montmayeur, J. P., Snapper, S., and Buck, L. B. (2001). Genetic
  tracing reveals a stereotyped sensory map in the olfactory cortex. Nature 414, 173–179.
Zozulya, S., Echeverri, F., and Nguyen, T. (2001). The human olfactory receptor repertoire.
  Genome Biol 2, RESEARCH0018.




                                                                                          283
