25 YEARS AFTER HIV DISCOVERY: PROSPECTS
FOR CURE AND VACCINE

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2008
by
Luc Montagnier
World Foundation for AIDS Research and Prevention, UNESCO, 1, rue Miollis,
75732 Paris Cedex 15, France.




The impressive advances in our scientific knowledge during the last century
allow us to have a much better vision of our origin on earth and our situation
in the universe than our ancestors. Life probably started on earth around
three and a half billion of years ago, and a genetic memory emerged early,
based on an extraordinarily stable molecule, the DNA double helix, bearing
a genetic code identical for all living organisms, from bacteria to men. We
are thus the heirs of myriads of molecular inventions, which have accumu-
lated over millions – sometime billions – of years. Environmental pressure
has of course both maintained these inventions and also modulated them
over the generations, through the deaths of individuals and sexual reproduc-
tion. For the last 30,000 years, our biological constitution has not changed:
a hypertrophic cortical brain, a larynx to speak and a hand to manipulate.
But for the last 10,000 years, another memory has emerged, which make our
species quite different from the others: this is the cultural memory which
transmits knowledge and societal organisation from generation to genera-
tion, through the use of language, writing and more recently virtual means
of communication.
   This revolution occurred in various sites on the earth almost simultan-
eously through sedentarisation of human populations by agriculture, leading
to several civilisations. Each human being thus receives two pieces of lug-
gage: genetic memory at birth and cultural memory during all his life, and
he will become a real human only if he is benefiting from both. For the last
three centuries, particularly in the 20th century, our scientific knowledge has
increased exponentially and has diffused all over the world.
   We have a tendency to consider ourselves as pure spirits, but the hard real-
ity still reminds us of our biological nature: each of us is programmed to die
and, during his life, is exposed to diseases. At the dawn of this new century,
we are still facing two major health problems:




                                                                           275


u New epidemics related to infectious agents (mostly bacteria and viruses)
u Chronic diseases (mostly cancers, cardiovascular, neurodegenerative,
  arthritic, auto-immune diseases, diabetes) linked to the increase in life
  expectancy and environmental changes related to human activities.

This presentation will obviously focus on one new epidemic, AIDS, but we
should not forget that there are other persistent and life-endangering epi-
demics, especially in tropical countries, such as malaria and tuberculosis.
   Moreover, other new epidemics should not be ruled out as human activi-
ties generate more favourable factors:
u Lack or loss of hygiene habits
u lack of water
u globalisation and acceleration of exchange and travel
u atmospheric and chemical pollution leading to oxidative stress and im-
  mune depression
u malnutrition, drug abuse and ageing, also leading to immune depression
u global warming leading to new ecological niches for insect vectors
u changes in sexual behaviours.

This last factor and immune depression caused by malnutrition, drug abuse
and increased co-infections, are probably the causes of the emergence of
AIDS as a global epidemic, affecting most if not all continents, recently in-
cluding the Polynesian islands.
   The causative agent existed in Africa before the emergence of the epidem-
ics in Central Africa and North America in the 1970s. As there exist related
viruses apparently well tolerated in non-human primates, it is tempting to
consider AIDS as a zoonosis, resulting from the transmission to humans of
related viruses infecting primate species without causing disease.
   But let us first recall the circumstances of the discovery of HIV in my labo-
ratory at the Institut Pasteur (Figure 1).




276


Figure 1. The Pasteur team involved in the discovery of HIV in 1983–1984.


AIDS as a pathologically distinct entity was first identified in June 1981 by mem-
bers of the CDC (particularly Harold Jaffe and James Curran) after reports
received from two medical doctors, Michael Gottlieb in Los Angeles and Alvin
Friedman-Kien in New York, of clusters of opportunistic infections and Kaposi
sarcoma occurring in young gay men and related to sexual intercourse.
   Following the publication of this report in the CDC Bulletin, similar cases
were described in Western European countries and particularly in France by
a group of young clinicians and immunologists led by Jacques Leibovitch and
Willy Rozenbaum.
   It was soon recognised that a similar disease, characterised at the biological
level by a profound depression of cellular immunity and clinically by infec-
tions previously described in chemically or genetically immunodepressed
patients, also existed in haemophiliacs and blood transfused patients.
   The case of haemophiliacs gave a clue as to the nature of the transmissible
agent: these AIDS patients had received purified concentrates of factor 8 or
9, made from pools of donated blood which had been filtrated by bacterio-
logical filters.
   This purification process should have eliminated any soluble toxic com-
pound and the filtration should have retained bacterial or fungal agents:
only viruses could be present in the preparations given to patients. This is
why I became interested in a search for viruses; but what kind of viruses?
Many viruses have immunodepressive activity, in order to persist in their
hosts. This is particularly the case of herpes viruses (cytomegalovirus) and
retroviruses. A putative candidate was the Human T Leukemia virus (HTLV)
described by R. C. Gallo and Japanese researchers.
   Having more expertise on retroviruses (see biography Chapter I), we em-
barked on the search for an HTLV-like virus, at the suggestion of the French

                                                                              277


working group and also encouraged by Institut Pasteur Production, an indus-
trial subsidiary of the Institute producing a hepatitis B vaccine from pool of
plasmas from blood donors.
   Knowing that retroviruses are usually expressed in activated cells, I set up
classical conditions to culture activated lymphocytes, using first a bacterial ac-
tivator of both T and B lymphocytes, Protein A, since I did not know in what
subset of cells the virus was hiding out.
   The reasoning at that stage was that we should look first at lymphocytes
from swollen lymph nodes, supposedly the site where viruses accumulate in
the early phase of infection.
   On January 3, 1983, I received a biopsy of a patient with cervical adenopa-
thy, a symptom already recognised as an early sign of AIDS. After dissection
of the sample into small pieces and their dissociation into single cells, the
lymphocytes were cultured in nutrient medium in the presence of Protein A
and anti-interferon serum.
   In fact, after addition of Interleukin 2, only T lymphocytes were multiply-
ing well and produced a small amount of virus detected by its reverse tran-
scriptase activity, measured by my associate Françoise Barré-Sinoussi. Only
some 9 months later could I also show growth of the virus in B-lymphocytes
transformed by Epstein-Barr virus (4).
   The viral growth ceased as the cellular growth started declining, but we
could propagate the virus in cultures of lymphocytes from adult blood do-
nors as well as in lymphocytes from cord blood. This allowed characterisation
of the virus, and showed for the first time that it was different from HTLVs.
A p24-25 protein could be immuno-precipitated by the serum of the patient
and not by antibodies specific to the p24 gag protein of HTLV1, kindly pro-
vided by Dr. R. C. Gallo.
   Electron microscopy of sections of the original lymph node biopsy, as well
as those from infected cultured lymphocytes, showed rare viral particles with
a dense conical core, similar to the retrolentiviruses of animals (infectious
anaemia virus in horses, visna virus in sheep, etc.), but different from HTLV.
Unlike the case of HTLV, we never saw the emergence of permanent trans-
formed lines from the infected lymphocyte cultures (Figure 2).




278


Figure 2. HIV through the electron microscope.


These results were published in a Science paper in May 1983 (1), together
with two papers by the Gallo and Essex groups in favour of HTLV being the
cause of AIDS. During the following months, more data accumulated in my
laboratory showing that this new virus was not a passenger virus, but was real-
ly the best candidate to be the cause of AIDS.

1) The same type of virus was isolated from patients of different origins: gay
   men with multiple partners, haemophiliacs, drug abusers, Africans.

First Viral Isolates of the Viral Oncology Unit
Patient initials           Origin          Clinical conditions   Cytopathic effect

Bru        ♂             Gay man,
                         caucasian
                                                  Pre-AIDS              –


Loi        ♂          Haemophiliac,
                        caucasian
                                                    AIDS                +


Lai        ♂             Gay man,
                         caucasian
                                                  AIDS (Ks)            ++

Eli        ♀           Zaïre, african               AIDS                +

Table 1.


2) Besides immune-precipitation of viral proteins (p25, P18), serums from
   patients with lymphadenopathy syndrome and a fraction of the serums
   from patients with advanced AIDS, were positive in an ELISA test using
   proteins from partially purified virus (2).

                                                                                279


3) In vitro, the virus was shown to infect only CD4+ T lymphocytes and not the
   CD8+ subset (3).
4) A cytopathic effect was observed with isolates made from patients with late
   symptoms of AIDS. Particularly the third isolate made from a young gay
   man with Kaposi Sarcoma (Lai) caused the formation of large syncitia,
   presumably due to the fusion of several infected cells (Figure 3). Attempts
   to grow the first isolate Bru in T cell lines isolated from patients with leu-
   kaemia or lymphoma were unsuccessful. However, we discovered later (5)
   that the Bru isolate was contaminated with the Lai isolate, which by con-
   trast could be grown in T cell lines (CEM, HUT78) in laboratories which
   received our Bru isolate at their request.




Figure 3. Electron micrography picture of a giant cell (syncitium) resulting of the fusion of
many lymphocytes expressing the HIV fusion protein (6).


In fact, a few laboratory isolates were shown to grow in mass quantities in T
cell lines, facilitating analysis of the virus and its use for detection of antibod-
ies by commercial blood tests.
   Our data, which I presented in September 1983 at a meeting on HTLV in
Cold Spring Harbor (6), were met with scepticism. Only in the spring of 1984
did the description of a quasi identical virus under the name of HTLV III by
the R. C. Gallo group (7) convince the scientific community that this new re-
trolentivirus was the cause of AIDS. The Jay Levy group in San Francisco also
isolated the same kind of virus (8), followed by many other laboratories.
   However, a few opponents led by P. Duesberg argued and are still arguing
that there is no real demonstration that the virus does exist and is the cause
of AIDS according to Koch’s postulates.
   In fact, the proviral DNA of the virus, renamed HIV (Human
Immunodeficiency Virus) by an international nomenclature committee, was
cloned and sequenced (9–11), showing the classical gene structure of animal
retroviruses which Dr. Duesberg helped himself to uncover earlier.


280


  But in addition, new genes (Tat, Nef), important in regulation of the
expression of the viral genetic information, were recognised from the DNA
sequencing, making the viral genome probably the most complex known in
the retrovirus family (Figure 4). HIV and its primate cousins are therefore a
well-characterised entity only composed of DNA sequences, none existing in
the human genome.




Figure 4. Genome structure of HIV1: gag, pol, env are the gene codes for the structural
proteins.


A posteriori, two facts should have provided to the few remaining sceptics final
proof that HIV is the culprit in AIDS:

1) Transmission of AIDS by blood transfusion has practically disappeared in
   countries where the detection of HIV antibodies in blood donors has been
   implemented;
2) The inhibition of virus multiplication by a combination of specific in-
   hibitors of the viral enzymes (reverse transcriptase, protease), has greatly
   improved the clinical conditions of patients. Mutations in the genome of
   HIV inducing resistance to these inhibitors has led to relapses and aggra-
   vation of the patients’ condition.

In 1986, thanks to our collaboration with Portuguese colleagues, we isolated a
second virus (which I named HIV2), from West African patients hospitalised
in a Lisbon hospital (12). They all had the signs of AIDS but had no antibod-
ies against our first virus. In fact, they had only antibodies to the most variable
protein of HIV, the surface glycoprotein. The patients had lost antibodies
against the well-conserved internal proteins of HIV2 which show common
epitopes with their counterparts of HIV1, unlike the glycoprotein (Figure 5).

                                                                                  281


Figure 5. Immunoprecipitation of radioactively labelled proteins of HIV1 and HIV2 by a
serum of an AIDS patient infected by HIV2; note in the HIV2 panel the precipitation of
the envelope protein.


The isolation of HIV1 (6) and HIV2 (12) viruses from AIDS patients in Africa
made us realise that we were dealing with a large epidemic of heterosexually
transmitted viruses.
   Evidence that HIV was not transmitted by casual contacts came from our
study in a French boarding school where HIV infected haemophilic children
were in close contact, day and night, with HIV negative non-haemophilic
children: none of the latter was found HIV positive (13).
   The isolation of the virus causing AIDS allowed the implementation of
rational prevention measures and also the beginning of a search for efficient
viral inhibitors.
   The first candidate, azidothymidine, was an efficient inhibitor of HIV
reverse transcriptase in in vitro experiments (Broder, Mitsuya et al.); and how-
ever, its use in AIDS patients, first looking promising, was later recognised as
disappointing (14).
   In fact, the treatment readily induced mutants of the virus resistant to AZT
and did not extend the life span of the patients. The main obstacle to treat-
ment with a single or two inhibitors was the capacity of the virus to mutate,
which also impedes the design of an efficient vaccine and explains the com-
plexity of the pathophysiology of AIDS.
   Only a combination of three inhibitors proved to be efficient in the
clinical outcome. Since 1996, clinicians are using HAART (Highly Active
Antiretroviral Therapy) to treat patients with high virus load and low CD4+
T cell number, preventing them most of the time from contracting lethal op-
portunistic infections (15).




282


Some milestones in the Research of AIDS
1981           Identiﬁcation of the disease in the USA
1983           First isolation of HIV
1984           Conﬁrmation of HIV as the causal agent of AIDS – Biological
               and molecular characterization
1985           First blood test to eliminate transmission of HIV by blood
               transfusion
1986           Isolation of HIV-2
1986           First use of AZT as an antiretroviral drug
1991           Apoptosis as a mechanism of cell death in AIDS
1995           Decrease of HIV perinatal transmission with AZT
1995           Demonstration of high rate of HIV replication during the
               silent period of infection
1996           Identiﬁcation of HIV main co-receptors
1996–97        Generalization of HAART in developed countries

Table 2.


HIV VARIABILITY
In fact, in order to escape the immune reactions of their hosts, most viruses
have a strategy of changing their immunogenic epitopes. In the case of HIV,
a conjunction of several factors put this at an unprecedented level.

I have listed below the factors which seem to be most responsible for this
variability.

1. Errors of reverse transcription
2. Genetic recombination
3. Incomplete neutralisation by Vif of the activity of the APOBEC3G cellular
   gene
4. Oxidative stress

The first is that the replicative enzyme, reverse transcriptase (RT), has no edi-
ting compensation, so that the transcription errors may reach 1/105 nucleo-
tides, far from 1/109 of the cellular DNA polymerases.
   However some other retroviruses, such as HTLV, do not show this variation
rate, since once integrated, the proviral DNA remains replicated by the cel-
lular DNA replicative machinery. The difference could be explained by the
fact that the HIV infected cells die, so that the virus can maintain itself only
by many cycles of new infections involving each time reverse transcription of


                                                                             283


its RNA into DNA. However, in in vitro infection of cell lines, also involving a
cytopathic effect and many cycles of re-infection, the virus seems to be stable,
in the absence of immunoselective pressure.
   Another variation factor is genetic recombination. The immune responses
(humoral and cellular) against the virus are unable to prevent a second virus
infection of the host (because of virus variability induced by the previous
factor and other causes), so that some cells could be co-infected by two vi-
ruses: this will also allow genetic recombination between the two viral RNAs
existing each in two copies. The result is a “mosaic” virus in which many
sequences from the two original viruses are entangled, starting from “hot
spots” of recombination. This is particularly visible in Africa, probably be-
cause of repeated exposure to infection in many patients. The mosaic viruses,
because of their selective advantage, then disseminate in the infected popula-
tion. The original subtypes called A B C D E G… defined by the sequence of
their envelope gene are thus replaced by A/G, B/C etc… depending on the
geographic location.
   Moreover, two other factors have been more recently identified: In the
lymphocytes are expressed a family of genes coding for enzymes able to
convert guanosine into adenosine in the viral DNA, fouling the viral genetic
code (APOBEC3G). However, the virus has evolved a gene, Vif, which can
more or less counteract this effect, rendering viable the viral DNA without
completely avoiding mutations (16).
   A last variability factor, whose importance has probably been overlooked, is
oxidative stress (see below), a cause of RNA and DNA mutations (before inte-
gration of the proviral DNA): highly reactive molecules derived from oxygen
can oxidise the bases, particularly guanine or deoxyguanine, thus modifying
their coding capacity or inducing a wrong replacement in repair.
   A combination of these factors could explain both the intrinsic variability
of the virus in the host during the long evolution of infection, and also the
increasing variability of the circulating strains as the epidemic is spreading in
various populations.
   We can at least act on this variability by decreasing the viral multiplication
rate inside the host by antiretroviral treatment and also by neutralising the
oxidative stress.


THE REMAINING PROBLEMS:
How HIV infection results in the destruction of the immune system
In the early years following the virus discovery, it was generally thought that
the drop in CD4+ T cells was due to their direct infection by a cytopathic
virus.
   In fact, the viral isolates (like Bru) made in the early stage of the disease
are not cytopathic; after binding to the CD4+ receptor of activated lympho-
cytes, they use a co-receptor (CCR5) which is the receptor for a chimiokine.
   Only viruses isolated from patients at late stages of the disease are cyto-
pathic (like Lai), and their direct infection of the remaining T lymphocytes

284


(by using another chemokine co-receptor CXC4) could account for the final
drop in these cells.
   In fact, the number of activated CD4+ T lymphocytes (the ones which only
allow full replication of the virus), is probably a limiting factor in the initial
infection, after the first contact with dendritic cells and monocytes of genital
or rectal mucosa. It is obvious that inflammation and co-infections (bacterial,
viral) could increase the number of activated T lymphocytes and therefore
could increase the risk of HIV infection.
   Recently, the virus has been found associated with the Peyer patches exist-
ing around the small intestine which constitutes a major source of activated
T lymphocytes.
   At the onset of infection, the virus replication is high in all the lymphatic
tissues, taking advantage of the delay in the reaction of the immune system
(in time order, interferon, NK cells, CD8T cells, antibody response) and then
decreases while persisting in some lymph nodes (Figure 6).




Figure 6. Evolution of HIV-1 infection in AIDS. Left: Untreated patients; Right: Patients
treated by antiretroviral therapy at year 6.


This is the beginning of the chronic phase, which is generally asymptomatic,
although lymphadenopathy is often present. It has been shown that the virus
replication continues in the lymph nodes, despite the immune response.
This starts declining, although there is a continuous renewal of T lympho-
cytes, both CD4+ and CD8+, which could last for years.

                                                                                    285


  During this period, we have found two phenomena which could help ex-
plain the indirect destruction of the immune system:

One biological: apoptosis
One biochemical: oxidative stress

Apoptosis: my laboratory was the first to describe this programmed cell death
in white blood cells cultured in a medium deprived of interleukin 2 (17). All
the subsets, not only the CD4+ T cells, were affected when taken from the
blood of asymptomatic HIV patients as well as from patients presenting with
full blown AIDS: CD8+ T cells, NK cells, B lymphocytes, monocytes.
   However, we found a good correlation between the drop in CD4+ T cells
in patients and this in in vitro phenomenon (18) We surmised that in the vivo
situation, cells were still alive but in pre-apoptosis.
   Indeed, we could detect in infected patients a general phenomenon of
immune activation (19), which has now become well recognised as a major
factor of AIDS pathogeny.
   At the biochemical level, we also showed that the lymphocyte population
of asymptomatic patients (CD4+, CD8+, NK) displayed the biochemical signs
of oxidative stress (excess of free radicals derived from oxygen): namely fast
degradation of oxidised proteins, carbonylation of some of their amino acids
(20). In the patients’ blood, we could detect a similar hyper-oxidation of
plasma lipids (21) and oxidisation of guanine.
   What could be the origin of this strong oxidative stress? At least one HIV
protein may contribute to it. It was shown by C. Flores, McCord and their
collaborators that the Tat protein, among many functions, inhibits the ex-
pression in lymphocytes of the Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase gene
(22). This enzyme is key to the transformation of the anion superoxide,
highly oxidant into hydrogen peroxide. Tat has been shown to circulate in
nanogram amounts in the blood of infected patients and to penetrate inside
cytoplasm.
   In addition, bacterial and viral co-infectors can also induce oxidative stress.
We studied the possibility that a “cold” persisting bacterial infection could co-
exist in HIV-infected patients.
   These studies were initiated because we observed that in vitro co-infection
of lymphocytes with some mycoplasma species (M. pirum, M. penetrans, M.
fermentans) and HIV could greatly reinforce the cytopathic effect of the lat-
ter.
   Moreover, these small bacteria lack catalase, an enzyme able to convert
hydrogen peroxide into water. Therefore they also generate oxidative stress
and, furthermore, are activators of lymphocytes (23).
   In summary, the pathophysiology of AIDS is complex. HIV is the main
cause, but could also be helped by accomplices and also have some indirect
effects by wrongly activating the immune system through oxidative stress.



286


PROSPECTS FOR THE FUTURE
No cure. No vaccine, but maybe a cure by a vaccine.
The advent of HAART has transformed AIDS into a tolerable infection, but
whatever the length of the treatment, the inhibitors used have not reached
the level of a cure! As soon as this treatment is interrupted, virus multiplica-
tion resumes within a few weeks and the immune system declines again.
   This observation led researchers to think that there is a reservoir of virus,
to which the drugs have no access (24), probably because the virus stays in a
latent form in some tissues.
   Our project is to design quantitative tests to evaluate the size of this reser-
voir and to prevent it from giving rise to actively multiplying virus by boosting
the immune system against the most conserved parts of viral proteins.
   A schematic protocol of this therapeutic immunisation, aimed at achieving
a functional eradication of HIV (25), could be the following:
1) First, antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for 3–6 months to reduce viral load
  in the plasma to undetectable levels and maintain it until the protocol has
  been terminated.
2) Then, treatment by antioxidants and immunostimulants such as an orally
  absorbable form of glutathione to reduce the oxidative stress induced by
  viral proteins and by HAART. Reduced glutathione is known to induce a
  shift from Th2 to TH1 responses, therefore reinforcing cell-mediated im-
  munity. Its effect can be enhanced by some synthetic immunostimulants,
  which are now close to approval for clinical use by regulatory authorities.
3) After a two-week treatment by the former products, start specific immu-
  nisation against HIV proteins by a therapeutic vaccine. Trials with vaccine
  preparation made for a therapeutic use have already been carried out,
  with mixed results probably because the immune system of the patients
  was not sufficiently restored, or/and also due to the inadequacy of the
  immunogens. Our genetic engineering data indicate that the native HIV
  glycoprotein must be modified in order to make immunogenic the most
  conserved parts of the protein, including the pocket involved in HIV bind-
  ing. This will result in a neutralisation capacity broad enough to cover
  potential escape mutants. I also advise adding during vaccine preparation
  two other proteins involved in immunosuppression, Tat and Nef, modified
  to become non functional while remaining immunogenic.
4) After this vaccination, interrupt HAART. If the protocol has been success-
  ful, there will be no virus rebound, as evidenced by a low viral load and an
  increase of the CD4+ T cell component. Regular monitoring of these two
  parameters will assess the durability of the immunisation. A strong cell-
  mediated immunity, in addition to the induction of neutralising antibod-
  ies, will permit the interruption of a cycle of new cell infections by newly
  formed viral particles. This control already exists spontaneously in a small
  number of HIV-infected patients, which show no immune depression even
  after many years.


                                                                              287


This protocol is complex, but it will be less expensive and for the patient
much more tolerable than life-long antiretroviral therapy.
   The protocol can also be applied to patients in the early stages of HIV in-
fection, perhaps with a better chance of success, as their immune system will
have a better ability to respond.
   If, in this optimistic scenario, HIV infection becomes a curable disease, the
impact on the epidemic itself will be considerable: in developing countries,
HIV infection represents a stigma for family and professional life. Many in-
fected individuals do not want to be tested and to learn their status, and as
consequence, they keep transmitting the virus to new partners. The prospect
of being treated and cured immediately after the diagnosis of HIV infection
will ease early testing and emergence of responsible behaviours.
   Moreover, the success of a therapeutic vaccine will facilitate the design of
an efficient preventive vaccine, based on the same viral components.
   Meanwhile, it will be essential to make accessible the use of antiretroviral
drugs to all patients who are eligible for them. This implies not only an in-
ternational effort to lower the price of these drugs, which has already been
partly achieved, but also a comparable effort to create adequate medical
structures with trained doctors and research centres in developing countries.
Our Foundation has chosen the mission to contribute to fulfilling these tasks
in Africa.*1




Figure 7. Centre Intégré de Recherche Bioclinique d’Abidjan (CIRBA), created in 1996.

*
   The World Foundation for AIDS Research and Prevention, in association with UNESCO and
local governments, has created two Centres for AIDS Research and Prevention; The “Centre
Intégré de Recherches Biocliniques d’Abidjan” – CIRBA (Figure 7) in Abidjan (Côte d’Ivoire)
and the International “Chantal Biya” Reference and Research Centre for HIV-AIDS Prevention
and Care-taking” (CIRBC) in Yaoundé (Cameroon).


288


REFERENCES
1.    F. Barré-Sinoussi, J. C. Chermann, F. Rey, M. T. Nugeyre, S. Chamaret, J. Gruest,
      C. Dauguet, C. Axler-Blin, F. Vezinet-Brun, C. Rouzioux, W. Rozenbaum & L.
      Montagnier, “Isolation of a T-lymphotropic retrovirus from a patient at risk for ac-
      quired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)”, Science, 220, 868–871 (1983).
2.    F. Brun-Vezinet, F. Barré-Sinoussi, A.G. Saimot, D. Christol, L. Montagnier, C.
      Rouzioux, D. Klatzmann, W. Rozenbaum, J.C. Gluckman & J.C. Chermann,
      “Detection of IgG antibodies to lymphadenopathy-associated virus in patients with
      AIDS or lymphadenopathy syndrome”, The Lancet, 1253–1256 (1984).
3.    D. Klatzmann, F. Barré-Sinoussi, M. T. Nugeyre, C. Dauguet, E. Vilmer, C. Griscelli,
      F. Brun-Vezinet, C. Rouzioux, J. C. Gluckman, J. C. Chermann & L. Montagnier,
      “Selective tropism of lymphadenopathy associated virus (LAV) for helper-inducer
      T-lymphocytes,” Science, 225, 59–63 (1984).
4.    L. Montagnier, J. Gruest, S. Chamaret, C. Dauguet, C. Axler, D. Guetard, M. T.
      Nugeyre, F. Barré-Sinoussi, J. C. Chermann, J. B. Brunet, D. Klatzmann & J. C.
      Gluckman, “Adaptation of Lymphadenopathy Associated Virus (LAV) to replication
      in EBV-transformed B lymphoblastoid cell lines,” Science, 225, 63–66 (1984).
5.    S. Wain-Hobson, J. P. Vartanian, M. Henry, N. Chenciner, R. Cheynier, S. Delassus, L.
      Pedroza Martins, M. Sala, M. T. Nugeyre, D. Guetard, D. Klatzmann, J. C. Gluckman,
      W. Rozenbaum, F. Barré-Sinoussi & L. Montagnier, “LAV revisited: origins of the early
      HIV-1 isolates from Institut Pasteur”, Science, 252, 961–965 (1991).
6.    L. Montagnier, J. C. Chermann, F. Barré-Sinoussi, S. Chamaret, J. Gruest, M. T.
      Nugeyre, F. Rey, C. Dauguet, C. Axler-Blin, F. Vezinet-Brun, C. Rouzioux, G. A.
      Saimot, W. Rozenbaum, J.C . Gluckman, D. Klatzmann, E. Vilmer, C. Griscelli, C.
      Foyer-Gazengel & J. B. Brunet in Human T cell leukemia/lymphoma viruses (R. C. Gallo,
      M. E. Essex & L. Gross, eds.), “A new human T-lymphotropic retrovirus: characteriza-
      tion and possible role in lymphadenopathy and acquired immune deficiency syn-
      dromes”, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York, 363–379 (1984).
7.    M. Popovic, M. G. Samgadharan, E. Read, R. C. Gallo, , “Detection, isolation and con-
      tinuous production of cytopathic retroviruses (HTLV-III) from patients with AIDS
      and pre-AIDS”, Science, 1984; 224: 497–500.
8.    J. A. Levy, A. D. Hoffman, S. M. Kramer, J. A. Lanois, J. M. Shimabukuro & L. S.
      Oskiro, “Isolation of lymphocytopathic retroviruses from San Francisco patients with
      AIDS”, Science, 1984, 225, 840–842.
9.    M. Alizon, P. Sonigo, F. Barré-Sinoussi, J. C. Chermann, P. Tiollais, L. Montagnier, S.
      Wain-Hobson, “Molecular cloning of lymphadenopathy-associated virus”, Nature, 312,
      no. 20/27, 757–760 (December 1984): printed version, manuscript.
10.   S. Wain-Hobson, P. Sonigo, O. Danos, S. Cole, M. Alizon, “Nucleotide sequence of
      AIDS virus, LAV”, Cell, 1985; 40, 9–17.
11.   L. Ratner, W. Haseltine, R. Patarca, K. J. Livak, B. Starcich, S. F. Josephs, E. R. Doran,
      A. Rafalski, E. A. Whitchorn, K. Baumeister, L. Ivanoff, S. R. Petteway, M. L. Pearson,
      J. A. Lautenbergen, T. S. Papas, J. Ghrayeb, N. T. Chang, R. Gallo, C. & F. Wong-Staal,
      “Complete nucleotide sequence of the AIDS virus, HTLV-III,” Nature (Lond.), 1985,
      313, 277–284.
12.   F. Clavel, D. Guetard, F. Brun-Vezinet, S. Chamaret, M. A. Rey, M. O. Santos-
      Ferreira, A. G. Laurent, C. Daughet, C. Katlama, C. Rouzioux, D. Klatzmann, J. L.
      Champalimaud, & L. Montagnier, “Isolation of a new human retrovirus from West
      African patients with AIDS”, Science, 1986, 233, 343–346.
13.   S. Berthier, R. Chamaret, J. Fauchet, N. Fonlupt, M. Genetet, M. Gueguen, A.
      Pommereuil, Ruffault & L. Montagnier, “Transmissibility of human immunodefi-
      ciency virus in haemophilic and non-haemophilic children living in a private school
      in France”, The Lancet, 598–601 (13 September 1986).
14.   M. Seligmann, D. A. Warrel, J.-P. Aboulker, C. Carbon, J. H. Darbyshire, J. Dormont,
      E. Eschwege, D. J. Girling, D. R. James, J.-P. Levy, P. T. A. Peto, D. Schwarz, A. B.


                                                                                           289


      Stone, I. V. D. Weller, R. Withnall, K. Gelmon, E. Lafon, A. M. Swart, V. R. Aber, A.
      G. Babiker, S. Lhoro, A. J. Nunn & M. Vray, “Concorde: MCR/ANRS randomised
      double-blind controlled trial of immediate and deferred zidovudine in symptom-free
      HIV infection”, The Lancet, 343, 871–881, 1994.
15.   M. Zuniga. A. Whiteside. A. Ghaziani. J.G. Bartlett. Preface By L. Montagnier/R.
      Gallo., A Decade of HAART. The Development and Global Impact of Highly Active
      Antiretroviral Therapy, J. Oxford University Press (2008).
16.   A. M. Sheehy, N. C. Gaddis, J. D. Choi, M. H. Malim (2002)”, “Isolation of a human
      gene that inhibits HIV-1 infection and is suppressed by the viral Vif protein”, Nature
      418, 646–650.
17.   M. L. Gougeon, R. Olivier, S. Garcia, D. Guetard, T. Dragic, C. Dauguet & L.
      Montagnier, “Mise en évidence d’un processus d’engagement vers la mort cellulaire
      par apoptose dans les lymphocytes de patients infectés par le VIH”, C. R. Acad. Sci.
      Paris, t. 312, Série III, 529–537 (1991).
18.   M. L.Gougeon, S. Garcia, J. Heeney, R. Tschopp, H. Lecoeur, D. Guetard, V. Rame,
      C. Dauguet & L. Montagnier, “Programmed cell-death in AIDS-related HIV and SIV
      infections”, AIDS Res. and Hum. Retrov. 9, 553–563 (1993).
19.   M. L. Gougeon, H. Lecoeur, A. Dulioust, M. G. Enouf, M. Crouvoisier, C. Goujard,
      T. Debord & L. Montagnier, “Programmed cell death in peripheral lymphocytes
      from HIV-infected persons: Increased susceptibility to apoptosis of CD4 and CD8
      T cells correlates with lymphocyte activation and with disease progression”, The J. of
      Immunol., 156, 3509–3520 (1996).
20.   G. Piedimonte, D. Guetard, M. Magnani, D. Corsi, I. Picerno, P. Spataro, L. Kramer,
      M. Montroni, G. Silvestri, J.F. Torres-Roca & L. Montagnier, “Oxidative protein dam-
      age and degradation in lymphocytes from patients infected with human immunode-
      ficiency virus”, J. of Infect. Dis., 176, 655–664 (1997).
21.   O. Lopez, D. Bonnefont-Rousselot, M. Mollereau, R. Olivier, L. Montagnier, J. Emerit,
      M. Gentilini & J. Delattre, “Increased plasma thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances
      (TBARS) before opportunistic infection symptoms in HIV-infected individuals”, Clin.
      Chim. Acta, 247, 181–187 (1996).
22.   M. Sevea, A. Faviera, M. Osmana, D. Hernandez, G. Vaitaitis, N. C. Flores, J. M.
      McCord, S. C. Flores, “The Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 Tat Protetin Increases
      Cell Proliferation, Alters Sensitivity to Zinc Chelator-Induced Apoptisis, and Changes
      Sp1 DNA Binding in HeLa Cells*1”, Biochemistry & Biophysics Vol. 361, 165–172
      (1999).
23.   Y. Sasaki, A. Blanchard, H.L. Watson, S. Garcia, A. Dulioust, L. Montagnier & M.L.
      Gougeon, “In vitro influence of Mycoplasma penetrans on activation of peripheral T
      lymphocytes from healthy donors or human immunodeficiency virus-infected indi-
      viduals”, Infect. Immun. 63, 4277–4283 (1995).
24.   D. D. Richman, D. M. Margolis, M. Delaney, Warner C. Grenne, D. Hazuda, R. J.
      Pomerantz, “The Challenge of Finding a Cure for HIV Infection”, Science 323, 1304–
      1307 (2009).
25.   L. Montagnier, “Toward functional eradication of HIV infection”, Future HIV Ther
      (2007) Vol. 1, 3–4.
Portrait photo of Luc Montagnier by photographer Ulla Montan.




290
