                        M   AURICE   H . F . WI L K I N S


      The molecular configuration of nucleic acids
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1962



Nucleic acids are basically simple. They are at the root of very fundamental
biological processes, growth and inheritance. The simplicity of nucleic acid
molecular structure and of its relation to function expresses the underlying
simplicity of the biological phenomena, clarifies their nature, and has given
rise to the first extensive interpretation of living processes in terms of macro-
molecular structure. These matters have only become clear by an unprece-
dented combination of biological, chemical and physical studies, ranging from
genetics to hydrogen-bond stereochemistry. I shall not discuss all this here
but concentrate on the field in which I have worked, and show how X-ray
diffraction analysis has made its contribution. I shall describe some of the
background of my own researches, for I suspect I am not alone in finding
such accounts often more interesting than general reviews.




I took a physics degree at Cambridge in 1938, with some training in X-ray
crystallography. This X-ray background was influenced by J. D. Bernal,
then at the Cavendish. I began research at Birmingham, under J. T. Randall,
studying luminescence and how electrons move in crystals. My contem-
poraries at Cambridge had mainly been interested in elementary particles,
but the organization of the solid state and the special properties which
depended on this organization interested me more. This may have been a
forerunner of my interest in biological macromolecules and how their struc-
ture related to their highly specific properties which so largely determine
the processes of life.
   During the war I took part in making the atomic bomb. When the war
was ending, I, like many others, cast around for a new field of research.
Partly on account of the bomb, I had lost some interest in physics. I was
therefore very interested when I read Schrödinger’s book "What is Life?"
and was struck by the concept of a highly complex molecular structure


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                             755
which controlled living processes. Research on such matters seemed more
ambitious than solid-state physics. At that time many leading physicists such
as Massey, Oliphant, and Randall (and later I learned that Bohr shared their
view) believed that physics would contribute significantly to biology; their
advice encouraged me to move into biology.
   I went to work in the Physics Department at St. Andrews, Scotland,
where Randall had invited me to join a biophysics project he had begun.
Stimulated by Muller’s experimental modification, by means of X-radia-
tion, of genetic substance, I thought it might be interesting to investigate the
effects of ultrasonics; but the results were not very encouraging.
   The biophysics work then moved to King’s College, London, where
Randall took the Wheatstone Chair of Physics and built up, with the help
of the Medical Research Council, an unusual laboratory for a Physics De-
partment, where biologists, biochemists and others worked with the phys-
icists. He suggested I might take over some ultraviolet microscope studies
of the quantities of nucleic acids in cells. This work followed that of Cas-
persson, but made use of the achromatism of reflecting microscopes. By
                                      1
this time, the work of Caspersson and Brachet2 had made the scientific
world generally aware that nucleic acids had important biological roles
which were connected with protein synthesis. The idea that DNA might
itself be the genetic substance was, however, barely hinted at. Its function
in chromosomes was supposed to be associated with replication of the pro-
tein chromosome thread. The work of Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty 3,
showing that bacteria could be genetically transformed by DNA, was pub-
lished in 1944, but even in 1946 seemed almost unknown, or if known, its
significance was often belittled.
   It was fascinating to look through microscopes at chromosomes in cells,
but I began to feel that as a physicist I might contribute more to biology by
studying macromolecules isolated from cells. I was encouraged in this by
Gerald Oster who came from Stanley’s virus laboratory and interested me
in particles of tobacco mosaic virus. As Caspersson had shown, ultraviolet
microscopes could be used to find the orientation of ultraviolet absorbing
groups in molecules as well as to measure quantities of nucleic acids in cells.
Bill Seeds and I studied DNA, proteins, tobacco mosaic virus, vitamin B12,
etc. While examining oriented films of DNA prepared for ultraviolet di-
chroism studies, I saw in the polarizing microscope extremely uniform
fibres giving clear extinction between crossed nicols. I found the fibres had
been produced unwittingly while I was manipulating DNA gel. Each time


756                       1962 M. H. F.WILKINS




Fig. 1. One of the first X-ray diffraction photographs of DNA taken in our lab-
oratory. This may be compared with the later photograph in Fig. 10. (Photograph
                       with R. Gosling; DNA by R. Signer).

that I touched the gel with a glass rod and removed the rod, a thin and al-
most invisible fibre of DNA was drawn out like a filament of spider’s web.
The perfection and uniformity of the fibres suggested that the molecules in
them were regularly arranged. I immediately thought the fibres might be
excellent objects to study by X-ray diffraction analysis. I took them to Ray-


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                            757
mond Gosling, who had our only X-ray equipment (made from war-surplus
radiography parts) and who was using it to obtain diffraction photographs
from heads of ram spermatozoa. This research was directed by Randall, who
had been trained under W. L. Bragg and had worked with X-ray diffraction.
Almost immediately, Gosling obtained very encouraging diffraction patterns
(see Fig. 1). One reason for this success was that we kept the fibres moist. We
remembered that, to obtain detailed X-ray patterns from proteins, Bernal
had kept protein crystals in their mother liquor. It seemed likely that the
configuration of all kinds of water-soluble biological macromolecules would
depend on their aqueous environment. We obtained good diffraction pat-
terns with DNA made by Signer and Schwander4 which Singer brought to
London to a Faraday Society meeting on nucleic acids and which he gener-
ously distributed so that all workers, using their various techniques, could
study it.




Between 1946 and 1950 many lines of evidence were uncovered indicating
that the genetic substance was DNA, not protein or nucleoprotein. For
instance, it was found that the DNA content of a set of chromosomes was
constant, and that DNA from a given species had a constant composition
although the nucleotide sequence in DNA molecules was complex. It was
suggested that genetic information was carried in the polynucleotide chain in
a complicated sequence of the four nucleotides. The great significance of bac-
terial transformation now became generally recognized, and the demonstra-
                            5
tion by Hershey and Chase that bacteriophage DNA carried the viral genet-
ic information from parent to progeny helped to complete what was a
fairly considerable revolution in thought.
   The prospects of elucidating genetic function in terms of molecular struc-
ture were greatly improved when it was known that the genetic substance
was DNA, which had a well-defined chemical structure, rather than an ill-
defined nucleoprotein. There were many indications of simplicity and reg-
ularity in DNA structure. The chemists had shown that DNA was a polymer
in which the phosphate and deoxyribose parts of the molecule were regularly
repeated in a polynucleotide chain with 3’-5’ linkages. Chargaff 6 discovered
an important regularity: although the sequence of bases along the poly-


758                       1962 M. H. F.WILKINS

nucleotide chains was complex and the base composition of different DNA’s
varied considerably, the numbers of adenine and thymine groups were always
equal, and so were the numbers of guanine and cytosine. In the electron
microscope, DNA was seen as a uniform unbranched thread of diameter
about 20 Å. Signer, Caspersson, and Hammarsten7 showed by flow-bire-
fringence measurements that the bases in DNA lay with their planes roughly
perpendicular to the length of the thread-like molecule. Their ultraviolet
dichroism measurements gave the same results and showed marked par-
allelism of the bases in the DNA in heads of spermatozoa. Earlier, Schmidt 8
and Pattri9 had studied optically the remarkable ordering of the genetic
material in sperm heads. Astbury10 made pioneer X-ray diffraction studies
of DNA fibres and found evidence of considerable regularity in DNA; he
correctly interpreted the strong 3.4 Å reflection as being due to planar bases
stacked on each other. The electro-titrometric study by Gulland and Jordan II
showed that the bases were hydrogen-bonded together, and indeed Gulland
suggested that the polynucleotide chains might be linked by these hydrogen
bonds to form multi-chain micelles.
   Thus the remarkable conclusion that a pure chemical substance was in-
vested with a deeply significant biological activity coincided with a consid-
erable growth of many-sided knowledge of the nature of the substance.
Meanwhile we began to obtain detailed X-ray diffraction data from DNA.
This was the only type of data that could provide an adequate description
of the 3-dimensional configuration of the molecule.




As soon as good diffraction patterns were obtained from fibres of DNA,
great interest was aroused. In our laboratory, Alex Stokes provided a theory
of diffraction from helical DNA. Rosalind Franklin (who died some years
later at the peak of her career) made very valuable contributions to the X-ray
analysis. In Cambridge, at the Medical Research Council laboratory where
structures of biological macromolecules were studied, my friends Francis
Crick and Jim Watson were deeply interested in DNA structure. Watson
was a biologist who had gone to Cambridge to study molecular structure.
He had worked on bacteriophage reproduction and was keenly aware of
the great possibilities that might be opened up by finding the molecular


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                           759
structure of DNA. Crick was working on helical protein structure and was
interested in what controlled protein synthesis. Pauling and Corey, by their
discovery of the protein α-helix, had shown that precise molecular model-
building was a powerful analytical tool in its own right. The X-ray data
from DNA were not so complete that a detailed picture of DNA structure
could be derived without considerable aid from stereochemistry. It was
clear that the X-ray studies of DNA needed to be complemented by pre-
cise molecular model-building. In our laboratory we concentrated on am-
plifying the X-ray data. In Cambridge, Watson and Crick built molecular
models.




The sharpness of the X-ray diffraction patterns of DNA showed that DNA
molecules were highly regular - so regular that DNA could crystallize. The
form of the patterns gave clear indications that the molecule was helical, the
polynucleotide chains in the molecular thread being regularly twisted. It was
known, however, that the purines and pyrimidines of various dimensions
were arranged in irregular sequence along the polynucleotide chains. How
could such an irregular arrangement give a highly regular structure? This
paradox pointed to the solution of the DNA structure problem and was
resolved by the structural hypothesis of Watson and Crick.




The key to DNA molecular structure was the discovery by Watson and
Crick 13 that, if the bases in DNA were joined in pairs by hydrogen-bonding,
the overall dimensions of the pairs of adenine and thymine and of guanine
and cytosine were identical. This meant that a DNA molecule containing
these pairs could be highly regular in spite of the sequence of bases being
irregular. Watson and Crick proposed that the DNA molecule consisted of
two polynucleotide chains joined together by base-pairs. These pairs are
shown in Fig. 2. The distance between the bonds joining the bases to the
deoxyribose groups is exactly (within the uncertainty of 0.1 Å or so) the
same for both base-pairs, and all those bonds make exactly (within the
uncertainty of 1º or so) the same angle with the line joining the C 1 atoms
of the deoxyribose (see Fig. 2). As a result, if two polynucleotide chains are


760                        1962 M. H. F.WILKINS




Fig. 2. Watson-Crick base-pairs (revised by S. Arnott). (Top): Guanine hydrogen-
bonded to cytosine. (Bottom): Adenine hydrogen-bonded to thymine. The distances be-
tween the ends of the C1-N3 and C1-N9 bonds are 10.7 Å in both pairs, and all these
                  bonds make an angle of 52º with the C1-C1 line.


joined by the base-pairs, the distance between the two chains is the same for
 both base-pans and, because the angle between the bonds and the C1-C 1
line is the same for all bases, the geometry of the deoxyribose and phosphate
parts of the molecule can be exactly regular.
   Watson and Crick built a two-chain molecular model of this kind, the
chains being helical and the main dimensions being as indicated by the X-ray
 data. In the model, one polynucleotide chain is twisted round the other and


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                                 761




Fig. 3. (Left): Molecular model of the B configuration of DNA. The sizes of the atoms
correspond to Van der Waals diameters. (Right): Diagram corresponding to the model.
The two polynucleotide chains, joined by hydrogen-bonded bases, may be seen
                                         clearly.


762                        1962 M. H .F.WILKINS

the sequence of atoms in one chain runs in opposite direction to that in the
other. As a result, one chain is identical with the other if turned upside
down, and every nucleotide in the molecule has identical structure and envi-
ronment. The only irregularities are in the base sequences. The sequence
along one chain can vary without restriction, but base-pairing requires that
adenine in one chain be linked to thymine in the other, and similarly guanine
to cytosine. The sequence in one chain is, therefore, determined by the se-
quence in the other, and is said to be complementary to it.
   The structure of the DNA molecule in the B configuration is shown in
Fig. 3. The bases are stacked on each other 3.4 Å apart and their planes are
almost perpendicular to the helix axis. The flat sides of the bases cannot bind
water molecules; as a result there is attraction between the bases when DNA
is in an aqueous medium. This hydrophobic bonding, together with the
base-pair hydrogen-bonding, stabilizes the structure.




It is essential for genetic material to be able to make exact copies of itself;
otherwise growth would produce disorder, life could not originate, and
favourable forms would not be perpetuated by natural selection. Base-
pairing provides the means of self-replication (Watson and Crick14). It also
appears to be the basis of information transfer during various stages in pro-
tein synthesis.
   Genetic information is written in a four-letter code in the sequence of the
four bases along a polynucleotide chain. This information may be transferred
from one polynucleotide chain to another. A polynucleotide chain acts as a
template on which nucleotides are arranged to build a new chain. Provided
that the two-chain molecule so formed is exactly regular, base-pairing en-
sures that the sequence in the new chain is exactly complementary to that
in the parent chain. If the two chains then separate, the new chain can act as
a template, and a further chain is formed; this is identical with the original
chain. Most DNA molecules consist of two chains; clearly the copying
process can be used to replicate such a molecule. It can also be used to transfer
information from a DNA chain to an RNA chain (as is believed to be the
case in the formation of messenger RNA).
   Base-pairing also enables specific attachments to be made between part


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                            763
of one polynucleotide chain and a complementary sequence in another. Such
specific interaction may be the means by which amino acids are attached to
the requisite portions of a polynucleotide chain that has encoded in it the
sequence of amino acids that specifies a protein. In this case the amino acid is
attached to a transfer RNA molecule and part of the polynucleotide chain
in this RNA pairs with the coding chain.
   Since the base-pairs were first described by Watson and Crick in 1953,
many new data on purine and pyrimidine dimensions and hydrogen-bond
lengths have become available. The most recent refinement of the pairs (due
to S. Arnott) is shown in Fig. 2. We now take the distance between C 1 atoms
as 10.7 Å instead of the value used recently of 11.0 Å, mainly because new
data on N-H...N bonds show that this distance is 0.2 Å shorter between
ring nitrogen atoms than between atoms that are not in rings. The linearity
of the hydrogen bonds in the base-pairs is excellent and the lengths of the
bonds are the same as those found in crystals (these lengths vary by about
0.04 Å).
   The remarkable precision of the base-pairs reflects the exactness of DNA
replication. One wonders, however, why the precision is so great, for the
energy required to distort the base-pairs so that their perfection is appre-
ciably less, is probably no greater than one quantum of thermal energy. The
explanation may be that replication is a co-operative phenomenon involving
 many base-pairs. In any case, it must be emphasized that the specificity of
 the base-pairing depends on the bonds joining the bases to the deoxyribose
 groups being correctly placed in relation to each other. This placing is prob-
 ably determined by the DNA polymerizing enzyme. Whatever the me-
chanics of the process are, the exact equivalence of geometry and envi-
ronment of every nucleotide in the double-helix should be conducive to
precise replication. Mistakes in the copying process will be produced if there
are tautomeric shifts of protons involved in the hydrogen-bonding or chem-
ical alterations of the bases. These mistakes can correspond to mutations.




After our preliminary X-ray studies had been made, my friend Leonard
Hamilton sent me human DNA he and Ralph Barclay had isolated from
human leucocytes of a patient with chronic myeloid leukaemia. He was
studying nucleic acid metabolism in man in relation to cancer and had pre-


764                           1962 M. H. F.WILKINS




Fig. 4. X-ray diffraction pattern of cephalopod sperm. The DNA tiolecules in the
sperm heads have their axes vertical. The 3.4 Å internucleotide spacing corresponds to
the strong diffraction at the top and bottom of the pattern. The sharp reflections in the
     central part of the pattern show that the molecules are in crystalline array.

pared the DNA in order to compare the DNA of normal and leukaernic
leucocytes. The DNA gave a very well-defined X-ray pattern. Thus began
a collaboration that has lasted over many years and in which we have used
Hamilton’s DNA, in the form of many salts, to establish the correctness of
the double-helix structure. Hamilton prepared DNA from a very wide
range of species and diverse tissues. Thus it has been shown that the DNA


        MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                                     765
double-helix is present in inert genetic material in sperm and bacteriophage,
and in cells slowly or rapidly dividing or secreting protein (Hamilton et al.16).
No difference of structure has been found between DNA from normal and




Fig. 5. X-ray diffraction photograph of DNA fibres (B configuration) at high humid-
ity. The fibres are vertical. The 3.4 Å reflection is at the top and bottom. The angle in
the pronounced X shape, made by the reflections in the central region, corresponds to
the constant angle of ascent of the polynucleotide chains in the helical molecule.
              (Photograph with H. R. Wilson; DNA by L. D. Hamilton.)


766                       1962 M. H. F.WILKINS

from cancerous tissues, or in calf thymus DNA separated into fractions of
different base composition by my colleague Geoffrey Brown.
   We also made a study, in collaboration with Harriet Ephrussi-Taylor, of
active transforming principle from pneumococci, and observed the same
DNA structure. The only exception to double-helical DNA so far found
is in some very small bacteriophages where the DNA is single-stranded. We
have found, however, that DNA, with an unusually high content of adenine,
or with glucose attached to hydroxymethylcytosine, crystallized differently.




It did not seem enough to study X-ray diffraction from DNA alone. Ob-
viously one should try to look at genetic material in intact cells. It was pos-
sible that the structure of the isolated DNA might be different from that in
vivo, where DNA was in most cases combined with protein. The optical
studies indicated that there was marked molecular order in sperm heads and
that they might therefore be good objects for X-ray study, whereas chromo-
somes in most types of cells were complicated objects with little sign of
ordered structure. Randall had been interested in this matter for some years
and had started Gosling studying ram sperm. It seemed that the rod-shaped
cephalopod sperm, found by Schmidt to be highly anisotropic optically,
would be excellent for X-ray investigation. Rinne17, while making a study
of liquid crystals from many branches of Nature, had already taken diffrac-
tion photographs of such sperm; but presumably his technique was inad-
equate, for he came to the mistaken conclusion that the nucleoprotein was
liquid-crystalline. Our X-ray photographs (Wilkins and Randall18) showed
clearly that the material in the sperm heads had 3-dimensional order, i.e. it
was crystalline and not liquid-crystalline. The diffraction pattern (Fig. 4)
bore a close resemblance to that of DNA (Fig. 5), thus showing that the
structure in fibres of purified DNA was basically not an artefact. Working
 at the Stazione Zoologica in Naples, I found it possible to orient the sperm
heads in fibres. Intact wet spermatophore, being bundles of naturally ori-
ented sperm, gave good diffraction patterns. DNA-like patterns were also
obtained from T2 bacteriophage given me by Watson.


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                                      767




Fig. 6. X-ray pattern of microcrystalline fibres of DNA. The general intensity dis-
tribution is similar to that in Fig. 4 but the diffraction is split into sharp reflections
owing to the regular arrangement of the molecules in the crystals. Sharp reflections
extend to spacings as small as 1.7 Å. (Photograph with N. Chard; DNA by L. D.
                                       Hamilton.)


768   1962 M. H. F.WILKINS


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                            769
The X-ray Diffraction Patterns of DNA and the Various Configurations of
                               the Molecule

X-ray diffraction analysis is the only technique that can give very detailed
information about the configuration of the DNA molecule. Optical tech-
niques, though valuable as being complementary to X-ray analysis, provide
much more limited information - mainly about orientation of bonds and
groups. X-ray data contributed to the deriving of the structure of DNA
at two stages. First, in providing information that helped in building the
Watson-Crick model; and second, in showing that the Watson-Crick pro-
posal was correct in its essentials, which involved readjusting and refining
the model.
   The X-ray studies (e.g. Langridge et a1.19, Wilkins20) show that DNA mol-
ecules are remarkable in that they adopt a large number of different con-
formations, most of which can exist in several crystal forms. The main
factors determining the molecular conformation and crystal form are the
water and salt contents of the fibre and the cation used to neutralize the
phosphate groups (see Table 1).
   I shall describe briefly the three main configurations of DNA. In all cases
the diffraction data are satisfactorily accounted for in terms of the same basic
Watson-Crick structure. This is a much more convincing demonstration of
the correctness of the structure than if one configuration alone were studied.
The basic procedure is to adjust the molecular model until the calculated
intensities of diffraction from the model correspond to those observed (Lang-
ridge et al.19).
    As with most X-ray data, only the intensities, and not the phases, of the
 diffracted beams from DNA are available. Therefore the structure cannot
 be derived directly. If the resolution of X-ray data is sufficient to separate
 most of the atoms in a structure, the structure may be derived with no
 stereochemical assumption except that the structure is assumed to consist of
 atoms of known average size. With DNA, however, most of the atoms
 cannot be separately located by the X-rays alone (see Fig. 7). Therefore,
 more extensive stereochemical assumptions are made: these take the form
 of molecular model-building. There are no alternatives to most of these
 assumptions but where there might be an alternative, e.g. in the arrangement
 of hydrogen bonds in a base-pair, the X-ray data should be used to establish
 the correctness of the assumption. In other words, it is necessary to establish
 that the structure proposed is unique. Most of our work in recent years has


770                          1962 M. H. F.WILKINS




Fig. 7. Fourier synthesis map (by S. Arnott) showing the distribution of electron
density in the plane of a base-pair in the B configuration of DNA. The distribution
corresponds to an average base-pair. The shape of the base-pair appears in the map, but
individual atoms in a base-pair are not resolved. (The Fourier synthesis is being revised
                       and the map is subject to improvement.)

been of this nature. To be reasonably certain that the DNA structure was
correct, X-ray data, as extensive as possible, had to be collected.




Fig. 5 shows a diffraction pattern of a fibre of DNA at highhumidity when
the molecules are separated by water and, to a large extent, behave independ-
ently of each other. We have not made intensive study of DNA under these
conditions. The patterns could be improved, but they are reasonably well-
defined, and the sharpness of many of their features shows that the molecules
have a regular structure. The configuration is known as B (see also Fig. 3);
it is observed in vivo, and there is evidence that it exists when DNA is in
solution in water. There are 10 nucleotide pairs per helix turn. There is no
obvious structural reason why this number should be integral; if it is exactly
so, the significance of this is not yet apparent.


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                              771




Fig. 8. Molecular model of DNA in the A configuration. The base-pairs may be seen
                           inclined 20º to the horizontal.


  When DNA crystallizes, the process of crystallization imposes restraints
on the molecule and can give it extra regularity. Also, the periodic arrange-
ment of the molecules in the microcrystals in the fibre causes the diffraction
pattern to be split into sharp reflections corresponding to the various crystal
planes (Fig. 6). Careful measurement of the positions of the reflections and
deduction of the crystal lattice enables the directions of the reflections to be
identified in three dimensions. Diffraction patterns from most fibrous sub-
stances resemble Fig. 5 in that the diffraction data are 2-dimensional. In
contrast, the crystalline fibres of DNA give fairly complete 3-dimensional
data. These data give information about the appearance of the molecule
when viewed from all angles, and are comparable with those from single


772                       1962 M. H. F.WILKINS

crystals. Techniques such as 3-dimensional Fourier synthesis (see Fig. 7) can
be used and the structure determination made reasonably reliable.




In this conformation, the molecule has nucleotide pairs per helix turn; the
helix pitch is 28 Å. Th e relative positions and orientations of the base, and
of the deoxyribose and phosphate parts of the nucleotides differ considerably
                                                                      o
from those in the B form; in particular the base-pairs are tilted 20 from
perpendicular to the helix axis (Fig. 8).
   The A form of DNA (Fig. 1) was the first crystalline form to be ob-
served. Although it has not been observed in vivo, it is of special interest
because helical RNA adopts a very similar configuration. A full account of
A DNA will shortly be available. A good photograph of the A pattern is
shown in Fig. 9.



This form may be regarded as an artefact formed by partial drying. The helix
is non-integral, with about 9j nucleotide pairs per turn. The helices pack
together to form a semi-crystalline structure; there is no special relation
between the position of one nucleotide in a molecule and that in another.
The conformation of an individual nucleotide is very similar to that in the B
form. The differences between the B and C diffraction patterns are accounted
for by the different position of the nucleotides in the helix. Comparison of
the forms provides further confirmation of the correctness of the structures.
In a way, the problem is like trying to deduce the structure of a folding chair
by observing its shadow: if the conformation of the chair is altered slightly,
its structure becomes more evident.




In contrast to DNA, RNA gave poor diffraction patterns, in spite of much
effort by various workers including ourselves. There were many indications
that RNA contained helical regions, e.g. optical properties of RNA solutions
strongly suggested (e.g. Doty2l) that parts of RNA molecules resembled
DNA in that the bases were stacked on each other and the structure was
helical; and X-ray studies of synthetic polyribonucleotides suggested that


      MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                            773




Fig. 9. X-ray diffraction pattern of microcrystdine fibres of DNA in the A con-
       figuration. (Photograph with H. R. Wilson; DNA by L. D. Hamilton.)

RNA resembled DNA (Rich22). The diffraction patterns of RNA (Rich and
Watson 23) bore a general resemblance to those of DNA, but the nature of
pattern could not be clearly distinguished because of disorientation and
diffuseness. An important difficulty was that there appeared to be strong
meridional reflections at 3.3 Å and 4 Å. It was not possible to interpret these
in terms of one helical structure.


                                  1962 M. H. F.WLLKINS




    Fig. 10. Comparison of the X-ray diffraction patterns of fibres of DNA in the A
    configuration (left) and transfer RNA (right). The general distribution of intensity is
    very similar in both patterns, but the positions of the sharp crystalline reflections differ
.   because the molecular packing in the crystals is different in the two cases. (Photograph
                   with W. Fuller and M. Spencer; RNA by G. L. Brown.)

       In early work, many RNA preparations were very heterogeneous. We
    thought that the much more homogeneous plant virus RNA might give
    better patterns, but this was not so. However, when preparations of ribo-
    somal RNA and "soluble" RNA became available, we felt the prospects of
    structure analysis were improved. We decided to concentrate on "soluble"
    RNA largely because Geoffrey Brown in our laboratory was preparing large
    quantities of a highly purified transfer RNA component of soluble RNA for
    his physical and chemical studies, and because he was fractionating it into
    various transfer RNA’s specific for incorporation of particular ammo acids
    into proteins. This RNA was attractive for other reasons: the molecule was


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                              775
unusually small for a nucleic acid, there were indications that it might have
a regular structure, its biochemical role was important, and in many ways
its functioning was understood.
   We found it very difficult to orient transfer RNA in fibres. However, by
carefully stretching RNA gels in a dry atmosphere under a dissecting mi-
croscope, I found that fibres with birefringence as high as that of DNA
could be made. But these fibres gave patterns no better than those obtained
with other types of RNA, and the molecules disoriented when the water
content of the fibres was raised. Watson, Fuller, Michael Spencer, and my-
self worked for many months trying to make better specimens for X-ray
study. We made little progress until Spencer found a specimen that gave
some faint but sharp diffraction rings in addition to the usual diffuse RNA
pattern. This specimen consisted of RNA gel that had been sealed for X-ray
study in a small cell, and he found that it had dried slowly owing to a leak.
The diffraction rings were so sharp that we were almost certain that they
were spurious diffraction due to crystalline impurity - this being common
in X-ray studies of biochemical preparations. A specimen of RNA had given
very similar rings due to DNA impurity. We were therefore not very
 hopeful about the rings. However, after several weeks Spencer eliminated
 all other possibilities: it seemed clear that the rings were due to RNA itself.
By controlled slow drying, he produced stronger rings; and, with the refined
 devices we had developed for stretching RNA and with gels slowly con-
centrated by Brown, Fuller oriented the RNA without destroying its crys-
 tallinity. These fibres gave clearly defined diffraction patterns, and the ori-
 entation did not disappear when the fibres were hydrated. It appeared that
 the methods I had been using earlier, of stretching the fibres as much as
 possible, destroyed the crystallinity. If instead, the material was first allowed
 to crystallize slowly, stretching oriented the microcrystals and the RNA
 molecules in them. Single molecules were too small to be oriented well
 unless aggregated by crystallization. It was rather unexpected that, of all the
 different types of RNA we had tried, transfer RNA which had the lowest
 molecular weight, oriented best.
    The diffraction patterns of transfer RNA were clearly defined and well-
 oriented (Spencer, Fuller, Wilkins, and Brown24). These improvements re-
 vealed a striking resemblance between the patterns of RNA and A DNA
 (Fig. 10). The difficulty of the two reflections at 3.3 Å and 4 Å was resolved
 (Fig. 11): in the RNA pattern the positions of reflections on three layer-lines
 differed from those in DNA; as a result, when the patterns were poorly


776                         1962 M. H. F.WILKINS




Fig. II. Diffraction pattern of transfer RNA showing resolution of diffraction, in the
regions of 3.3 Å and 4 Å, into three layer-lines indicated by the arrows and corres-
ponding to the A DNA pattern. (Photograph with W. Fuller and M. Spencer; RNA
                                    by G. L. Brown.)



 oriented, the three reflections overlapped and gave the impression of two.
 There was no doubt that the RNA had a regular helical structure almost
 identical with that of A DNA. The differences between the RNA and
 DNA patterns could be accounted for in terms of small differences between
the two structures.
    An important consequence of the close resemblance of the RNA structure
 to that of DNA is that the RNA must contain base sequences that are largely
 or entirely complementary. The number of nucleotides in the molecule is
 about 80. The simplest structure compatible with the X-ray results consists
 of a single polynucleotide chain folded back on itself, one half of the chain
 being joined to the other by base-pairing. This structure is shown in Fig. 12.
 while we are certain the helical structure is correct, it must be emphasized
 that we do not know whether the two ends of the chain are at the end of
 the molecule. The chain might be folded at both ends of the molecule with
 the ends of the chain somewhere along the helix. It is known that the amino
 acid attaches to the end of the chain terminated by the base sequence cyto-
 sine-cytosine-adenine.


MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                            777




 Fig. 12. Molecular model and diagram of a transfer RNA molecule.


778                      1962 M. H. F.WILKINS

         Relation of the Molecular Structure of RNA to Function

Molecular model-building shows that the number of nucleotides forming
the fold at the end of a transfer RNA molecule must be three or more. In
our model, the fold consists of three nucleotides, each with an unpaired base.
It might be that this base-triplet is the part of the molecule that attaches to
the requisite part of the coding RNA polynucleotide chain that determines
the sequence of amino acids in the polypeptide chain of a protein. It is
believed that a base-triplet in the coding RNA corresponds to each amino
acid. The triplet in the transfer RNA could attach itself specifically to the
coding triplet by hydrogen-bonding and formation of base-pairs. It must
be emphasized, however, that these ideas are speculative.
   We suppose that part of the transfer RNA molecule interacts specifically
with the enzyme that is involved in attaching the amino acid to the RNA;
but we do not know how this takes place. Similarly, we know little of the
way in which the enzyme involved in DNA replication interacts with DNA,
or of other aspects of the mechanics of DNA replication. The presence of
complementary base sequences in the transfer RNA molecule, suggests that
it might be self-replicating like DNA; but there is at present little evidence
to support this idea. The diffraction patterns of virus and ribosome RNA
show that these molecules also contain helical regions; the function of these
are uncertain too.
   In the case of DNA, the discovery of its molecular structure led imme-
diately to the replication hypothesis. This was due to the simplicity of the
structure of DNA. It seems that molecular structure and function are in
most cases less directly related. Derivation of the helical configuration of
RNA molecules is a step towards interpreting RNA function; but more
complete structural information, e.g. determination of base sequences, and
more knowledge about how the various kinds of RNA interact in the ribo-
some, will probably be required before an adequate picture of RNA func-
tion emerges.




Since the biological specificity of nucleic acids appears to be entirely deter-
mined by their base sequences in them, determination of these sequences is
probably the most fundamental problem in nucleic acid research today. The


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                                 779




Fig. 13. Diffraction pattern of unoriented transfer RNA, showing diffraction rings
with spots corresponding to reflections from single crystals of RNA. The arrows point
                       to reflections from planes ~ 6 Å apart.


number of bases in a DNA molecule is too large for determination of base
sequence by X-ray diffraction to be feasible. However, in transfer RNA the
number of bases is not too large. The possibility of complete structure anal-
ysis of transfer RNA by means of X-rays is indicated by two observations.
First, we have observed (Fig. 13), in X-ray patterns of transfer RNA, sep-
arate spots each corresponding to a single crystal of RNA. We estimated
their size to be about 10u and have confirmed this estimate by observing, in
the polarizing microscope, birefringent regions that probably are the crys-
tals. It should not be too difficult to grow crystals several times larger, which
is large enough for single-crystal X-ray analysis.
   The second encouraging observation is that the X-ray data from DNA
have restricted resolution almost entirely on account of disorientation of the
microcrystals in DNA fibres. The DNA intensity data indicate that the
temperature factor (B = 4Å) is the same for DNA as for simple compounds.
It thus appears that DNA crystals have fairly perfect crystallinity and that, if


780                      1962 M. H. F.WILKINS

single crystals of DNA could be obtained, the intensity data would be ad-
equate for precise determination of all atomic positions in DNA (apart from
the non-periodic base sequence).
   We are investigating the possibility of obtaining single crystals of DNA,
but the more exciting problem is to obtain single crystals of transfer RNA
with crystalline perfection equal to that of DNA, and thereby analyse base
sequence. At present, the RNA crystals are much less perfect than those of
DNA. However, most of our experiments have been made with RNA that
is a mixture of RNA’s specific for different amino acids. We have seldom
used RNA that is very largely specific for one amino acid only. We hope
that good preparations of such RNA may be obtained consisting of one type
of molecule only. We might expect such RNA to form crystals as perfect
as those of DNA. If so, there should be no obstacle to the direct analysis of
the whole structure of the molecule, including the sequence of the bases and
the fold at the end of the helix. We may be over-optimistic, but the recent
and somewhat unexpected successes of X-ray diffraction analysis in the nu-
cleic acid and protein fields, are cause for optimism.




During the past twelve years, while studying molecular structure of nucleic
acids, I have had so much help from so many people that all could not be
acknowledged properly here. I must, however, thank the following:
   Sir John Randall, for his long-standing help and encouragement, and for
his vision and energy in creating and directing a unique laboratory;
   all my co-workers at various times over the past twelve years; first,
Raymond Gosling, Alex Stokes, Bill Seeds, and Herbert Wilson, then Bob
Langridge, Clive Hooper, Max Feughelman, Don Marvin, and Geoffrey
Zubay; and at present, Michael Spencer, Watson Fuller, and Struther Arnott,
who with much ability, skill and persistence (often through the night) car-
ried out the X-ray, molecular model-building, and computing studies;
   my late colleague Rosalind Franklin who, with great ability and expe-
rience of X-ray diffraction, so much helped the initial investigations on
DNA;
   Leonard Hamilton for his constant encouragement and friendly cooper-
ation, and for supplying us with high-quality DNA isolated in many forms
and from many sources; Geoffrey Brown for giving me moral and intellec-


       MOLECULAR CONFIGURATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS                                   781
tual support throughout the work and for preparing RNA for X-ray study;
Harriet Ephrussi-Taylor for the privilege of collaborating with her in stud-
ying crystallization of transforming principle; the laboratory technicians,
mechanics and photographers, including P. J. Cooper, N. Chard, J. Hayward,
Mrs. F. Collier, Z. Gabor, and R. Lerner, for having played a valuable part
in the work at various stages.
   I also wish to thank:
   the Medical Research Council for their far-sighted and consistent support
of our work; King’s College for being our base; I.B.M. United Kingdom
Limited and I.B.M. World Trade Corporation and the London University
Computer Unit for help with computing; The Rockefeller Foundation and
The British Empire Cancer Campaign for financial support; the Sloan-
Kettering Institute, New York, and the Stazione Zoologica, Naples, for use
of facilities.
   More generally, I thank:
   Francis Crick and Jim Watson for stimulating discussion; Norman Sim-
 mons for having refined techniques of isolating DNA and thereby helping
 a great many workers including ourselves; many other workers for supplying
us with DNA and RNA; and especially, Erwin Chargaff for laying foun-
dations for nucleic acid structural studies by his analytical work and his dis-
covery of the equality of base contents in DNA, and for generously helping
us newcomers in the field of nucleic acids.



 1. T. Caspersson, Naturwiss., 29 (1941) 33.
 2. J. Brachet, Arch. Biol. Liege, 53 (1942) 207.
 3. O. T. Avery, C. M. MacLeod, and M. McCarty, J. Exp. Med., 79 (1944) 137.
 4. R. Signer and H. Schwander, Helv. Chim. Acta, 32 (1949) 853.
 5. A. D. Hershey and M. Chase, J. Gen. Physiol., 36 (1952) 39.
 6. E. Chargaff, Experientia, 6 (1950) 201.
 7. R. Signer, T. Caspersson, and E. Hammarsten, Nature, 141 (1938) 122.
 8.W. J. Schmidt, Die Doppelbrechung von Karyoplasma, Zytoplasma, und Metaplasma,
     Borntraeger, Berlin, 1937.
 9. H. O. E. Pattri, Z. Zellforsch. Mikroskop. Anat., 16 (1932) 723.
10. W. T. Astbury, Symp. Soc. Exptl. Biol., I. Nucleic Acid, Cambridge Univ. Press,
     1947, p. 66.
11. J. M. Gulland and D. O. Jordan, Symp. Soc. Exptl. Biol., I. Nucleic Acid, Cambridge
     Univ. Press, 1947.
12. J. M. Gulland, Cold. Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 12 (1947) 95.
13. J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick, Nature, 171 (1953a) 737.


782                         1962 M. H. F.WILKINS

14. J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick, Nature, 171 (1953b) 964.
15. K. Hoogsteen, Acta Cryst., 12 (1959) 822.
16. L. D. Hamilton, R. K. Barclay, M. H. F. Wilkins, G. L. Brown, H. R. Wilson,
     D. A. Marvin, H. Ephrussi-Taylor, and N. S. Simmons, J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol.,
     5 (1959) 397.
17. F. Rinne, Trans. Faraday Soc., 29 (1933) 1016.
18. M. H. F. Wilkins and J. T. Randall, Biochim. Biophys. Act., 10 (1953) 192.
19. R. Langridge, H. R. Wilson, C. W. Hooper, M. H. F. Wilkins, and L. D. Hamil-
     ton, J. Mol. Biol., 2 (1960) 19.
20. M. H. F. Wilkins, J. Chim. Phys., 58 (1961) 891.
21. P. Doty, Biochem. Soc. Symp., No. 21 (1961) 8.
22. A. Rich, in A Symposium on Molecular Biology (Ed. Zirkle), Univ. Chicago Press,
     1959, p. 47.
23. A. Rich and J. D. Watson, Nature, 173 (1954) 995.
24. M. Spencer, W. Fuller, M. H. F. Wilkins, and G. L. Brown, Nature, 194 (1962)
     1014.
