                                                      Michael Rosbash Lecture   365




Circadian Rhythms and the
Transcriptional Feedback
Loop
Nobel Lecture, 7 December 2017 by
Michael Rosbash
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Brandeis University,
Waltham, MA, USA.


INTRODUCTION
Circadian clocks undoubtedly arose in response to the daily changes in
illumination that are due to the rotation of the earth. Indeed, sunrise and
sunset are very consistent external events, if we ignore the slight change
in timing that usually occurs every day. Although this change can be sub-
stantial at some times and in some locations, in March near the north and
south poles for example, life and biological clocks probably evolved in
more temperate zones.
    Clocks function to allow organisms to anticipate daily changes in their
environment. When something happens every day at the same time,
organisms “learn” that the event will occur. This anticipation, preparing
for what is going to happen, is a superior strategy to merely reacting to
that change. Animals use their clocks to maximize or minimize their
encounters with what I like to call the big 3: finding food, finding mates,
and avoiding predators.
    Clocks may also serve to provide order to internal processes. The tem-
poral separation of different biochemical reactions is an example and may


366   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      provide an additional fitness advantage. These inexorable rhythms, due to
      the persistent ticking of a biological clock in our brains and in many if not
      most other tissues, serve to coordinate myriad features of our behavior,
      metabolism and physiology – even our sleep-wake cycle (Hardin and
      Panda, 2013).
          Circadian rhythms are present in most if not all animals, plants, and
      some species of fungi like Neurospora. Even some photosynthetic bacte-
      rial species like cyanobacteria have well-studied circadian clocks (Kondo
      et al., 1993). Indeed, the first circadian clock may have belonged to photo-
      synthetic cyanobacteria, which are probably responsible for oxygenation
      of the atmosphere. These cyanobacterial clocks as well as plant clocks are
      very different from those of animals, with no credible homology between
      the different clock proteins. Therefore circadian rhythms probably
      emerged multiple times in evolution, which underscores their importance
      (Rosbash, 2009).
          The rotation of the earth on its axis is a source of daily light and temper-
      ature cycles in most locations on earth. These daily cycles are considered
      the oldest and most continuous environmental features to which life was
      originally exposed. Even the self-replicating molecules of the original RNA
      world that preceded cellular life probably arose in the presence of light-
      dark and temperature cycles, well before the atmosphere was anything like
      it is today. The rotation of the earth was also perhaps 20 percent shorter
      four billion years ago than it is today, which may help explain why circadian
      clocks are not precise twenty-four-hour timekeepers (Rosbash, 2009).
          The fact that endogenous circadian rhythms have periods distinct from
      precisely 24hr is a key piece of evidence that the rhythms are entrained
      rather than driven by the solar cycle. It is generally acknowledged that the
      first person to recognize that circadian rhythms are not driven was an
      eighteenth-century French astronomer named de Mairan. He had been
      musing about the movements of plants, which famously extend their
      leaves during the daytime and retract them at night. It was assumed that
      this daily leaf movement rhythm is light-driven, but de Mairan tested this
      hypothesis in 1729. To perform this first “free-running” circadian experi-
      ment in the absence of a light-dark cycle or entraining cues, he took a
      plant down to the basement, probably his wine cellar. In principle, it had
      constant conditions, i.e., no daily variations in light. Miraculously, the leaf
      movements continued unabated on a circa twenty-four-hour schedule,
      indicating that they were driven by an endogenous circadian clock rather
      than by light (Daan, 2010).
          Importantly however, de Mairan did not carefully measure the
      free-running period of the leaf movements, nor did other scientists
      addressing this problem for decades thereafter. Although there were no
      light fluctuations in the basement during the experiment, other oscillating


                                                      Michael Rosbash Lecture   367


stimuli were not measured or considered, e.g., humidity, temperature etc.
Because the world lives on a 24hr schedule, any human interference could
provoke an environmental oscillation of 24hr and drive the plant
rhythms. Neither de Mairan nor other plant scientists who followed him
considered that the key was not only the absence of light but also a care-
ful measurement of non-24hr period length. Although a 24hr period could
reflect an endogenous timekeeper with that precise period, it could also
reflect a driven oscillator, one that requires external 24hr oscillations of
some kind. A non-24hr period however must reflect an endogenous time-
keeper. (I am taking a bit of license in making this statement so strongly.)
For some reason, it was a very long time before this distinction was
appreciated and leaf movement period measurements made with much
more precision. Eventually, however, they were done and shown to be
non-24hr, indicating unambiguously that leaf movements were not driven
by a feature of the external world but reflected endogenous circadian
timekeepers (Daan, 2010).
    The circadian period of other organisms is similarly almost always
measured under constant or “free-running” conditions, which usually
means many days, weeks or even months in darkness; humans are com-
monly measured in another more elaborate way because of ethical issues
with a constant darkness protocol. Endogenous periods usually vary
between 22 and 26 hours. Mice for example have periods of about 23.5
hours and rats about 24.5 hours. Importantly, there are even differences
between inbred strains of mice, indicating that quantitative features of
the circadian system are under genetic control; I will have much more to
say about genetics and mutants below. Importantly, these circadian or not
exactly 24hr rhythms are normally reset or “entrained” by the light-dark
cycle. This is how humans, rodents and other organisms have a cycle that
is identical from one day to the next: a somewhat slow or fast clock is
advanced or delayed every day by the 24hr light cycle (Daan, 2010).
    In the early-mid 20th century, a similar endogenous clock assay was
carried out for Drosophila. This organism shows a rhythm of eclosion, the
emergence of adult flies from their pupal cases. This is a population assay
as any one fly experiences this event only once. However, the population
emerges in a circadian manner with a major peak after dawn. In other
words, adult emergence is gated by the circadian clock; animals that have
not emerged by late morning must wait until the following morning. This
is presumably to reduce exposure of newly emerged adults to mid-day
and late afternoon heat. As expected of a circadian phenomenon, this cir-
cadian gating of eclosion continues in constant darkness. Endogenous
periods of Drosophila were measured under these conditions; although
they vary somewhat from species to species and strain to strain, they are
very close to 24hr (Bunning, 1935; Kalmus, 1935, 1940a, b).


368   THE NOBEL PRIZES


         The circadian pioneer Colin Pittendrigh introduced and championed
      many important aspects of circadian biology. He was among the first if
      not the first to appreciate the importance and universality of the follow-
      ing phenomenon: if clocks were to function properly, especially in poikil-
      otherms like Drosophila, then there must be a mechanism to keep their
      timing system effectively insensitive to temperature changes (Pittendrigh,
      1954). When the ambient temperature drops or increases substantially,
      say by 10°C, the insect still must be able to tell time, e.g., to properly
      anticipate dawn and dusk. Pittendrigh showed that the endogenous
      period of Drosophila pseudoobscura does not change much with tempera-
      ture as measured with the eclosion assay in constant darkness (Pittend-
      righ, 1954), and the importance of temperature compensation was also
      appreciated by others (Hastings and Sweeney, 1957). The eclosion assay
      was used in the landmark 1971 paper by Konopka and Benzer, which
      arguably initiated the modern era of circadian molecular genetics and cer-
      tainly initiated my circadian work (Konopka and Benzer, 1971).


      KONOPKA AND BENZER
      Seymour Benzer is an American hero, a one-of-a-kind scientist (Weiner,
      1999). As a solid-state physics Ph.D. student at Purdue University in the
      1940s, he came close to discovering the transistor, a discovery that won
      William Shockley, John Bardeen, and Walter Brattain of Bell Labs the
      1956 Nobel Prize in Physics. He transferred his interests to molecular
      genetics and studied the fine structure of the gene as a Purdue faculty
      member. For this work during the ’50s and early ’60s, he shared many
      prizes including the 1971 Lasker Award with Sydney Brenner and Charles
      Yanofsky. Many people, including me, often wondered why Benzer did not
      win a Nobel Prize for this groundbreaking work. (Brenner won a Nobel
      Prize in 2002 for his later work on the worm, C. elegans.)
         Benzer moved to Caltech in the mid-’60s and changed his research
      focus, from a study of phage genes to the foundations of behavior using
      fly genetics. Caltech had been a major center of Drosophila genetic work
      since T.H. Morgan moved there from Columbia in 1928. (Morgan won the
      1933 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine; this was the first American
      Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine and the first Drosophila Nobel
      Prize.) Benzer’s strategy followed what had been done in other areas of fly
      biology, namely associate single mutations and their underlying genes
      with a phenotype. The strategy was simple: the phenotypes in this case
      would be behavioral and the identified genes would therefore be – by
      definition – behavioral genes.
         Ron Konopka was Benzer’s first student (Fig. 1). Importantly, Konopka
      had become interested in circadian rhythms in college and brought the


                                                         Michael Rosbash Lecture      369



                          Figure 1. Ronald J. Konopka,
                          around the time he began
                          graduate school at Caltech
                          (Rosbash, 2015).




circadian problem to Benzer, contrary to what one might imagine from
first principles. Konopka also designed as well as carried out the first
eclosion screen to search for credible circadian mutants (Rosbash, 2015).
   Konopka exploited the remarkable genetics toolkit of Drosophila to
simplify the eclosion screen. He used the classic attached X strategy so
that the X chromosome of a mutagenized male would be inherited by his
male progeny; like in humans, the Y chromosome is normally inherited by
males from a male parent. However in Drosophila and now unlike in
mammals, it is the X:autosome ratio that determines phenotypic sex; the
Y chromosome predominantly contributes to sperm motility. With this
attached X strategy therefore, the phenotypes of mutated genes on the X
could be assayed in males of the first (F1) generation with no need for



                                                   Figure 2. Identification of
                                                   X-linked mutations in D.
                                                   melanogaster. EMS-mutage-
                                                   nized sperm is used to fertilize
                                                   eggs containing either an
                                                   attached X-chromosome or a
                                                   Y chromosome. Recessive mu-
                                                   tations on the X-chromosome
                                                   from mutagenized sperm are
                                                   phenotypically visible in the
                                                   F1 male offspring (Baker and
                                                   Woodard, 2007).


370   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      backcrossing. As there is only a single mutagenized X chromosome in
      these F1 males, even recessive mutations would be visible. The disadvan-
      tage was that only about 20% of fly genes are present on the X chromo-
      some, so potentially interesting genes present on the autosomes would be
      invisible (Fig. 2).
         The screen was remarkably successful, and the Konopka-Benzer paper
      identified 3 mutant strains, each with a very different circadian phenotype
      from the normal wild-type fly with a ca. 24hr period. One mutant had a
      short period, about 19–20 hours, the second had a long period, about 29
      hours, and the third had no apparent rhythm at all; it appeared arrhyth-
      mic. Remarkably, the phenotypes were not only assayed with the tradi-
      tional fly eclosion assay (Fig. 3) but also with a locomotor activity assay
      (Fig. 4). Even more remarkably, the mutations would not complement, i.e.,
      they appeared to be alleles of the same gene, which they named period.
      More extensive genetic analyses in the paper were consistent with this
      single gene conclusion. In addition, the phenotypes were semi-dominant,
      a result that has been extended to many circadian genes in different sys-
      tems in the subsequent literature. These properties – including the
      mind-boggling fact that a single gene could apparently mutate to speed


                                         Figure 3. Eclosion rhythms of
                                         wild-type and Konopka and
                                         Benzer’s period mutants (Ko-
                                         nopka and Benzer, 1971).


                                                              Michael Rosbash Lecture   371




Figure 4. Locomotor activity patterns of wild-type and period mutants (Konopka and
Benzer, 1971).




up, slow down or stop the clock – suggested that the rhythm-generating
machinery reads out period gene expression in some semi-quantitative
manner to influence circadian time-keeping in multiple directions
(Konopka and Benzer, 1971).
   The field made very little progress for the next decade or so. Although I
am not aware of another laboratory other than Konopka’s that was work-
ing on Drosophila melanogaster circadian rhythms in the early-mid ’70s, I
suspect that the major reason for the lack of progress was not the lack of
manpower but the lack of viable approaches other than genetics. The
insect was too small for most physiological approaches, and the strictly
genetic approach, or phenogenetic approach as it is sometimes called,
was inherently limited.


BRANDEIS AND RECOMBINANT DNA
One new lab that did enter the field of Drosophila circadian biology in the
’70s was that of my friend and Brandeis colleague Jeff Hall. He also
trained with Seymour Benzer but as a post-doc. Jeff knew Ron Konopka
well from their time together at Caltech; Ron was doing his Ph.D. in the
Benzer lab and then returned to Caltech as an assistant professor after a
brief post-doc with Colin Pittendrigh at Stanford. Jeff’s research interests
in the late ’70s were focused on neurogenetics writ large and also more
narrowly on fruit fly courtship. His post-doc Bambos Kyriacou made a
finding in the late ’70s that merged the field of courtship with that of cir-
cadian rhythms. He discovered that the courtship song that the male fly
sings to a female has about a 1 min rhythm. Moreover, the period mutants
affect this ultradian rhythm similar to the way that these mutants affect
circadian rhythms, i.e., shorter, longer and no rhythm at all (Kyriacou and


372   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      Hall, 1980). Although this finding lacks any mechanistic underpinning
      and has recently become quite controversial (Kyriacou et al., 2017; Stern,
      2014; Stern et al., 2017), the reason for mentioning it here is historical: it
      enhanced Jeff’s interest in Drosophila circadian biology and by extension
      my own.
          Despite all this fascinating phenomenology, it was my contention in
      the early ’80s that one could not strike off in a new direction, with new
      methods and ideas, without being able to get at the molecules – the RNAs
      and proteins – that were participating in timekeeping; they included the
      period RNAs and proteins. I must confess that this view also reflected a
      certain subjective bias; I was not comfortable with strictly genetic argu-
      ments, regardless of their strength in hindsight. This means that I was
      still far from certain that period and its gene products played a central
      role in circadian timing.
          Enter recombinant DNA technology into the story in the late ’70s-early
      ’80s; it had transformed genetics, including my own yeast work. We were
      actively cloning yeast genes and using recombinant DNA methods to
      study their expression. It goes almost without saying that this new
      approach also solved my “comfort problem”; one could finally imagine
      cloning and sequencing enigmatic genes like Drosophila period. The appli-
      cation of recombinant DNA technology would therefore not only enable
      an entirely new generation of experiments but also might provide some
      insight into the function of this gene and by extension the molecular
      underpinnings of circadian rhythms.
          Jeff and I discussed the possibility of collaborating in this new direc-
      tion for at least a year but were unable to begin for a number of reasons,
      including most importantly the lack of personnel. This obstacle was over-
      come when Pranitha Reddy, a Brandeis Biochemistry graduate student,
      transferred into my lab. Her young thesis advisor Vivian Ernst had tragi-
      cally passed away, and Pranitha needed a new home. I offered her this
      new project, the cloning of the period gene, and she enthusiastically
      accepted. The loose collaboration plan was that Jeff’s lab would provide
      the genetics and behavior expertise, whereas Pranitha and my lab would
      do the cloning and provide the recombinant DNA expertise.
          Importantly, this technology was making rapid progress in ways that
      were highly relevant to the identification of period. It became feasible by
      the early ’80s to pursue the cloning of Drosophila period by chromosome
      walking, a strategy pioneered by the Hogness lab at Stanford (Bender et
      al., 1983a; Bender et al., 1983b; Spierer et al., 1983). Moreover, gene identi-
      fication could then be done by gene rescue, which had just been accom-
      plished by Rubin and Spradling (Rubin and Spradling, 1982; Spradling
      and Rubin, 1982). Our dream was to rescue the per0 strain and its arrhyth-
      mic phenotype with a piece of cloned DNA containing the wild-type (nor-


                                                       Michael Rosbash Lecture     373


mal) period gene. Although chromosome walking and gene identification
by rescue were not relevant to the yeast recombinant DNA research ongo-
ing in my lab, we were deep into other recombinant DNA studies as men-
tioned above. The gap between what was ongoing in my lab and these
new genetic strategies was therefore not big.
   Pranitha led the successful Brandeis effort to clone this DNA, and she
was aided by Will Zehring and Dave Wheller from Jeff’s lab (Reddy et al.,
1984). We had collaborative help in the important initial phases of this
work from Christopher Hadfield and Vince Pirrotta then at the EMBO
labs in Heidelberg, Germany. They had expertise in making phage librar-
ies from DNA microdissected from Drosophila giant salivary glands. We
knew from the genetic mapping work of Konopka that the Drosophila
period gene was located at position 3B 1-2, between the white and zeste
genes on the X chromosome (Konopka and Benzer, 1971). Our European
collaborators made a DNA library from a piece of the salivary gland X
chromosome surrounding region 3B 1-2, which reduced the amount of
chromosome walking we would have to undertake.
   Our rescue experiments were spearheaded by Zehring and Wheeler in
the Hall lab with help from Reddy as well as Ron Konopka and Bambos
Kyriacou (Zehring et al., 1984). Bambos had by this time returned to a fac-
ulty position in the UK but remained a frequent collaborator. He was
responsible for the courtship song rhythm assay, which was also meas-
ured in this first gene rescue publication. Konopka had also moved, from
Caltech to Clarkson College in upstate New York. Jeff was in frequent




                                             Figure 5. Gift of Hall and Rosbash
                                             to the Nobel Museum. (a) Original
                                             Drosophila Activity Monitor (DAM)
                                             Board. (b) Recording traces from
                                             DAM system showing activity pro-
                                             files of per01 mutant and wild-type
                                             flies.


374   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      communication with him, and Ron helped us set up our initial Brandeis
      locomotor activity monitoring system. It became our gift, from me and
      Jeff, to the Nobel Museum (Fig. 5). Konopka also acted as an advisor, to
      make sure that we were carrying out and interpreting these locomotor
      activity rhythm assays – effectively sleep-wake assays – properly. This
      was our principal assay (Fig. 6); we only rarely assayed eclosion. My grad-
      uate student Qiang Yu also helped with these experiments, with cloning
      and especially with DNA injections into embryos. Qiang had spent several
      years in the Chinese countryside during the cultural revolution. Some of
      that time was spent repairing watches, which made him an expert at fine
      motor movements under magnification. These were precisely the skills
      required for the embryo injections, which generated the transgenic fly
      strains.
         These two first papers, the cloning and characterization of the putative
      period DNA as well as the gene rescue experiments, relied for identifica-
      tion on classical genetic rearrangements used by Konopka in his charac-
      terization of the period gene (Konopka and Benzer, 1971). They dated
      from an earlier characterization of the white-zeste region of the fly
      genome within which period maps. This region and its chromosomal
      rearrangements were studied in detail by Bert Judd and his collaborators
      at the University of Texas. It is not coincidental that they included his




      Figure 6. Activity grams showing rescue of per01 arrythmicity by
      segments of DNA from the per region. Each line represents a subjective
      day, while the midline mark in each actogram denotes the timing of
      lights turning on (Zehring et al., 1984).


                                                           Michael Rosbash Lecture   375


Ph.D. student Mike Young, with whom Jeff Hall and I have shared this
Nobel Prize (Young and Judd, 1978). Importantly in the context of our ini-
tial cloning and gene rescue efforts, our combined group at Brandeis did
not know that the Young lab at Rockefeller University was engaged in very
similar experiments (Bargiello et al., 1984; Bargiello and Young, 1984).
Both groups soon learned about the other one, and we were locked in an
intense battle for primacy during the first few years of this work. Impor-
tantly, the cloning and rescue of period was done independently and at the
same time in both places. Although unpleasant at the time, the competi-
tion and focus probably contributed to some of these early successes. I
note that the functional identification of a behavioral gene by transgenic
rescue by both groups, Rosbash-Hall and Young, was accomplished 13
years before the same goal was achieved in mouse with the Clock gene by
Takahashi and colleagues. Admittedly, this was a much more challenging
task given the size of the mouse genome and other issues.
   Mike Young and his colleagues deserve high marks for these early
accomplishments. Although many of the conclusions were similar to ours,
the early Young papers did a better job than we did of focusing in on a 4.5
kb transcript as the correct period mRNA. We were distracted by a 0.9 kb
transcript, which was encoded just downstream of period and underwent
apparent circadian oscillations in level (Reddy et al., 1984)) This transcript
turned out to be a red herring: it is strongly expressed during pupation, just
prior to eclosion. The daily synchronized emergence of young adults com-
bined with the rapid decay of the transcript after eclosion gave rise to
“apparent” circadian oscillations during adulthood (Lorenz et al., 1989).


SEARCHING FOR PERIOD PROTEIN FUNCTION
The next big question was, what is the function of the period protein or
PER? This was approached in the obvious way, i.e., by DNA sequencing
and done once again in parallel by the Young group and our Brandeis
group (Baylies et al., 1987; Citri et al., 1987; Jackson et al., 1986; Yu et al.,
1987b). The single nucleotide changes of the 3 mutations handsomely
conformed to the simplest interpretation of the Konopka and Benzer
data, but we were disappointed that the protein sequence itself was not
instantly illuminating. These were, however, the early days of sequencing
with rather few proteins in the database. This explains why the PER
sequence did not link to its now known family of proteins; it was the first
member of this family, i.e., a “pioneer protein.” However, PER did link to
proteoglycans, which often have repeated sequences that resemble the
glycine-threonine (GT) repeat sequences of PER (Jackson et al., 1986;
Reddy et al., 1986). The serines of proteoglycan GS repeats are sites of
O-linked glycosylation.


376   THE NOBEL PRIZES


          We pursued this relationship and published a paper indicating that
      PER is indeed a proteoglycan (Reddy et al., 1986). In hindsight, the bio-
      chemical characterization of PER was simply too superficial to draw such
      a strong conclusion. The Young lab competition issue (I feared – correctly
      it turned out – that they too were working on this proteoglycan hypothe-
      sis) and a lack of prudence led me to push forward and publish these
      modest biochemical experiments. I also thought that the GT repeat
      sequence had to be significant and made the classical error of letting a
      potential exciting conclusion erase what should have been vigilant skepti-
      cism about my own data. I still don’t know to this day if those experi-
      ments were in error or just their interpretation. I suspect the latter, for
      which I am 100% responsible, i.e., the results were probably correct but
      simply due to protein aggregation. In any case, the “PER is a proteogly-
      can” hypothesis stood tall in 1986 with no other proposed functions for
      PER. Moreover, this hypothesis soon stood even taller because of a high
      profile paper published in 1987 through a collaborative effort from the
      Young laboratory and that of David Spray at Albert Einstein (Bargiello et
      al., 1987). This paper argued that the per mutations affect intercellular
      communication in Drosophila larval salivary glands. PER would be resi-
      dent in the extracellular matrix and quantitatively affect gap junction
      function, a perfect role for a proteoglycan. Importantly, there were no
      strong data to the contrary nor even another competing hypothesis for
      PER function in 1987.
          The first hint that this proteoglycan hypothesis might be on the wrong
      track was also published in 1987 and came from my outstanding graduate
      student Qiang Yu (Yu et al., 1987a). In one of the first of many behav-
      ior-transformation papers in which per DNA was manipulated in vitro
      and then assayed functionally in vivo, Qiang cleanly excised the GT
      repeat region from the PER coding region and assayed the function of this
      deleted gene and protein. We assayed as usual two behaviors, circadian
      locomotor activity rhythms and the courtship song rhythms. The deletion
      had a strong effect on the more enigmatic courtship rhythms, but the
      canonical ca. 24hr locomotor activity rhythm assay was unaffected.
      Although the paper title featured the positive result, we recognized that
      the lack of an effect on the circadian assay was important. If the GT
      repeat region is the cardinal feature that defines proteoglycan properties,
      e.g., O-linked glycosylation, might this mean that the protein was not a
      proteoglycan? Might the biochemistry and the salivary gland gap junction
      results be misleading?
          The results of a study we published in the following year was also rele-
      vant to the proteoglycan hypothesis (Colot et al., 1988). We cloned and
      sequenced period from D. pseudoobscura and D. virilis. The coding
      sequences of both genes are missing the GT repeat region but can rescue


                                                      Michael Rosbash Lecture   377


behavioral rhythms of per0 D. melanogaster flies, consistent with the dele-
tion experiment described above. Because the coding regions of the two
genes still contain several pairs of TG and SG amino acids and because
single SG dipeptides can serve as sites for the O-linked attachment of gly-
cosaminoglycan side chains, the data could not eliminate the proteogly-
can possibility. They did, however, add to a growing sense of doubt.
   Unrelated to proteoglycans, the assay of behavior with manipulated
period DNA was used in other papers published at about the same time.
We characterized an unusual collection of spliced transcripts encoded by
per and showed that two of them have biological activity in transforma-
tion-rescue experiments (Citri et al., 1987). The first author, Yoav Citri,
became fascinated with fly rhythms and began these experiments when
he was a post-doc in the Baltimore lab at MIT; he then moved over to my
lab to continue the work. He left Brandeis to become an assistant profes-
sor at the Weizmann Institute around 1989 and died tragically in 1995 in a
traffic accident.
   We also used this sequence and rescue strategy to address the molecu-
lar identity of the famous Konopka mutations, with Qiang Yu once again
principally responsible for these experiments in my laboratory (Yu et al.,
1987b). Our sequence data largely agreed with that published the previous
year from the Young group (Jackson et al., 1986), but our per gene con-
tained an extra exon and was also missing an intron present in the Young
publication, which interrupted a long contiguous coding exon. As a con-
sequence, our predicted sequence was 97 amino acids longer than the one
published by Young. We identified the per01 and perS mutations, and in
both cases identified only a single nucleotide change from wild-type per
DNA. The work did not just rely on these sequence differences but also
used chimeric DNA fragments to show that altered biological activity
tracked with the mutation. Remarkably and consistent with the original
hypothesis of Konopka that per01 is a null mutant with no biological activ-
ity, this mutation creates a stop codon; there is therefore no wild-type
PER encoded and perhaps no protein at all. The perS nucleotide change
creates a serine to asparagine missense mutation at position 589. Both
changes were in locations that underscored the fact that the 4.5 kb tran-
script encodes PER as originally suggested by Young and colleagues.
   Although our original sequencing data made it almost certain that the
mutation at position 589 is responsible for the perS short period pheno-
type, we recapitulated this change in a subsequent study in which posi-
tion 589 of wild-type DNA was changed to encode a number of different
amino acids including asparagine (Rutila et al., 1992). The results not only
verified that the serine to asparagine change was indeed responsible for
the short period phenotype but also indicated that short period is likely to
be the default phenotype of most amino acids at position 589, i.e., only


378   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      serine and threonine have a ca. 24 hr period. The data in this paper also
      indicated that the perS protein is a hypomorph (has decreased function)
      rather than a hypermorph, with an increase in gene/protein activity as
      originally postulated by Konopka and Benzer (Konopka and Benzer,
      1971). The Young lab identified all 3 Konopka and Benzer mutations and
      also showed that more copies of period transgenes led to shorter periods
      (Baylies et al., 1987).
         At the risk of making a slight tangent to discuss much more recent
      data, we now have a quite sophisticated view of at least part of the PER
      molecular cycle, and these data underscore the hypomorphic or loss-of-
      function character of the perS protein. PER amino acid 589 is phosphoryl-
      ated by the kinase Nemo, which probably delays subsequent PER phos-
      phorylation events by the important circadian kinase doubletime (DBT);
      they lead to the degradation of PER, which happens too rapidly in the
      absence of PER 589 phosphorylation (Chiu et al., 2011). This rapid degra-
      dation of PERS occurs after the disappearance of TIM in the late night or
      early day, a scenario that is also consistent with more recent data on the
      effects of the perS mutation (Li et al., 2014; Li and Rosbash, 2013). In con-
      trast to our understanding of the PERS effect, there is still no good mech-
      anistic understanding of the PERL amino acid change and why it slows


                                                          Figure 7. Comparison of SIM
                                                          and PER sequences (Crews
                                                          et al., 1998).


                                                       Michael Rosbash Lecture   379


the circadian cycle (Kidd et al., 2015). Although PERL may interact more
weakly with TIM (Gekakis et al., 1995), it is still uncertain which fea-
ture(s) of PER activity is specifically affected by PERL.
   The 1987 mechanistic speculations about perS protein function were
difficult to reconcile with a proteoglycan function. Moreover, we soon
learned of an impending publication that further eroded my confidence in
this hypothesis. Steve Crews, working in Corey Goodman’s lab had
cloned and sequenced a Drosophila gene called single-minded with protein
coding homology to PER. Their 1988 paper showed that Single-minded
(SIM) is a nuclear protein and strongly suggested it was a transcription
factor (Crews et al., 1988). Especially difficult to square with proteoglycan
theory was SIM nuclear localization. We now know that the homology
reflects a protein-protein interaction domain called PAS and present in a
family of transcription factors; the three founding members are PER,
ARNT and SIM; ARNT is a mammalian protein, the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (Huang et al., 1993). Although the homology
was quite modest and could have reflected a motif shared by proteins
with completely different functions (Fig. 7), it offered an important com-
peting possibility: perhaps period encodes a transcription factor.


BACK ON TRACK: GENE EXPRESSION AND THE FEEDBACK LOOP
The possibility of a gene expression function was dramatically enhanced
by the first relevant data from my post-doc Paul Hardin, who was examin-
ing period mRNA from fly heads at different circadian times. The paper
that was ultimately published made two findings (Hardin et al., 1990). The
first is that these mRNA levels undergo robust circadian oscillations in fly
heads. The second is that the phase of RNA cycling was affected by the
per missense mutations identically to their effects on behavioral phase
(Fig. 8). Paul gets full credit for making these seminal findings, including
the important idea to use fly heads rather than whole flies for the source
of RNA. The lack of cycling in certain body tissues diluted the cycling sig-
nal and therefore reduced the cycling amplitude in RNA from whole flies
so that it was not reliable.
   Paul’s experimental success was helped by his local environment,
namely, the fact that a good fraction of his colleagues in my lab studied
yeast RNA and were facile with state-of-the-art RNA methods. As PCR
did not exist at this time, Paul had to use RNase protection to assay spe-
cific per mRNA levels. This method was not terribly difficult but also not
trivial, so this aspect of the Brandeis circadian work benefited from being
adjacent to – in effect embedded within – a nucleic acid-centric research
program. Circadian labs elsewhere had a difficult time establishing these
kinds of nucleic acid-centric approaches (personal communication).


380   THE NOBEL PRIZES



                                                     Figure 8. Both Per+ and pers mRNA
                                                     levels undergo circadian oscillations.
                                                     pers mRNA oscillations correspond
                                                     to the shortened period exhibited by
                                                     these mutant flies (Hardin et al., 1990).




         We now know that the feedback effects of the per missense mutations
      on per RNA cycling operate predominantly at the transcriptional level and
      are upstream of their effects on behavior, i.e., the protein directly affects
      its own transcription as part of the timekeeping mechanism. (I should
      note that this is still inferred rather than directly shown, because we do
      not have a per mutation that is known only to impair the feedback effect
      on its own transcription with a period effect as measured behaviorally.)
      At the time of this first paper, however (Hardin et al., 1990), there were
      many possibilities, and we were very conservative in interpreting these
      results. For example, there were no transcriptional or pseudo-transcrip-
      tional assays, so feedback could have operated at a post-transcriptional
      level. We also had no evidence that PER functions directly to affect its
      own gene expression, for example by binding to chromatin or to pre-mR-
      NAs, and our model considered the possible role of intermediate effector
      proteins. We even considered that circadian behavior would be required
      to generate oscillating mRNA levels, i.e., the feedback effects on gene
      expression might then be downstream of a PER effect on behavior. In this
      case, PER would be affecting circadian behavior and perhaps the circa-
      dian clock independent of its feedback effect on its own gene expression
      (Fig. 9). Nonetheless, the Hardin et al. data taken together with a simple
      and positive interpretation of the modest homology to the Single-minded
      transcription factor suggested a simple parsimonious hypothesis: PER


                                                        Michael Rosbash Lecture       381



                                                  Figure 9. Original feedback
                                                  loop model showing broadly
                                                  how per might regulate its own
                                                  expression (Hardin et al., 1990).




was engaged in a negative feedback loop that affects its own expression
and that this loop was “the clock” or at least central to timekeeping. The
negative feedback loop would therefore be upstream of the behavioral
rhythms that are usually measured by circadian biologists.
   This new working model of how PER functions, namely at the level of
gene expression regulation, was very attractive, and my lab pushed hard
to support and extend this new view of timekeeping. First was to address
transcriptional vs. post-transcriptional regulation. To this end, Paul Har-
din showed that feedback regulation almost certainly occurred at the
transcriptional level (Hardin et al., 1992). This paper had two principal
experiments. i) It showed that pre-mRNA oscillations were similar if not
identical to mRNA oscillations. ii) It showed that the feedback could be
recapitulated with per 5’ flanking sequences, i.e., they would drive cycling
of a reporter gene. (Fig. 10).
   To my surprise, we had serious trouble publishing this important
paper. Perhaps this was because transcriptional regulation was taken for
granted by the scientific community; post-transcriptional regulation,
splicing for example, was not yet broadly appreciated as a viable regula-
tory mechanism.
   The second paper addressed PER subcellular localization. Is it a
nuclear protein like SIM or is it cytoplasmic? The latter would favor an
indirect effect on transcription and possibly even other functions. To


382   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Figure 10. per mRNA oscillations are transcriptionally regulated (Hardin et al., 1992).




      address this issue, my graduate student Xin Liu went to Seymour Ben-
      zer’s lab for a few months to do immunoelectron microscopy. (Xin
      recently retired after many years as a UCLA professor.) PER was a nuclear
      protein (Liu et al., 1992). This was consistent with a more direct role on
      transcription and made the proteoglycan hypothesis even less likely.
         The third paper was carried out by an excellent graduate student,
      Honkui Zeng, who addressed whether PER functioned in a direct, cell-au-
      tonomous manner. (Honkui has been with the Allen Brain Institute for
      more than a decade and is currently the Executive Director of its Struc-
      tured Science Division.) There was at this time no evidence that PER
      inhibited transcription within the same cells in which it was expressed.
      To this end, Honkui showed that the photoreceptor cells of the adult fly
      eye contain a circadian oscillator system similar to the brain. She also
      showed that constitutively overexpressing PER in these cells prevented
      endogenous per RNA cycling and caused low per RNA levels with no
      effects on locomotor activity rhythms, consistent with cell-autonomous
      negative feedback (Zeng et al., 1994). A similar strategy was subsequently
      applied to brain circadian neurons with similar results (Yang and Sehgal,
      2001).
         The fourth paper came from yet another outstanding graduate student,
      Josh Huang. (Josh is current a Professor of Neuroscience at the Cold
      Spring Harbor Laboratory). He addressed the role of the PAS domain, the
      protein sequence link between PER and known transcription factors
      (Huang et al., 1993). At the time of this work in 1994, there were 3 known
      PAS-containing (PAS-bHLH, basic-helix-loop-helix) transcription fac-
      tors: In addition to PER there were Single-minded as mentioned above
      and the two subunits of the aryl hydrocarbon (AH) receptor. Josh’s work
      showed that PAS could function as a novel protein dimerization motif


                                                     Michael Rosbash Lecture   383


and mediate associations between different members of the PAS protein
family. As PER had and still has no known DNA interaction motifs, we
proposed that it regulates circadian transcription by interacting with the
PAS domain of an important positively-acting circadian transcription fac-
tor. This prediction turned out correct with the identification of the
PAS-containing positive circadian transcription factors, the heterodi-
meric Clock and BMAL1 in mammals and their orthologs Clock and Cycle
in flies (see below).
   Taken together with the original Hardin feedback loop paper, these
four subsequent papers laid the foundation of a coherent transcrip-
tion-centric view of circadian timekeeping; it seemed incompatible with
gap junctions. Indeed, I already had doubts about this hypothesis in 1989;
at this time the work for the first Hardin feedback loop was largely done
(Hardin et al., 1990), and we had shown that the GT region – the linchpin
of the proteoglycan relationship – is not conserved in related Drosophila
species (Colot et al., 1988) and that this region is also not necessary for
PER circadian function (Yu et al., 1987a). Although I had no idea how to
advance or challenge our biochemistry paper (Reddy et al., 1986) in an
efficient way, I thought we should repeat the simpler Young-Spray salivary
gland-gap junction paper to see if it was correct (Bargiello et al., 1987).
Also, for this experiment, I really had no idea what to do; it was not only
completely beyond my expertise but also outside that of my circle of
friends and colleagues. Nonetheless I was quite obsessed and for the next
year or two would ask scientific strangers, “Do you know anything about
gap junctions?” “Can you help us out with this experiment?” One day at a
Brandeis cocktail party I was introduced to Dan Goodenough. I asked
him naively, “Where do you work and what do you do?” He said, “Harvard
and on gap junctions.” I latched onto his ankle: “Can you PLEASE help us
repeat a gap junction experiment in Drosophila larval salivary glands?”
He said sure, and we were on our way. I had no available personnel, but
Jeff had a technician with time to spare. So, Kimberly Flint spent several
months hosted by the Goodenough lab and showed that those key gap
junction experiments would not repeat. Dan Goodenough was a prince,
not only to host Kimberly and let her work in his lab but also because he
refused to coauthor any paper that might emerge from the work. We com-
municated our failure to Young before publication, and Jeff also told his
former post-doc Kathy Siwicki about our results. She was at the Marine
Biological Laboratory (MBL) at Woods Hole at the time and was appar-
ently doing the same experiments in collaboration with David Spray, the
senior author of the Bargiello et al. paper who was also there during that
summer of 1992. They wrote a short paper for the Biological Bulletin, the
local MBL journal. It was published super rapidly, in October, and they
included Kimberly, Jeff and me as coauthors (Siwicki et al., 1992). Young,


384   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      Spray and all coauthors then acted properly and retracted their Nature
      paper in December of 1992 (Saez et al., 1992), and we published an inde-
      pendent and properly documented paper the following year in the Journal
      of Membrane Biology (Flint et al., 1993). This was the death knell for the
      proteoglycan hypothesis, and we forged ahead with gene expression.


      THE LINK TO MAMMALS
      The identification of mammalian PER in 1997 was incredibly important.
      This is because for the first time it seemed likely that what we had learned
      in flies would be applicable to mammals including humans. This finding,
      that mammals contain one or more period genes, was independently
      accomplished in two different laboratories and done before the existence
      of the human genome sequence, meaning one could not just search the
      data base for a mammalian protein sequence with a credible relationship
      to PER (Sun et al., 1997; Tei et al., 1997). It was done by PCR and required
      a judicious selection of primer sequences. My laboratory and others also
      tried to do this but unsuccessfully (data not shown; personal communica-
      tion).


      NEW CIRCADIAN MUTANTS
      The Young laboratory also made a connection to mammals, with their
      modern (post-Konopka and Benzer) efforts to identify Drosophila circa-
      dian mutants. They discovered two very important fly clock genes, one of
      which linked in an important and simple way to mammals. That gene was
      doubletime, which encodes the Drosophila version of the important mam-
      malian kinase CKI (Kloss et al., 1998; Price et al., 1998). It modifies PER
      and also CLK during the circadian cycle. Well after the publications on
      doubletime from the Young lab, we also identified and studied two novel
      mutant versions of doubletime, which emerged from our own efforts to
      isolated new circadian mutants (Suri et al., 2000). CKI not only plays an
      important role in the mammalian clock but a mutation in this gene also
      underlies the phenotype of the famous 20hr tau hamster (Lowrey et al.,
      2000).
         The other Young laboratory clock gene from this early period is timeless
      (Gekakis et al., 1995; Myers et al., 1995; Price et al., 1995; Sehgal et al.,
      1994; Sehgal et al., 1995). Although its relationship to mammals was not
      immediately apparent and is considerably weaker even today than that of
      period and doubletime (Gotter, 2006), timeless played an incredibly impor-
      tant role in the fly circadian system. In addition, its identification and
      cloning in 1995 showed that period was not unique and that scientists
      other than Konopka and Benzer could identify clock mutants. This fear


                                                        Michael Rosbash Lecture   385


was not entirely unfounded, as almost 25 years had passed between the
publication of Konopka and Benzer on period and these Young lab publi-
cations on the second Drosophila clock gene timeless (tim).
    Importantly, the characterization of tim connected back to PER and to
the feedback loop, i.e., tim mRNA undergoes RNA cycling like per mRNA,
the tim mutants affect per as well as cycling of their own mRNA, i.e., tim
mRNA (Sehgal et al., 1995) and the timeless protein (TIM) interacts with
PER (Gekakis et al., 1995). In fact, TIM and PER associate together in the
cytoplasm and are probably transported together into the nucleus (Jang et
al., 2015; Meyer et al., 2006; Vosshall et al., 1994). However, the regulatory
role of this transport event – the extent to which it contributes to circa-
dian timing (Meyer et al., 2006) – is less certain in my view. All proteins
are synthesized on cytoplasmic ribosomes. So nuclear proteins must be
transported from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, but this transport event
need not be under clock control. Temporal control of nuclear and cyto-
plasmic localization (Shafer et al., 2002) could equally well reflect regula-
tion of cytoplasmic or nuclear retention rather than nuclear transport per
se. Indeed, we have some evidence that PER-TIM retention on chromatin
is temporally regulated (data not shown).
    Our own principal contribution to the tim story came from biochemis-
try (Zeng et al., 1996). My graduate student Hongkui Zeng was trying to
identify PER partner proteins, by characterizing proteins associated with
PER in fly head extracts with mass spectometry. Because we realized that
there might be different partners at different times of day, Hongkui began
by characterizing the size of the protein complex within which PER was
located at different times. PER appeared to be monomeric in the morning
during its declining/degrading phase but in a larger complex later in the
day during its increasing/accumulating phase. Moreover, that complex
appeared to have one additional major protein, with an apparent molecu-
lar weight somewhat greater than PER (Zeng et al., 1996). That complex
and the additional protein disappeared in the late night or rapidly after a
light pulse. We were gearing up to identify that seemingly light-sensitive
protein by mass spectrometry when we heard about the Young lab suc-
cess in identifying TIM. Because the TIM molecular weight was some-
what greater than that of PER and the two proteins associate in a yeast
two hybrid assay (Gekakis et al., 1995), TIM was an excellent candidate
for the PER partner protein we had identified in fly head extracts. The
Young laboratory was very gracious in providing us with an anti-TIM
antibody with which we were able to definitively identify it as the higher
molecular weight PER partner identified in our gels (Zeng et al., 1996).
    The rapid degradation of TIM at the end of the night or in response to
a phase-shifting pulse of light was independently observed and proposed
to be important for light-mediated phase-shifting and entrainment in 3


386   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      labs at about the same time (Hunter-Ensor et al., 1996; Myers et al., 1996;
      Zeng et al., 1996). We also provided evidence that TIM degradation and
      phase-shifting do not just occur in parallel. This study (Suri et al., 1998)
      made use of a new tim allele. In an attempt to shed light on the enigmatic
      perL mutation, we had screened for allele-specific suppressors or enhanc-
      ers of that mutation, namely, additional mutations elsewhere in the fly
      genome that would have a different phenotypic effect on that perL back-
      ground than on a wild-type background. It was to my knowledge the first
      genetic screen of its kind, a behavioral suppressor-enhancer screen. It
      identified a new tim allele, which we named tim suppressor of long or timSL
      (Rutila et al., 1996). In this context of TIM degradation and light, timSL
      enhanced the light-sensitivity of TIM degradation and phase-shifting in
      parallel (Suri et al., 1998), indicating that TIM destabilization indeed con-
      nects the core central clock to entrainment by the light-dark cycle, the
      principal zeitgeiber (temporal cue) of the environment in which we live.
         What is the molecular connection between light and TIM degradation?
      Patrick Emery in my lab and Ralf Stanewsky in the Hall lab worked
      closely together and identified Cryptochrome as a major circadian photo-
      receptor; they also cloned the gene and identified a mutant strain that was
      significantly impaired in circadian light perception (Emery et al., 1998;
      Stanewsky et al., 1998). The work also relied on important previous work
      from mammals and constituted another strong link between the fly and
      mammalian circadian systems.
         The story begins with the important DNA repair enzyme photolyase,
      which is present from E. coli to man. This enzyme had been studied for a
      long time by the biochemist Aziz Sancar, who shared the 2015 Nobel Prize
      in chemistry for his outstanding work. The plant blue light photoreceptor
      cryptochrome is a close structural relative of photolyase. There were
      mammalian gene sequences that were related to cryptochrome, and San-
      car was convinced that their encoded proteins, cryptochrome 1 and 2
      (CRY1 and CRY2) must function in circadian photoreception. Indeed, the
      initial properties of these gene and proteins, including phenotypes of
      mouse mutants missing these cryptochromes, was consistent with a cir-
      cadian photoreceptor function for cryptochromes in mammals (Vitaterna
      et al., 1999). Moreover, there was strong evidence that there was an
      unknown photoreceptor in the mammalian eye that accounts for persis-
      tent circadian photoreception in rodless-coneless mice (Lucas et al.,
      1999); this is in addition to the known photoreceptor function of cryp-
      tochromes in plants. Importantly, melanopsin was soon discovered as
      that missing eye photoreceptor (Provencio et al., 1998) and mammalian
      cryptochromes currently have no function in circadian photoreception.
         Nonetheless, these Sancar ideas about a circadian photoreceptor func-
      tion for cryptochrome and the known mammalian cryptochrome genes


                                                      Michael Rosbash Lecture   387


resonated with us at Brandeis. The fly circadian system was known to be
maximally sensitive to blue light, and there was no known eye pigment or
other identified photoreceptor that might play this role. So, Patrick Emery
in my lab set out to clone and characterize Drosophila cryptochrome (cry;
the sequence information indicated there was only gene as is commonly
the case in flies). The work showed that its protein product CRY was
light-sensitive, i.e., degraded in response to light exposure, and that CRY
overexpression enhanced circadian light sensitivity (Emery et al., 1998).
    At the same time, Ralf Stanewsky in the Hall lab had identified a new
circadian mutant that was light-insensitive. It had very interesting proper-
ties, which were consistent with the absence of a circadian photoreceptor.
With Emery’s map position and the identification of a deletion that
uncovered the locus, Stanewsky could quickly assign the mutation to the
cry gene. Characterization of the mutant strain, called cryb, indicated that
the gene cry indeed encoded a circadian photoreceptor (Stanewsky et al.,
1998) as was also indicated by the Emery et al. paper described directly
above (Emery et al., 1998).
    Subsequent work over the next couple of years, predominantly from
Emery, extended this initial work by showing quite remarkably that cryb
flies remain rhythmic in constant light (Emery et al., 2000a). This is
unlike wild-type flies as constant light destroys their rhythms – and those
of many organisms. This simple observation indicates that CRY acts as
the only principal circadian photoreceptor in Drosophila.
    Emery and colleagues also showed at about the same time that
expressing CRY only in a small number of key circadian neurons in the
brain could rescue the circadian deficits of the cryb mutant background.
This indicates that CRY functions within the brain and is therefore a deep
brain photoreceptor (Emery et al., 2000b).
    How does CRY work, i.e., how does it interface with the circadian
clockworks? CRY and TIM interact in a light-dependent fashion, even in
yeast (Ceriani et al., 1999). Amita Sehgal and colleagues then discovered
that the F-box protein Jetlag interacts with CRY and TIM after light expo-
sure and helps deliver them both to the proteosome. As predicted, phase-
shifts are reduced in jetlag mutants (Koh et al., 2006).
    This CRY-TIM mechanism is not the only way that the Drosophila
clock system can achieve phase shifts. Clock neuron firing, specifically
PDF neuron firing, can also elicit phase shifts and in a CRY-independent
manner (Guo et al., 2014). This mode of firing also results in TIM degra-
dation and presumably reflects in part the connections of the fly eye to
the PDF neurons and/or the role of other clock neurons (Fig. 11).
    The common feature of these two modes of phase-shifting, light-CRY
and light-firing, is TIM degradation or post-transcriptional regulation.
This contrasts with the enhanced clock gene transcription that is the pri-


388   THE NOBEL PRIZES




                                                      Figure 11. Firing of PDF cells
                                                      triggers TIM degradation and a
                                                      phase-shift, both of which can
                                                      occur in a CRY-independent
                                                      manner (Guo et al., 2014).




      mary means of achieving light-mediated phase-shifts in mammalian sys-
      tems (Albrecht et al., 1997; Shearman et al., 1997; Shigeyoshi et al., 1997).
      Nonetheless, it remains uncertain whether this difference will remain so
      striking, i.e., whether future results will reveal some important light-me-
      diated post-transcriptional regulation of clock gene expression in mam-
      mals or some light-mediated clock gene transcriptional regulation in flies.
         However, one strong argument in favor of this difference between flies
      and mammals is the different roles of cryptochrome in the two systems. In
      contrast to its photoreceptor role in flies, cryptochrome is the major tran-
      scriptional repressor in mammals (Reppert and Weaver, 2002). These two
      roles reflect two major features of the cryptochrome ancestor photolyase,
      namely, photon capture and interaction with DNA (Emery et al., 1998;
      Gehring and Rosbash, 2003). It is striking that butterflies have two cryp-
      tochromes: one that resembles more closely Drosophila cryptochrome and
      functions as a photoreceptor; and another that resembles more closely
      mammalian cryptochrome and functions as a transcriptional repressor
      (Zhu et al., 2005). The butterfly situation appears to be the insect “rule,”
      with the Drosophila situation the “exception” (Yuan et al., 2007).
         The role of cryptochrome in transcriptional repression was preceded
      by the discovery of CLK-BMAL1 in mammals and their orthologs CLK-
      CYC in flies. Joe Takahashi and colleagues spearheaded the cloning of
      CLK through a forward genetic screen in mice. A robust behavioral phe-
      notype of the CLKD17 allele was first identified by behavioral screening
      (Vitaterna et al., 1994). The gene was identified three years later as a
      member of the bHLH-PAS-containing protein family (Antoch et al., 1997;
      King et al., 1997). The bHLH domain suggested DNA binding and other
      bHLH-PAS family members had been identified as bona fide transcription
      factors, making this function an excellent candidate for CLK. Moreover,


                                                       Michael Rosbash Lecture   389


given the presence of a PAS domain in PER and the circadian behavioral
phenotype of the mutant, CLK was probably also a major circadian tran-
scription factor as described above. Importantly however, the two 1997
papers did not connect CLK to the transcription of PER (Antoch et al.,
1997; King et al., 1997), i.e., they did not clarify whether CLK was the pos-
itive transcription factor that drives the synthesis of the negative regula-
tor PER. This was done a year later by Takahashi and coworkers, in
papers that also identified the CLK partner BMAL1 (Darlington et al.,
1998; Gekakis et al., 1998).
    We came to the identical conclusion at almost the same time, by identi-
fying the CLK-BMAL1 orthologs Clock-cycle or CLK-CYC (Allada et al.,
1998; Rutila et al., 1998). This was the major result of a genetic screen we
had been carrying out over several years. It had the goal of finding the
positive transcription factor that drives the transcription of per and tim.
To this end, we decided to focus on a large number of mutant strains,
which were totally arrhythmic. The logic was that a loss of function muta-
tion in this positive transcription factor would not be able to synthesize
PER and TIM and therefore should be arrhythmic. We also adopted this
strategy to do something different than what we knew was well underway
in the Young laboratory, i.e., competently searching for mutant strains
with altered circadian periods. Some of these inevitably emerged from
our screen as well.
    It turned out to be much easier to find arrhythmic strains than strains
with altered periods, presumably because functional rhythms rely on
many different functions and pathways, e.g., output pathways from circa-
dian neurons to motor neurons, in addition to the core timekeeping
mechanism. A subscreen was therefore required to avoid these output
pathways and focus in on that subset of the arrhythmic strains that might
be candidates for encoding the positive transcription factor(s). So about
50 arrhythmic strains were assayed for cycling of per and tim mRNA. The
vast majority of these mutant strains still manifested robust cycling of per
and tim mRNAs, consistent with the notion that they did not impact core
circadian timekeeping. (As a byproduct, these results indicated that
robust behavioral oscillations are not necessary for molecular feedback,
e.g., for the effect of PER on the cycling of its own mRNA (Fig. 9).) How-
ever, 3 mutant strains were exceptional and manifested non-cycling, low
levels of per mRNA even in a light-dark cycle. We then identified and
cloned the 3 mutant genes. Remarkably, two of them were alleles of cycle,
and one was an allele of Clock, exactly the phenotype one might expect
from a mutant in the key positive circadian transcription (Allada et al.,
1998; Rutila et al., 1998). Given the results of Takahashi and colleagues
(Darlington et al., 1998; Gekakis et al., 1998), the field was really on its
way by 1998 with powerful, parallel systems in flies and mammals.


390   THE NOBEL PRIZES


         The final coda to the feedback loop chapter was the demonstration
      that PER interacts directly with CLK-CYC in flies (Lee et al., 1998; Menet
      et al., 2010) and with CLK-BMAL1 in mammals (Lee et al., 2001).


      A FAMILY STORY RESULTING IN TRIKINETICS
      LOCOMOTOR ACTIVITY MONITORS
      I went on sabbatical to Paris with my family in 1988–1989. In the spring
      of 1989, shortly before returning to Brandeis, I received a phone call in
      Paris from Max Cowan, the Chief Scientific Officer of the Howard Hughes
      Medical Institute (HHMI). He informed me that I would be appointed as
      an Investigator of HHMI as of July 1, 1989. He asked me what I wanted for
      “set-up funds.” I told him I had no idea because I already had a functional
      lab. He then suggested $100,000.00, and I said “sure.” As there were no
      pressing needs, I began to consider what I might do with those funds.
          Shortly after returning to Brandeis in late June, I went to a family
      (wife’s family) barbecue in Newton, Massachusetts where I live. My wife
      is Chilean, and her brother-in-law was visiting with us. His first cousin,
      Sergio Simunovic, is also Chilean by birth and lives in Newton, had gone
      to MIT, and was the host of the barbecue. I asked Sergio what he did for a
      living. He answered that he was an engineer and owned a small robotics
      company in Waltham, Massachusetts. Waltham is next to Newton and
      also where Brandeis University is situated. I immediately asked Sergio if
      he might be interested in designing and building Drosophila locomotor
      activity monitors for us. He introduced me to his partner Mark Spencer,
      and we decided to begin a collaboration. It used up half my HHMI set-up
      funds, i.e., I paid $50,000.00 to TriKinetics to fund the R&D costs of the
      Drosophila locomotor activity monitors. (Perhaps some monitors were
      included in this initial cost; I can’t recall.) For several months, Mark
      worked almost exclusively with my post-doc/research assistant Joan
      Rutila, the talented individual in my lab who supervised our genetic
      screening efforts, to design functional activity monitors. The challenge
      was to adjust the detection sensitivity so beam crossing detection was
      reliable – with minimal false positives and false negatives; this obstacle
      was eventually surmounted by Mark and Joan. In summary, success was
      achieved through a 3-way collaboration: my HHMI funds and initiative,
      Mark, and Joan. These same monitors are still sold today (Fig. 12).
          I never imagined that these monitors would be used all over the world,
      i.e., I had assumed that they would be used by our two labs at Brandeis,
      perhaps also the Young lab at Rockefeller and then eventually by a few of
      our students who would establish independent labs. One would expect
      that I or my lab received some money or discount from TriKinetics but
      this was not the case.


                                                         Michael Rosbash Lecture   391



                                               Figure 12. Drosophila Activity
                                               Monitors.




EVOLUTIONARY CONSIDERATIONS
Somewhat after the first transcriptional feedback loop papers appeared
from Brandeis, the Dunlaps at Dartmouth published an outstanding
mechanistic paper describing a rather similar feedback loop scheme for
Neurospora circadian rhythms (Aronson et al., 1994). This story started
with Jerry Feldman, who was at UC Santa Cruz. Feldman and his col-
leagues isolated Neurospora circadian mutants not too long after the
Konopka story was published (Feldman and Hoyle, 1973; Feldman and
Hoyle, 1976). These studies identified the frequency gene, which had
genetic properties remarkably similar to those described by Konopka and
Benzer for Drosophila and its period gene (Gardner and Feldman, 1980;
Loros and Feldman, 1986; Loros et al., 1986). Jay Dunlap was a post-doc
in the Feldman lab at Santa Cruz and moved along with his now wife Jen-
nifer Loros to Dartmouth and began a molecular attack on the circadian
problem in Neurospora. Over the subsequent almost 25 years since the
first molecular paper (Aronson et al., 1994), the Neurospora circadian
clock has developed into a wonderful scientific tale, which has striking
similarities to the fly and mammalian clock (Dunlap and Loros, 2017).
Dunlap and Loros have even argued that these clocks have a single origin
(Lee et al., 2000). However, I find these data less than totally convincing,
i.e., the similarities either reflect convergent evolution or the evolutionary
relationship between animal and Neurospora rhythms has not yet been
clarified.


392   THE NOBEL PRIZES


         From a more general perspective and as mentioned near the beginning
      of this manuscript, circadian clocks almost certainly arose multiple times
      in evolution; there is essentially no molecular bridge between the cyano-
      bacterial clock and eukaryotic clocks, and only the most speculative con-
      nection between plant clocks and the mammalian-fly clock (Rosbash,
      2009). Fly cryptochrome does suggest, however, that this particular
      branch of the circadian world arose in response to the DNA damage
      caused by sunlight. Moreover, this “flight from light” hypothesis also
      explains the blue light sensitivity of cryptochrome. This is the wavelength
      that penetrates substantial depths in the ocean, perhaps reflecting the
      origin of life in the oceans as well as the diel migration that still occurs
      there today (Emery et al., 1998; Gehring and Rosbash, 2003; Pittendrigh,
      1993; Rosbash, 2009). Responding to light would have preceded the origin
      of clocks, e.g., the ability to anticipate the daily appearance of light at
      dawn. In this view, the circadian kinases and other molecules that partici-
      pate in the DNA damage response might even bridge plant and animal
      clocks (Rosbash, 2009). There is also another competing hypothesis to
      “flight from light” for the origins of clocks, namely the temporal organiza-
      tion of metabolism (Tu and McKnight, 2006).


      WHAT REMAINS INTERESTING TO STUDY IN CIRCADIAN BIOLOGY?
      Metabolism segues conveniently to medicine and future practical
      advances: metabolism is one of the myriad aspects of human physiology
      that are under circadian control. However, this Nobel Prize was given pre-
      dominantly for our contributions to physiology rather than to medicine.
      (The Prize is after all for Physiology OR Medicine.). We now know about
      the dangers of shift work, the benefits of good circadian and sleep
      hygiene as well as the possible benefits of restricted feeding (Melkani and
      Panda, 2017), but major medical applications remain a future goal.
      Although this sentiment is similar to the one expressed by T.H. Morgan
      about genetics and medicine in his Nobel manuscript (The Nobel Lecture
      1934), I am more optimistic about future medical advances from circadian
      biology than he was about medical advances from genetics in 1933. For
      understandable reasons, Morgan could not foresee the remarkable future
      that lay ahead for genetics, a practical as well as a conceptual future. The
      future is now more tangible in the case of clocks, because so much of the
      mammalian genome and therefore so much of physiology is known to be
      under circadian control (Zhang et al., 2014). There are also a number of
      possible drug targets implicated in the regulation of circadian physiology.
         Additional future challenges are the precise timing mechanisms of ani-
      mal circadian clocks and temperature compensation. What is really keep-
      ing time, i.e., what are the rate-limiting steps and why is there such little


                                                        Michael Rosbash Lecture   393


change with temperature? Although some progress has been made in our
understanding of temperature compensation (Mehra et al., 2009), I sus-
pect there is more to learn.
   Another frontier is the relationship between neuroscience, clocks and
sleep. Circadian clocks have been known for a long time to impact sleep
(Borbely, 1982; Borbely et al., 2016; Daan et al., 1984). Moreover, sleep
remains a major mystery. There are many hypotheses about how and why
we sleep, but in my opinion these issues – especially why we sleep –
remain major mysteries. Moreover, the neuronal circuitry that underlies
the “how” of sleep and perhaps also the “why” is quite complex in mam-
mals (Saper and Fuller, 2017). I am optimistic that the rather simple
organization of the fly brain and especially its circadian circuitry will pro-
vide an entrée into this fascinating topic; my own current research is
beginning to focus in this direction (Guo et al., 2016). I look forward to a
future that will reveal the mysteries of sleep comparable to the progress I
have witnessed in circadian biology since I began in this field 35 years
ago.


FINAL THOUGHTS
What began in 1982 as a foray into cloning a clock gene became a grand
adventure. Much to my surprise, a remarkable landscape was eventually
revealed. I say this not because I was particularly pessimistic or uninter-
ested in circadian biology 35 years ago but because most research prob-
lems don’t work out in such remarkable fashion.
   I have been asked by numerous students since October 2 something
like, “How can I do something important and significant like you have
done?” The answer is, “I have no idea, not only for you but also for me: I
don’t know how I arrived at this place today. This answer is a bit tongue
in cheek of course, so here’s a somewhat more detailed answer.
   Luck played a huge role in my success, indeed in anyone’s success. A
substantial fraction of this luck was just being in the right place at the
right time. Another fraction, perhaps not unrelated to the “right place-
right time” comment, was knowing about nucleic acids and macromo-
lecular metabolism when this turned out to be a key to thinking about the
problem. Having an operating yeast RNA lab interspersed among my cir-
cadian researchers was an enormous advantage when it was time to put
in place these methods.
   It is also important to stress that almost all aspects of luck are just
“one-off” and cannot be repeated. Like the pinball that seemingly traces
the same path, it doesn’t come out exactly the same the second time
‘round. For this reason, trying to do something great – shooting for prizes
and fame let’s call it – is a fool’s errand. It is good to pick an important


394   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      problem, but even more important is to love your work, the craft of being
      a scientist. My partner in crime Jeff Hall adored the craft of fly genetics;
      he was damn good at it too. A second piece of advice is to enjoy the people.
      Life science research is truly a social activity – or at least it was during my
      more than 50 years since I began graduate school at MIT. I have made
      remarkable friends through science, people I truly admire and in some
      cases love. I am also fond of almost all the fantastic people who joined my
      circadian lab at key points in time. It goes without saying that I wouldn’t be
      writing this document without their efforts, intellectual as well as physical.
      There is also family to thank, wife as well as children. They have been
      long-suffering and an unending source of support and joy.
         I will close by saying that I never saw myself in historical context when
      work was ongoing (I still don’t) but as the scientific equivalent of a work-
      ing class guy; I was always trying to put one foot in front of the other so
      that my research was moving forward more often than it was moving
      backwards – at least some of the time. Like almost every other active sci-
      entist, I was trying to maintain my funding, make sure my students and
      post-docs had decent papers and fulfill my obligations to Brandeis and to
      HHMI. Even when we published the feedback loop paper (Hardin et al.,
      1990), there was no dramatic sense of accomplishment. We simply moved
      on to the next stage of the work, the next stage of worry I might call it: Is
      the paper correct? How could we resolve the ambiguities in the final fig-
      ure/model? How does PER work? This is truly how I see myself; I am just
      a regular guy, a scientist who got incredibly lucky.




      references
      Albrecht, U., Sun, Z.S., Eichele, G., and Lee, C.C. (1997). A differential response of
         two putative mammalian circadian regulators, mper1 and mper2, to light. Cell
         91, 1055–1064.
      Allada, R., White, N.E., So, W.V., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1998). A mutant
         Drosophila homolog of mammalian Clock disrupts circadian rhythms and tran-
         scription of period and timeless. Cell 93, 791–804.
      Antoch, M.P., Song, E.-J., Chang, A.-M., Vitaterna, M.H., Zhao, Y., Wilsbacher, L.D.,
         Sangoram, A.M., King, D.P., Pinto, L.H., and Takahashi, J.S. (1997). Functional
         identification of the mouse circadian clock gene by transgenic BAC rescue. Cell
         89, 655–667.
      Aronson, B.D., Johnson, K.A., Loros, J.J., and Dunlap, J.C. (1994). Negative feed-
         back defines a circadian clock: Autoregulation of the clock gene frequency. Sci-
         ence 263, 1578–1584.
      Bargiello, T.A., Jackson, F.R., and Young, M.W. (1984). Restoration of circadian
         behavioural rhythms by gene transfer in Drosophila. Nature 312, 752–754.
      Bargiello, T.A., Saez, L., Baylies, M.K., Gasic, G., Young, M.W., and Spray, D.C.
         (1987). The Drosophila clock gene per affects intercellular junctional communi-
         cation. Nature 328, 686–691.


                                                                Michael Rosbash Lecture     395


Bargiello, T.A., and Young, M.W. (1984). Molecular genetics of a biological clock in
   Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 81, 2142–2146.
Baylies, M.K., Bargiello, T.A., Jackson, F.R., and Young, M.W. (1987). Changes in
   abundance or structure of the per gene product can alter periodicity of the
   Drosophila clock. Nature 326, 390–392.
Bender, W., Akam, M., Karch, F., Beachy, P.A., Peifer, M., Spierer, P., Lewis, E.B.,
   and Hogness, D.S. (1983a). Molecular Genetics of the Bithorax Complex in
   Drosophila melanogaster. Science 221, 23–29.
Bender, W., Spierer, P., and Hogness, D.S. (1983b). Chromosomal walking and
   jumping to isolate DNA from the Ace and rosy loci and the bithorax complex in
   Drosophila melanogaster. J Mol Biol 168, 17–33.
Borbely, A.A. (1982). A two process model of sleep regulation. Hum Neurobiol 1,
   195–204.
Borbely, A.A., Daan, S., Wirz-Justice, A., and Deboer, T. (2016). The two-process
   model of sleep regulation: a reappraisal. J Sleep Res 25, 131–143.
Bunning, E. (1935). Zur Kenntniss der endergonen Tagesrhythmik bei Insekten
   und Pflanzen. Ber Deut botan Ges 53, 594–623.
Ceriani, M.F., Darlington, T.K., Staknis, D., Mas, P., Petti, A.A., Weitz, C.J., and Kay,
   S.A. (1999). Light-dependent sequestration of TIMELESS by CRYP-
   TOCHROME. Science 285, 553–556.
Chiu, J.C., Ko, H.W., and Edery, I. (2011). NEMO/NLK phosphorylates PERIOD to
   initiate a time-delay phosphorylation circuit that sets circadian clock speed.
   Cell 145, 357–370.
Citri, Y., Colot, H.V., Jacquier, A.C., Yu, Q., Hall, J.C., Baltimore, D., and Rosbash,
   M. (1987). A family of unusually spliced biologically active transcripts encoded
   by a Drosophila clock gene. Nature 326, 42–47.
Colot, H.V., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1988). Interspecific comparison of the
   period gene of Drosophila reveals large blocks of non-conserved coding DNA.
   EMBO J 7, 3929–3937.
Crews, S.T., Thomas, J.B., and Goodman, C.S. (1988). The Drosophila single-minded
   gene encodes a nuclear protein with sequence similarity to the per gene prod-
   uct. Cell 52, 143–152.
Daan, S. (2010). A History of Chronobiological Concepts: In The Circadian Clock, U.
   Albrecht, ed. (New York, NY: Springer), pp. 1–35.
Daan, S., Beersma, D.G., and Borbely, A.A. (1984). Timing of human sleep: recov-
   ery process gated by a circadian pacemaker. Am J Physiol 246, R161–183.
Darlington, T.K., Wager-Smith, K., Ceriani, M.F., Staknis, D., Gekakis, N., Steeves,
   T.D.L., Weitz, C.J., Takahashi, J.S., and Kay, S.A. (1998). Closing the Circadian
   Loop: CLOCK-induced Transcription of Its Own Inhibitors per and tim. Science
   280, 1599–1603.
Dunlap, J.C., and Loros, J.J. (2017). Making Time: Conservation of Biological
   Clocks from Fungi to Animals. Microbiol Spectr 5.
Emery, P., So, W.V., Kaneko, M., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1998). CRY, a Drosoph-
   ila clock and light-regulated cryptochrome, is a major contributor to circadian
   rhythm resetting and photosensitivity. Cell 95, 669–679.
Emery, P., Stanewsky, R., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (2000a). A unique circadi-
   an-rhythm photoreceptor. Nature 404, 456–457.
Emery, P., Stanewsky, R., Helfrich-Forster, C., Emery-Le, M., Hall, J.C., and Ros-
   bash, M. (2000b). Drosophila CRY is a deep brain circadian photoreceptor.
   Neuron 26, 493–504.


396   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      Feldman, J.F., and Hoyle, M. (1973). Isolation of circadian clock mutants of Neuros-
         pora crassa. Genetics 755, 605–613.
      Feldman, J.F., and Hoyle, M.N. (1976). Complementation analysis of linked circa-
         dian clock mutants of Neurospora crassa. Genetics 82, 9–17.
      Flint, K.K., Rosbash, M., and Hall, J.C. (1993). Transfer of dye among salivary gland
         cells is not affected by genetic variations of the period clock gene in Drosophila
         melanogaster. JMembrane Biol 136, 333–342.
      Gardner, G.F., and Feldman, J.F. (1980). The frq locus in Neurospora crassa: A key
         element in circadian clock organization. Genetics 96, 877–886.
      Gehring, W., and Rosbash, M. (2003). The coevolution of blue-light photoreception
         and circadian rhythms. J Mol Evol 57 Suppl 1, S286–289.
      Gekakis, N., Saez, L., Delahaye-Brown, A.-M., Myers, M.P., Sehgal, A., Young, M.W.,
         and Weitz, C.J. (1995). Isolation of timeless by PER protein interactions: Defec-
         tive interaction between timeless protein and long-period mutant PERL. Science
         270, 811–815.
      Gekakis, N., Staknis, D., Nguyen, H.B., Davis, C.F., Wilsbacher, L.D., King, D.P.,
         Takahashi, J.S., and Weitz, C.J. (1998). Role of the CLOCK protein in the mam-
         malian circadian mechanism. Science 280, 1564–1569.
      Gotter, A.L. (2006). A Timeless debate: resolving TIM’s noncircadian roles with
         possible clock function. Neuroreport 17, 1229–1233.
      Guo, F., Cerullo, I., Chen, X., and Rosbash, M. (2014). PDF neuron firing phase-
         shifts key circadian activity neurons in Drosophila. Elife 3.
      Guo, F., Yu, J., Jung, H.J., Abruzzi, K.C., Luo, W., Griffith, L.C., and Rosbash, M.
         (2016). Circadian neuron feedback controls the Drosophila sleep–activity pro-
         file. Nature 536, 292–297.
      Hardin, P.E., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1990). Feedback of the Drosophila period
         gene product on circadian cycling of its messenger RNA levels. Nature 343,
         536–540.
      Hardin, P.E., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1992). Circadian oscillations in period
         gene mRNA levels are transcriptionally regulated. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89,
         11711–11715.
      Hardin, P.E., and Panda, S. (2013). Circadian timekeeping and output mechanisms
         in animals. Curr Opin Neurobiol 23, 724–731.
      Hastings, J.W., and Sweeney, B.M. (1957). On the mechanism of temperature inde-
         pendence in a biological clock. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 43, 804–811.
      Huang, Z.J., Edery, I., and Rosbash, M. (1993). PAS is a dimerization domain com-
         mon to Drosophila Period and several transcription factors. Nature 364, 259–
         262.
      Hunter-Ensor, M., Ousley, A., and Sehgal, A. (1996). Regulation of the Drosophila
         protein timeless suggests a mechanism for resetting the circadian clock by light.
         Cell 84, 677–685.
      Jackson, R.F., Bargiello, T.A., Yun, S.-H., and Young, M.W. (1986). Product of the
         per locus of Drosophila shares homology with proteoglycans. Nature 320, 185–
         188.
      Jang, A.R., Moravcevic, K., Saez, L., Young, M.W., and Sehgal, A. (2015). Drosophila
         TIM binds importin alpha1, and acts as an adapter to transport PER to the
         nucleus. PLoS Genet 11, e1004974.
      Kalmus, H. (1935). Periodizität und Autochronie (= Ideochronie) als zeitregelnde
         Eigenschaften des Organismus. Biologia Generalis 11, 93–114.
      Kalmus, H. (1940a). Diurnal Rhythms in the Axolotl Larva and in Drosophila.
         Nature 145, 72–73.


                                                              Michael Rosbash Lecture     397


Kalmus, H. (1940b). New research in the diurnal periodicity of animals. Acta Med
    Scand, suppl 108, 227–233.
Kidd, P.B., Young, M.W., and Siggia, E.D. (2015). Temperature compensation and
    temperature sensation in the circadian clock. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112,
    E6284–6292.
King, D.P., Zhao, Y., Sangoram, A.M., Wilsbacher, L.D., Tanaka, M., Antoch, M.P.,
    Steeves, T.D.L., Vitaterna, M.H., Kornhauser, J.M., Lowrey, P.L., et al. (1997).
    Positional Cloning of the mouse circadian clock gene. Cell 89, 641–653.
Kloss, B., Price, J.L., Saez, L., Blau, J., Rothenfluh, A., Wesley, C.S., and Young,
    M.W. (1998). The Drosophila clock gene double-time encodes a protein closely
    related to human casein kinase Iepsilon. Cell 94, 97–107.
Koh, K., Zheng, X., and Sehgal, A. (2006). JETLAG resets the Drosophila circadian
    clock by promoting light-induced degradation of TIMELESS. Science 312,
    1809–1812.
Kondo, T., Strayer, C.A., Kulkarni, R.D., Taylor, W., Ishiura, M., Golden, S.S., and
    Johnson, C.H. (1993). Circadian rhythms in prokaryotes: Luciferase as a
    reporter of circadian gene expression in cyanobacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
    90, 5672–5676.
Konopka, R.J., and Benzer, S. (1971). Clock mutants of Drosophila melanogaster.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 68, 2112–2116.
Kyriacou, C.P., Green, E.W., Piffer, A., and Dowse, H.B. (2017). Failure to reproduce
    period-dependent song cycles in Drosophila is due to poor automated pulse-de-
    tection and low-intensity courtship. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
Kyriacou, C.P., and Hall, J.C. (1980). Circadian rhythm mutations in Drosophila
    melanogaster affect short-term fluctuatons in the male’s courtship song. Proc
    Natl Acad Sci USA 77, 6729–6733.
Lee, C., Bae, K., and Edery, I. (1998). The Drosophila CLOCK protein undergoes
    daily rhythms in abundance, phosphorylation and interactions with the PER-
    TIM complex. Neuron 4, 857–867.
Lee, C., Etchegaray, J.P., Cagampang, F.R., Loudon, A.S., and Reppert, S.M. (2001).
    Posttranslational mechanisms regulate the mammalian circadian clock. Cell
    107, 855–867.
Lee, K., Loros, J.J., and Dunlap, J.C. (2000). Interconnected feedback loops in the
    Neurospora circadian system. Science 289, 107–110.
Li, Y., Guo, F., Shen, J., and Rosbash, M. (2014). PDF and cAMP enhance PER sta-
    bility in Drosophila clock neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111, E1284–1290.
Li, Y., and Rosbash, M. (2013). Accelerated degradation of perS protein provides
    insight into light-mediated phase shifting. J Biol Rhythms 28, 171–182.
Liu, X., Zwiebel, L.J., Hinton, D., Benzer, S., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1992). The
    period gene encodes a predominantly nuclear protein in adult Drosophila. J
    Neurosci 12, 2735–2744.
Lorenz, L.J., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1989). Expression of a Drosophila mRNA
    is under circadian clock control during pupation. Development 107, 869–880.
Loros, J.J., and Feldman, J.F. (1986). Loss of temperature compensation of circa-
    dian period length in the frq-9 mutant of Neurospora crassa. J Biol Rhythms 1,
    18767–18198.
Loros, J.J., Richman, A., and Feldman, J.F. (1986). A recessive circadian clock
    mutant at the frq locus in Neurospora crassa. Genetics 114, 1095–1110.
Lowrey, P.L., Shimomura, K., Antoch, M.P., Yamazaki, S., Zemenides, P.D., Ralph, M.R.,
    Menaker, M., and Takahashi, J.S. (2000). Positional syntenic cloning and functional
    characterization of the mammalian circadian mutation tau. Science 288, 483–492.


398   THE NOBEL PRIZES

      Lucas, R.J., Freedman, M.S., Munoz, M., Garcia-Fernandez, J.M., and Foster, R.G.
         (1999). Regulation of the mammalian pineal by non-rod, non-cone, ocular pho-
         toreceptors. Science 284, 505–507.
      Mehra, A., Shi, M., Baker, C.L., Colot, H.V., Loros, J.J., and Dunlap, J.C. (2009). A
         role for casein kinase 2 in the mechanism underlying circadian temperature
         compensation. Cell 137, 749–760.
      Melkani, G.C., and Panda, S. (2017). Time-restricted feeding for prevention and
         treatment of cardiometabolic disorders. J Physiol 595, 3691–3700.
      Menet, J.S., Abruzzi, K.C., Desrochers, J., Rodriguez, J., and Rosbash, M. (2010).
         Dynamic PER repression mechanisms in the Drosophila circadian clock: from
         on-DNA to off-DNA. Genes Dev 24, 358–367.
      Meyer, P., Saez, L., and Young, M.W. (2006). PER-TIM interactions in living
         Drosophila cells: an interval timer for the circadian clock. Science 311, 226–229.
      Myers, M.P., Wager-Smith, K., Rothenfluh-Hilfiker, A., and Young, M.W. (1996).
         Light-induced degradation of TIMELESS and entrainment of the Drosophila
         circadian clock. Science 271, 1736–1740.
      Myers, M.P., Wager-Smith, K., Wesley, C.S., Young, M.W., and Sehgal, A. (1995).
         Positional cloning and sequence analysis of the Drosophila clock gene timeless.
         Science 270, 805–808.
      Pittendrigh, C.S. (1954). On temperature independence in the clock-system con-
         trolling emergence time in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 40, 1018–1029.
      Pittendrigh, C.S. (1993). Temporal organization: Reflections of a Darwinian clock-
         watcher. Annu Rev Physiol 55, 17–54.
      Price, J.L., Blau, J., Rothenfluh, A., Abodeely, M., Kloss, B., and Young, M.W. (1998).
         double-time is a novel Drosophila clock gene that regulates PERIOD protein
         accumulation. Cell 94, 83–95.
      Price, J.L., Dembinska, M.E., Young, M.W., and Rosbash, M. (1995). Suppression of
         PERIOD protein abundance and circadian cycling by the Drosophila clock
         mutation timeless. EMBO J 14, 4044–4049.
      Provencio, I., Jiang, G., De Grip, W.J., Hayes, W.P., and Rollag, M.D. (1998). Melan-
         opsin: An opsin in melanophores, brain, and eye. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95,
         340–345.
      Reddy, P., Jacquier, A.C., Abovich, N., Petersen, G., and Rosbash, M. (1986). The
         period clock locus of D. melanogaster codes for a proteoglycan. Cell 46, 53–61.
      Reddy, P., Zehring, W.A., Wheeler, D.A., Pirrotta, V., Hadfield, C., Hall, J.C., and
         Rosbash, M. (1984). Molecular analysis of the period locus in Drosophila mela-
         nogaster and identification of a transcript involved in biological rhythms. Cell
         38, 701–710.
      Reppert, S.M., and Weaver, D.R. (2002). Coordination of circadian timing in mam-
         mals. Nature 418, 935–941.
      Rosbash, M. (2009). The implications of multiple circadian clock origins. PLoS
         Biol 7, e62.
      Rosbash, M. (2015). Ronald J. Konopka (1947–2015). Cell 161, 187–188.
      Rubin, G.M., and Spradling, A.C. (1982). Genetic transformation of Drosophila with
         transposable element vectors. Science 218, 348–353.
      Rutila, J.E., Edery, I., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1992). The analysis of new
         short-period circadian rhythm mutants suggests features of D. melanogaster
         period gene function. J Neurogenet 8, 101–113.
      Rutila, J.E., Suri, V., Le, M., So, W.V., Rosbash, M., and Hall, J.C. (1998). CYCLE Is a
         Second bHLH-PAS Clock Protein Essential for Circadian Rhythmicity and
         Transcription of Drosophila period and timeless. Cell 93, 805–814.


                                                             Michael Rosbash Lecture     399


Rutila, J.E., Zeng, H., Le, M., Curtin, K.D., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1996). The
   timSL mutant of the Drosophila rhythm gene timeless manifests allele-specific
   interactions with period gene mutants. Neuron 17, 921–929.
Saez, L., Young, M.W., Baylies, M.K., Gasic, G., Bargiello, T.A., and Spray, D.C.
   (1992). Per – no link to gap junctions. Nature 360, 542–542.
Saper, C.B., and Fuller, P.M. (2017). Wake-sleep circuitry: An overview. Curr Opin
   Neurobiol 44, 186–192.
Sehgal, A., Price, J., Man, B., and Young, M. (1994). Loss of circadian behavioral
   rhythms and per RNA oscillations in the Drosophila mutant timeless. Science
   263, 1603–1606.
Sehgal, A., Rothenfluh-Hilfiker, A., Hunter-Ensor, M., Chen, Y., Myers, M., and
   Young, M.W. (1995). Rhythmic expression of timeless: A basis for promoting cir-
   cadian cycles in period gene autoregulation. Science 270, 808–810.
Shafer, O.T., Rosbash, M., and Truman, J.W. (2002). Sequential Nuclear Accumula-
   tion of the Clock Proteins Period and Timeless in the Pacemaker Neurons of
   Drosophila melanogaster. J Neurosci 22, 5946–5954.
Shearman, L.P., Zylka, M.J., Weaver, D.R., Kolakowski, L.F.J., and Reppert, S.M.
   (1997). Two period homologs: circadian expression and photic regulation in the
   suprachiasmatic nuclei. Neuron 19, 1261–1269.
Shigeyoshi, Y., Taguchi, K., Yamamoto, S., Takekida, S., Yan, L., Tei, H., Moriya, T.,
   Shibata, S., Loros, J.J., Dunlap, J.C., et al. (1997). Light-induced resetting of a
   mammalian circadian clock is associated with rapid induction of the mPer1
   transcript. Cell 91, 1043–1053.
Siwicki, K.K., Flint, K.F., Hall, J.C., Rosbash, M., and Spray, D.C. (1992). The
   Drosophila period gene and dye coupling in larval salivary glands: a re-evalua-
   tion. Biol Bull 183, 340–341.
Spierer, P., Spierer, A., Bender, W., and Hogness, D.S. (1983). Molecular mapping of
   genetic and chromomeric units in Drosophila melanogaster. J Mol Biol 168, 35–50.
Spradling, A.C., and Rubin, G.M. (1982). Transposition of cloned P elements into
   Drosophila germ line chromosomes. Science 218, 341–347.
Stanewsky, R., Kaneko, M., Emery, P., Beretta, M., Wager-Smith, K., Kay, S.A., Ros-
   bash, M., and Hall, J.C. (1998). The cryb mutation identifies cryptochrome as a
   circadian photoreceptor in Drosophila. Cell 95, 681–692.
Stern, D.L. (2014). Reported Drosophila courtship song rhythms are artifacts of
   data analysis. BMC Biol 12, 38.
Stern, D.L., Clemens, J., Coen, P., Calhoun, A.J., Hogenesch, J.B., Arthur, B.J., and
   Murthy, M. (2017). Experimental and statistical reevaluation provides no evi-
   dence for Drosophila courtship song rhythms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114,
   9978–9983.
Sun, Z.S., Albrecht, U., Zhuchenko, O., Bailey, J., Eichele, G., and Lee, C.C. (1997).
   RIGUI, a putative mammalian ortholog of the Drosophila period gene. Cell 90,
   1003–1011.
Suri, V., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (2000). Two novel doubletime mutants alter
   circadian properties and eliminate the delay between RNA and protein in
   Drosophila. J Neurosci 20, 7547–7555.
Suri, V., Qian, Z., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1998). Evidence that the TIM light
   response is relevant to light-induced phase shifts in Drosophila melanogaster.
   Neuron 21, 225–234.
Tei, H., Okamura, H., Shigeyoshi, Y., Fukuhara, C., Ozawa, R., Hirose, M., and
   Sakaki, Y. (1997). Circadian oscillation of a mammalian homologue of the
   Drosophila period gene. Nature 389, 512–516.


400   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      Tu, B.P., and McKnight, S.L. (2006). Metabolic cycles as an underlying basis of
         biological oscillations. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7, 696–701.
      Vitaterna, M.H., King, D.P., Chang, A.-M., Kornhauser, J.M., Lowrey, P.L., McDon-
         ald, J.D., Dove, W.F., Pinto, L.H., Turek, F.W., and Takahashi, J.S. (1994).
         Mutagenesis and mapping of a mouse gene, Clock, essential for circadian
         behavior. Science 264, 719–725.
      Vitaterna, M.H., Selby, C.P., Todo, T., Niwa, H., Thompson, C., Fruechte, E.M., Hit-
         omi, K., Thresher, R.J., Ishikawa, T., Myazaki, J., et al. (1999). Differential regu-
         lation of mammalian period genes and circadian rhythmicity by cryptochromes
         1 and 2. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96, 12114–12119.
      Vosshall, L.B., Price, J.L., Sehgal, A., Saez, L., and Young, M.W. (1994). Block in
         nuclear localization of period protein by a second clock mutation, timeless. Sci-
         ence 263, 1606–1609.
      Weiner, J. (1999). Time, love, memory: A great biologist and his quest for the origins of
         behavior, 1st ed. (New York: New York: Knopf).
      Yang, Z., and Sehgal, A. (2001). Role of molecular oscillations in generating behav-
         ioral rhythms in Drosophila. Neuron 29, 453–467.
      Young, M.W., and Judd, B.H. (1978). Nonessential Sequences, Genes, and the Polyt-
         ene Chromosome Bands of DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER. Genetics 88,
         723–742.
      Yu, Q., Colot, H.V., Kyriacou, C.P., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1987a). Behaviour
         modification by in vitro mutagenesis of a variable region within the period gene
         of Drosophila. Nature 326, 765–769.
      Yu, Q., Jacquier, A.C., Citri, Y., Hamblen, M., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (1987b).
         Molecular mapping of point mutations in the period gene that stop or speed up
         biological clocks in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84, 784–
         788.
      Yuan, Q., Metterville, D., Briscoe, A.D., and Reppert, S.M. (2007). Insect cryp-
         tochromes: Gene duplication and loss define diverse ways to construct insect
         circadian clocks. Mol Biol Evol 24, 948–955.
      Zehring, W.A., Wheeler, D.A., Reddy, P., Konopka, R.J., Kyriacou, C.P., Rosbash,
         M., and Hall, J.C. (1984). P-element transformation with period locus DNA
         restores rhythmicity to mutant, arrhythmic Drosophila melanogaster. Cell 39,
         369–376.
      Zeng, H., Hardin, P.E., and Rosbash, M. (1994). Constitutive overexpression of the
         Drosophila period protein inhibits period mRNA cycling. EMBO J 13, 3590–
         3598.
      Zeng, H., Qian, Z., Myers, M.P., and Rosbash, M. (1996). A light-entrainment mech-
         anism for the Drosophila circadian clock. Nature 380, 129–135.
      Zhang, R., Lahens, N.F., Ballance, H.I., Hughes, M.E., and Hogenesch, J.B. (2014). A
         circadian gene expression atlas in mammals: Implications for biology and med-
         icine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111, 16219–16224.
      Zhu, H., Yuan, Q., Briscoe, A.D., Froy, O., Casselman, A., and Reppert, S.M. (2005).
         The two CRYs of the butterfly. Curr Biol 15, R953–954.
