ETHOLOGY AND STRESS DISEASES
Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1973

by
NIKOLAAS   TINBERGEN

Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, England




Many of us have been surprised at the unconventional decision of the Nobel
Foundation to award this year’s prize ‘for Physiology or Medicine’ to three
men who had until recently been regarded as ‘mere animal watchers’. Since
at least Konrad Lorenz and I could not really be described as physiologists,
we must conclude that our scientia amabilis is now being acknowledged as an
integral part of the eminently practical field of Medicine. It is for this reason
that I have decided to discuss today two concrete examples of how the old
method (1) of ‘watching and wondering’ about behaviour (which inciden-
tally we revived rather than invented) can indeed contribute to the relief of
human suffering - in particular of suffering caused by stress. It seems to me
fitting to do this in a city already renowned for important work on psychoso-
cial stress and psychosomatic diseases (2).
    My first example concerns some new facts and views on the nature of what
is now widely called Early Childhood Autism. This is a set of behavioural
aberrations which Leo Kanner first described in 1943 (3). To us, i.e. my wife
Elisabeth and me, it looks as if it is actually on the increase in a number of
western and westernised societies. From the description of autistic behaviour -
or Kanner’s syndrome (4) - it is clear, even to those who have not themselves
seen these unfortunate children, how crippling this affliction is. In various
degrees of severity, it involves, among other things: a total withdrawal from
the environment; a failure to acquire, or a regression of overt speech, and a
serious lagging behind in the acquisition of numerous other skills; obsessive
preoccupation with a limited number of objects; the performance of seemingly
senseless and stereotyped movements; and an EEG pattern that indicates high
overall arousal. A number of autists recover (some of them ‘spontaneously’)
but many others end up in mental hospitals, where they are then often diag-
nosed, and treated, as schizophrenics.
    In spite of a growing volume of research on the subject (5), opinions of
medical experts on how to recognise autism, on its causation, and therefore
on the best treatment vary widely. Let me consider this briefly, point by point.
   1. There is disagreement already at the level of diagnosis and labeling. For
instance, for 445 children Rimland compared the diagnosis given by the doc-
tor who was consulted first, with a ‘second opinion’ (6). If the art of diagno-
sis had any objective basis, there should be a positive correlation between first
and second opinions. In fact, as Rimland points out, there is not a trace of
such a correlation - the diagnoses are practically random (Table 1). What


                                                                              113




these doctors have been saying to the parents is little more than: ‘You are
quite right; there is something wrong with your child’.
   And yet, if we use the term autism in the descriptive sense of ‘Kanner's
syndrome’, it does name a relatively well-defined cluster of aberrations.
   2. The disagreement about the causation of autism is no less striking. It
expresses itself at two levels. First, there is the usual ‘nature-nurture’ contro-
versy. The majority of experts who have written on autism hold that it is due
either to a genetic defect, or to equally irreparable ‘organic’ abnormalities -
for instance brain damage such as can be incurred during a difficult delivery.
Some of the specialists are certainly emphatic in their assertion that autism
is ‘not caused by the personalities of the parents, nor by their child-rearing
practices’ (7). If this were true, the outlook for a real cure for such children
would of course be bleak, for the best one could hope for would be an amelio-
ration of their suffering. But there are also a few experts who are inclined
to ascribe at least some cases of autism to damaging environmental causes -
either traumatising events in early childhood, or a sustained failure in the
parent-infant interaction (8). If this were even partially correct, the prospect
for a real cure would be brighter of course.
   The confusion about causation is also evident in the disagreement about
the question what is ‘primary’ in the overall syndrome - what is ‘at the
root of the trouble’ - and what are mere symptoms. Some authors hold that
autism is primarily either a cognitive, or (often mentioned in one breath) a
speech defect (9). Others consider the hyperarousal as primary (10). Those
who subscribe to the environmental hypothesis think either in terms of too
much overall input (11), or in terms of failures in the processes of affilia-
tion, and of subsequent socialisation (8).
   3. In view of all this it is no wonder that therapies, which are often based
on views concerning causation, also differ very widely. Nor is it easy to judge
the success rates of any of these therapies, for the numbers of children treated
by any individual therapist or institution are small; also, the descriptions of
the treatments are inevitably incomplete and often vague. Unless one obser-
ves the therapist in action it is not really possible to judge what he has actual-
ly been doing.
   In short, as O’Gorman put it not long ago (4. p. 124) ‘. . . our efforts in
the past have been largely empirical, and largely ineffectual’.
   In view of all this uncertainty any assistance from outside the field of
Psychiatry could be of value. And it is such assistance that my wife and I have
recently tried to offer (12). Very soon our work led us to conclusions which
went against the majority opinion, and we formulated proposals about thera-
pies which, with few exceptions, had not so far been tried out. And I can
already say that, where these treatments have been applied, they are leading
to highly promising results, and we feel that we begin to see a glimmer of
hope.
   Before giving my arguments for this optimistic prognosis, let me describe
how and why we became involved.
   Our interest in autistic children, aroused initially by what little we had seen


116                                   Physiology or Medicine 1973


of the work that was being done in the Park hospital in Oxford, remained
dormant for a long time. But when, in 1970, we read the statement by Drs.
John and Corinne Hutt that ‘. . . apart from gaze aversion of the face,
all other components of the social encounters of these autistic children are
those shown by normal non-autistic children’. (13, p. 147), we suddenly sat
up, because we knew from many years of child watching that normal chil-
dren quite often show all the elements of Kanner’s syndrome.
   Thinking this over we remembered the commonsense but sound warning
of Medawar, namely that ‘it is not informative to study variations of be-
haviour unless we know beforehand the norm from which the variants de-
part’ (14, p. 109), and we realised that these words had not really been heed-
ed by psychiatrists. In their literature we had found very little about nor-
mal children that could serve as a basis for comparison.
   We also realised that, since so many autists do not speak (and are often
quite wrongly considered not to understand speech either) a better insight
into their illness would have to be based on the study of their non-verbal
behaviour. And it is just in this sphere that we could apply some of the meth-
ods that had already proved their value in studies of animal behaviour (15).
   Therefore we began to compare our knowledge of the non-verbal behaviour
that normal children show only occasionally, with that of true autists, which
we had not only found described in the literature but also began to observe
more closely at first hand.
   The types of behaviour to which we soon turned our attention included
such things as: the child keeping its distance from a strange person or situa-
tion; details of its facial expressions; its bodily stance; its consistent avoid-




Fig. 1. Two photographs of a girl (aged 6 years) taken in the same spring. Left: taken
by a school photographer. Right: taken by her elder sister. They illustrate some non-
verba l expression s as use d in motivational an a lysis. Fro m T in b e r g e n a n d T i n b e r g e n ,
1972.


Fig. 2. An example of ‘temporary’ and permanent autistic behaviour. Left: Typical
slight rejection by a twelve months old normal boy, photographed in his own home in
the presence of his mother, who was smiling at him, and faced by him, from approxi-
mately four metres distance. The photographer, who was his (rarely met) grandfather,
was approximately 1 1/2 metres away from the child. From Tinbergen and Tinbergen
1972. Right: ‘Response of an autistic child to repeated attempts of adult to make eye-
to-eye contact (drawn from 8 mm motion picture film) from Hutt and Ounsted 1966’.
Reproduced from Hutt and Hutt 1970.




ance of making eye contact etc. - an extremely rich set of expressions that are
all correlated with overt avoidance (Figs 1 and 2). The work of professional
child ethologists is beginning to show us how immensely rich and subtle the
repertoire is of such non-verbal expressions (16).
   But, apart from observing these behaviours themselves, we also collected
evidence about the circumstances which made normal children revert to
bouts of autistic behaviour.
   What emerged from this dual approach was quite clear: such passing at-
tacks of autistic behaviour appear in a normal child when it finds itself in a
situation that creates a conflict between two incompatible motivations. On
the one hand, the situation evokes fear (a tendency to withdraw, physically
and mentally) but on the other hand it also elicits social, and often explorat-
ory behaviour - but the fear prevents the child from venturing out into the
world. And, not unexpectedly, it is ‘naturally’ timid children (by nature or
by nurture, or both) that show this conflict behaviour more readily than more
resilient, confident children. But my point is that they all respond to the
environment.
   Once we had arrived at this interpretation, we tested it in some simple
experiments. In fact, we realised that in our years of interaction with children
we had already been experimenting a great deal. Such experiments had not
been aiming at the elicitation of autistic behaviour, but rather at its opposite:
its elimination. As we have written before, each of these experiments was in


118                          Physiology or Medicine 1973


reality a subtly modulated series of experiments. For a description of what
we actually did, I quote from our original publication. We wrote (12, pp.
 29-30):
    ‘What we invariably do when visiting, or being visited by a family with
young children is, after a very brief friendly glance, ignoring the child(ren)
completely, at the same time eliciting, during our early conversations, friendly
responses from the parent(s). One can see a great deal of the behaviour of
 the child out of the corner of one’s eye, and can monitor a surprising amount
of the behaviour that reveals the child’s state. Usually such a child will start
by simply looking intently at the stranger, studying him guardedly. One may
already at this stage judge it safe to now and then look briefly at the child
and assess more accurately the state it is in. If, on doing so, one sees the child
avert its glance, eye contact must at once be broken off. Very soon the child
will stop studying one. It will approach gingerly, and it will soon reveal its
strong bonding tendency by touching one - for instance by putting its hand
tentatively on one’s knee. This is often a crucial moment: one must not re-
spond by looking at the child (which may set it back considerably)
but by cautiously touching the child’s hand with one’s own. Again, playing
this ‘game’ by if necessary stopping, or going one step back in the process,
according to the child’s response, one can soon give a mildly reassuring signal
by touch, for instance by gently pressing its hand, or by touching it quickly,
and withdrawing again. If, as is often the case, the child laughs at this, one
can laugh oneself, but still without looking at the child. Soon it will become
more daring, and the continuation of contact, by touch and by indirect voca-
lisation, will begin to cement a bond. One can then switch to the first, ten-
tative eye contact. This again must be done with caution, and step by step;
certainly with a smile, and for brief moments at first. We find that first cover-
ing one’s face with one’s hands, then turning towards the child (perhaps
saying ‘where’s Andrew?’ or whatever the child’s name) and then briefly
 showing one’s eyes and covering them up at once, is very likely to elicit a
smile, or even a laugh. For this, incidentally, a child often takes the initiative
 (see, e.g. Stroh and Buick (11)). Very soon the child will then begin to solicit
this; it will rapidly tolerate increasingly long periods of direct eye contact and
join one. If this is played further, with continuous awareness of and adjust-
ments to slight reverses to a more negative attitude, one will soon find the
child literally clamouring for intense play contact. Throughout this process
the vast variety of expressions of the child must be understood in order to
monitor it correctly, and one must oneself apply an equally large repertoire
in order to give, at any moment, the best signal. The ‘bag of tricks’ one
has to have at one’s disposal must be used to the full, and the ‘trick’ selected
must whenever possible be adjusted to the child’s individual tastes. Once
established, the bond can be maintained by surprisingly slight signals; a child
coming to show proudly a drawing it has made is often completely happy
with just a ‘how nice dear’ and will then return to its own play. Even sim-
pler vocal contacts can work; analogous to the vocal contact calls of birds
 (which the famous Swedish writer Selma Lagerloef correctly described in


                             Ethology and Stress Diseases                    119


‘Nils Holgersson’ as, ‘I am here, where are you?‘) many children develop
an individual contact call, to which one has merely to answer in the same
language.
   ‘The results of this procedure have been found to be surprisingly rapid,
and also consistent if one adjusts oneself to the monitoring results. Different
children may require different starting levels, and different tempos of step-
ping-up. One may even have to start by staying away from the child’s favourite
room. It is also of great significance how familiar to the child the physical
environment is. Many children take more than one day; with such it is im-
portant to remember that one has to start at a lower level in the morning
than where one left off the previous evening. We have the impression that the
process is on the whole completed sooner if one continually holds back until
one senses the child longing for a more intense contact.’
   With all these experiences with normal children in mind, we began to
reconsider the evidence about permanently autistic children - again using our
own observations as well as the reports we found in the literature. And two
things became clear almost at once: neither for genetic abnormalities nor for
gross brain damage was there any convincing, direct evidence; all we found
were inferences, or arguments that do not hold water.
   The main argument for a genetic abnormality is the statement (and one
hears it time and again) ‘these children have been odd from birth’. And we
also found that, for various reasons, neither the specialists nor the parents are
very willing to consider environmental influences. But in view of what we
know about the effects of non-genetic agents that act in utero - of which the
new indications about the effects of rubella contracted by pregnant women
is only one (17) -the ‘odd-from-birth’ argument is of course irrelevant. And
at least two cases are known of identical twins of whom only one developed
Kanner’s syndrome (18).
   Equally unconvincing are the arguments in favour of gross brain damage-
this idea too is based mainly on inference.
   On the other hand, the body of positive evidence that points to environ-
mental causes is growing. For instance, many workers report that the inci-
dence of autism is not random. Relatively many autists are first-born children
 (19). There is also a pretty widespread conviction that the parents of autists
are somehow different - for instance many of them are very serious people,
or people who are themselves under some sort of strain. And to a trained
observer it is also very obvious that autists respond to conditions, which to
them are frightening or intrusive, by an intensification of all their symptoms.
Conversely, we have tried out our ‘taming procedure’ as described for nor-
mal children on some severely autistic children, and succeeded in ‘drawing
them out of their shells’, an making them snuggle up to us, and even in making
them join us in, for instance, ‘touch games’. I cannot possibly go into all
the evidence, but there are several good indications, firstly, that many autists
are potentially normal children, whose affiliation and subsequent socialisation
processes have gone wrong in one way or another, and secondly: this can often
be traced back to something in the early environment - on occasion a frighten-


120                         Physiology or Medicine 1973


ing accident, but most often something in the behaviour of the parents, in
particular the mothers. Let me hasten to add that in saying this we are not
blaming these unfortunate parents. Very often they seem to have been either
simply inexperienced (hence perhaps the high incidence among first-borns);
or over-apprehensive; or over-efficient and intrusive; or - perhaps most often
- they are people who are themselves under stress. For this, and many other
reasons, the parents of autists deserve as much compassion, and may be as
much in need of help, as the autists themselves.
   Now if we are only partially right in assuming that at least a large pro-
portion of autists are victims of some kind of environmental stress, whose
basic trouble is of an emotional nature, then one would expect that those
therapies that aim at reducing anxiety - by allowing spontaneous socialisa-
tion and exploration whenever it occurs - would be more successful than those
that aim at the teaching of specific skills. Unfortunately (as I have already
said), it is hardly possible to judge from published reports what treatment
has actually been applied. For instance one speech therapist may behave
rather intrusively, and turn a child into a mere ‘trained monkey’, leaving
all the other symptoms as they were, or even making them worse. Another
speech therapist may have success simply by having proceeded in a very gen-
tle, motherly way. One has to go by those instances where one has either been
involved oneself or where one knows pretty precisely how the therapist has in
fact proceeded. It is with this in mind that I will now mention briefly three
examples of treatments that seem to hold great promise.
   Firstly, even before we published our first paper, the Australian therapist
Helen Clancy had been treating autistic children and their families along
lines that are very similar to, in fact are more sophisticated than those recom-
mended by us in 1972.
   The gist of Clancy’s method is as follows (8): firstly, since she considers
the restoration of affiliation as the first goal of treatment of autism, she
treats both mother and child, and the family as well. She does this by provok-
ing in the mother an increase in maternal, protective behaviour. Secondly,
she uses a form of operant conditioning for speeding up the child’s response
to this change in the mother. In other words, she tries to elicit a mutual
emotional bond between mother and child, and refrains, at least at first,
from the piecemeal teaching of particular skills.
   With those mothers who were willing to cooperate, Clancy has achieved
highly encouraging success - although of course a few families (4 out of appr.
50 treated over a period of 14 years) have failed to benefit.
   Secondly, after the first public discussion of our work, my wife received
invitations to visit some schools for autists, and to observe what was being
done. She found that in one of them, a small day school which already had an
impressive record of recoveries, the treatment was likewise aimed at the resto-
ration of emotional security, and teaching as such, including some gentle
speech therapy, was never started until a child had reached a socially positive
attitude. Much to our dismay, this school has since been incorporated into a
school for maladjusted children - the experiment has been discontinued.


                             Ethology and Stress Diseases                    121


   Thirdly, a regional psychiatrist invited us a year ago to act as advisors in a
fascinating experiment which she too had begun well before she had heard of
our work. Three boys, who are now 9, 9 1/2 and 11 1/2 years of age, and who
had all been professionally diagnosed as severely autistic, are now being gently
integrated into a normal primary school. This involves a part-time home-
tutor for each boy, a sympathetic headmaster, and willingness of the parents
to cooperate. The results are already little short of spectacular. In fact, a
specialist on autistic children who visited the school recently said to us: ‘Had
the records not shown that these three children were still severely autistic a
couple of years ago, I would not now believe it’. This experiment, which is
also run along lines that are consistent with our ideas, is being carefully docu-
mented.
   It is this type of evidence, together with that provided by a number of al-
ready published case histories (20), that has by now convinced us that many
autists can attain full recovery, if only we act on the assumption that they
have been traumatised rather than genetically or organically damaged.
   I cannot go into further details here, but I can sum up in a few sentences
the gist of what the ethological approach to Early Childhood Autism has pro-
duced so far:
    1. There are strong indications that many autists suffer primarily from an
emotional disturbance, from a form of anxiety neurosis, which prevents or re-
tards normal affiliation and subsequent socialisation, and this in its turn
hampers or suppresses the development of overt speech, of reading, of explo-
ration, and of other learning processes based on these three behaviours.
    2. More often than has so far been assumed these aberrations are not due
to either genetic abnormalities or to gross brain damage, but to early environ-
mental influences. The majority of autists - as well as their parents - seem to
be genuine victims of environmental stress. And our work on normal children
has convinced us not only that this type of stress disease is actually on the
increase in western and westernised countries, but also that very many chil-
dren must be regarded as semi-autistic, and even more as being seriously at
risk.
    3. Those therapies that aim at the reduction of anxiety and at a re-start-
ing of proper socialisation seem to be far more effective than for instance
speech therapy per se and enforced social instruction, which seem to be at
best symptom treatments, and to have only limited success. Time and again
 treatment at the emotional level has produced an explosive emergence of
 speech and other skills.
    If I now try to assess the implications of what I have said, I feel at the
 same time alarmed and hopeful.
    We are alarmed because we found this corner of Psychiatry in a state of
 disarray, and because we discovered that many of the established experts -
 doctors, teachers and therapists - are so little open to new ideas and even
 facts. Another cause for alarm is our conviction that the officially recognised
 autists are only a fraction of a much larger number of children who obviously
 suffer to some degree from this form of social stress.


122                         Physiology or Medicine 1973


   We feel hopeful because attempts at curing such children at the emotio-
nal level, while still in the experimental stage, are already leading to positive
results. And another encouraging sign is that, among the young psychiatrists,
we have found many who are sympathetic to our views, or even share them,
and begin to act on them.
    In the interest of these thousands of unfortunate children we appeal to all
concerned to give the ‘stress view’ of autism at least the benefit of the doubt,
and to try out the forms of therapy that I have mentioned.
    My second example of the usefulness of an ethological approach to Medi-
cine has quite a different history. It concerns the work of a very remarkable
man, the late F. M. Alexander (21). His research started some fifty years
before the revival of Ethology for which we are now being honoured, yet his
procedure was very similar to modern observational methods, and we believe
that his achievements and those of his pupils deserve close attention.
    Alexander, who was born in 1869 in Tasmania, became at an early age a
 ‘reciter of dramatic and humorous pieces’. Very soon he developed serious
vocal trouble and he came very near to losing his voice altogether. When no
 doctor could help him, he took matters into his own hands. He began to
observe himself in front of a mirror, and then he noticed that his voice was
 at its worst when he adopted the stances which to him felt appropriate and
 ‘right’ for what he was reciting. Without any outside help he worked out,
 during a series of agonising years, how to improve what is now called the
 ‘use’ of his body musculature in all his postures and movements. And, the re-
 markable outcome was that he regained control of his voice. This story, of
 perceptiveness, of intelligence, and of persistence, shown by a man without
 medical training, is one of the true epics of medical research and practice
 (22).
   Once Alexander had become aware of the mis-use of his own body, he
began to observe his fellow men, and he found that, at least in modern west-
ern society, the majority of people stand, sit and move in an equally defec-
tive manner.
   Encouraged by a doctor in Sydney, he now became a kind of missionary.
He set out to teach - first actors, then a variety of people - how to restore the
proper use of their musculature. Gradually he discovered that he could in this
way alleviate an astonishing variety of somatic and mental illnesses. He also
wrote extensively on the subject. And finally he taught a number of his pupils
to become teachers in their turn, and to achieve the same results with their
patients. Whereas it had taken him years to work out the technique and
to apply it to his own body, a successful course became a matter of months -
with occasional ‘refresher’ sessions afterwards. Admittedly, the training of a
good Alexander teacher takes a few years.
   For scores of years a small but dedicated number of pupils have continued
his work. Their combined successes have recently been described by Barlow
 (23). I must admit that his physiological explanations of how the treatment
could be supposed to work (and also a touch of hero worship in his book)
made me initially a little doubtful, and even sceptical. But the claims made,


                             Ethology and Stress Diseases                   123


first by Alexander, and reiterated and extended by Barlow sounded so extra-
ordinary that I felt I ought to give the method at least the benefit of the
doubt. And so, arguing that medical practice often goes by the sound empiri-
cal principle of ‘the proof of the pudding is in the eating’, my wife, one of
our daughters and I decided to undergo treatment ourselves, and also to use
the opportunity for observing its effects as critically as we could. For obvious
reasons, each of us went to a different Alexander teacher.
   We discovered that the therapy is based on exceptionally sophisticated ob-
servation, not only by means of vision but also to a surprising extent by using
the sense of touch. It consists in essence of no more than a very gentle, first
exploratory, and then corrective manipulation of the entire muscular system.
This starts with the head and neck, then very soon the shoulders and chest
are involved, and finally the pelvis, legs and feet, until the whole body is un-
der scrutiny and treatment. As in our own observations of children, the thera-
pist is continuously monitoring the body, and adjusting his procedure all the
time. What is actually done varies from one patient to another, depending
on what kind of mis-use the diagnostic exploration reveals. And naturally, it
affects different people in different ways. But between the three of us, we
already notice, with growing amazement, very striking improvements in such
diverse things as high blood pressure, breathing, depth of sleep, overall cheer-
fulness and mental alertness, resilience against outside pressures, and also in
such a refined skill as playing a stringed instrument.
    So from personal experience we can already confirm some of the seemingly
fantastic claims made by Alexander and his followers, namely that many types
of under-performance and even ailments, both mental and physical, can be
alleviated, sometimes to a surprising extent, by teaching the body muscula-
ture to function differently. And although we have by no means finished our
course, the evidence given and documented by Alexander and Barlow, of
beneficial effects on a variety of vital functions no longer sounds so astonish-
ing to us. Their long list includes first of all what Barlow calls the ‘rag
bag’ of rheumatism, including various forms of arthritis; but also respiratory
troubles, even potentially lethal asthma; following in their wake, circulation
defects, which may lead to high blood pressure and also to some dangerous
heart conditions; gastro-intestinal disorders of many types; various gynaeco-
logical conditions; sexual failures; migraines and depressive states that often
lead to suicide - in short a very wide spectrum of diseases, both ‘somatic’
and ‘mental’, that are not caused by identifiable parasites.
    Although no one would claim that the Alexander treatment is a cure-all
in every case, there can be no doubt that it often does have profound and
 beneficial effects - and, I repeat once more, both in the ‘mental’ and
 ‘somatic’ sphere.
    The importance of the treatment has been stressed by many prominent
people, for instance John Dewey (24, Aldous Huxley (25), and - perhaps
more convincing to us - by scientists of renown, such as Coghill (26), Ray-
mond Dart (27), and the great neurophysiologist Sherrington (28). Yet, with
few exceptions, the medical profession has largely ignored Alexander - per-


124                            Physiology or Medicine 1973




Fig. 3. Typical slumped sitting positions. From Barlow, 1973.




haps under the impression that he was the centre of some kind of ‘cult’, and
also because the effects seemed difficult to explain. And this brings me to
my next point.
   Once one knows that an empirically developed therapy has demonstrable
effects, one likes to know how it could work; what its physiological explana-
tion could be. And here some recent discoveries in the borderline field between
neurophysiology and ethology can make some aspects of the Alexander therapy
more understandable and more plausible than they could have been in Sher-
rington’s time.




Fig. 4. Three sitting positions: (a Slumping; (b) Sitting too straight; (c) Balanced.
From Barlow, 1973.


                                                                                 125




                          Fig. 5. Position of pelvis, back, neck and head in ‘slump-
                          ing’ position. From Barlow, 1973.



   One of these new discoveries concerns the key-concept of ‘re-afference’
 (29). There are many strong indications that, at various levels of integration,
from single muscle units up to complex behaviour, the correct performance of
many movements is continuously checked by the brain. It does this by compar-
ing a feedback report, that says ‘orders carried out’, with the feedback ex-
pectation for which, with the initiation of each movement, the brain has been
alerted. Only when the expected feedback and the actual feedback match
does the brain stop sending out commands for corrective action. Already the
discoverers of this principle, von Holst and Mittelstaedt, knew that the func-
tioning of this complex mechanism could vary from moment to moment with
the internal state of the subject-the ‘target value’ or Sollwert of the ex-




                                              Fig. 6. Standing in ‘hunched’ position
                                              (left) and well balanced (right). From
                                              Barlow, 1973.


                            Physiology or Medicine 1973




                                                Fig. 7 . P o st u re b e f o r e ( l e f t ) a n d a f t e r
                                                Ale x a n d e r t re a t m e n t . T h e p h o t o g r a p h
                                                on the left shows muscle contractions at
                                                 the hack of the neck; raised shoulders
                                                and tightened buttocks. After treatment
                                                 these tensions had disappeared and the
                                                patient was overall taller. From Barlow,
                                                 1973.




pected feedback changes with the motor commands that are given. But what
Alexander has discovered beyond this is that a lifelong mis-use of the body-
muscles (such as caused by, for instance, too much sitting and too little walk-
ing) can make the entire system go wrong. As a consequence, reports that
‘all is correct’ are received by the brain (or perhaps interpreted as correct)
when in fact all is very wrong. A person can feel ‘at ease’ e.g. when slouching
in front of a television set, when in fact he is grossly abusing his body. I can
show you only a few examples, but they will be familiar to all of you. (Figs.
3-7.
   It is still an open question exactly where in this complex mechanism the
matching procedure goes wrong under the influence of consistent mis-use.
But the modern ethologist feels inclined, with Alexander and Barlow, to
blame phenotypic rather than genetic causes for mis-use. It is highly unlikely
that in their very long evolutionary history of walking upright, the Hominids
have not had time to evolve the correct mechanisms for bipedal locomotion.
This conclusion receives support from the surprising, but indubitable fact that
even after forty to fifty years of obvious mis-use one’s body can (one might
say) ‘snap’ back into proper, and in many respects more healthy use as a
result of a short series of half-hourly sessions. Proper stance and movement
are obviously genetically old, environment-resistant behaviours (30). Mis-use,
with all its psychosomatic or rather: somato-psychic consequences, must there-
fore be considered a result of modern living conditions - of a culturally deter-
mined stress. I might add here that I am not merely thinking of too much
sitting, but just as much of the ‘cowed’ posture that one assumes when one
feels that one is not quite up to one’s work - when one feels insecure.


                                                                             127


    Secondly, it need not cause surprise that a mere gentle handling of body
muscles can have such profound effects on both body and mind. The more
that is being discovered about psychosomatic diseases, and in general about
the extremely complex two-way traffic between the brain and the rest of the
body, the more obvious it has become that too rigid a distinction between
‘mind’ and ‘body’ is of only limited use to medical science - in fact can be
a hindrance to its advance.
   A third biologically interesting aspect of the Alexander therapy is that every
session clearly demonstrates that the innumerable muscles of the body are con-
tinuously operating as an intricately linked web. Whenever a gentle pressure
is used to make a slight change in leg posture, the neck muscles react im-
mediately. Conversely, when the therapist helps one to ‘release’ the neck
muscles, it is amazing to see quite pronounced movements for instance of the
toes, even when one is lying on a couch.
    In this short sketch, I can do no more than characterise, and recommend,
the Alexander treatment as an extremely sophisticated form of rehabilition,
or rather of re-deployment, of the entire muscular equipment, and through
that of many other organs. Compared with this, many types of physiotherapy
which are now in general use look surprisingly crude and restricted in their
effect - and sometimes even harmful to the rest of the body.
    What then is the upshot of these few brief remarks about Early Childhood
Autism and about the Alexander treatment? What have these two examples
in common? First of all they stress the importance for medical science of open-
minded observation - of ‘watching and wondering’. This basic scientific
method is still too often looked down on by those blinded by the glamour
of apparatus, by the prestige of ‘tests’ and by the temptation to turn to
drugs. But it is by using this old method of observation that both autism and
general mis-use of the body can be seen in a new light: to a much larger
extent than is now realised both could very well be due to modern stressful
conditions.
    But beyond this I feel that my two excursions into the field of medical
research have much wider implications. Medical science and practice meet
with a growing sense of unease and of lack of confidence from the side of the
 general public. The causes of this are complex, but at least in one respect the
 situation could be improved: a little more open-mindedness (31), a little more
collaboration with other biological sciences, a little more attention to the body
 as a whole, and to the unity of body and mind, could substantially enrich
 the field of medical research. I therefore appeal to our medical colleagues to
 recognise that the study of animals - in particular ‘plain’ observation - can
 make useful contributions to human biology not only in the field of somatic
 malfunctioning, but also in that of behavioural disturbances, and ultimately
 help us understand what psychosocial stress is doing to us, It is stress in the
 widest sense, the inadequacy of our adjustability, that will become perhaps
 the most important disruptive influence in our society.
     If I have today stressed the applicability of animal behaviour research I do
 not want to be misunderstood. As in all sciences, applications come in the


128                                     Physiology or Medicine 1973


wake of research motivated by sheer intellectual curiosity. What this occasion
enables me to emphasise is that biologically oriented research into animal
behaviour, which has been done so far with very modest budgets, deserves
encouragement - whatever the motivation and whatever the ultimate aims of
the researcher. And we ethologists must be prepared to respond to the chal-
lenge if and when it comes.


NOTES       AND   REFERENCES


 1. I call the method old because it must already have been highly developed by our
      ancestral hunter-gatherers, as it still is in non-westernised hunting-gathering tribes
      s u ch a s th e Bush me n , th e Eskimo and the Au st ra lia n Ab o rig i n e s . A s a s c i e n t i f i c
      method applied to Man it could be said to have been revived first by Charles Dar-
      win in 1872 in ‘The Expression of the Emotions in Man and the Animals.’
    London, John Murray.
 2. Levi, L. (ed.) 1971 Society, Stress, and Disease. Vol. 1.: The Psychosocial En-
      vironment and Psychosomatic Diseases. London, Oxford University Press.
 3. Kanner, L. 1943 Autistic disturbances of affective contact. Nerv. Child 2, 217-
      250. Recently, Kanner has published a selection of his papers in Childhood Psycho-
      sis 1973 Washington D.C., Winston & Son (distributed by John Wiley & Sons).
 4. When I speak of Kanner’s syndrome, I refer to the largely descriptive list of symp-
      toms given by O’Gorman, G. 1970 The Nature of Childhood Autism. London,
      Butterworth. This is a slightly modified version of the description given in Creak,
      M. 1961 (Chairman) The schizophrenic syndrome in childhood. Progress report of
      a working party. Brit. Med. J. 2, 889-890. Many other definitions of autism in
      its various forms are mixtures of observed behavioural deviations and interpreta-
      tions. For a discussion of the confusion surrounding the word ‘autism’ see Tin-
     bergen & Tinbergen (see below, note 12) pp. 45-46.
 5. For the purpose of finding one’s way in this literature we can refer to Rutter, M.
      1965 Infantile Autism. London, Methuen; and to the quarterly, started in 1971:
      Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia, published by Winston & Son,
      Washington, D.C., which prints original articles as well as reviews.
      The most recent and most exhaustive review is:
      Ornitz, E. M. 1973 Childhood Autism. (Medical Progress). Calif. Med. 118, 2 1 -
      47.
         Throughout the literature (not only on autism but on many other psychiatric
      issues as well) one finds one fundamental error in scientific reasoning. Time and
      again we receive the comment that we overlook the ‘hard’ evidence of internal
      malfunctioning, in autists as well as in other categories of the mentally ill. I assure
      my readers that we do not overlook such evidence (such as that on blood platelets,
      on lead contents, on EEG patterns, etc.). The erroneous assumption underlying
      most of the arguments in which such facts are used for the purpose of throwing
      light on the causation of the behavioural deviation is almost invariably due to the
      confusion between correlations and cause-effect relations. With some exceptions
      (such as the deleterious effect of lead) the physiological or biochemical evidence is
      considered, without any ground whatsoever, to indicate causes, whereas the correla-
      ti o ns fo u n d could just as well point to con se q u e n c e s or side-effects. It is just as
      nonsensical to say that retarded bone growth, or abnormalities in the blood platelet
      picture (or for that matter speech defects, or high overall arousal) are ‘causes’ of
      autism as it is to say that a high temperature is the ‘cause’ of typhoid, or pneu-
      monia. Unless there is evidence, clinical and ultimately .experimental, indicating
      what is cause and what is effect the opinions based on ‘hard’ evidence are in fact
      worthless. Our experimental evidence discussed on pp. 10 and 11 is hard, whereas
      evidence on correlations-however impressive the techniques might be by which


                                           Ethology and Stress Diseases                                        129


      they are found-are scientifically useless until an attempt is made to place it into
      cause-effect context. This is what I mean in my final paragraphs by ‘the glamour of
      apparatus’-the idolisation of techniques, coupled with the failure to think about
      the meaning of evidence, is a serious disease of medical research.
6. Rimland, B. 1971 The differentiation of childhood psychoses. J. Aut. Childh.
    Schizophr. 1, 161-175.
 7. Wing, L. 1970 The syndrome of early childhood autism. Brit. J. Hosp. Med. 381-392,
      (p. 381). See also Tinbergen and Tinbergen (see below, note 12) p. 51.
8. One of the most prominent exponents of this view is: Bettelheim, B. 1967 The
      Empty Fortress: Infantile Austism and the Birth of S e l f . L o n d o n , C o l l i e r - M a c m i l -
      lan. See also: Clancy, H. and G. McBride 1969 The autistic process and its treat-
      ment. J. Child Psycho1 Psychiatry 10, 233-244.
 9. Rutter, M. et.al. 1971 Autism-a central disorder of cognition and language? In:
      M. Rutter (ed.) Infantile Autism: Concepts, Chara c t e r i s t i c s , a n d T r e a t m e n t . L o n -
    don, Churchill.
10. Hutt, C., Hutt, S. J., Lee, D. and Ounsted, C., 1964 Arousal and childhood autism.
      Nature 204, 908-909.
      Hutt, S. J. and Hutt, C., (eds.) 1970 Behaviour S t u d i e s i n P s y c h i a t r y . O x f o r d ,
      Pergamon Press.
11. Stroh, G. Buick, D. 1970 The effect of relative sensory isolation on the behaviour
      of two autistic children. In: S. J. Hutt and C. Hutt (eds.) Behaviour Studies in
      Psychiatry. Oxford, Pergamon Press. pp. 161--174.
12. Tinbergen, E. A. and Tinbergen, N. 1972 Early Childhood Autism-an Ethological
      A p p r o a c h . A d v a n c e s i n E t h o l o g y 10, l-53. Berlin, Paul Parey.
13. Hutt, S. J. and Hutt, C., 1970 Direct Observation a n d M e a s u r e m e n t o f B e h a v i o u r .
      Springfield, Ill., Charles C. Thomas.
14. Medawar, P. B. 1967 The Art of the Soluble. London, Methuen.
15. For a recent review about the analysis of non-verbal signs of mixed motivation, or
      motivational conflicts, see e.g. M a n n i n g , A . 1 9 7 2 A n I n t r o d u c t i o n t o A n i m a l B e -
      haviour. London, Arnold. (Chapter 5). and Hinde, R. A. 1970 Animal Behavior.
      New York, McGraw-Hill. (Chapter 17). Both books give further references.
16. See e.g. Blurton Jones, N. G. (ed.) Ethological Studies of Infant Behaviour.
      London, Cambridge University Press.
17.   Chess, S. 1971 Autism in children with congenital rubella. J. Aut. Childh. Schizophr.
      I, 33-47. The point I want to make with this brief reference is that, while one
      should call rubella an early environmental influence and therefore not ‘congenital’
      in the sense of ‘genetic’, it might well be correct to call it ‘organic’, even though
      rubella could well create a state of anxiety already during pregnancy in mothers who
      have heard about other damaging effects of the disease. And this in itself could well
      cause a complex psychosomatic state.
18. Kamp, N. L. J. 1964 Autistic syndrome in one of a pair of monozygotic twins.
      Psychiatr., Neurol., Neurochir. 67, 143-147; a n d V a i l l a n t , G . E . 1 9 6 3 T w i n s d i s -
      cordant for early infantile autism. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 9, 163-167. While I do
      not of course intend to underrate the possibility of genetic predisposition, the hy-
      pothesis of a purely genetic deviation conflicts with this type of observation. At the
      same time we know that even when twins grow up in the same family, their expe-
      riences can never be identical.
19. See, e.g. Wing, L. 1971 Autistic Children. London, Constable. p. 8.
20. Although not all the authors of the following books label their subject as ‘autistic’,
      I mention them because the descriptions of the initial behaviour conform in whole
      or in part to Kanner’s syndrome; and, as I have said, I consider such descriptions the
      only acceptable starting points.
      d’Ambrosio, R. 1971 No Language but a Cry. London, Cassell.
      Axline, V. 1964 Dibs--in Search of Self. (since 1971 available as a Pelican Book,


130                                      Physiology or Medicine 1973


      Harmondsworth, Penguin Books Ltd.)
      Copeland, J. and J. Hodges 1973 For the Love of Ann. London, Arrow Original.
      Hundley, J. M. 1973 (first published in 1971) The Small Outsider. Sydney,
      Angus and Robertson.
      Park, C. C. 1972 (first published in 1967) The Siege. Pelican Book, Harmonds-
      worth, Penguin Books Ltd.
      Wexler, S. S. 1971 (first published in 1955) The Story of Sandy. New York, A
      Signet Book.
      Thieme, G. 1971 Leben mit unserem autistischen Kind. Lüdenscheid, Hilfe für das
      autistische Kind, e.V.
      No two of these seven children received the same treatment, but on the whole one
      can say that those who were treated primarily at the emotional level rather than at
      the level of specific skills showed the most striking improvement.
21. The clearest introduction is: Alexander, F. M. 1932 The Use of Self. London Cha-
      terston; but a great deal of interest can also be found in Alexander, F. M. 1910
      Man’s Supreme Inheritance. London, Chaterston, and Alexander, F. M. 1942 The
      Universal Constant in Living. London, Chaterston.
22. The history of medical science is full of such examples of ‘breakthroughs’ due
      to a re-orientation of attention. Compare e.g. Jenner’s discovery that milkmaids did
      not contract smallpox; Goldberger’s observation that the staff of a ‘lunatic asylum’
      did not develop pellagra; Fleming’s wondering about empty areas round the Penni-
      cillium in his cultures.
23. Barlow, W. 1973 The Alexander Principle. London, Gollancz.
24. Dewey, K. See e.g. 1932 Introduction to Alexander, F. M. The Use of Self. Lon-
      don, Chaterston.
25. Huxley, A. 1937 Ends and Means. London: Chatto and Windus. Huxley, A. 1965
      End-gaining and means whereby. Alexander J. 4, 19.
26. Coghill, G. E. 1941 Appreciation: the educational methods of F. Matthias Alexan-
      der. In: Alexander, F. M. 1941 The Universal Constant in Living. New York, Dut-
      ton.
27. Dart, R. A. 1947 The attainment of poise. South Afr. Med. J. 21, 74-91. Dart,
      R. A. 1970 An anatomist’s tribute to F. M. Alexander, London, the Shelldrake Press.
28. Sherrington, C. S. 1946 The Endeavour of Jean Fernel. London, Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press.
      Sherrington, C. S. 1951 Man on his Nature. London, Cambridge University Press.
2 9 . vo n Ho l s t, E. an d Mitte lstaedt, H. 1950 D a s Re a f f e re n z prin z i p . N a t u r w i s s . 3 7 ,
      464-476.
30. Tinbergen, N. 1973 Functional ethology and the human sciences. Proc. Roy. Soc.
      Lond. B. 182, 385-410.
31. This plea is nowadays heard more often: see e.g. Kanner, L. 1971 Approaches:
      retrospect and prospect. J. Aut. Childh. Schizophr. 1, 453-459 (see p. 457).
