TURNING PAGES

Nobel Lecture, December 7, 2007
by
Oliver Smithies
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7525, USA.




I am fortunate in having been a bench scientist for almost 60 years, and per-
haps somewhat prescient in having kept all my notebooks (of which there are
more than 130 since I first began). Together they are a record of my happy
life as a scientist. They are also a more or less complete record of the progres-
sion and logic of the work that brings me to Stockholm today, and of what I
expect to continue when I return to North Carolina. My hope is that in the
next 40 minutes or so I can share this progression with you by TURNING
PAGES in these notebooks. And I want to talk to a large degree to the people
up in the balconies -- the students.
   The first group of pages documents my CHANCE invention of molecular
sieving electrophoresis. My first job was in Toronto, Canada, and I was look-
ing for a precursor for insulin (which I never found!). In the course of this
work, I was having trouble in studying insulin with filter paper electropho-
resis, as my January 1st, New Year’s Day, 1954 page illustrates. [“Students, note
the day!”]. Insulin stuck to the paper and unrolled like a carpet. -- the more
protein that I used, the further the carpet unrolled. (Left panel, Figure 1).




Figure 1.


Then, on January 23rd, 1954 (Middle panel, Figure 1) [“Notice, students,
Saturday morning!”], I learned of a new method of electrophoresis that used a
bed of moist starch grains (which do not adsorb proteins) for the electropho-
retic medium, instead of moist filter paper (Kunkel and Slater, 1952). But, in
order to find the separated proteins when using this method, it was necessary

                                                                             209


to carry out a protein assay on each of about 40 slices taken from the moist
starch bed. I had no technical help, not even a dishwasher, and I couldn’t
afford the time to do multiple protein assays for each electrophoresis experi-
ment. Happily, however, when I was a boy I sometimes helped my mother with
the laundry, and remembered that the boiled starch she used for my father’s
shirts set into a jelly when it was cold. This memory suggested to me that I
could cook the starch grains, make a gel, carry out the electrophoresis, and
then just stain the gel to find the proteins. (Right panel, Figure 1). As a con-
sequence of raids on them when no one else was around, I knew the where-
abouts of the best stockrooms in the Connaught Laboratory where I worked,
and so I was able to find some starch and test the gel idea that afternoon.
[“Saturday, still”] The starch gelled only when its concentration was high, but
the result with insulin was, as I recorded in my notebook, “very promising!” I
later found out that a high concentration of starch impeded the migration of
large proteins more than small proteins. This need to use a high concentra-
tion of starch was the chance element in my invention of molecular sieving gel
electrophoresis (Smithies, 1955). [“Molecular sieving occurs, students, when you
use polyacrylamide gels with proteins and agarose gels with DNA.”]
   Three months later, I tried electrophoresing serum – “just for a rough
test” – and next day found a total of 11 components. At that time serum was
thought to contain only 5 components (albumin, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta and
gamma globulins), so I knew I was onto something likely to be important.
I stopped looking for the insulin precursor, and began to study serum pro-
teins.
   Over the next 7 months I worked the bugs out of the starch gel electro-
phoresis method using serum from myself and from two of my graduate
student friends at the University of Toronto, Gordon H. Dixon and George
E. Connell, whom I co-opted to give blood. (Left panel, Figure 2) By the end
of October, 1954, I was about ready to publish, when for the first time I ran a
sample from a female, Beth Wade (B.W., right panel, Figure 2).




Figure 2.

My notebook entry on that day (“Most odd – many extra components”) fails
to record that I thought I’d found a new way of telling males from females!
Indeed I called one type M, and the other type F, and found this designation

210


to be correct for several male-female comparisons over the next week or so.
But, after a hilarious day when one pair of individuals had the M versus F
electrophoretic patterns reversed, the gender distinction proved to be incor-
rect. In its place, I thought it likely that the differences had a genetic basis.
So, I contacted Norma Ford Walker, at the Hospital for Sick Children in
Toronto. She was a remarkable lady, “one of the founding members of the in-
stitutions of human and medical genetics in North America” (Miller, 2002).
And together we showed that the differences in the electrophoretic patterns
of individuals were determined by common and completely harmless varia-
tions in the gene (Hp) controlling haptoglobin – the chief hemoglobin bind-
ing protein in plasma (Smithies and Walker, 1955; 1956).
   We identified three common phenotypes (and genotypes): Hp1-1, (Hp1/
Hp1), Hp2-1 (Hp2/Hp1) and Hp2-2 (Hp2/Hp2). (Left panel, Figure 3).




Figure 3.

This finding opened the next chapter in the book of my scientific life – an
OPPORTUNITY to study the genetic differences in proteins, starting with the
haptoglobins. This I undertook in collaboration with my ex-graduate student
friends, Gordon Dixon and George Connell, who had by then come back to
the University of Toronto as junior faculty members.
   For many years I have advocated and practiced “Saturday morning” experi-
ments, of which you have already had a sample. These experiments have the
advantage of not needing to be completely rational, and can be carried out
without weighing chemicals, and so forth. [“But, students, not without proper
lab-book notes.”] And I carried out many of these in trying to simplify the com-
plex electrophoretic patterns associated with the products of the Hp2 gene.
One of them included the use of phenol. This was short-lived because phenol
dissolved my apparatus! Reducing the protein with beta mercaptoethanol
(BME) in the presence of urea, following a suggestion from Gordon, proved
to be the key. But not without another hilarious incident that followed my
accidental breakage of a bottle of BME over my shoes. I put them on the win-
dowsill for a while. But I didn’t have many pairs of shoes, and so I soon began
to wear them again. Several days later, during a visit for other reasons to the
local police station, I heard two old ladies whispering together. One asked
the other, “Do you smell it?” Her friend responded, “Yes. Do you think it’s a
body?” My shoes went outside on the windowsill for a while longer.
   After learning how to separate haptoglobin into its subunits (alpha and
beta), we found that its genetics were more complicated than Norma Ford

                                                                             211


Walker and I had thought. Thus when George began purifying haptoglobin
from single bottles of donated plasma we found (Right panel, Figure 3) that
there are three common haptoglobin alleles (Hp1F, Hp1S and Hp2), not two
(published later in Connell et al., 1962). We also noted that the Hp2 gene,
the one which is associated with the complex protein patterns, appeared to
produce twice as much alpha subunit as the other two genes (HpIF and HpIS).
And there were other findings that made us think that the Hp2 gene was
more complicated than the Hp1F and Hp1S genes. For example, when Gordon
compared the peptide maps of the hpIFA, hp1SA and hp2A haptoglobin
subunits, the results were very puzzling, and we had great difficulty in believ-
ing them --- hp2A appeared to contain all the peptides present in hpIFA and
hp1SA, plus an extra one. Then, during a get together in Toronto in 1961, I
remember saying to Gordon and George, “Let’s believe our own data.” And I
suddenly realized that the Hp2 gene was probably the product of some sort of
recombinational event between the HpIF and HpIS genes that had generated a
partially duplicated fusion gene. The Hp2 gene would consequently produce
a larger protein having the same peptides as a mixture of hpIFA and hp1SA
together with a novel junction peptide, “J”, not present in either hpIFA or
hp1SA. (Left panel, Figure 4). We had become the first people to detect
non-homologous recombination at the level of a gene! We called it “non-
homologous”, because the recombination between the Hp1F and Hp1S genes
was within regions that are unrelated in sequence.




Figure 4.

We decided to present our data and our partial gene duplication hypothesis
at the 1961 Second International Conference of Human Genetics in Rome.
We also designed an experimental test that George was going to do before we
each gave our part of the story at the conference. He would use the ultracen-
trifuge to determine the sedimentation coefficients of the alpha subunits with
the expectation that the hp2A subunit, which our hypothesis said was larger
than hp1FA and hp1SA, would sediment more rapidly. We met in Rome on
the evening before our talks to review George’s results, and he broke the bad
news – the sedimentation coefficients of the three hpA subunits did not dif-
fer. What to do? Well, we decided, despite this result, to go ahead with our

212


planned talks, with the understanding that in my part of the presentation I
would describe our hypothesis and the experimental test of it that we had
carried out. Then I would say “We don’t believe the result, and I’ll go home and
invent a new method for determining molecular sizes.” The next two pages
in my notebooks (Figure 5) show the implementation of that plan (Smithies,
1962). [“Notice, students, that you shouldn’t always believe your results!”]




Figure 5.

The new method showed that hp2A was bigger than hpIFA and hpISA.
(Later, when George got rid of aggregation by adding urea, the ultracentri-
fuge gave the same result.) Together we published our conclusion that the
Hp2 gene was a partial gene duplication resulting from a non-homologous
crossing-over event between the HpIF and HpIS genes in a heterozygous indi-
vidual, HpIF / HpIS. (Smithies et al., 1962).
   The next part of this chapter in my science concerns the clear distinction
between the randomness of non-homologous recombination and the predict-
ability of homologous recombination. When I told Professor James H. (“Jim”)
Crow, Chairman of Genetics at the University of Wisconsin, about our results,
he referred me to some beautiful classical work involving the genes control-
ling the development of the eye of the fruit fly, Drosophilia. In succession over
a period of over 20 years, Tice (1914), Zeleny (1919), Sturtevant (1925) and
Bridges (1936) provided evidence that a unique, non-homologous recombina-
tional event, which occurred only once, had generated a duplication on the
X chromosome of the fruit fly that changed the shape of the eye. They also
showed that this duplication enabled unequal but homologous recombina-
tional events that occasionally gave rise to a triplication or to a return to the
unduplicated chromosome. We extrapolated this result to the haptoglobin
genes, and expected that the same type of event would occur with them –
namely that unequal but homologous recombination within the duplicated

                                                                             213


region of the already larger Hp2 gene would likewise lead repeatedly to a
still larger triplicated gene (Right panel, Figure 4). And we found this larger
gene as an uncommon variant (Hp3, but historically called Hp2J) that had
arisen independently in all parts of the world where the Hp2 gene was already
in the population. This was my first real understanding of the fundamental
difference between the unpredictable nature of non-homologous recombi-
nation and the predictability of homologous recombination.
    Later, in the late 1970s, I spent a sabbatical period in Fred Blattner’s labo-
ratory in the same building as my own laboratory, and learned how to work
with DNA and with bacterial and bacteriophage mutants (and, as a concur-
rent sabbatical activity, learned to fly!). Then, when Fred’s Charon bacterio-
phages were judged to be safe enough for use in cloning human genes, our
groups collaborated in isolating and characterizing the two closely related
genes that code for the human fetal globins, Gγ and Aγ (Blattner et al., 1978;
Smithies et al., 1978). Subsequently, when we sequenced these two genes,
we found clear evidence that DNA had been exchanged between them as
a result of another type of homologous recombination, “gene conversion”.
(Slightom et al., 1980). So, homologous recombination was very much a part
of my scientific gestalt. And, not surprisingly, having worked with globin
genes, I kept thinking that it ought to be possible to use DNA coding for
the normal human B globin gene, which was now readily available, to correct
the mutant human B globin gene that leads to sickle cell anemia, the most
frequent disease caused by a single gene in people of African descent. But
no one had demonstrated that such an event (now called “gene targeting”)
was possible with a genome as large as that of humans and other mammals,
although it was known to occur in yeast (Hinnen et al., 1978; Szostak and Wu,
1979) with a genome of less than one hundredth the size.
    Then in 1982, while teaching a graduate course in molecular genetics at
the University of Wisconsin, I came across a beautiful paper that catalyzed
me to start writing the next chapter in my book of science – “PLANNING” to
use homologous recombination to correct a mutant gene in the human ge-
nome. The catalytic paper was published in Nature on the first of April, 1982
(Goldfarb et al., 1982). In this paper, the investigators described an elegant
gene-rescue procedure to isolate a transforming gene from human T24 blad-
der carcinoma cells. This gene-rescue procedure depended on using mutant
lambda bacteriophages that had a lethal amber chain-termination mutation
which could be suppressed if the bacteriophages picked up a copy of supF (a
mutant tRNA gene able to suppress amber chain-termination mutations).
The amber mutant bacteriophages would not grow otherwise. The proce-
dure was complicated, and I had to study the paper carefully in order to use
it in teaching. This effort had, however, an unanticipated benefit. During the
next 3 weeks I realized that I could use a modified form of Goldfarb’s gene-
rescue procedure in an assay to determine whether it was possible to place
“corrective DNA in the right place” in the human genome.




214


Figure 6.

On April 22nd, 1982, on page 13 of my γ notebook (Figure 6.), I summarized
my idea under the heading “Assay for gene placement” (now called “gene
targeting”). I proposed to make a DNA construct that included a large frag-
ment of DNA covering the human beta-type globin genes, together with
the supF gene and the thymidine kinase gene, TK. I would then introduce
this DNA into human cells that were TK-, select for transformants that had
become TK+, and then use gene rescue to look for a recombinant fragment in
which the supF gene was now next to the B globin gene. This would prove
that the incoming DNA had been inserted into the correct place. I was con-
fident that I could detect gene targeting, even if it was extremely rare, because
I had three levels of selection: selection in the eukaryotic TK- human cells

                                                                             215


of transformants that had picked up the TK gene and so could grow in a
HAT- containing medium; selection in the prokaryotic E.coli cells of mutant
bacteriophages that could grow because they had picked up DNA fragments
containing the supF gene; and selection by autoradiography of bacteriophag-
es that also had B globin sequences. Only homologous recombination could
generate the diagnostic recombinant fragment containing both the supF gene
from the incoming DNA and the B globin gene from the target locus.
   At that time DNA sequencers and DNA synthesizers were not yet available,
so making the large targeting construct was difficult, and I had to clone it as
a cosmid, which I called Cosos 17. Making this cosmid took me 7 months.
Some idea of the complexity of this task is apparent from the next notebook
pages that I show but will not attempt to explain (Figure 7.).




Figure 7.

By the end of 1982, I had sent Cosos 17 to my collaborator Raju Kucherlapati
at the University of Illinois. He was to make a calcium phosphate precipitate
with this DNA for transfection into another human bladder carcinoma cell
line, EJ. Meanwhile, I began work on what turned out to be a scientifically
dangerous experiment: I carried out a plasmid by plasmid recombination
experiment to test whether the gene-rescue assay would work. The tester
plasmid was $B17, a small precursor of Cosos 17. The mock target contained
the human B globin gene. The good news was that both the recombination
and the bacteriophage gene-rescue assay worked (Smithies et al., 1984). The
unforeseen bad news was that bacteriophages containing the diagnostic re-
combinant fragment were now present in the lab.
   In May of 1983, Raju sent back to us the first DNA sample, RK41, from a
gene-targeting experiment with Cosos 17 and the human EJ bladder carci-
noma cells. On June 23rd (my 58th birthday), I started the bacteriophage assay

216


phase of this first real test of the overall scheme. 288 bacteriophages grew; 104
(34%) contained some B globin sequences; but, birthday or not, none hybrid-
ized to the critical B globin IVS2 probe! (Figure 8). So this first real experiment
failed to provide any evidence that homologous recombination had occurred.




Figure 8.


Over a period of almost a year, my lab and Raju’s lab continued experiments
with the EJ cells, but without success. These negative results led my graduate
student Karen Lyons to suggest that the failure might be because the drug-
resistance gene, NeoR, which we were now using instead of TK, might not be
transcribed when incorporated into the B globin locus of a bladder-related
cell that does not express B globin. [“Students, you should keep going when things
don’t work; but you should also think carefully about what might be wrong.”] Two
alternatives were available. We could retain the drug selection, but use cells
that expressed human globin; or we could continue to use the EJ bladder carci-
noma cells but without using drug selection. One of our earlier collaborators,
Art Skoultchi, gave us a cell line which he had made that was suitable for
the first type of experiment. It was a mouse-human hybrid erythroleukemia
cell line (which we called Hu11) that carried a human chromosome 11 and
expressed human B globin (Zavodny et al., 1983). Unfortunately the eryth-
roleukemia cells grew in suspension, and could only be transformed by a
newly devised procedure – electroporation (Potter et al., 1984) – and no elec-
troporator was then commercially available. So I spent the next few months
designing and testing a homemade apparatus, which was constructed inside
a baby bathtub from part of a plastic test tube rack and electronic parts from
the local Radio Shack store. The final version of the apparatus, illustrated
in schematic and real form in Figure 9, does not look impressive -- but it
worked, and was subsequently used for all the definitive experiments.

                                                                               217


Figure 9.


[“Students: never make a complex piece of apparatus that can be bought in order to
save money; but by all means make it to save the time that you will have to wait before
some manufacturer makes it.”]




Figure 10.

Meanwhile Raju did an experiment of the second type, using the EJ bladder
carcinoma cells without drug selection. This experiment also used a different
targeting construct, $B117, illustrated in Figure 10. (Smithies et al., 1984).
$B117 was the recombination tester plasmid $B17 which I had modified so
that it could be cut (with Bst X I) in the region of homology. This type of cut,
we had already shown, increases the frequency of homologous recombina-
tion in mammalian cells, as it does in yeast (Kucherlapati et al., 1984). Raju

218


treated the bladder carcinoma cells with BstX I-digested $B117, grew them
up without any drug selection, and then sent us DNA from the cells. My tech-
nician, Mike Koralewski tested this DNA with the bacteriophage assay in late
August, 1984. He found one IVS2-positive bacteriophage, which I purified
and showed had the hoped-for recombinant DNA fragment with supF next to
B globin IVS2. This was good news.
   But we began to have worries. One worry was that this single bacteriophage
could have been a contaminant from our recombination tester experiment.
(We had had a contamination problem in some earlier gene cloning ex-
periments.) An even more serious worry was that the recombinant fragment
present in the bacteriophage might have been formed by recombination in
the bacterial cells used in the gene rescue assay, rather than in the mammalian
cells used for the transformation. We were discouraged!
   Fortunately, however, I had recently bought an airplane, and had flown
it to Florida for a short sailing vacation with my pilot friends. This vacation
re-energized me sufficiently that I could face starting the $B117 experiments
again -- with two important changes. First, my postdoctoral fellow, Ron Gregg,
who had been trying unsuccessfully to inactivate the Hprt gene in human fi-
broblasts, would electroporate BstX I-digested $B117 into the Hu11 cells that
express the human B globin gene. Second, after Ron had isolated DNA from
drug resistant transfectants, I would digest it with XbaI and size separate the
restriction enzyme products into two fractions. One fraction would cover the
size range 5.5 – 8.5 kb, and another would cover the range 8.5 – 16.5 kb. This
fractionation had two purposes. It would reduce the amount of DNA to be
packaged into bacteriophages; and, more importantly, it would separate XbaI
fragments that were 7.7 kb long (the size of the XbaI recombinant fragment)
from any fragments that were 11 kb long (the size of the XbaI fragment from
the unaltered target locus). If the recombinant fragment was already present
in the DNA from the Hu11 cells before the DNA had been exposed to bacteria,
the 5.5 – 8.5 kb DNA fraction would give IVS-2 positive bacteriophages. If
the recombinant fragment was the result of a recombinational event occur-
ring in the bacteria, the 8.5 – 16.5 kb DNA fraction would give IVS-2 positive
bacteriophages. In early 1985, this fractionation experiment was completed
using size fractionated DNA from a flask containing ~ 1000 drug-resistant
colonies. Two IVS-2 positive phages were obtained with the 5.5 – 8.5 kb frac-
tion. (Upper panel Figure 11) Now we believed our results.




                                                                           219


Figure 11.

It took three more months for me to iron out various problems with the gene
rescue assay, and for Ron Gregg to generate pools of individually cloned Hu11
transformants. But by April we had identified a pool of about 300 cloned
Hu11 transformants that gave three IVS-2 positive phages. And, in May, DNA
from 30 sub-cloned Hu11 transformants from the 300 pool gave us eight IVS-2
positive phages (Lower panel Figure 11.). This meant that at least one of the
30 subclones was correctly targeted, and we could now use a direct test for
recombination (a Southern blot of DNA from each colony) in place of the
indirect bacteriophage assay.

220


  On May 18th, 1985 [“Saturday, yet again!”], I Southern-blotted Ron’s electro-
phoresis gel of DNA from 11 of these 30 colonies (Figure 12). On May 20th, I
noted on page 134 of my K notebook that subclone “#20 is it!” -- 3 years and 1
month and 7 notebooks after the original idea. In September of 1985, the pa-
per (Smithies et al., 1985) which I imagine the Nobel Committee considered
my most important was published -- after I was 60!




Figure 12.


I have already referred to all who contributed to this paper except one –
Sallie Boggs. She was a visiting professor from the University of Pittsburgh.
She chose, as her part in the work, to ensure that we had a “back-up” to the
bacteriophage assay, in case it did not succeed. To implement this, she car-
ried out Southern blots of DNA from 243 individual Hu11 transformants
without ever using the phage gene-rescue assay. Although the phage assay,
in the end, led to a correctly targeted colony before Sallie found a positive
transformant, her work established that the electroporator we had made
could introduce single copies of DNA into the cell genome without any other
detectable changes in about 80% of transformants (Boggs et al., 1986).
   At this point, it was clear that gene targeting was impractical for any near-
term use in the gene therapy that I had initially hoped. The frequency of
targeting was too low. The bacteriophage assay we had used to detect targeting
was desperate (indeed nobody, including me, ever used the assay again). But
these experiments had told us that gene targeting was possible. We now knew
that we could introduce DNA into a chosen site and alter a target gene in a pre-
planned way. So, what to do? Well the first thing was to find a simpler system
in which to improve the procedure. And towards this end several investigators
in the field independently began experiments with genes that had a directly
observable phenotype. Ron Gregg in our group chose the Hprt gene, which

                                                                            221


makes cells resistant to HAT selection when it is normal, and makes them resis-
tant to 6-thioguanine when it is disabled; Mario Capecchi also chose the Hprt
gene; Raju Kucherlapati chose the TK gene. But success was slow in coming.
   Then I heard about Martin Evans’ work in isolating what we now call em-
bryonic stem (ES) cells and using them to generate mice, and I immediately
began to think about using gene targeting in these cells to modify genes in
the mouse. Since ES cells grow rapidly and can be cloned from single cells,
a low frequency of gene targeting would not be an issue. We could therefore
modify a gene in the ES cells, and use the targeted cells to make animal
models of human genetic diseases for study and for testing therapeutic pro-
cedures. As a step towards this end, in November 1985, Martin personally
brought some of his cells to our lab (Figure 13). [“Students: Don’t be shy about
asking other scientists for reagents or help!”]




Figure 13.


222


Martin also put us in touch with Tom Doetschman who had experience with
ES cells, which need to be handled correctly if they are to be capable of gen-
erating mice. In December of 1987, we published our first use of gene target-
ing in ES cells -- to correct a mutation in the Hprt gene of E14TG2a ES cells
that had been isolated by Hooper et al. (1987). The DNA construct, made
by Nobuyo Maeda, worked the first time that Tom used it! The big colonies
resulting from gene-corrected cells were easy to distinguish from the tiny
residues left from cells in which the mutant gene had not been corrected.
(Figure 14).




Figure 14.


Mario Capecchi independently contacted Martin Evans for help with ES
cells within weeks of our contacting him. And his group’s paper, describing a
knock out of the normal Hprt gene in ES cells (Thomas and Capecchi, 1987),
and ours describing correction of a mutant form of the gene (Doetschman et
al., 1987), were also within weeks of each other. Both had used drug-selection
procedures to isolate the targeted cells, based on the enzymatic activity of
HPRT.
   However, a procedure was needed for targeting genes that did not have
a directly selectable product. A big help would be to have a simplified
recombinant-fragment assay. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) described
by Kary Mullis at Cold Spring Harbor in 1986 (Mullis et al., 1986) looked to
be eminently suitable for this purpose (Left panel, Figure 15), and I began to
work on this idea a few months after hearing Kary talk. Again, no suitable ap-
paratus was commercially available. So Hyung-Suk Kim and I made our own
PCR machine, which I still use (Right panel Figure 15).

                                                                          223


Figure 15.


Time does not permit me to describe many of the animal models that we have
since made using gene targeting in ES cells, with the help of our PCR meth-
od of detecting the diagnostic recombinant fragment (Kim and Smithies,
1988), together with the powerful positive-negative selection method devised
by Mario’s group in 1988, as a “general approach for producing mice of any
desired genotype” (Mansour et al., 1988). But I can highlight some of them.
   Bev Koller, as a post doctoral fellow in my laboratory, was the first to make
a mouse model of cystic fibrosis, the most common single gene defect in
Caucasians. (Figure 16) (Koller et al., 1991; Snouwaert et al., 1992).




Figure 16.




224


  Nobuyo Maeda and her colleagues made a mouse model of atherosclerosis
(Zhang et al., 1992) that became a best-seller at Jackson Laboratories; it is
an inspiring model of this genetically complex human disease that causes
around 30% of deaths in advanced societies. (Figure 17).




Figure 17.


John Krege led me into a very productive investigation of genetic factors im-
portant in another very common disease – high blood pressure (Krege et al.,
1997; Smithies, 2005). For this work we used a computerized blood pressure
measuring apparatus made by John Rogers, who was at that time one of my
glider pilot students (Krege et al., 1995). I chose him to make the new ma-
chine (Figure 18) because he had told me about a computerized device that
he had designed and built to detect the stones left in pitted cherries, which
cause lost teeth in the eaters and lawsuits against the suppliers!




                                                                         225


Figure 18.

Marshall Edgell helped me to use a different sort of mouse in computer sim-
ulations that explored how genetic factors influence blood pressure (Figure
19) (Smithies et al., 2000).




Figure 19.


  Devising these and other simulations has helped me to uncover unexpect-
ed relationships and has stimulated ideas that I might not have had without

226


this work. In saying this, I stress that the greatest value of these relatively
simple computer simulations does not stem from their ability to replicate
experimental data, or even make predictions; rather it comes from forcing
one to clarify which elements in a complex system are most critical, and how
these elements integrate into a logically consistent whole. [“Students, try a
simulation yourself; suitable generic programs for model building are available (for
example Stella®) that you can use without being a computer expert”.]
   Before closing, I want to mention a previous visit to the Karolinska Institutet
on September 6th, 2002. During that visit, I heard Dr. Karl Tryggvason, who
is here today, give a fascinating talk on how the kidney separates large
molecules from small molecules. But I didn’t quite agree with him. And so
afterwards, in the corridor, I asked him “Why doesn’t it clog?” His response
was “That’s a good question!” which is the one most of us give when we
don’t have an answer. Suddenly I thought that I already knew the answer, as
a result of having recently written a scientific memoir of my undergraduate
tutor, thesis advisor, and lifelong friend, A. G. (“Sandy”) Ogston (Smithies,
1999). In one of his papers, Sandy had derived an elegantly simple equation
[f = e π(R+r)2n ] that very accurately describes the behavior in gels of molecules
of different sizes (Ogston, 1958). So, on my return to North Carolina, I wrote
a brief communication on the topic and sent it to Nature (Figure 20).




Figure 20.

It was rejected, I’m glad to say, because this caused me to write a better paper
that described not only my hypothesis, but also a computer simulation of this
aspect of kidney function [“Another simulation, students!”], and some testable
predictions based on these ideas (Smithies, 2003). My personal scientific
efforts are currently directed towards testing the predictions. And the last
pages that I turn for you (Figure 21) illustrate the sequencing of a DNA con-
struct made to implement this work.

                                                                                227


Figure 21.


[“At 82 it is still possible to work at the weekends!”]

         What’s on the next page?

         I don’t know!!

         But that’s what makes science exciting!!!

  Finally, in closing, I emphasize the importance of choosing a branch of sci-
ence that makes your everyday work enjoyable, as mine has been. [“Students:
when it was not, I changed it!”] I also emphasize the importance for a scientist
to have other interests for diversion (mine is still flying) when science is
being fickle. A happy relationship (mine is with my wife Nobuyo Maeda)
can also be a source of comfort at such times – and can provide a captive
audience with whom to share science’s much less frequent times of bliss.
Scientific happiness is in sharing ideas and the daily excitement of new re-
sults with students, colleagues and other scientists. My adviser, Sandy Ogston,
had it right when he summarized his view of our discipline. His words are the
theme of my visit to Sweden. They capture better than I can what it means to
spend a life doing science.
  “For science is more than the search for truth, more than a challenging
game, more than a profession. It is a life that a diversity of people lead to-
gether, in the closest proximity, a school for social living. We are members
one of another.”

A. G. Ogston
Australian Biochemical Society Annual Lecture
August 1970, Search, Vol. 1, No. 2, 60-63.

228


REFERENCES
Blattner, F. R., Blechl, A. E., Denniston-Thompson, K., Faber, H. E., Richards, J. E.,
    Slightom, J. L., Tucker, P. W. and Smithies, O. (1978) Cloning human fetal gamma
    globin and mouse alpha-type globin DNA: preparation and screening of shotgun col-
    lections. Science. 202, 1279-1284.
Boggs, S. S., Gregg, R. G., Borenstein, N., and Smithies, O. (1986). Efficient transforma-
    tion and frequent single-site, single-copy insertion of DNA can be obtained in mouse
    erythroleukemia cells transformed by electroporation. Experimental Hematology 14,
    988-994.
Bridges, C. B. (1936). The bar “gene” a duplication. Science 83, 210-211.
Connell, G. E., Dixon, G. H., and Smithies, O. (1962). Subdivision of the three common
    haptoglobin types based on 'hidden' differences. Nature 193, 505-506.
Doetschman, T., Gregg, R. G., Maeda, N., Hooper, M. L., Melton, D. W., Thompson, S.,
    and Smithies, O. (1987). Targetted correction of a mutant HPRT gene in mouse em-
    bryonic stem cells. Nature 330, 576-578.
Goldfarb, M., Shimizu, K., Perucho, M. and Wigler, M. (1982) Isolation and preliminary
    characterization of a human transforming gene from T24 bladder carcinoma cells.
    Nature. 296, 404-409.
Hinnen, A., Hicks, J. B. and Flink, G. R. (1978). Transformation of yest. Proceedings of the
    National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 75, 1929-1933.
Hooper, M., Hardy, K., Handyside, A., Hunter, S., and Monk, M. (1987). HPRT-deficient
    (Lesch-Nyhan) mouse embryos derived from germline colonization by cultured cells.
    Nature 326, 292-295.
Kim, H. S., and Smithies, O. (1988). Recombinant fragment assay for gene targetting
    based on the polymerase chain reaction. Nucleic Acids Research 16, 8887-8903.
Koller, B. H., Kim, H. S., Latour, A. M., Brigman, K., Boucher, R. C., Jr., Scambler, P.,
    Wainwright, B., and Smithies, O. (1991). Toward an animal model of cystic fibrosis: tar-
    geted interruption of exon 10 of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene in
    embryonic stem cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
    States of America 88, 10730-10734.
Krege, J. H., Hodgin, J. B., Hagaman, J. R., and Smithies, O. (1995). A noninvasive com-
    puterized tail-cuff system for measuring blood pressure in mice. Hypertension 25,
    1111-1115.
Krege, J. H., Kim, H. S., Moyer, J. S., Jennette, J. C., Peng, L., Hiller, S. K., and Smithies, O.
    (1997). Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene mutations, blood pressures, and cardio-
    vascular homeostasis. Hypertension 29, 150-157.
 Kucherlapati, R. S., Eves, E. M., Song, K. Y., Morse, B. S. and Smithies, O. (1984)
    Homologous recombination between plasmids in mammalian cells can be enhanced
    by treatment of input DNA. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
    United States of America. 81, 3153-3157.
Kunkel, H. G., and Slater, R. J. (1952). Zone electrophoresis in a starch supporting me-
    dium. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine Society for
    Experimental Biology and Medicine, New York, NY 80, 42-44.
Mansour, S. L., Thomas, K. R., and Capecchi, M. R. (1988). Disruption of the proto-
    oncogene int-2 in mouse embryo-derived stem cells: a general strategy for targeting
    mutations to non-selectable genes. Nature 336, 348-352.
Miller, F. (2002). The importance of being marginal: Norma Ford Walker and a Canadian
    school of medical genetics. American Journal of Medical Genetics 115, 102-110.
Mullis, K., Faloona, F., Scharf, S., Saiki, R., Horn, G., and Erlich, H. (1986). Specific en-
    zymatic amplification of DNA in vitro: the polymerase chain reaction. Cold Spring
    Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 51 Pt 1, 263-273.
Ogston, A. G. (1958). The space in a uniform random suspension of fibres Trans. Faraday
    Soc. 54, 1754-1757.
Ogston, A. G. (1970). An open-ended tale. Search, 1, (2), 60-63.


                                                                                             229


Potter, H., Weir, L., and Leder, P. (1984). Enhancer-dependent expression of human kappa
    immunoglobulin genes introduced into mouse pre-B lymphocytes by electroporation.
    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 81,
    7161-7165.
Slightom, J. L., Blechl, A. E. and Smithies, O. (1980) Human fetal G gamma- and A gam-
    ma-globin genes: complete nucleotide sequences suggest that DNA can be exchanged
    between these duplicated genes. Cell. 21, 627-638.
Smithies, O. (1955). Zone electrophoresis in starch gels: group variations in the serum
    proteins of normal human adults. The Biochemical Journal. 61, 629-641.
Smithies, O. (1962). Molecular size and starch-gel electrophoresis. Archives of biochemis-
    try and biophysics. Suppl 1, 125-131.
Smithies, O. (1999). Alexander George Ogston: 30 January 1911-29 June 1996.
    Biographical memoirs of fellows of the Royal Society. 45, 351-364.
Smithies, O. (2003). Why the kidney glomerulus does not clog: a gel permeation/diffusion
    hypothesis of renal function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
    United States of America 100, 4108-4113.
Smithies, O. (2005). Many little things: one geneticist's view of complex diseases. Nat. Rev.
    Genet. 6, 419-425.
Smithies, O., and Walker, N. F. (1955). Genetic control of some serum proteins in normal
    humans. Nature 176, 1265-1266.
Smithies, O., and Walker, N. F. (1956). Notation for serum-protein groups and the genes
    controlling their inheritance. Nature 178, 694-695.
Smithies, O., Connell, G. E., and Dixon, G. H. (1962). Chromosomal rearrangements and
    the evolution of haptoglobin genes. Nature 196, 232-236.
Smithies, O., Blechl, A. E., Denniston-Thompson, K., Newell, N., Richards, J. E., Slightom,
    J. L., Tucker, P. W. and Blattner, F. R. (1978). Cloning human fetal gamma globin and
    mouse alpha-type globin DNA: characterization and partial sequencing. Science. 202,
    1284-1289.
Smithies, O., Koralewski, M. A., Song, K. Y., and Kucherlapati, R. S. (1984). Homologous
    recombination with DNA introduced into mammalian cells. Cold Spring Harbor sym-
    posia on quantitative biology 49, 161-170.
Smithies, O., Gregg, R. G., Boggs, S. S., Koralewski, M. A., and Kucherlapati, R. S. (1985).
    Insertion of DNA sequences into the human chromosomal beta-globin locus by homo-
    logous recombination. Nature 317, 230-234.
Smithies, O., Kim, H. S., Takahashi, N., and Edgell, M. H. (2000). Importance of quantitative
    genetic variations in the etiology of hypertension. Kidney international 58, 2265-2280.
Snouwaert, J. N., Brigman, K. K., Latour, A. M., Malouf, N. N., Boucher, R. C., Smithies, O.,
    and Koller, B. H. (1992). An animal model for cystic fibrosis made by gene targeting.
    Science 257, 1083-1088.
Sturtevant, A. H. (1925). The effects of unequal crossing over at the bar locus in Drosophila.
    Genetics 10, 117-147.
Szostak, J. W. and Wu, R. (1979). Insertion of a genetic marker into the ribosomal DNA of
    yeast. Plasmid. 2, 536-554.
Thomas, K. R., and Capecchi, M. R. (1987). Site-directed mutagenesis by gene targeting in
    mouse embryo-derived stem cells. Cell 51, 503-512.
Tice, S. C. (1914). A new sex-limited character in Drosophila. Biol. Bull. 26, 221-230.
Zavodny, P. J., Roginski, R. S., and Skoultchi, A. I. (1983). Regulated expression of hu-
    man globin genes and flanking DNA in mouse erythroleukemia--human cell hybrids.
    Progress in clinical and biological research 134, 53-62.
Zeleny, C. (1919). A change in the bar gene of Drosophila involving further decrease in
    facet number and increase in dominance. Jour. Gen. Physiol. 2, 69-71.
Zhang, S. H., Reddick, R. L., Piedrahita, J. A., and Maeda, N. (1992). Spontaneous hyper-
    cholesterolemia and arterial lesions in mice lacking apolipoprotein E. Science 258,
    468-471.
Portrait photo of Olivier Smithies by photographer Ulla Montan.


230
