                          O   TTO   F . ME Y E R H O F


                 Energy conversions in muscle
                       Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1923



This highest scientific honour, in the form of the Nobel Prize, which has
been awarded to me for my investigations into the conversions of energy in
muscle, gives me the pleasant duty of reporting to you on this problem and
upon the results which my work has achieved. It is especially gratifying to
me that this recognition is in part shared with me by my distinguished
friend, the previous speaker, Professor A.V. Hill from London, with whom
my work has had so many close points of contact and with whom, in spite
of the present political unrest, I have worked in cooperation towards the
mutual goal of explaining the process of muscle contraction.
    The fact that chemical processes must be involved as a source of energy
for muscle performance was already accepted as a necessary deduction from
their own thesis by the discoverers of the law of the conservation of energy.
In fact, the young Helmholtz had already made certain observations con-
cerning the conversion of matter in muscles during activity which in them-
selves were correct but, on account of their incompleteness and the lack
of knowledge concerning the chemical nature of the relevant substances,
served no useful purpose. The previous speaker has already told you about
the considerable progress achieved by the English scientists Fletcher and
Hopkins by their recognition of the fact that lactic acid formation in the
muscle is closely connected with the contraction process. These investiga-
tions were the first to throw light upon the highly paradoxical fact, already
established by the physiologist Hermann, that the muscle can perform a
considerable part of its external function in the complete absence of oxygen.
As, on the other hand, it was indisputable that in the last resort the energy for
muscle activity comes from the oxidation of nutriment, the connection
between activity and combustion clearly had to be an indirect one. In fact,
Fletcher and Hopkins observed that in the absence of oxygen in the muscle,
lactic acid appears, slowly in the relaxed state and rapidly in the active state,
and that this lactic acid disappears again in the presence of oxygen. Obvi-
 ously, then, oxygen is involved not while the muscle is active, but only when
 it is in the relaxed state, and this assumption has been supported by further


28                            1922 O.F.MEYERHOF

research on the part of Parnas and Verzar. In what relation the lactic acid
 stands to muscle performance, where it comes from and what becomes of it
 when it disappears in the presence of oxygen, was completely obscure. In
 fact, there were several different, irreconcilable interpretations current, all of
 which appeared nevertheless to be supported by experiment. It was at this
point that I started to work on the problem. A bright light in the midst of
this obscurity appeared when Professor Hill made the important discovery,
 about which he has just spoken to you, that the contraction heat of the mus-
cle occurs in two distinct phases of approximately the same extent - one
phase which is directly connected with the work and is the same in presence
or absence of oxygen, which he called the "initial heat"; and a second phase,
which basically only occurs in the presence of oxygen, and which he called
 "delayed heat" and quite rightly connected with the - disappearance of the
lactic acid. Apart from the pioneer work of Fletcher and Hopkins, it was
this discovery above all which, shining out like a beacon light through a
sea mist, made it possible for me to steer a safe course through the shallows.
   If we now observe an excised frog muscle operating under maximum
oxygen supply, chemical analysis will only prove that a certain quantity of
glycogen in the muscle disappears, whereas an exactly sufficient quantity
of oxygen necessary for its oxidation is assimilated, and the corresponding
amount of carbon dioxide is given off. The connection between these pro-
cesses can be more exactly analysed if the muscle is first allowed to work
under anaerobic conditions, and subsequently brought out into oxygen.
During the anaerobic phase, in fact, lactic acid accumulates in the muscle
approximately in proportion to the amount of work performed. At the
same time a corresponding quantity of glycogen disappears, while the
quantity of lower carbohydrates, particularly free glucose and the hexose-
phosphoric acid discovered in the muscle by Embden, is not noticeably al-
tered. In the second, oxidative, phase the lactic acid which has formed dis-
appears, while a specific quantity of extra oxygen is assimilated. In fact, the
disappearance of lactic acid during this period is in exact proportion to the
increased consumption of oxygen. However, the oxygen is only sufficient
to oxidize a fraction of the disappearing lactic acid; the remainder, which in
the case of complete fatigue is about three-quarters of the total lactic acid,
is quantitatively reconverted into glycogen. I must state already here that
this ratio of the lactic acid which disappears altogether to that burnt is not
always constant under all conditions, and from the energetic point of view
this is important, to which I must return later. To start with, however, we


                 ENERGY CONVERSIONS IN MUSCLE                                 29
will concern ourselves with this figure obtained under suitable conditions
of extreme anaerobic fatigue, and subsequent recuperation in oxygen. Of
four molecules of lactic acid which disappear, three are then converted back
into glycogen and one is oxidized. To be exact, we cannot even maintain
with certainty that the lactic acid itself is burnt. We find only an oxidized
carbohydrate-equivalent with the respiratory quotient 1. Whether this is
sugar or lactic acid we cannot be certain. I have, therefore, chosen the formu-
lation for the two phases which you can see on this board.




In the anaerobic, active phase the glycogen is broken down into lactic acid
via glucose and, I assume in agreement with Embden, by way of hexose-di-
phosphoric acid. On the board the decomposition of five sugar-equivalents
of glycogen is assumed, of which four are esterified with phosphoric acid
and form eight molecules of lactic acid.
   In the second, aerobic phase these eight molecules of lactic acid disappear,
while two of them, or alternatively, as we might equally well assume, one
molecule of sugar, are burnt. The importance of this strangely coupled re-
action can only be understood after a study of energetics. But before I turn
to this, it is important to stress that this activity metabolism in the muscle is
not a separate phenomenon, but is no more than an increase of the metab-
olism in the resting state. For even in the resting state the glycogen in an
isolated muscle in oxygen disappears directly by way of oxidation into car-
bon dioxide and water. If, however, we keep a resting muscle in nitrogen
for a considerable time, lactic acid is constantly accumulating in it during the


30                            1922 O.F.MEYERHOF

anaerobiosis. If we now compare this lactic acid accumulation with the quan-
tity of oxygen which the muscle would have assimilated in the same time
under aerobic conditions, we find that approximately three times the amount
of lactic acid has accumulated as could have been consumed by the oxygen
in the same amount of time. Here also, then, the lactic acid is not just a
simple intermediate product of the decomposition of the sugar. In fact, if we
bring the muscle back into the air after extended anaerobiosis, it will assimi-
late a certain quantity of extra oxygen, approximately equivalent to the
amount previously lost. At the same time, the lactic acid disappears once
again in such a way that most of it is reconverted into glycogen, whereas
only a fraction, or the corresponding quantity, of carbohydrate is consumed.
The process is, therefore, exactly the same as when the muscle is active, only
the accumulation of lactic acid progresses much more slowly. We can di-
rectly see from this the importance of muscle respiration in the resting state,
in that it maintains a labile condition of lactic acid production and removal,
which can be accelerated instantly on stimulation. Probably this explosive
release of lactic acid during contraction occurs, because stimulation suddenly
increases the permeability of membranes which have previously to a certain
extent acted as a barrier between the participants in the reaction. Respiration
in the muscle in the resting state can, therefore, be said to keep them in a state
of readiness for activity.
   We can establish that the lactic acid is directly associated with muscle
contraction by an exact comparison of the work performed under anaerobic
conditions with the formation of lactic acid. As the best expression of the
activity potential of muscle we may choose here, following Fick and Pro-
fessor Hill, the tension which the muscle develops on stimulation when pre-
vented from shortening, i.e. the so-called isometric contraction. If we allow
the muscle to go on working under anaerobic conditions until it is exhausted
it produces a certain quantity of lactic acid and develops a degree of tension
in proportion to this quantity. This total anaerobic work can be very con-
siderable - for instance, a frog muscle of 1 g in weight in N2 can produce 160
kg of tension in 1000 contractions.
   I found that there is a very simple reason why there is any limit at all to
this and why activity does not in fact continue until the available glycogen
is used up. It was thought earlier, and in particular by Fletcher and Hopkins
themselves, who were the first to become aware of the so-called fatigue-
maximum, that this was conditioned by the exhaustion of an immediate
preliminary stage of the lactic acid. This is, however, not the case - it stems


                  ENERGY CONVERSIONS IN MUSCLE                               31
rather from the accumulation of the acid in the muscle itself. If we remove
a large part of the acid from the muscle by placing it in a Ringer’s solution
particularly rich in bicarbonate, it produces before total exhaustion not only
very much more lactic acid, but also correspondingly more work. By the
addition of various buffer mixtures to the muscle it was proved that the
increase in performance due to this admixture corresponded almost exactly
to the percentage of lactic acid which escaped from the muscle into the sur-
rounding solution.
   The significance of these chemical reactions only becomes clear when we
consider the energetic conditions. In the anaerobic active phase lactic acid
is formed from glycogen, at the rate of 1 g lactic acid from 0.9 g glycogen,
since during the formation of every 180 g of lactic acid 18 g of water are
absorbed




The combustion heat of glycogen, according to Stohmann’s readings, is
4191 cal/g - that is, 3772 per 0.9 g. As these readings were made about thirty
years ago with still somewhat primitive instruments, a revised determina-
tion seemed desirable, especially as the American scientists Emery and Bene-
dict had found a rather higher value of 4227 cal/g. This new determination
was made at my suggestion in Germany by a pupil of Professor Roth in
Brunswick, and at the same time in Manchester by Mr. Slater. In the first
case Stohmann’s readings were completely confirmed, resulting in 4188 cal/g
or 3769 cal/0.9 g. Slater, however, using a differently produced glycogen,
obtained a very much higher value, i.e. in relation to the above glycogen
formula he obtained 3883 cal/0.9 g. I will come later to the reasons which
for the time being have caused me to regard the values of Stohmann and
Roth to be more accurate. The combustion heat of lactic acid I determined
anew, since the values given in the literature appeared unreliable, and I ob-
tained 3601 cal for dilute lactic acid, a value which was confirmed in Roth’s
Institute and which agreed also with the Americans Emery and Benedict.
If the chemical process during contraction turned out to be as one was only
recently tempted to imagine it-that is to say, if during activity lactic acid
is formed from glycogen and this is evenly consumed during relaxation-
then only the difference in combustion heat between 0.9 g of glycogen and
1 g of lactic acid - i.e. 170 cal - would be released by activity in the muscle.
On the other hand, the combustion of the lactic acid at 3601 cal would take


32                          I922 O.F.MEYERHOF

place in the oxidative recuperative period. Such a process, in which only 5%
of the heat released would occur in the contractive phase, would appear to
be extremely doubtful theoretically and would into the bargain contradict
the fact established by Professor Hill that heat quantities in the active and
recuperative phases are approximately the same. In fact, this consideration
was really the beginning of my preoccupation with the problem of muscle.
The process is actually quite different. It soon became evident to me from
a great number of determinations that during the formation in the muscle
of 1 g of lactic acid, not 170 cal but 380-390 cal were released, a figure which
was not very far removed from older, slightly less accurate, results which
Peters, a pupil of Professor Hill, had obtained. Before we discuss the reason
for this very big divergence of the contraction heat from the difference be-
tween the combustion heats, we must first calculate the energy balance of
the recovery phase. If, as is represented in the above equation and has on
average been proved by my experiments, of a total of 4 molecules of lactic
acid which disappear, one is burnt (or, which comes to the same thing, a
carbohydrate equivalent of it), then altogether, for 1 g of sugar taking part
in the reaction, or 0.9 g of glycogen, 3772/4 = 943 cal must be released. As
we have measured 3 85 cal in the active phase, the remainder - i.e. approx. 560
cal - must be expected during the recuperative phase. According to this, 40%
of the heat must occur in the active phase, 60% in the recovery phase. In
fact this was very well confirmed, at least with regard to the order of mag-
nitude, by measurement of the total heat production in the recovery phase
and comparison with the oxygen consumption. According to this: (1) the
increase in heat produced in the oxidative recuperative phase was approxi-
mately as great as, or only slightly greater than, the anaerobic heat of the
exhaustion state of the muscle; (2) this heat, reckoned according to oxygen
assimilation, was smaller than the corresponding carbohydrate consumption
which took place simultaneously. For every 1 C.C. of oxygen during carbo-
hydrate oxidation 5 cal should have appeared; but there were only 3.5 cal,
and altogether had vanished about the same amount of heat in the recovery
phase as had appeared in the anaerobic phase.
   We now find that this result agrees very well with Professor Hill’s find-
ings, about which he has just spoken to you: the heats of the active and the
recovery phases are equal. But, as he went on to establish, this result can
be confirmed even more exactly by the more accurate analysis of heat for-
mation which is made possible by the myothermic method developed by
Hill and Hartree, also by the study of the oxygen consumption in relation


                   ENERGY CONVERSIONS IN MUSCLE                                33
to the disappearance of lactic acid during recovery under various conditions.
The result of these experiments shows that the quotient

                         total disappearing lactic acid
                                lactic acid burnt

is not constant - it is greater in completely fresh muscles, and can in fact
 amount to as much as 5:1 - 6:1, and it is of approximately the same size in
live humans as in live frogs. In the case of humans this was proved indirectly
in Professor Hill’s laboratory. I myself obtained a similar result on the whole
frog by using the same direct methods as would have been used on the
isolated muscle.
   Such an increase in the quotient means, however, that a smaller part of
the heat occurs in the recovery phase. For if out of six molecules, for in-
stance, only one is burnt then there must arose from the conversion of 1 g
of sugar 3772/6 = 630 cal, of which 385 are in the fatigue phase, so that 245
must be in the recovery phase. In this case 60% must already be released
in the active phase, and only 40% in the recovery phase. The quotient ap-
pears to lie between these two amounts according to the degree of exhaus-
tion and the condition of the muscle - between 6:1 and 4:1; and in un-
favourable conditions it is even smaller. The muscular mechanism operates
so much the more economically the more lactic acid molecules can be trans-
formed back into glycogen through the oxidation of one of them. Thus
this figure represents the efficiency of the recovery process. It is an expression
of how much of the oxidative energy is used in endothermal processes for
the conversion of the material in the preliminary stages. In the case of the
above equation the efficiency would be 40% - under the more favourable
conditions of a completely fresh frog muscle or of a living animal it would
be 50-60%. Curiously enough, the ratio is smaller in the case of respiration
in rest, i.e. of 2-3 molecules lactic acid which disappear 1 is burnt. My more
recent experiments have, in fact, shown that many poisons, and also trau-
matic damages, experienced by the animal before death, will cause the ratio
to deteriorate still further. All these circumstances result in a squandering
of energy.
   There is a very important problem connected with the size of the anaer-
obic contraction heat itself, which, as we have seen, is in the region of 385
cal, whereas thermochemical data only give a difference in the combustion
heat of 170 cal for the conversion of glycogen into dilute lactic acid. How
does this difference arise? The following has been established: if the forma-


34                           1922 O.F.MEYERHOF

tion of heat and of lactic acid are compared, not in the working muscle, but
in crushed muscular tissue suspended in phosphate solution, we then obtain
 about 200 cal/g instead of 385 cal, and at the same time the lactic acid passes
into the phosphate solution. The heat of neutralization of lactic acid with
biphosphate is, however, 19 cal/g. Added to this is the heat of the cleavage of
glycogen into lactic acid, 170 cal, and these taken together amount to 190 cal,
which agrees, allowing a margin of error, with our measured value of 200 cal.
   Similarly, the heat even in an intact muscle can be reduced if a consider-
able amount of the lactic acid passes into the surrounding solution. This can
be brought about if lactic acid is allowed to form in a resting muscle sus-
pended in a carbonated Ringer’s solution. Half of the lactic acid can escape
into the surrounding solution, and the ratio will be 280 cal per g lactic acid
instead of 385 cal, and finally only 230 cal.
   This particular heat formation which lactic acid produces in the living
muscle is, however, bound up with the hydrogen ion. In fact, other acids
which we allow to penetrate from outside into the frog muscle cause con-
siderable heat production which is independent of lactic acid formation
within the muscle. In this way I observed that the penetration of valeric
acid into the muscle caused the release of up to 11,000 cal/mol of acid as-
similated by the muscle. Reckoned in terms of lactic acid this corresponds
to a heat production of 120 cal/g. This heat, as close analysis shows, is de-
pendent upon the reaction of the acid with the tissue protein. This tissue
protein acts as a buffer substance and keeps the reaction within the muscle
always more or less constant, even during heavy lactic acid production.
Even in the case of maximum exhaustion, when approx. 0.4% of lactic acid
is produced in the muscle, the index of the hydrogen-ion concentration
(pH) is only displaced from 7.5 to 6.8. With this buffer reaction there is a
characteristic heat formation - an inverse protein dissociation heat - which is
bound up with the deionization of the protein.
   These conditions are very clearly seen in relation to the amino acids,
which behave in principle in the same way as protein, which is in fact com-
posed of amino acids. If we start, for instance, with a solution of glycine
with the addition of caustic soda solution there will be in the solution, apart
from other substances, the salt sodium glycine, which we can regard as
being completely dissociated, and which will be abbreviated here as NaG.


                                                                            (1)


                  ENERGY CONVERSIONS IN MUSCLE                               35
If we now add hydrochloric acid or lactic acid or another not too weak acid,
then a reaction will take place which is shown here in Formula (1). Out of
the totally dissociated glycine-acid sodium there is formed the weak, non-
dissociated glycine acid, and in this reaction a positive heat of approx. 11,000
cal can be measured. This is nothing else than the inverse heat from the
electrolytic dissociation of the glycine. If a buffer solution is made of con-
centrated protein solution, free from basic salts, by the addition of caustic
soda solution at about pH 8, and if lactic acid is now added in such a quantity
that the H-ion concentration is barely altered, a corresponding reaction will
obviously take place, which is shown here in the following equation:


                                                                            (2)


Here we find an even greater heat production - with muscle proteinin the
presence of ammonium salt it will be 12,650 cal. This dissociation heat of
protein is the largest known dissociation heat of any acid. The reason for
this may be connected with the fact that the deionization of amino acids
and protein causes the production of internal ammonium salt, as shown in
the following diagram:




We can check this supposition by means of formaldehyde. Formaldehyde
causes the formation of a methylene compound from the amino acids with
stronger acid properties. At the same time as the addition of acids the very
high dissociation heat disappears almost completely,
   Prom the dissociation heat of 12,600 cal per equivalent can be calculated
a heat production of 140 cal per g lactic acid. As, however, the lactic acid in
the muscle to a certain reacts with phosphate and carbonate this figure
should be reduced a little. I have already shown that of the 385 cal formed
per 1 g of lactic acid in the anaerobic contraction phase 170 are due to the
splitting of the glycogen into dilute lactic acid. There remain 215 cal. Of
these, up to 140 can be explained by the dissociation heat of the protein.
There remain, over and above the margin of possible error, 70-80 cal for
which up till now we can only provide a hypothetical explanation. At first


36                          1922 O.F.MEYERHOF

sight three such explanations appear possible: (1) the combustion heat of the
glycogen may be higher than has been supposed; (2) secondary reactions
about which we as yet know nothing may take place; (3) the dissociation
heat of the protein may be greater in living muscle than in solution. The
first possibility seemed to have found strong support from Slater’s experi-
ments, according to which glycogen is supposed to have a combustion heat
100 cal greater than the value I have given it. However, I was able to prove
that this was unlikely, by bringing about a splitting of the glycogen into
maltose and dextrose by means of a diastatic ferment which engendered
combustion heats of 3 752 and 3 748 cal. To my surprise the heat of the cleav-
age of dissolved glycogen into dissolved maltose and dextrose was only
about 10 cal/g of glucose. But these values in fact agree approximately with
the glycogen combustion heat determined by Stohmann, as the solution
heat of dextrose amounts to minus 12.5 cal/g. For the conversion of 0.9 g
of glycogen into 1 g of solid dextrose the figure of 10 + 12.5 = 22.5 cal
was thus determined by experiment. From this the combustion heat of the
dissolved glycogen could be calculated as about 3770 cal per 0.9 g. That of
anhydrous glycogen is incidentally much higher, on account of a very con-
siderable hydration heat, but this need not concern us here, since the gly-
cogen in the muscle is in hydrated form. At the same time, there is a very
interesting conclusion to be drawn in connection with the result of these
readings. We have good reason to believe that the actual process of muscular
work does not begin with the splitting of the glycogen but with that of the
dextrose or the phosphoric acid hexose. The energy released by the conver-
sion of the glycogen into hexose is then lost to the activity process. Up till
now it has been possible to assume that more than 30 cal/g of sugar - that is
to say, no less than 8% of the total energy - was squandered in this way. It is
now apparent, however, that as a result of the negative solution heat of
glucose, the conversion of dissolved glycogen into dissolved dextrose only
requires approx. 10 cal - that is to say, barely 3% of the contraction heat.
It is possibly even lower in the case of the conversion into phosphoric acid
hexose. This result is in harmony with the splendid economy which is
shown in the reactions of the living organisms.
   Of the possibilities just mentioned for the explanation of the difference
of about 70 cal there now remain, therefore, only the two last. Up till now
there has been no reason to suppose that, side by side with the carbohydrate
metabolism, a fat or protein metabolism also plays a part in the contraction
mechanism, nor that inorganic compounds such as phosphoric acid undergo


                 ENERGY CONVERSIONS IN MUSCLE                                 37
permanent changes on account of anaerobic exhaustion. Therefore I incline
to the third of the above hypotheses, namely that protein in living muscle
has a higher dissociation heat than in solution: this supposition is supported
by the consideration that the material of which the muscular machinery
is composed is protein, whereas carbohydrates form the combustion mate-
rial. Somehow the oxidation energy of the combustion material must play
a part in the mechanism itself. This is in fact the case with the deionization
of muscle protein. The oxidation energy first becomes active in the recovery
phase; and then, as a result of the coupling of the oxidation with the re-
synthesis of the lactic acid, not only is the endothermic process of rebuilding
the glycogen brought about, but also the alkali is released from the vanishing
alkali-lactate, and this leads to the endothermic, involuntary dissociation of
the muscle protein. In this way the muscular apparatus is once again put
into working order. We can compare this process to the charging of an
accumulator, which Professor Hill has given as an image of the recovery
reaction, or, if we prefer, to the winding-up of a watch, as I have more often
described it. It would then appear theoretically quite logical to expect that
a relatively large part of the total energy should be lost in this process. But
we must leave the definitive explanation of this point to the future.
   We can, however, say now that the deionization of the protein by the
lactic acid produced by muscle activity plays, without any doubt, an impor-
tant part in the contraction mechanism. It explains in the first place the
flaccidity of the muscle which sets in after shortening under anaerobic con-
ditions in spite of the presence of lactic acid. This flaccidity would be brought
about by nothing more than the diminution of the lactic acid acidity, just as,
conversely, we would hold the H-ions responsible for the release of the con-
traction. Certainly, the flaccidity heat discovered by Hill and Hartree, even
though it must be considered to originate in the superimposition of various
chemical and physical processes, is obviously the principal cause of the deion-
ization heat of protein. On the other hand, the exhaustion maximum of lactic
acid would be conditioned by the supply of alkali separable from the protein
salt of the muscle.
   I think, therefore, that in this way we have obtained a comparatively
simple and satisfactory picture of energy conversions in muscle, the future
shape of which will be of theoretical value and practical interest.
   To remove the uncertainty concerning the combustion heat of glycogen
 mentioned in this lecture, I have since, with Dr. Meier, brought about the
combustion of several glycogen preparations with various reservations. For


38                          1922 O.F.MEYERHOF

anhydrous glycogen (C6H 10O 5) from frog muscles we obtained 3806 cal,
for glycogen hydrate (C6H 10O 5·H 2O), 3786 cal, from which, taking into
account the solution heat of dissolved glycogen, 3775 cal was found, so that
the value used above is almost exactly correct.
   It also became clear that during deionization of saturated solutions of ammo
acids in non-aqueous media (alcohol-water mixture) besides a deionization
heat, a precipitation heat occurs, which amounts to just about 70 cal/mol - a
pointer to the possible explanation for the cause of the unexpected remainder
in the contraction heat.
