                             P AUL H . M Ü L L E R


              Dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane
                    and newer insecticides
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1948


Ladies and Gentlemen.
   Since Perkin synthesized the first dyestuff in 1856, about 90 years have
elapsed. During this period the synthesis of artificial dyestuffs has gone
through enormous development.
   The discovery of fuchsines by Emanuel Verguin in 1859, unlocked the tri-
phenylmethane dyestuffs for the dyestuffs chemist.
   The very important discovery of the diazo compounds by Peter Griess, in
1858, certainly brought about the most significant reaction in the chemistry
of dyestuffs, a quite unique impetus to the development of this field of
organic chemistry.
   The most important milestones in this development are: the preparation
of Bismarck brown by C. Martius in 1863, of Chrysoidine by O. N. Witt
in 1876, and Congo Red, the first dyestuff capable of direct application to
cotton, by P. Böttiger in 1884.
   This large-scale development and the vast mass of experimental material
 available have called for a variety of attempted explanations. The relation-
 ships between composition and colour on the one hand, and fastness on the
 other, were the subjects of several attempts at theoretical explanation.
    Particularly fruitful in this respect was the theory of O. N. Witt on chro-
 mophores and auxochromes, and the theory - valid only in special cases - of
 E. Schirm, J. Prakt. Chem., 144 (1936) 69, concerning the connexion between
 composition and affinity to cellulose fibre.
    Thanks to these results the dyestuffs chemist today, after about 90 years of
 untiring detailed study, is in the fortunate position to possess certain points of
 reference enabling him to set up his programme of work in bold outlines.
    The field of synthetics is already very much more complicated in the case
 of the pharmaceutical chemist.
    Today, certain basic substances and formulae are known, as for instance
 salicylic acid, the barbiturates and the sulfonamides which are able to release
 certain physiological activity.


228                            1948 P.H.MÜLLE R

   Long years of patient detailed study have produced explanations of the
constitution of important vitamins, hormones and bacteriostatic substances
such as penicillin, streptomycin, etc., and later these were, in part, synthe-
sized. Yet in spite of all these results we are still far removed from being able
to predict with any degree of reliability, the physiological activity to be ex-
pected from any given constitution. In other words, the connexion between
constitution and action are so far still quite unexplained. In addition we have
the particularly difficult conditions caused by the uncertainty of tests on
living material.
   More difficult still are the relationships in the field of pesticides, and in
particular of synthetic insecticides.
   First of all then, we could consider synthesizing natural insecticides such as
pyrethrum and rotenone of known composition and obtained from plants,
but quite irrespective of the excessive price entailed in providing a synthesis
of such a highly complicated chemical substance there are, as we shall soon
see, other grave disadvantages.
   We must be clear on this point, namely that we are in fact, moving into
unknown territory where there are no points of reference to begin with so
that we can only proceed by feeling our way. To this too we must add the
grave difficulties of biological trials requiring multiple controls of the results.
   When, in about 1935 and on behalf of my Company, J.R. Geigy A.G. in
Basel, I began to study the field of insecticides, and in particular those insec-
ticides of importance to agriculture, the situation looked desperate indeed.
Already an immense amount of literature existed on the subject and a flood
of patents had been taken out. Yet of the many patented pesticides there
were practically none on the market and my own investigations showed
that they were not comparable with known insecticides such as the arsenates,
pyrethrum or rotenone.
   This gave me the courage to press on. In other respects too, the chances
were worse than poor; only a particularly cheap or remarkably effective in-
secticide had any prospects of being used in agriculture, since the demands
put upon an agricultural insecticide must necessarily be strict. I relied upon
my determination and powers of observation. I considered what my ideal
insecticide should look like, and the properties it should possess.
   I soon realized that a contact or "touch" insecticide would possess very
much better prospects than an oral poison. The properties of this ideal in-
secticide should be as follows:
1. Great insect toxicity.


                    DDT AND NEWER INSECTICIDE S                               229
 2. Rapid onset of toxic action.
 3. Little or no mammalian or plant toxicity.
 4. No irritant effect and no or only a faint odour (in any case not an un-
    pleasant one).
 5. The range of action should be as wide as possible, and cover as many
    Arthropoda as possible.
 6. Long, persistent action, i.e. good chemical stability.
 7. Low price (= economic application).
 Known insecticides can be grouped as follows under these seven headings:




First of all, a substance had to be found with greater contact insecticidal
  properties and this was obviously not so easy. My biological trials were con-
  ducted in a large glass chamber, of the Peet-Grady type, in which I put Cal-
  liphora vomitoria treated with a fine spray of the substance to be tested, in a
 non-toxic solvent. Suitable non-toxic or relatively non-toxic solvents are
 ethyl alcohol and acetone. I conducted my early experiments myself in those
 days and still do so today since, in my view, nothing is better than making
 one’s own observations.
     Such personally conducted biological investigations stimulate the chemist
 in his work, and at the same time he learns, by his observations, to under-
  stand the problems and uncertainties of biological tests and is thus better able
  to appreciate the difficulties facing his colleagues who work in biology. He
  will also test substances synthesized by himself with far more keenness and
  understanding than will a biologist working at a distance from him, who,
  unconsciously tends in time to lose interest because the tedious chemical
 formulae mean little to him.
     Sometimes new and valuable discoveries may be made by small changes
 in methods of application, or again by the correct observation of apparently
  unimportant side-effects.
     Our natural-science branches are today specialized in the extreme. This is


230                          1948 P.H.MÜLLE R




useful when some-small detail is to be examined; in my judgement, how-
ever, it becomes a fatal disadvantage when two branches - in our case chem-
ical and biological - become intermingled.
   After the fruitless testing of hundreds of various substances I must admit
that it was not easy to discover a good contact insecticide. In the field of
natural science only persistence and sustained hard work will produce results,
and so I said to myself "Now, more than ever, must I continue with the
search. " This capacity I owe probably - apart from my inborn determina-
tion - to strict upbringing by my teacher, Professor Fichter, who taught us
that in chemistry results can only be achieved by using the utmost patience.
   From earlier trials I knew that compounds with the group -CH2Cl, for
instance -CO-CH 2 Cl, often showed a certain activity. From the work
done at the same time in our firm by Dr. H. Martin and his colleagues on
toxic substances for the control of moths, in which I personally took no part,
I knew that compounds of the general formula:




frequently showed considerable oral toxicity to moths.


                    DDT AND NEWER INSECTICIDE S                             231
   In studying the literature, I came across an article by Chattaway and Muir
in the J. Chem. Soc., 1934, p. 701, which described the preparation of diphen-
yl-trichloroethane




I remembered my earlier experiments with substances comprising the -CH2Cl
group, for instance laurylchloroacetate, etc. and I was curious to know what
effects the CCl3 groups would have on the activity of contact insecticides.
   The substance was prepared in September 1939 and tests showed a very
considerable contact-insecticidal activity on flies. I began to prepare derivates
from this basic material and, probably influenced by the results in the field of
moth control, I synthesized the p,p’-dichloro combination




 This compound, originally made as long ago as 1873 by an Austrian student
in the course of his thesis, now showed a strong insecticidal contact action
 such as I had to date never observed in any substance.
    My fly cage was so toxic after a short period that even after very thorough
 cleaning of the cage, untreated flies, on touching the walls, fell to the floor.
 I could carry on my trials only after dismantling the cage, having it thorough-
 ly cleaned and after that leaving it for about one month in the open air.
     Similar observations were made by American scientists during their first
 tests of dichlorodiphenyl-trichloroethane :
    "The toxic action of DDT is so strong that some of the scientists who first
 used it, ruined important experiments because they failed to clean their in-
 sect cages before using them again, and the small amounts of DDT remaining
 were sufficient to kill the new insects introduced." (From How Magic is DDT ,
 by General James Stevens Simmons, 1945, p. 4.)
    Later the material was tested on other insects such as aphids, gnats (Culex)
 and finally cockchafers, Colorado beetles, etc. In all cases the new compound
 acted, although it often killed only in a matter of hours or days. This is also
  the reason why initially the biologists were not very interested in the sub-
  stance; pyrethrum and rotenone had accustomed them to expect a rapid
  knock-down and they did not understand that long residual activity far out-
  weighed the slow toxic process.


232                             1948 P.H.MÜLLE R

  Finally these laboratory results were confirmed by field trials conducted
by the research stations at both Wadenswil and Oerlikon (Switzerland) and
by our own field trials, and it was found that the effects on the Colorado
beetle lasted from four to six weeks.




DDT insecticides have now been introduced into all possible fields of insect
 control, for instance in hygiene, textile protection, storage and plant protec-
 tion. It is noteworthy that in Sweden the application of DDT for timber
 protection is also being studied, and has already had considerable success.
    After the recognition of the strong contact action of dichloro-diphenyl-
 trichloroethane all possible derivates and analogues were synthesized both by
us and later also abroad, and tested.
    It is very surprising indeed how little has come of these trials, and it only in-
 dicates how strictly specific the action is. When the slighest, seemingly unim-
 portant change is made in the dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane molecule,
the whole wide range of activity possessed by the original substance is lost.
    This is already shown by the isomers : e.g. the o,p’-compound




is present as an impurity to the extent of about 10% in the raw p,p’-dichloro-
diphenyl-trichloroethane and its activity is, depending upon the insects
treated, about 10-20 times less than that of the p,p’-combination.
   The o,o’-combination, estimated at 1% of the raw substance, behaves in
the same way; it is only very slightly active.




The m,p’-combination, which may be prepared from


                  DDT AND NEWER INSECTICIDE S                                 233




on the other hand, again shows a relatively strong insecticidal action which
does not, however, approach that of the p,p’-isomer.
  A survey of the properties of the isomers known to date has been made by
my colleague Dr. Gatzi.




  Of the many analogues and related substances of dichlorodiphenyl-tri-
chloroethane which were prepared, only a few have any real application as
insecticides.
   The most interesting perhaps is p,p’difluorodiphenyl-trichloroethane,
which has shown a somewhat faster contact-insecticidal activity than p,p’-
dichlorodiphenyl-trichloroethane but an insufficient residual activity, in
addition to which the cost is too high for widespread use. Another interest-
ing insecticide is p,p’dimethoxydiphenyl-trichloroethane, recommended
particularly in America where, with some specific pests, it worked to some
 extent better than its older brother. It possesses the great advantage of having
somewhat less mammalian toxicity than the DDT insecticide, but in the main
its action is too specific.
   A further specific insecticide is p,p’-ditolyl-trichloroethane




which is however too selective and has therefore found little application.
 p,p’-Dichlorodiphenyl-dichloroethane, the so-called DDD


234                             1948 P.H.MÜLLE R


                           Cl



also has certain uses and is easily obtainable from dichloracetal and chloro-
benzol. It is said to be equally toxic to mosquito larvae as dichloro-diphenyl-
trichloroethane but at the same time less toxic to mammals. After great
initial optimism, little is heard of it nowadays; clearly the product has failed
to satisfy in some respect.
   Naturally, the synthesis of these closely related substances of dichloro-
diphenyl-trichloroethane does not represent the end of the road, and work
continues uninterrupted.
   The industrial chemist is, in this field, not in the happy position of his
academic colleague of being able to freely publish his findings. In view of
possible patents which might be taken out, he must bide his time until it has
been confirmed as quite certain that no other application is possible.
   Since the discovery of dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane a number of
other insecticides have been discovered.
   γ -Hexachlorocyclohexane, again a substance long known to man (Michael
Faraday first produced it in 1825 as the mixed isomers     α,        has found its
uses as an insecticide for specific applications. Its very clinging, unpleasant
smell militates against widespread use.
   During the war, I. G. Farben developed an aphicide based on hexaethyl-
tetraphosphate and having the complicated formula:




Today, the Americans (Victor Chemical Co.) have superseded this with their
synthesized tetraethyl pyrophosphate having the formula :


                   DDT AND NEWER INSECTICIDE S                             235
A chlorinated camphene, the formula for which is not firmly established but
is probably:




was developed in America by the Hercules Powder Co. and was successfully
used against certain cotton pests.
  "Velsicol 1068" or "Chlordane", also called "Octachlor" is manufactured
by the Velsicol Company and the Julius Hyman Corporation. The general
formula for this compound is C10H 6Cl 8. We seem here to be dealing with
chlorinated dicyclopentadiene.
   The most active insecticide in every respect, surpassing in most cases even
dichlorodiphenyl-trichloroethane, is a phosphorus compound developed
during the War by the German firm I.G. Farben. In Germany it is known as
"E 605 ", while in America where large-scale trials have already been held it
goes under the name of "Parathion"; it consists of p-nitrophenyldiethyl-
thiophosphoric acid ester having the formula:




In the beginning all these insecticides were greeted with great optimism, and
people prophesied only a short life for dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane.
   Some of these insecticides have found a special application for certain
purposes, and will probably continue to be used for these. E. 605 is possibly
the most interesting, but it must be excluded in cases demanding the least
possible toxicity to humans and maximum residual activity. E. 605 is a sub-
stance having a very high mammalian toxicity and decomposes rapidly on
exposure to air and light, and because of this it is of little use in the fight
against epidemic diseases.
   On the whole there is now less talk of this new insecticide and DDT has,
particularly in the field of hygiene, maintained and even improved its domi-
nating position.
   Ladies and gentlemen, we are today on the threshold of a new develop-


236                           1948 P.H.MÜLLE R

ment in the field of pest control. Whilst before we had to depend on inor-
ganic poisons such as the arsenates or the perishable active substances of
plants such as pyrethrum or rotenone, we now have, besides dichloro-di-
phenyl-trichloroethane, a whole series of substances capable of being syn-
thesized. This development appears to be paving a way similar to that in the
field of dyestuffs, so that gradually insecticides and other pest-control agents
will be available providing a whole range of specific properties.
    In many respects this development can perhaps better be compared to that
followed for several decades by the synthesis of medical products as outlined
by S. Frankel in his Die Arzneimittel-Synthese (Synthesis of Medical Products),
p. 9. In a somewhat more succinct and clear form, he says:
   "The artist sees as his purpose not the slavish imitation of Nature degraded
by art to simple reproduction. He rather employs his subjective conception
of beauty in order to give birth to a new beauty which Nature does not
offer in precisely that form. He creates this by using a natural form of repre-
sentation which is none the less characteristic of the artist.
    Similarly the synthetics chemist must create new types of substances, in-
spired by the action of substances found in Nature and guided by his chem-
ical and pharmaco-dynamic knowledge of active groups.
    In so doing, his imagination, too, must be given full rein, just as the artist
creates from contemplation of what, subjectively, appears to him as being
beautiful."
    But at this stage it is of course presumptuous to wish to look into the
future; the new fields are still hidden and decades of years ofpatient, pains-
taking study by biologists and chemists still lie ahead before one day we will
perhaps finally be able to recognize the relationships between chemical con-
stitution and mode of action.
    Most certainly it was premature, when the insecticidal activity of dichloro-
 diphenyl-trichloroethane had only just been recognized and scant experi-
 mental material was made available, for theories regarding this relationship
 to be advanced from various quarters. Owing to the lack of appropriate
bases these were found to be wrong, and further development has since con-
firmed this to be so.
    Even the mode of action of DDT in poisoning an insect is far from fully
explained. We may indeed assume with a fair degree of certainty that the
poison enters the insect’s body via the sense-organs and somehow travels
 along the nervous system. (In other words, dichloro-diphenyl-trichloro-
ethane is a nerve poison, like pyrethrum.) However, the real cause of death


                  DDT AND NEWER INSECTICIDE S                                237
is today still unknown in spite of the fact that all over the world, particularly
in America and here in Europe, numerous laboratories are trying to find the
answer to this question. The problem is not made easier by the fact that we
now know that certain insects such as bees which develop a higher temper-
ature in their hives and presumably also have a higher body-temperature
than other insects, by virtue of this develop immunity to dichloro-diphenyl-
trichloroethane.
   The field of pest control is immense, and many problems impatiently
await a solution. A new territory has opened up for the synthetics chemist, a
territory which is still unexplored and difficult, but which holds out the hope
that in time further progress will be made.
   I am grateful and glad that I have been permitted to lay a first foundation
stone in this puzzling and apparently endless domain,
