                               PA   U L   EHRLICH


                        Partial cell functions
                       Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1908



The history of the knowledge of the phenomena of life and of the organized
world can be divided into two main periods. For a long time anatomy, and
particularly the anatomy of the human body, was the α and ω of scientific
knowledge. Further progress only became possible with the discovery of the
microscope. A long time had yet to pass until through Schwann the cell was
established as the final biological unit. It would mean bringing coals to New-
castle were I to describe here the immeasurable progress which biology in all
its branches owes to the introduction of this concept of the cell. For this con-
cept is the axis around which the whole of the modern science of life revolves.
   It is, I think, a generally acknowledged and undisputed fact that everything
which happens in the body, assimilation, disassimilation, must ultimately be
attributed to the cell alone; and furthermore, that the cells of different organs
are differentiated from each other in a specific way and only perform their
different functions by means of this differentiation.
   The results produced here are mainly based on histological examinations
of dead and living tissues, with, of course, most valuable contributions from
the neighbouring sciences - physiology, toxicology, and particularly com-
parative anatomy and biology. Yet I am inclined to think that the limit of
what the microscope could and has done for us is now approaching and that
for a further penetration into the important, all-governing problem of cell life
even the most highly refined optical aids will be of no use to us. Now, at this
moment, the time has come to penetrate into the most subtle chemism of cell
life and to break down the concept of the cell as a unit into that of a great
number of individual specific partial functions. But since what happens in the
cell is chiefly of a chemical nature and since the configuration of chemical
structures lies beyond the limits of the eye’s perception we shall have to find
other methods of investigation for this. This approach is not only of great
importance for a real understanding of the life processes, but also the basis
for a truly rational use of medicinal substances.
   The first advance in this complicated field came about, as so frequently
happens, in a roundabout way. After Behring’s renowned discovery of the


                         PARTIAL CELL FUNCTIONS                                305
antitoxins I had set myself the task of penetrating further into the mysterious
nature of this process, and after long labours I have succeeded in finding the
key to it.
    As you know, the function of stimulating the formation of antibodies be-
longs to one particular group of poisonous substances only, to the so-called
toxins. These are metabolic products of animal and plant cells: diphtherial
toxin, tetanus toxin, the phytotoxin of jequirity, ricin, snake venom, e tutti
quanti. None of these substances can be made to crystallize, and they obvi-
ously belong to the class of protein substances. The toxin is generally charac-
terized by two properties: (1) by its poisonousness; and (2) by its ability to
stimulate the production of the specific antitoxin in the animal body.
    My quantitative investigations of this process have shown that the toxins,
especially the solutions of diphtherial toxin, will - either spontaneously if left
standing for some time, or through the action of thermal influences or certain
chemicals (iodine) - change in such a way that they are more or less deprived
of their toxicity but retain their ability to produce antibodies. Furthermore,
it has become obvious that the products of this transformation which I call
toxoids, and which my honoured friend Professor Arrhenius has also encount-
ered in his numerous experiments, have still retained the ability to neutralize
the antitoxin in a specific way. Indeed, in favourable cases I and others have
succeeded in proving that the transformation of toxin into toxoid can be a
perfectly quantitative one, so that a given toxic solution will combine with
exactly the same amount of antitoxin before and after the transformation
into toxoid.
    These facts permit only one explanation, namely that there must be two
 differently functioning groups present in the toxin. One of these, which has
been preserved also in the "toxoid" and must therefore be considered the more
 stable one, must be allowed the ability on the one hand to stimulate the forma-
 tion of antibodies in the animal body by immunization, and on the other to
 neutralize antibodies in the test tube and in vivo. The relations between toxin
 and its antitoxin are strictly specific - tetanus antitoxin neutralizes exclusively
 tetanus toxin, diphtheria serum only diphtherial toxin, snake serum only
 snake venom, to mention just a few examples out of hundreds. For this reason
 it must be assumed that the antipodes enter into a chemical bond which, in
 view of the strict specificity is most easily explained by the existence of two
 groups of distinctive configuration - of groups which according to the com-
 parison made by Emil Fischer fit each other "like lock and key". Considering
 the stability of the bond on the one hand and the fact on the other that neu-


306                                  1908 P.EHRLICH

tralization occurs even in very great dilutions and without the help of chem-
ical agents, it must be assumed that this process is to be attributed to a close
chemical relationship and probably represents an analogue to actual chem-
ical syntheses.
   More recent investigations have in fact shown that it is possible by chemical
actions to break up the product of the union, the neutral combination toxin-
antitoxin, into its original components. For instance Morgenroth in particular
has proved in the case of a number of toxins - I shall just mention snake venom
and diphtherial toxin - that under the action of hydrochloric acid the com-
pound can be separated again into its original constituents, in the same way
that in pure chemistry stable compounds, such as the glycosides, can through
the action of acids be broken down into their two components: sugar and the
basal aromatic complex. These investigations have shown that the stable group
of the toxin molecule, which I call haptophore, can exercise great chemical
activity of a specific kind, and thus the obvious assumption was that it must
be precisely this group which causes the adhesion of the toxin to the cell.
When we see how some bacterial poisons produce disturbances only after
weeks of incubation and then damage the heart or kidney or nerves, when
we see how animals suffering from tetanus present contractions and spasms
for months, we are forced to the direct conclusion that all these phenomena
can only be caused by the adhesion of the toxic substance to quite definite cell com-
plexes.
    I therefore assumed that the tetanus toxin for instance must unite with
certain chemical groupings in the protoplasm of cells, particularly the motor
ganglion cells, and that this chemical union represents the prerequisite and
cause of the disease. I have therefore simply called such cell groupings "poison
receptors" or just "receptors". Wassermann has been able to prove my view
 correct in every detail in his noted experiments in which he was the first to
produce evidence that normal brain is able to render innocuous given quan-
tities of tetanus toxin which are introduced. Many objections have been made
 to these experiments, but none have proved valid, and I believe that I may
now pronounce it as a definite fact that certain specific groupings must in
fact exist in the cells which fix the poison. That these, the cell’s receptors, which
produce the fixation, react to the haptophore part of the toxin can be deduced
from the immunizations through toxoids, where the haptophore group is
 the only one which has been preserved. But since this haptophore grouping
 of the toxin must have a highly complex and peculiar stereochemical struc-
 ture, and since it reacts simultaneously and in the same sense to the cell receptors


                         PARTIAL CELL FUNCTIONS                               307
and the antitoxin, it must be concluded from this that the group in the proto-
plasm, the cell receptor, must be identical with the "antitoxin" which is contain-
ed in solution in the serum of immunized animals, for a really well-made key
will not open different locks at the same time. As the cell receptor is ob-
viously pre-formed, and the artificially-produced antitoxin only the con-
sequence, i.e. secondary, one can hardly fail to assume that the antitoxin is
nothing else but discharged components of the cell, namely receptors discharged
in excess. The explanation of this fact was a very obvious one. One only needs
to assume that the various specific cell receptors which take up the snake
venom, the diphtherial toxin, the tetanus toxin, the botulin poison, etc. are
not properly speaking designed for the purpose of serving as toxic receptors for
substances with which the animal under the normal conditions of its life might
perhaps never come into contact, but that they exist, in actual fact, in order
to combine chemically with normal products of metabolism, i.e. to assimilate
them. As these receptors, which may be regarded as lateral chains ("Seiten-
ketten") of the protoplasm, capable of assimilation, become occupied by the
toxin, the relevant normal function of this group is eliminated. Now that
element comes in which was to be expected from the fundamental law of tissue
defect and its compensation, discovered by Karl Weigert - the deficiency is
not merely exactly compensated, but made up to excess, i.e. there is hyperregen-
eration. Finally, if the injections are increased and repeated, so many such
groupings are formed in the body of the cells that they inhibit as it were the
normal functions and the cell gets rid of the disturbing excess by discharging
them into the blood.
   The colossal difference between the amount of poison injected and the anti-
toxin produced is probably the most characteristic feature of this process and
this is best illuminated by Knorr’s statement that one part of toxin produces
an amount of antitoxin capable of neutralizing millions of times the amount
of the poison which started the process.
   There are however many minds which consider the process a much more
simple one. Straub is of the opinion that it is on the whole analogous to
simpler processes of vital detoxification, e.g. to the forming of a sulphuric
acid ester from injected phenol, and that these processes only differ in that
the phenol-sulphuric acid remains stable in the organism, whilst the toxin-
antitoxin complex in the organism is not held but is partially destroyed. But
only one component, the injected toxin, is said to perish, while the other, the
product of the reaction of the organism - as something which has developed
in the body and thus is not foreign to it - escapes elimination and remains


308                              1908 P.EHRLICH

preserved in the blood and body fluids. By systematic repetition of the poisoning
it would then be possible to accumulate protective power in the blood, so
that when it is introduced into other organisms it can also protect these from
toxic diseases and would thus be acting as a curative serum.
   So far Straub. Faced with such a simple explanation it can only be sur-
prising that this problem has occupied the great army of researchers studying
immunity for so many years. But in fact the author has completely missed the
vital clue, namely that according to his theory a certain amount of toxin would
produce only exactly the equivalent amount of antitoxin! In actual fact this
is fortunately not the case in immunization. On the contrary, it has been prov-
ed much more conclusively - and I refer to my statement about Knorr above -
that one part of poison can produce so much antibody that a millionfold
multiple of the equivalent is achieved. This should prove Straub’s view un-
tenable.
   It is much more important that from the evidence of this hyperregeneration
the pre-formation and the chemical individuality of the toxin receptors concerned is
proved. That which can be constantly formed anew in the cell and mixed
with the blood like a secretion must have a chemical "individuality", and with
realization of this the first step had been taken which led to the differentiation
of the concept of the cell into that of a great number of separate, individual func-
tions. I had assumed right from the beginning that the toxin represents nothing
more than a nutritive substance capable of assimilation, to which in addition
- by some sort of accident - is attached a lateral grouping, usually of an unstable
nature, which causes the toxic action as such.
   This view, which I have held from the beginning, has subsequently very
quickly found confirmation many times over. It has in fact been possible to
prove the complete independence of the haptophore and toxophore groups,
as substances were discovered which had the ability to produce antibodies,
and therefore were antigens, without at the same time having a toxic effect.
Perhaps I may remind you in the first place of the precipitins, which were
first discovered by Kraus, Tschistowitsch and Bordet. Through the important
discovery that even the genuine protein substances of animal and plant or-
ganism are able, irrespective of whether they have a toxic effect or not, to
produce antibodies with a specific chemical reaction, an antigenic nature
could be proved also of actual nutritive substances, just as could previously
be expected after my observations. But even among the poisons produced
by nature some have been found which will readily demonstrate the independ-
ence of the haptophore and the toxophore apparatus. These are the cytotoxins


                          PARTIAL CELL FUNCTIONS                                309
which are normally found in the blood serum of higher animals or can be
produced arbitrarily through immunization with any type of cell. They differ
from all other poisons known to us in their extraordinary specificity, in their
monotropic action, which so far distinguishes only these poisons which are
fabricated in the living animal body. Because of the complexity of their con-
stitution a differentiation between the haptophoric and the toxophoric prin-
ciple is palpably obvious, so that here the distributive component, the am-
boceptor, is given the function of concentrating the actual active substances
on the affected substratum, through the increase in avidity which follows
localization. The fact that the animal cells are antigens, although they have
no toxic action, proves simultaneously, not only the possibility of immuniza-
tion with protein substances in solution, but also the sole responsibility on
the part of the haptophore group for the formation of antibodies.
   It is precisely this discovery and analysis of the specific relations between
haptophore antibody groups and receptors which has become of the highest
theoretical and practical importance for the more recent serum diagnosis. I
mention only the determining of the agglutination titre which has found its
most important use in Widal’s typhoid reaction; the differentiation of proteins
established by Wassermann and Uhlenhuth which is so important for forensic
blood tests; the measuring of the opsonic index inaugurated by Wright, not
to mention the manifold uses which have been found for the process of com-
plement fixation - the scientific foundation of which likewise rests on the
principle of the adhesion of the antibody to the haptophore group.
   I will not go into this any further now and will only draw "the" conclusion
from it that there are a series of nutritive substances, probably mostly of pro-
tein nature, which find specific receptors in the cells and that it is thus possible,
through immunization, to lure into the blood these structures in great abund-
ance and in the form of typical varieties - as represented by the agglutinins,
the precipitins, the amboceptors, the opsonins on the one hand, and the anti-
toxins and antiferments on the other. They can then be accumulated there to
such an extent that a thorough study of these substances, which within the
cell-formation is quite impossible, can now actually be undertaken. How far
the analysis of such processes can be taken is shown by the study of the type
of link between toxin and antitoxin and the discovery of the very complicated
action of the amboceptors.
   Of course this does not solve the secret of life itself, which may be compared
with the complicated organism of a mechanical work of art, but nevertheless
the possibility of taking out individual wheels and studying them exactly sig-


310                             1908 P. EHRLICH

nifies an advance compared with the old method of breaking into pieces the
whole work and then trying to deduce something from the mixture of broken
pieces.
   I describe all the receptors which are able to and designed to assimilate
nutritive substances as "nutriceptors" and would regard these nutriceptors as
the source of the antibodies which are theoretically and practically so import-
ant, and which I have enumerated above. Obviously anyone adhering to the
pluralistic point of view - and considering the complicated system of the or-
ganism, the almost illimitable variety and specificity of cell functions, this
seems to me absolutely inescapable - must assume that there exists a whole
range of nutriceptors of different types. From the point of view of immuniza-
tion these can be differentiated into three types:
   (1) Those which do not enter the blood in the form of antibodies. It may be
assumed that this will probably be the case with those nutriceptors which
serve the very simplest functions, for instance the assimilation of simple fat
substances or of types of sugar.
   (2) Those which enter the blood in the form of the antibodies mentioned
and characterized above, and the development of which corresponds to a
hyperregeneration.
   (3) The third form presents a contrast to this in so far as it is not a case of
new formations, but of a decrease in receptors. Experimental proof of this
occurrence has however so far been only very rare. The only known instance
is probably the evidence produced by H. Kossel that after prolonged immun-
ization of rabbits with the haemotoxic eel serum the blood corpuscles as such
did finally become insensitive to this agent, as though they had lost the specific
receptors.
   Now I, in company with my colleagues, Dr. Röhl and Miss Gulbransen,
have succeeded in penetrating further into the nature of the artificial loss of
receptors and in illuminating the whole mechanism. Our work will shortly
be published in a more extensive form; here I would like to emphasize that
the experiments were done on trypanosomes. Franke had at one time infected
a monkey at my Institute with a certain species of trypanosome, then brought
about its cure through chemotherapeutic agents, and then again, in order to
test the immunity of the animal, reinfected it with the original strain. But
contrary to expectation it turned out that the monkey was not immune, but
that it sickened again after a very prolonged period of incubation. If mice
were treated with blood coming from the infected animal, i.e. containing
trypanosomes, they fell ill and died. But if the trypanosomes were first re-


                           PARTIAL CELL FUNCTIONS                                   311
moved from the blood of the monkey it became apparent that the serum
thus produced was capable of killing off the original parasites. This revealed
that a variety of the parasites had developed in the monkey which in contrast
to the original strain was no longer affected by the serum - a serum-resistant
strain. Similar observations were at the same time recorded by Kleine and
lately also by Mesnil.
   Now if experimental animals which have been infected with a certain spe-
cies of trypanosome are treated not with a full sterilizing dose of a suitable
substance (arsanil, arsacetin, arsenophenylglycin), but with a somewhat smal-
ler one, trypanosomes disappear from the blood for a greater or lesser period
of time. The formation of antibodies has occurred in this case too, as can be
easily proved. The few parasites which have escaped death now remain in
the organs for a greater or lesser period of time, gradually adapt themselves
to the anti-substances in the serum, and then, as soon as this has happened,
return to the blood where they increase rapidly and lead to the death of the
animal. If the trypanosomes obtained by this method are transferred to one
group of mice which have been previously infected with the original strain,
have been cured through the administration of suitable doses and have thus
become carriers of the specific antibodies, and to a second group of normal
mice, one becomes convinced that the parasites grow equally quickly in both
groups. The parasites of the recidive strain have therefore undergone a bio-
logical change in that they have become serum-resistant.* The change which
has thus been produced in the parasites is not a superficial one, but may be
reproduced unchanged for many months by passage through normal animals. The
recidive strain retains unchanged its property of being resistant to the anti-
bodies produced by the original strain and can thus be identified with absolute
certainty.
   It was now our concern to obtain an insight into the nature of this process.
The explanation for this which we have found after many and varied experi-
ments is the following : the original strain contains an abundance of a certain
uniform type of nutriceptor which we shall call group "A". When the para-
sites are killed and dissolved within the organism of the mice the "A" grouping
acts as an antigen and now produces an antibody which originates by virtue

* It is, by the way, possible to get exactly the same strain in another, much simpler way
which consists of infecting the mice with the original strain, fully curing them on the
second day with a full dose, and then reinfecting them 2-3 days later with the same
strain. After a greater or lesser period of time parasites will appear in the blood which
fully correspond to those of the recidive strain.


312                               1908 P.EHRLICH

of its relationship to group "A". If living parasites are now brought into
contact with this antibody, either in the test tube or in vivo, it will be adhered
to by the trypanosomes. The effect on the parasites in this way is that they
undergo in vivo the biological change which leads to the development of the
recidive strain. This change occurs in that in the new strain the original "A"
grouping disappears and a new grouping, which we shall call "B", appears
instead. That there is a new grouping in the recidive strain can be shown as
follows : if two mice are infected with the recidive strain - carrier of the "B"
grouping - and then completely healed; if one mouse is then infected with
the original strain, and the other with the recidive strain itself, the reinocula-
tion with the original strain - carrier of "A" grouping - proceeds smoothly,
while reinfection with the recidive strain fails at first. This shows that the
original strain and the recidive strain are not identical, or must possess two
differently functioning groups. We therefore have a typical case of immunization prod-
ucing loss of receptors while developing a completely new type of receptor.
    Whether one calls this change a mutation or a variation is really of little
significance; the main thing is that it can be produced intentionally and arti-
ficially and that it is hereditary. But in view of the great interest which this
particular problem has for biology and the theory of evolution, we have
tried to get a fuller understanding of the process.
    First of all it was necessary to determine how the trypanosome-antibodies
influence the parasites. In accordance with the assumption common in im-
munology it might be accepted, that these antibodies produce direct toxic
actions, i.e. contain toxophoric or trypanolytic groups, and that therefore the
adhesion as such would necessarily produce damage to or death of the cell.
But my colleagues and I have become convinced that this is not the case. In
 contrast to the usual species of trypanosomes, which contain only one uni-
 form grouping "A", "B", or "C", etc. and which may therefore be called
 "unios", other types present themselves, which have two groups in the proto-
plasm at the same time, e.g. "A" and "B", and may therefore be called "binios".
 If one such binio "A" - "B" is acted upon by the isolated antibody "A" or
"B", this does not cause the slightest damage to growth. This arises only if
 the parasite is occupied by both anti-substances at the same time. It follows
 from this that the presence of antibodies does not have a direct toxic effect
 on the trypanosomes, and it seems to follow from this triple experiment that
 the antibody only has an effect in so far as it prevents the intake of nutritive
 substances through occupation of the group concerned. If in the binio "A" -
 "B" the grouping "A" is obstructed by the antibody, the parasite can continue


                         PARTIAL CELL FUNCTIONS                                 313
to vegetate through its grouping "B". This also proves that the groupings
"A" and "B" must be chiefly regarded as nutriceptors.
   If the amount of antibody is very large the parasite can no longer feed itself
at all and dies. It is easiest to convince oneself of this by mixing parasites with
varying amounts of antiserum in the test tube. With the high concentrations
which stop the intake of food altogether the death of the parasites follows,
while with weaker concentrations which permit a vita minima in which muta-
tion is possible a recidive strain develops. This mutation must therefore be
entirely due to starvation of the protoplasm, under the influence of which new
potential structures of the trypanosome develop. Antibodies like those which
we have just been considering, and which have a purely anti-nutritive action,
I call "atrepsirls" and I believe that these probably play an extraordinarily impor-
tant role not only for bacteria, but in biology in general.
   Most of my colleagues in this field will probably find it easy to accept the
idea that there are certain chemical groupings in the cell for the reception
of the various nutritive substances, once their existence has been definitely
proved by the presence of the antibodies. But what is much more difficult
is the question whether for the reception of other, less complicated substances
too there are analogous functional groups. For the simplest further function
of the cell, the absorption of oxygen, the problem is in my opinion already
solved. We know that in the haemoglobin molecule it is exclusively the or-
ganically associated iron residue which provides the loose link between oxygen
on the one hand and carbon dioxide and hydrocyanic acid on the other. It will
therefore be necessary to assume certain groupings in the protoplasm of the
red blood corpuscles, which have a maximal relationship to iron, and form
a complex compound with it which has the characteristic functional properties.
The protoplasm of the red blood corpuscles would thus be characterized by
the abundant presence of "ferroceptors" which complemented with iron would
lead to the finished haemoglobin molecule. In a similar way it will also be
necessary to assume that the blue respiratory pigment of crayfish contains
"cuproceptors", and others probably "manganoceptors". Also, the localization of
iodine in certain glandular systems, particularly the thyroid gland, and the
evidence that iodine is arranged in certain aromatic lateral chains will have
to be interpreted in this way.
   Much more difficult, however, is the question whether such preformed
chemoreceptors may also be assumed to exist in the cell in the case of the
great number of actual medicaments. This question takes us into the important
field of the relation between constitution and action, which represents the basis


314                             1908 P.EHRLICH

for a rational development of therapy. Only when we really know the points
where the parasites attack, only when we have established what I call the
therapeutic biology of the parasites, will it be possible to combat the infective
agents successfully.
   I have therefore carried out these studies of mine on the detection of definite
chemoreceptors, first on monocellular living beings - protists - because the
conditions there are much more favourable to a clear understanding than those
in the infinitely complicated machinery of the higher organisms. I therefore
asked myself the question: do the trypanosomes possess in their protoplasm
definite groupings which govern the captivation of definite chemical sub-
stances ?
   If a certain substance is able to kill trypanosomes or other parasites in the
test tube or in the animal body, this can only happen because an accumulation
of it takes place in these parasites, but the process itself is not explained by the
establishment of these bare facts. There are very many explanations for this and
only when it is possible to prove that we have here a function which is open
to specific changes and variations, will we have proof of a preformed formation.
   Unfortunately it appears that the way in which it was so easy to produce
proof of preformation for the nutriceptors, namely by the transfer of the cast-off
receptors into the blood, does not apply for the chemoreceptors, as they are
much more simply constructed and remain attached to the cell - that is, they
are not rejected.
   Here it was only possible to see clearly in a roundabout way, which took us
via the drug-resistant strains of the trypanosomes. Together with my faithful
colleagues Franke, Browning, and Röhl, I have shown that it is possible to
obtain by a systematic treatment trypanosome strains which are resistant to
the three substances which so far are known to be inimical to trypanosomes:
compounds of the arsenic series, fuchsine, and the acid azo-dye from the ben-
zopurpurine series, trypan red. These resistant strains have the following char-
acteristics :
   (1) Stability of the acquired property. This is so great that for instance our
arsenic strain, after it has passed in 2½ years about 380 times through mice, is now
even today equally resistant to drugs as the original strain.
   (2) A principal characteristic of drug resistance is its strict specificity which
is distinctive in that it relates not to one specific compound but to the whole
chemical grouping to which this specific compound belongs. The strain resistant
to fuchsine, for instance, is not only resistant to this, but also to a whole series
of related triphenylmethane dyes, e.g. malachite green, ethyl green, hexaethyl


                          PARTIAL CELL FUNCTIONS                                 315
violet. On the other hand it has remained sensitive to both the other types,
that is, to trypan red and an arsenical substance. A corresponding specificity
is shown by the strain resistant to trypan red and also that resistant to arse-
nicals. That there are in fact three different functions here is furthermore ap-
parent from the fact that by successive treatment of one and the same strain
of trypanosomes with the three above-named substances it is possible to ob-
tain a triple-resistant strain, i.e. a strain which is resistant to representatives of
all three classes. Such a strain, assuming maximal stability, is extremely valu-
able for the discovery of new types of trypanocidal agents. If, for instance,
some new substance is obtained which as such is capable of destroying the
normal trypanosomes, it is only necessary to let this substance act upon the
triple-resistant strain to find out whether it is a new type of remedial sub-
stance or not. If not, the triple-resistant parasites will not disappear with this
treatment, but continue to flourish; but if they do disappear then the substance
under test does not correspond to any of the three types of remedial sub-
stance mentioned, and a representative of a new class of remedial substance is being
dealt with. The triple-resistant strain is therefore so to speak the cribrum
therapeuticurn, the therapeutic sieve, with the aid of which it is possible to
recognize what is homologous, and separate what is different.
   A further important question was then to determine in what way this spe-
cific drug resistance comes about. Here it was the atoxyl strain which I used
for the experiments. To get an exact picture it seemed necessary to investigate
the behaviour of the arsenic resistant parasites in the test tube, removed from
all the disturbances and complications of the organism. In this a great diffi-
culty soon arose, as the remedial substance used most often in therapy, ato-
xyl (p-aminophenyl arsenic acid) does not have the slightest lethal effect on
trypanosomes in the test tube; even solutions of a higher percentage were not
sufficient for this. This phenomenon was all the more striking since according
to Koch’s investigations the parasites could be made to vanish within the
human body in a few hours after injections of 0.5 grams of atoxyl; a lethal
effect had therefore been achieved with a concentration of 1:120,000.
   This was a process which more recently has been named "indirect effect".
It was not difficult for me to find the reason for this phenomenon as I had in
previous years made a thorough study of the reducing power of the body.
We know that arsenic acid in the body is reduced to arsenious acid; we also
know that cacodylic acid is reduced to that foul-smelling cacodyl; it was there-
fore obvious to think of reduction first of all. In atoxyl, p-aminophenyl
arsenic acid, the arsenic residue is pentavalent, while in the two products of


316                              1908 P.EHRLICH

the reduction of it the arsenic residue only has a trivalent action - as in arseni-
ous acid. We thus obtained two different products :

  (1) monomolecular p-aminophenyl arsenic oxide




  (2) arising from the reduction of the latter, the yellow diaminoarseno-
benzene




In contrast to atoxyl, these substances proved to be highly trypanocidal both
in the test tube and in the animal body. Even solutions of 1:1,000,000 of the
arsenic oxide compound destroyed the trypanosomes within one hour. The
closely related p-hydroxyphenyl arsenic oxide has an even stronger effect:
1:10,000,000.
   Through this it was proved that the pentavalent arsenic residue releases no
trypanocidal function whatsoever, but that this function is exclusively con-
nected with the trivalent unsaturated state.
   More than 60 years ago Bunsen, with prophetic clarity of perception, point-
ed out that cacodyl, the product of reduction, is so poisonous in comparison
with the almost non-poisonous cacodylic acid, and deduced from this the
chemical character of the binding of the cacodyl. It also tallies extraordinarily
well with this that unsaturated carbon monoxide, for instance, and a number
of other unsaturated compounds are so much more toxic than the correspond-
ing saturated radicals. We shall therefore have to assume that the arsenoceptor
of the cells is only able to take up the arsenic residue which is unsaturated and
therefore eager to adhere.
   With the aid of such reduced compounds it was now quite easy to examine
the atoxyl strain in the test tube. It became apparent that suitable concentra-
tions of the chemicals would still destroy it, i.e. that this was not a case of


                         PARTIAL CELL FUNCTIONS                               317
loss of receptors, as we had proved with regard to the recidive strain. But a
comparison of the lethal dose with that necessary to destroy the normal strain
showed that the resistant strain required a much higher concentration, and that
an amount which would destroy the normal strain at once did not, even after
one hour, show the slightest effect on the viability of the resistant parasites.
   These test-tube investigations seemed to indicate that the arsenoceptor had
been preserved in the atoxyl-resistant trypanosome strain, but that its avidity
had decreased, which could be seen from the fact that only through the use
of much stronger solutions could the toxic concentration necessary for lethal
effects be achieved; the normal arsenoceptor of the original strain will attract
the same amount to itself from weaker solutions because of its initially higher
avidity.
   We have now been able to prove biologically quite clearly that the arseno-
ceptor does in fact represent a certain function, the avidity of which can be
systematically and successively decreased through immunization. So far we have
been able to reach three different stages of relationship. Stage I was achieved
by subjecting the parasites systematically to the treatment of p-aminophenyl
arsenic acid and its acetyl product. We continued the treatment ad maximum
for years, until there was no further increase. The resistant strain thus obtained
was at the same time also resistant to a whole series of other arsenic compounds,
from among which I would particularly like to mention the p-oxide com-
pound, the urea compound, the benzylidene compound, a number of acid
derivatives, etc.
   As there is the possibility - and in animal experiments this happens very
frequently - that arsenic-resistant strains develop during therapeutic processes
in animal and in man and these do of course completely prevent a successful
continuation of therapy, it was now necessary to find substances which were
still able to attack the resistant strain and combine with its receptors. After a
long search we found altogether three compounds, the most important of
which is arsenophenylglycine. With the help of this compound it was possible
to bring even the arsenic strain I characterized above to a cure, which can only
be thus explained that the substance seizes the avidity stump of the arseno-
ceptor like a pair of pincers. With this anchorage, however, the possibility
opens to obtain a still higher resistance to arsenic. We did in fact succeed in
this, though not without considerable trouble, and derived from the arsenic
strain I at a higher level, arsenic strain II, which was completely resistant to
arsenophenylglycine.
   Now Plimmer has recently discovered a preparation, tartar emetic, which


318                             1908 P.EHRLLCH

in high dilutions also destroys trypanosomes. Tartar emetic is the salt of an
antimony compound which is closely related chemically to arsenic. When we
thereupon tested tartar emetic on the arsenic strain II we found that the latter
was destroyed by the tartar emetic. Furthermore we succeeded in going a stage
further by treating the arsenic strain II with arsenious acid, so that there now
developed the third strain, arsenic strain III, which had now also become re-
sistant to tartar emetic. I would like to emphasize particularly that this arsenic
strain III, which was bred only under the influence of arsenious acid, was re-
sistant to tartar emetic, but not to arsenious acid. This result can only be ex-
plained by the assumption that it is arsenious acid which, of all conceivable
arsenic compounds, has the maximal relationship to the arsenoceptor, and that
it will probably require the greatest effort or even be entirely impossible to
produce a strain - and this would be arsenic strain IV - which would be re-
sistant to arsenious acid as well.
    To support my view that under the influence and attack of selected com-
 pounds there is a successive avidity restriction of the same receptor, I could
produce many additional interesting facts, as for instance the phenomenon
that the trypanosome can of course also be made resistant directly, with a
more strongly effective reagent, i.e. arsenophenylglycine. A strain produced
in this way proved as expected resistant also to the class of less avid substances,
that is, atoxyl, acetyl arsenilate, etc. A panresistant strain would thus be ob-
tained if one were to start producing resistance with right away the most
highly effective agents - and these are tartar emetic and arsenious acid. Ac-
 cording to our researches, however, it seems unfortunately impossible to
produce resistance directly with these substances; it is only possible to do this
in the roundabout way via the previous treatment of strains with phenyl
 arsenic acid derivatives.
    The restriction of avidity is of course a chemical process which obviously
 allows the interpretation that in the vicinity of the arsenic grouping concern-
 ed, other groups develop or disappear which reduce the capacity to react. Perhaps
 I may give a chemical example. Benzyl cyanide reacts to nitrosodimethyl-
 aniline. But in order that the reaction may take place, heat and a stronger
 condensation agent, the free alkali, are necessary. If on the other hand a nitro-
 group is introduced into the benzene nucleus, the reacting power of the me-
 thylen group is heightened tremendously: the two substances, nitro-benzyl
 cyanide and nitrosodimethylaniline, react even in the cold. The introduction
 of the nitro-group has therefore had an accelerating influence on the reaction.
 If the nitro-compound is reduced to p-aminobenzyl cyanide it is less capable


                          PARTIAL CELL FUNCTIONS                               319
of reaction than the original material; the amino-group has therefore had a
 diminishing influence on the reaction, while the acetyl product of the amino-
compound reacts more or less like the original material.
   We can see from this simple example that three different groupings, at-
tached to the benzene nucleus in the paraposition, will either have no in-
fluence whatsoever on the methylene group, or strengthen it or weaken it. The
weakening would in our case correspond to the restriction of avidity.
   In my opinion the protoplasm can therefore be divided into a large number
of individual functions which are interspersed among the nutriceptors in the
form of different chemoceptors. But in my opinion these two main groups must
be closely interconnected. This becomes apparent from the following con-
sideration:
   Trypanosomes of different origin, bred in different laboratories, usually
show a different behaviour right from the beginning towards a certain cura-
tive substance. For instance, the trypanosome strain Mal de Caderas which I
tried first had no resistance to trypan red, and I was therefore able to get a
cure with this substance. This is still possible even today. Jakimov has had
similarly good cures in Russia, while Uhlenhuth could not observe any in-
fluence on his strains. These are therefore innate differences; but that these are
not wholly fortuitous is obvious from the fact that even today, after it has passed
through normal mice for many years, my strain shows the same curability
through trypan red as before. In contrast to this my Nagana strain could not
be cured by trypan red and is still the same today. But when we made this
strain into a recidive strain then it became apparent that within 14 days this
property which had been continued and maintained for years had altered.
This proves that the chemoceptors are connected with the constitution of the
protoplasm and undergo alterations if we alter the constitution of the proto-
plasm by mutation.
   The reverse, i.e. whether a change of the cell substance, and particularly
its nutriceptors, can be achieved by influencing the chemoceptors, has on the
other hand not yet been definitely established. Browning had indeed ob-
served and reported that through the serum reaction the fuchsine and atoxyl
strains differ from each other and from the original strain. But more detailed
investigation has shown further that these were not specific changes, in con-
nection with fuchsine or arsenic, but changes corresponding to the recidive
mutation described above; changes which are due to the fact that during the
treatment the mice have frequently undergone recidivations which then led
to the development of recidive strains.


320                              1908 P. EHRLICH

   I have thus come to the end. I am conscious of the fact that there are gaps
in the work I have presented. But how could this be otherwise with a subject
a truly exhaustive study of which would require the recapitulation of long
and wearisome labours? But I did want to show you that we are getting to
grips with the problem of obtaining an insight into the nature of action of
therapeutic substances, the conception of which must consist in the recog-
nition de sedibus et causis pharmacorum. I also hope that if these aspects
are followed up systematically, it will be easier than heretofore to develop a
rational drug synthesis, and I may mention that in this respect arsenophenyl-
glycine has so far proved an entirely ideal remedy in animal experiments.
   For with the help of this substance it is really possible in every animal species
and with every kind of trypanosome infection to achieve a complete cure with
one injection, a result which corresponds to what I call therapia sterilisans magna.
