                                     P   H I L I P   S . H    E N C H




          The reversibility of certain rheumatic and
non-rheumatic conditions by the use of cortisone or
         of the pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone

                            Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1950.




It may be appropriate to discuss in this Nobel Lecture three general aspects
of    cortisone   and     pituitary       adrenocorticotropic              hormone     (ACTH):         (1)    the
development of the theory which eventually led to the use of cortisone and
ACTH in rheumatic and certain other conditions; this I shall do in some
detail, giving certain data not published heretofore; (2) the present status of
cortisone and ACTH in general medicine; this topic I shall discuss summarily
in view of the several current reports thereon; and (3) some major require-
ments for the orderly development of cortisone and ACTH as therapeutic
agents; this aspect will be touched upon briefly.




Development of the Theory which Led to the Use of Cortisone and ACTH
                                   in Rheumatic Diseases


Previous opinions on the prognosis of rheumatoid arthritis.                          The anatomic and
clinical identity of what we now call rheumatoid arthritis was established
fairly clearly about 100 years ago. During the next 75 years medical writers
emphasized the distressing chronicity of this condition.
     Rheumatoid   arthritis    was       called       "one    of     the    most    intractable,    obstinate,
and crippling diseases that can befall the human body" (Lane and Griffiths,
1890).    Distinguished     English       clinicians         were    concerned       by   "the     great      and
lasting   feebleness"   (Garrod,         1859)       which     the    disease      produced      and     by    its
"cases of ruin and despair, in one sense more malignant than cancer" (Spen-
der, 1889).
     A contrasting feature of rheumatoid arthritis, that of its occasional remis-
sions, attracted the attention of some writers (Garrod, 1876; Osler, 1892;
Jones, 1909). But relatively complete remissions were so uncommon or so
unpredictable that they were regarded as medical curiosities, the sponta-


312                                   1950                                 H     P.S.HENC

neous appearance or therapeutic induction of which was hardly to be ex-
pected. This air of pessimism regarding the rheumatic disease in general and
rheumatoid arthritis in particular still finds expression in some of the modern
writings and texts.


Ameliorating effect of jaundice on rheumatoid arthritis.                          It was in this gloomy
tradition that, beginning about 1923, I served my rheumatologic apprentice-
ship. But on April 1, 1929, a 65-year old patient at the Mayo Clinic told me
an unusual story. A few days before that date he was painfully affected with
rheumatoid arthritis, as he had been for four years. Then jaundice suddenly
developed, and within a week most of his arthritic manifestations had dis-
appeared. The jaundice lasted five weeks but the rheumatoid arthritis did
not relapse until several weeks after the jaundice had disappeared.
  The thought occurred: Instead of being relentlessly progressive, this dis-
ease, rheumatoid arthritis, may be potentially reversible, more so than we
have believed, perhaps rapidly so.
  During the next five years (1929 to 1934) observations were made on 16
patients with chronic arthritis or fibrositis in whom jaundice of different
                                            3 9 d , e
types and degrees d e v e l o p e d                     . If the jaundice was deep enough and was
characterized            by    bilirubinemia      of      the   "direct-reacting      type",       the   rheumatic
symptoms quickly diminished or disappeared for varying lengths of time
(days to months) and then gradually returned.


Early speculations regarding the ameliorating agent of jaundice.                                   The fact that,
contrary to general opinion, rheumatoid arthritis was potentially reversible,
                                                                                      39f,g,k
and rapidly so, thus became increasingly apparents                                              . But what agent
was responsible for the sudden reversibility of this disease during hepatitis
with jaundice? The dominant feature of visible jaundice suggested that a
                                                                 39d,e
biliary constituent might be responsible                                 . Was the amelioration of rheu-
matoid arthritis the result of a temporary excess in the blood and bodily
tissues, of a normal biliary constituent such as bilirubin or bile acids, or of an
abnormal substance produced during jaundice, such as an autolysate of the
                                               39d,e
liver or of some other tissue?                         . It seemed reasonable to believe that such
striking relief from rheumatoid arthritis was effected by some substance
which was normal to the human organism rather than by an abnormal mate-
       39f,h
rial           .   Therefore   the   hope   was          expressed       "that   jaundice        provides   to      the
general circulation, not an abnormal product but a normal constituent, ade-
                                                                                                                 39f,h
quate amounts of which perhaps the arthritic patient did not have"                                                       .


     C O R T I S O N E / A C T H                        I N        ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C             C O N D I T I O N S       3 1 3

But because the ameliorating effect of jaundice sometimes lasted several
weeks after the values for serum bilirubin in blood had returned to normal
                                                                                                                   39f,h
it did not seem likely that bile pigments were responsible                                                                 .


Therapeutic        implications.                      The therapeutic implications inherent in these ob-
servations were recognized, and the hope was expressed that further studies
might lead to the discovery of the responsible agent which might some day
                                            39e-h
be    provided            at         will           . "A           study   of     the       phenomenon           may           enhance         our
knowledge of the pathogenesis of these [rheumatic] diseases and may lead
                                                                                39j
to some superior method of treatment" .


A t t e m p t s to reproduce the phenomenon of relief by u s i n g substances related to
jaundice and the liver.                             A search for the ameliorating agent, "Nature’s dra-
                               39g
matic antidote"                      was begun. To test the validity of the conjectures men-
tioned above, and in an attempt to reproduce the phenomenon of relief
which may occur during spontaneous jaundice, various methods were em-
              39g,h,j,k
employed                  . Volunteers with rheumatoid arthritis were given bile salts
by mouth, a derivative of a bile acid (decholin) orally and intravenously,
liver extracts parenterally, ox bile by proctoclysis, and large amounts of
human bile by stomach tube. A few other rheumatoid volunteers underwent
transfusion with blood from highly jaundiced patients. But these procedures
had no significant antirheumatic effect. One rather desperate rheumatoid
patient permitted me to give her toluylene diamine by mouth; unfortunately
and surprisingly, the jaundice induced thereby was of the hemolytic type
                                                                     39h
and did not induce a remission . Then, to other volunteers with rheuma-
toid arthritis, bilirubin was given intravenously alone, or in combination
with decholin after the method of Thompson and Wyatt (1937). Although
the patients experienced marked hyperbilirubinemia and became strikingly
pigmented, the results were negative or at least quite inferior to the effects
                                                       39g,h
of spontaneous jaundice                                        .


     The ineffectiveness of these various substances, the ones which were most
obviously related to jaundice, strengthened an earlier suspicion that, despite
                                                                                                                                         39h
the dominant feature of visible jaundice, the antirheumatic "substance X"
might    be    "an         extrahepatic                    substance        found          or      activated     elsewhere         than        in
                                                                                        39g,j
the liver as the indirect result of jaundice"                                                   , or at any rate, that it might
be some substance not necessarily related to jaundice. Thus it was stated,
"Among     other           phenomena,                    pregnancy,             which           seems   to    have     little     or     noth-
ing to do with bilirubin, often provokes a similarly effective if less dramatic


314                                 1950   P.S.HENCH


remission in [rheumatoid] arthritis... If this represents a chemical control, I
wonder if Nature in the last analysis has more than one way of controlling
 the arthritic process. There should be some common denominator between
                                                                      39h
the two reactions and, off hand, bilirubin seems to be excluded" .


Ameliorating effect of pregnancy. For many years observers, noting the greater
incidence of rheumatoid arthritis among women, had speculated as to pos-
sible relationships between this disease and the menses, pregnancy, and the
 postpartum state. The literature of the past century contains scattered refer-
ences to the subject, generally only a sentence here or a paragraph there.
Earlier writers generally believed that pregnancy and especially the puerperal
 state exerted an adverse effect on patients with rheumatoid arthritis (Trous-
 seau, 1871; Charcot, 1881; Bannatyne, 1896; Strangeways and Burt, 1907).
 But it was also occasionally noted that pregnancy sometimes temporarily
 checked the disease (Garrod, 1890; Llewellyn, 1927). In summary, the con-
 flicting and confusing opinions stated that rheumatoid arthritis may be pre-
 cipitated by, or first appear during, pregnancy; that it may be aggravated
 during, or relieved partially or completely by pregnancy; or that the disease
 is unaffected by pregnancy but aggravated by the postpartum state. No
critical investigation appears to have been undertaken to clarify these con-
 fusions.
   At the Mayo Clinic we saw, not infrequently, patients who had become
 pregnant during the course of their rheumatoid arthritis. It was observed
 that most of them noted, not long after the onset of pregnancy, an undramat-
 ic and slowly progressive development of relief from their arthritic disability.
 Prior to 1929 this phenomenon did not engage our attention except for the
 matter of recording it in the appropriate records. But after 1931, records of
 these cases were more carefully made and assembled by my colleague, Dr.
 Charles Slocumb, and me, because of my growing belief that this phenom-
 enon of relief was analogous to, if not identical with, that which may occur
                   39d,f
 during jaundice           , and that the same agent might be responsible for the
 relief both during pregnancy and jaundice, although the mechanism for
                                                39h
 developing the agent might be different .


 Relationship between the antirheumatic agent of jaundice and that of pregnancy.
 As a result of observations on the effect of 34 pregnancies on 20 patients
 with rheumatoid arthritis the pattern of the articular relief during preg-
                                   39i
 nancy was described in 1938 . A more extensive study was summarized in


   C O R T I S O N E / A C T H I N ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C C O N D I T I O N S                            3 1 5
        39m
1949          . Regarding a possible relationship between the antirheumatic sub-
stance X of jaundice and that of pregnancy, the following tentative conclu-
sion    was       reached:    "It   does     not    seem       illogical          to   suppose    that   the   agents
responsible for both these phenomena are closely related, perhaps identical,
and if the agent is a chemical substance, it would appear that it is neither
                                                                      39h.i
bilirubin nor a strictly female sex hormone"                                  .


Could         substance   X    be   a    bisexual     hormone?        The          comment       continued:    "It    is
interesting to note the close chemical relationship between such diverse
substances as cholesterol [which may increase in blood in both jaundice and
pregnancy], ergosterol, the precursor of vitamin D [which was, in 1938,
considered by some to be useful in rheumatoid arthritis], some of the sex
hormones [which were occasionally given to rheumatoid patients with neg-
ative or equivocal results], cortin, and bile acids. Further studies are in
progress to discover if possible, the responsible agents for therapeutic pur-
poses. If the potent common denominator of these two phenomena - the
ameliorating effects of pregnancy and of jaundice - can be discovered, pro-
                                                         39i
gress in treatment may be expected" .
 One of the chief biologic changes related to pregnancy was known to be
a marked increase in the bodily concentration of certain hormones. Thus it
was the studies on the ameliorating effect of pregnancy which led to a
transfer of interest from some biliary substance to a consideration of some
hormone as the possible substance X. Although cortin (whole adrenal ex-
tract) was one of the glandular extracts which we listed for consideration in
1938 we did not use it till later.
   But which (if any) hormone might substance X be? Despite the dominant
feature of pregnancy the following facts seemed to speak against the like-
lihood that the unknown antirheumatic agent was a unisexual hormone, that
i s , a f e m a l e h o r m o n e o r o n e s t r i c t l y r e l a t e d t o p r e g n a n c y : (1) j a u n d i c e d
rheumatoid males obtained the same relief as non-jaundiced pregnant fe-
males; (2) the pattern of relief during pregnancy did not clearly coincide
with the time periods during which any one of the then known female sex
hormones was reported to be increased; (3) certain female sex hormones,
administered from time to time to a few rheumatoid patients by various
workers including my colleague, Dr. Charles Slocumb, had produced no
striking or consistent relief. Hence it was conjectured that if substance X was
                                                                                                                     39i
a hormone it was not a unisexual (female) hormone but a bisexual one .


316                                          1950   P.S.HENCH


Specificity of these phenomena.                Changing views were held as to the specificity
of the effects of jaundice and pregnancy. Among our first patients relieved
by jaundice or pregnancy were a few with fibrositis, intermittent hydrar-
throsis, or sometimes sciatica, as well as those with rheumatoid arthritis.
Therefore the phenomenon of relief was at first (1934) regarded as "prob-
                                                                                                    39e,f
ably non specific", at least not specific for rheumatoid arthritis alone                                    .
  Later (1938) the phenomenon was tentatively regarded as being "relatively
                                                                  39h,j
specific for rheumatoid arthritis and fibrositis"                         . Then (1940) it was noted
that patients with hay fever and severe asthma, egg sensitivity or migraine,
were sometimes relieved by intercurrent jaundice; in other words hepatitis
with jaundice appeared to "invoke an anti-allergic as well as an antirheumat-
              39k
i c r e a c t i o n " . Finally, data were collected which suggested that patients
with psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis, asthma, migraine, hay fever, Addison’s
disease, and myasthenia gravis were sometimes relieved during pregnancy
                    3 9 m
and/or jaundice          . Therefore the phenomenon of relief by the hypothetical
common denominator of jaundice and pregnancy came to be regarded as
                                                             39k,m
"group-specific rather than disease-specific"                         . This of course enhanced
greatly the potential importance of substance X.

Related phenomena. Through the years during which these studies on the
effects of jaundice and pregnancy on several diseases, but particularly on
rheumatoid arthritis, were being pursued, it was noted that somewhat sim-
ilar, though less dramatic, symptomatic remissions could be induced, oc-
                                                            39a,k,m
casionally by reactions to typhoid vaccine                            , not infrequently by almost
                                  39d,k,m                                                              39k,m
any surgical operation                       , and also by short periods of starvation                          .
We suspected that anesthesia alone might be an important factor in the
production of the transient postoperative relief which followed diverse sur-
                                                                                  39d,m
gical procedures on patients with rheumatoid arthritis                                    . My colleague,
Dr. Slocumb, confirmed this fact, producing certain degrees of articular
improvement by giving various anesthetic agents alone to several rheuma-
                    86
toid volunteers .
  The phenomena of relief by these various other procedures were regarded
as probably related somehow to the more familiar phenomena induced by
                             3 9 d , f , k
jaundice or pregnancy                        . But for a long time speculations thereon did
not provide a clue as to the probable identity of substance X.

Recapitulation of conclusions and conjectures ( 1 9 2 9 - 1 9 4 0 ) .               In summary, the
following conclusions and conjectures were arrived at from 1929 to 1940,
partly as a result of various clinical observations and partly as the result of


   C O R T I S O N E / A C T H       I N    ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C       C O N D I T I O N S       3 1 7

numerous experimental failures*. I n p a s s i n g , i t m a y b e w o r t h m e n t i o n i n g
that the development of the theory which eventually led us to the use of
cortisone and ACTH in rheumatic and other conditions was guided as much
by our failures to induce experimental remissions with certain particular
substances as it was by interrelating the clinical observations.
   It was decided that: (1)rheumatoid arthritis was not necessarily a relentless
progressive disease but was potentially reversible; (2) there developed during
jaundice and pregnancy (perhaps also during typhoid vaccine reactions,
starvation,   and       anesthesia)        an   antirheumatic           "substance    X";   (3)   if       non-
jaundiced pregnant women and jaundiced males were relieved in a similar
manner, as seemed likely, substance X was not a unisexual (female) hor-
mone nor the product of a damaged liver; (4) substance X was probably a
                           39h,m                                                                  39f,h
biologic compound                  which is normal to the human organism                                  , one
                                                           39h,m
which is specific in nature and function                           ; and (5) in view of the amel-
iorating effect both of pregnancy and of jaundice, substance X might be a
bisexual hormone.


Could substance X be an adrenal hormone ?                Prior to 1938 my conferences with
Dr. Kenda11 concerning the possible nature of substance X were irregular,
infrequent, and casual. But thereafter he became my chief collaborator, and
my conferences with him became more and more frequent. As we tried, on
innumerable occasions from 1938 to 1948, to conjecture what might be the
chemical nature of substance X, neither of us knew that he and his associates,
working on compound E (the adrenal cortical substance, 17-hydroxy-II-
d e h y drocorticosterone) in his laboratory a few yards away, were at that very
moment     isolating,    identifying,       and   preparing        to    synthesize   "substance       X"    or
a reasonable facsimile thereof.**
   It would not be proper to infer that my confidence in the validity of these
developing concepts was constant and unwavering. One was often dealing
only with subtle suggestions, and it was frankly recognized that one or more

* During these several early years (1929 to 1940) in which the above-mentioned
clinical observations were made and these ideas were being formulated, I had the
council and aid of many colleagues at the Mayo Clinic, chief of whom were my
departmental colleague, Charles H. Slocumb, M.D., who became associated with me
in 1934, and Edward C. Kendall, Ph.D., of the Department of Biochemistry.
* * It is the privilege of Drs. Kendall and Reichstein to describe on this occasion, in
their own Nobel Lectures, the isolation, identification, and production of the substance
which was called compound E by Kendall, substance Fa by Reichstein and his associ-
ates, and compound F by Wintersteiner and Pfiffner.


318                                         1950       P.S.HENCH


of the main presumptions were not based on certain knowledge or facts,
but were the (seemingly) logical development of some other presumption
which, however, reasonable it might appear to be, might be erroneous.
Hence, other possibilities were entertained from time to time and occasional
excursions into the empiric were indulged in. In 1938 Dr. Slocumb and I
gave to a few patients with rheumatoid arthritis, adrenal lecithin prepared
for us by E. C. Kendall and B. F. McKenzie. We administered it, not as an
a d r e n a l p r o d u c t per se, b u t i n a n a t t e m p t t o p r o d u c e h y p e r l i p e m i a w h i c h
often accompanies jaundice or pregnancy. No significant relief resulted.


Decision to administer compound E of Kendall.                        During one of our conferences
in January, 1941, Dr. Kendall and I decided to administer to rheumatoid
patients the adrenal cortical substance, 17-hydroxy-II-dehydrocorticoste-
rone, whenever it might become available. The reasoning behind this joint
decision was fragile, but it was logical in the light of what we knew then
and know now. Sixteen years previously, in 1925, the weakness, fatigue, and
low blood pressure common among patients with rheumatoid arthritis,
which we then called "chronic infectious arthritis", suggested to me that in
connection with, or in addition to, a supposed factor of infection, secondary
‘metabolic changes were present, and that the adrenal glands might somehow
                                           39b,c
be involved in this diseases                       . But the postmortem examination, in 1925,
of the adrenal glands of two patients with rheumatoid arthritis lent no
                                                                                        39c
support to the vague suspicion regarding an adrenal factor , and the notion,
though not forgotten, was laid aside.
   In our conference of January, 1941, Dr. Kendall (with whom I had pre-
viously discussed not only the above-mentioned vague notion of an adrenal
factor in rheumatoid arthritis but also the striking if transient remissions
sometimes induced by reactions to typhoid vaccine) remarked-that his com-
pound E increased the resistance of animals against reactions to typhoid
                                                       56,57,67                                         79
vaccine. Kendall’s compound E                                     (substance Fa of Reichstein ) w a s
being separated in small amounts from the adrenal glands of animals but it
had not yet been tested in any human disease. Might it be useful against
rheumatoid arthritis? The decision to try it out was recorded in my pocket
notebook. But we did not know then that almost eight years would elapse
before there would be enough of this adrenocortical substance to administer
to a rheumatoid patient. Our plan to use it remained attractive through the
several years of waiting.
   In lieu of this. hormone, Slocumb and I gave, in 1941, Kendall’s adrenal


    C O R T I S O N E / A C T H      I N   ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C    C O N D I T I O N S           3 1 9

cortex   extract,   "cortin",   to   three    patients   with    rheumatoid       arthritis,         without
                       4   2
impressive results . With none of Kendall’s compound E or any other
likely product available to us we then (1941 and 1942; 1946 to 1948) pro-
duced in a few arthritis volunteers jaundice induced by the oral use of lacto-
phenin after the method of Hanssen (1942). Temporary remissions were
                                                                               39m
induced but we could not identify the responsible agent                           .


First use of Kendall’s compound E in rheumatoid arthritis.                 In August, 1948, we
tried to relieve a woman, badly crippled with rheumatoid arthritis, by giving
lactophenin orally to induce jaundice. But no jaundice developed. We then
decided to try compound E (Kendall) if it was available. Our earlier con-
jecture that substance X might be an adrenal hormone had meanwhile be-
                                                                               10,26,99,100,105,106,108
come strengthened by the observation of others                                                            that
some of the seemingly diverse agents which often temporarily relieved ar-
thritic patients (foreign protein reactions, starvation, various surgical oper-
ations) were now known to be capable of stimulating the adrenal cortex.
But despite our sustained desire to use this hormone whenever it might be
available, we had no firm conviction, only the hope, that this compound
might be substance X.
             391
  A letter requesting enough of Kendall’s compound E for one patient
was sent on September 4, 1948, to Merck & Co., Inc., whose research
                                                84
chemists (chiefly Dr. L. H. Sarett ) , w o r k i n g i n c o l l a b o r a t i o n w i t h D r .
Kendall and his associates, had finally succeeded in making a small amount
of this substance. The letter concluded: "We know that there is a potentially
provokable mechanism [for the reversibility of rheumatoid arthritis] which
is activated by pregnancy and jaundice very rapidly, by jaundice for example
within three days... Therefore if any adrenal compound is of real significance
in rheumatoid arthritis we would expect to see some results within a very
few days." A small supply of Kendall’s compound E was soon received from
Drs. Randolph Major, Vice President, and James Carlisle, Medical Director
of Merck & Co., Inc.
  Dr. Kendall and I decided to use for this first rheumatoid patient daily
doses of 100 mg intramuscularly, so that we might not commit the error of
underdosage. Thus, on September 21, 1948, Dr. Slocumb began to admin-
ister to the above-mentioned patient daily doses of 100 mg of compound E
(not the acetate) in the form of a crystalline suspension in saline solution.
Within three days the patient was markedly improved and continued to
improve until the daily dose was reduced to 25 mg.


320                                                                      1950      P.S.HENCH


       Because of very limited supplies and the difficulties which were encoun-
tered in the preparation of the early suspensions, only four more patients
were              given                compound                  E    (which      Dr.    Kendall       and      I    later   renamed           "corti-
sone")                  from             September,                  1948,   to    January,    1949.           The     preparation           of     the
suspensions of compound E for intramuscular injection presented many
problems which, step by step during these months, were solved by Dr.
                                                                                                   56,57
Kendall, who has discussed them elsewhere                                                                  .
       In January, 1949, we requested a supply of ACTH from Dr. John R.
Mote, then Director of Laboratories of Armour & Co. We first administered
it on February 8, 1949, to a patient with rheumatoid arthritis. Thereafter
c o r t i s o n e ( M e r c k ) , o r A C T H ( Ar m o u r ) o r b o t h w e r e g i v e n b y m y a s s o -
ciates Drs. Slocumb and Polley, and by our assistants to a series of patients
with severe or moderately severe rheumatoid arthritis. The first report of
results was presented April 20, 1949, by Hench, Kendall, Slocumb and
                   40
P o l l e y . Dr. Randall Sprague had become our advisor in metabolic proce-
dures and carried out the metabolic studies which were made in some of
our cases by himself in collaboration with Drs. Power, Mason, Albert, and
                                  94
Mathieson .




                 The Present Status of Cortisone and ACTH in General Medicine


                             General results of cortisone or ACTH in rheumatoid arthritis


Clinical effects.                                To date several thousand patients with rheumatoid arthritis
in various parts of the world have received either cortisone, generally corti-
sone acetate, or ACTH, daily for periods varying from only a few days to
                                                                                                                             3-8,17,22,24,28,50,52-54,60,
many months. The results obtained elsewhere
64,69,78,82,91,92,101,102
                                       are                  in   agreement        with     those           reported      from         the         Mayo
                            3 9 0 , 4 0 - 4 5 , 1 0 7
C l i n i c                                             .

       In practically all cases most of the symptoms have markedly and quickly
diminished during the use of either hormone. Because the clinical results
from ACTH are essentially similar to those from cortisone it is assumed that
ACTH, when injected intramuscularly, stimulates patients with responsive
adrenals to increase the production of their own cortisone, or a similar steroid
hormone such as 17-hydroxycorticosterone (Kendall’s compound F)*.


* This has since been named "hydrocortisone".


   C O R T I S O N E / A C T H                I N   ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C   C O N D I T I O N S   321

  When either hormone is given, there is a diminution, first of the subjective
phenomena (stiffness, soreness, tenderness), later of the objective features
(fever if present, swelling, flexion contractures if not too long established,
size of rheumatoid nodules, and enlarged lymph nodes). A sense of well-
being, increased psychomotor activity, and increased appetite and weight
commonly develop.
  Laboratory abnormalities tend to diminish. Sedimentation rates generally
decrease, often rapidly. Hemoglobin concentrations may increase and hyper-
globulinemia usually decreases. Urinary 17-ketosteroids generally diminish
during the daily use of 100 mg doses of cortisone, increase during the use of
        42,66,94
ACTH               . Either hormone increases the excretion of corticosteroids in
urine. Urinary amino acids increase during remissions induced by cortisone
or ACTH as they do during spontaneous remissions or those related to preg-
                            9 , 5 0
nancy or jaundice                     . The hormones may alter the alpha waves in electro-
                        6 , 4 9 , 7 8
encephalograms                          .   They do not prevent formation of antibodies, nor
alter agglutinins to sensitized red sheep cells present in sera of rheumatoid
          9 8
patient .
  Subjective relief may be marked but incomplete, almost complete or com-
plete. Objective features usually do not disappear entirely: some fusiform
thickening or painless articular bogginess may remain to show that the dis-
ease is suppressed rather than cured. Residual architectural damage to carti-
lage and bone remains unaffected. Articular biopsies of synovia, carried out
before and at various times during the use of these hormones, have revealed
                                                            3,42
varying degrees of improvements .


Results of hormonal discontinuance.                          Relief of symptoms has usually lasted as
l o n g a s t h e h o r m o n e s w e r e g i v e n . But thereafter relapses have generally
occurred: usually within one or two months, occasionally more promptly
                                                      4 2
and severely (rebound relapses) . But a number of patients have retained
much, sometimes almost all, of their relief for several months without the
                                  42
aid of the hormones . A few other patients have experienced a short relapse
for about a month, then regained much of their previous improvement.
The question arises whether these posthormonal remissions were spontane-
ous and coincidental or induced by the previous hormonal usage.


Undesirable physiologic effects ("side effects") of cortisone and ACTH. The do-
ses of hormones required to suppress rheumatoid arthritis are relatively
high compared to doses which protect addisonian patients (or patients with


322                                                  1950            P.S.HENCH


adrenal                insufficiency)*. Often these doses are well tolerated, especially if
given for only a few weeks; sometimes they are not, in which case the
consequences of hypercortisonism develop, and any one or more of a va-
riety of effects may occur. Some of these are of little importance; others
are of greater consequence and may provide certain hazards to certain pa-
                 40-45,94
tients                      .

     Side effects encountered fairly frequently have been mild irritability with
increased psychomotor activity, an initial retention, generally mild, of so-
dium chloride and water, producing fluctuant weight with or without visible
pretibial edema; mild hypertrichosis, acneiform eruption or rounding of the
face. Fluid retention if it develops, is usually mild, generally lasts only a few
days and may then disappear even though the dosage of hormone is not
altered. The doses currently employed do not as a rule produce deficits of
electrolytes or nitrogen, at least in persons allowed eat at will. Certain
                                                                                                       6-8,14,28,50,69,72,78,
rare or rather rare side effects are of special interest
82,94,102
            : transient renal glycosuria or significant reduction of carbohydrate
                        6,42,51,93                                                                 42,94
tolerance                            ; hypopotassemic hypochloremic alkalosis                              ; transient
major alterations of psyche which may develop for a few days, generally in
persons with markedly disturbed personality patterns, or with prepsychotic
                                              4 9 , 7 8 , 8 1
o r p s y c h o t i c dispositions                              ;   and spontaneous fractures occurring in
elderly osteoporotic persons usually after excessive physical activity. Signif-
icant interference with wound healing has occurred rarely in patients receiv-
ing the usual doses employed. So far all the side effects observed by us and
others have been reversible and have disappeared when the dosage was
lowered sufficiently, or the use of hormone discontinued.
                                                                                                                      42,45,94
     The side effects have been listed and discussed in detail elsewhere                                                         .
Physicians who would use these hormones should become familiar with these
possible side effects and-with certain measures devised for their prevention,
modification or control.
     Because of their potential effects, cortisone or ACTH should be used with
caution in the following: hypertensive cardiovascular disease, diabetes melli-
         6,42,51,94,                                                                                                      68,69
tus                    tuberculosis, old rheumatic carditis with decompensation
94,102                                                              8 1
         , l a t e n t o r f r a n k p s y c h o s e s , marked osteoporosis associated with
                                                                          102              32,83
senility or with rheumatoid arthritis , and peptic ulcers                                          .
      Certain measures have been devised to prevent or modify some of the
 * During the past few months we have been using smaller suppressive and smaller
maintenance doses than we used previously; results have been generally quite satis-
factory and will be reported elsewhere.


          C O R T I S O N E / A C T H           I N   ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C   C O N D I T I O N S   3 2 3
                                 42,45,94
 undesirable effects                        . These include limitation of sodium chloride intake
 to 1 g or less, and, if necessary, the oral use of a diuretic such as potassium
 nitrate, to control retention of fluid; oral use of potassium chloride if nec-
 essary to control. deficits of potassium and chloride; personality appraisals
 and the avoidance or cautious use of the hormones in patients with prepsy-
                            81
 c h o t i c t e n d e n c i e s ; early reduction of the initial suppressive doses to lower
                                                                                                               7,
 "maintenance doses" in all cases in which use of the hormones is prolonged
 28,45
         ; and use of estrogen (such as 5 mg of estrone twice weekly) in meno-
                                                                             42
 pausal women somewhat intolerant to cortisone .
         The incidence of troublesome side effects has been fairly low among
 patients given the hormones for a few days or weeks. As a result of the
 procedures just mentioned and others, the incidence of side effects has been
 declining among patients given the hormones for many weeks or months.


 Potentiation of cortisone and A C T H .                    Attempts have been made to find some
 synergistic material which, when given with cortisone or ACTH, would
 enhance the effect of doses of cortisone or ACTH which were too small to
 produce side effects. Salicylates and vitamin C, and more recently insulin,
have been recommended. So far we have seen no potentiation of cortisone
 from-such measures. The effects of cortisone or ACTH given in conjunction
 with gold salts to patients with rheumatoid arthritis are being investigated;
 detailed results have not been reported.


 Gaps in Our Current Knowledge of Basic Facts.                              A completely rational and
 physiologic method for the administration of these hormones cannot yet be
 developed because we presently lack sufficient knowledge concerning cer-
 tain basic facts. The main defects in our knowledge can be summarized
 briefly: (1) I t i s n o t y e t k n o w n h o w m u c h c o r t i s o n e o r A C T H i s p r o d u c e d
 daily by the adrenal and pituitary glands of normal persons, or by patients
 with rheumatoid arthritis or with one of the other diseases influenced by
 these hormones. (2) Exogenous ACTH stimulates responsive adrenals to
 increase their production of endogenous cortisone but we do not know how
 much that increase is in any given case. (3) The administration of exogenous
 cortisone exerts a suppressive effect on the production of endogenous corti-
 sone but we cannot yet measure, with any degree of precision, the decrease
 in production, which incidentally may vary considerably during the ad-
 ministration of. the exogenous cortisone. (4) We do not y e t k n o w w h e t h e r
 cortisone (or compound F, hydrocortisone) is the only adrenal cortical hor-


324                                            1950      P.S.HENCH

          5,66,73
mone                . Little is known about the metabolism of cortisone, about how
much is utilized normally by the cells of the body, or how much is (nor-
mally) altered or destroyed in the body or excreted before it has had an
effect.
   Until we acquire some of this knowledge we can only attempt to develop,
with intelligence and with concern for calculated risks, an empiric and reason-
ably safe method of administration.


Optimal Method of Administration of Cortisone and ACTH.                          For the investi-
gative management of rheumatoid arthritis and other chronic conditions
which seem now to require prolonged use of the hormones, the basic policy
must be to provide the greatest symptomatic relief that is possible consistent
with the avoidance of undesirable physiologic effects. If doses which are
needed for full symptomatic relief produce significant side effects, one should
reduce the dose and be content with less than full suppression of rheumatic
symptoms, at least until a superior plan of administration is developed.
   The optimal dosage and method of administration remain to be deter-
mined. Various plans of administration of cortisone and ACTH are under
                          7,28,45,82
investigation                          . T he advantages and disadvantages of each plan have
been described. The main schemes include (1) repeated, fairly short, inter-
rupted courses using the same hormone for each course; (2) repeated, fairly
short, interrupted courses, alternating the hormones; using for example cor-
tisone for the first course, ACTH for the second course, cortisone for the
third, and so forth; (3) more or less continued administration of either hor-
mone: first the use of suppressive doses, then a gradual reduction to the level
of an effective maintenance dose, and then the prolonged use of maintenance
doses given either three days each week (intramuscularly) or daily (orally
or intramuscularly). A significant number of rheumatoid patients are being
satisfactorily managed by this latter method. The combined tie of cortisone
and ACTH, given in differing proportions and by differing schedules, is also
under investigation.


Oral Administration of Cortisone.                       The former remarks about cortisone refer
chiefly to its intramuscular administration. Current investigations indicate
that cortisone is also effective when given orally in tablet form. In May, 1949,
one of our rheumatoid patients responded very well to the oral administra-
tion of capsules of highly concentrated adrenal cortex extract (Upjohn) con-
                                             42,76
taining compounds E and F                            . From this experience and from the observa-


   C O R T I S O N E / A C T H      I N   ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C            C O N D I T I O N S    3 2 5

                                           37
tions of Heilman and Kendall w h o a d m i n i s t e r e d c o r t i s o n e t o a n i m a l s w e
concluded that the oral use of cortisone would be effective. Satisfactory
results from cortisone tablets given to rheumatoid patients have been re-
                                                       29                                            60
ported by Freyberg and his associates , by Kuzell and Schaffarzick , and
                                                                                                          39P,43,45
by Boland and Headley. Our own results have also been satisfactory                                                    ;
details regarding 100 cases will be reported soon with my colleagues, Ward,
                                            107
Slocumb, Polley, and Lowman . The total daily oral dose which is effective
in most cases approximates in amount the effective daily intramuscular dose.
It is the preliminary impression of Freyberg and his associates, of Boland and
Headley, and of ourselves that when small doses are given orally several
times a day the clinical effect may be more satisfactory and the incidence of
undesired effects may be lower than when one large daily dose is given intra-
muscularly. The new method may be more physiologic, approximating the
more or less continuous output of small amounts of cortisone-like material
from the human adrenal cortex.


Extension of the Use of these Hormones against Other Conditions.                                When the
effectiveness of cortisone and ACTH against rheumatoid arthritis became
apparent we remembered that the ameliorating effect of jaundice and preg-
                                                                     39k,m
nancy is not disease specific but group specific                             . We remembered also
that jaundice and pregnancy appear to exert an anti-allergic, as well as an
                              39k
a n t i - r h e u m a t i c , e f f e c t . Therefore it seemed logical to hope that these hor-
mones would be found to be useful against certain non-rheumatic as well as
other rheumatic diseases. If one could assume that cortisone (or a cortisone-
like substance such as Kendall’s compound F) is the ameliorating agent
operating in jaundice or pregnancy, cortisone and ACTH might be expected
to be effective against ( I) various diseases commonly relieved by jaundice or
                39m
pregnancy          ; (2) diseases which involved essentially the same histologic
types of tissues (muscular, fibrous, collagenous) which are affected in rheu-
                                                                             39k
matoid arthritis; and (3) c e r t a i n a l l e r g i c c o n d i t i o n s .
   For these reasons, therefore, the first extension of the use of these hormones
by us, and then by others, was to cases of lupus erythematosus disseminatus,
and acute rheumatic fever, then to various allergic conditions.


Results in rheumatic fever.           Following the use of either hormone, the acute
manifestations of rheumatic fever have generally subsided quickly, some of
them (fever, polyarthritis, tachycardia, "toxemia") usually within a few days,
others usually within two to three weeks (increased sedimentation rates, aug-


326                                     1950       P.S.HENCH

                                                                      2 , 4 1 , 4 2 , 4 4 - 4 6 , 6 8 , 6 9 , 1 0 1 , 1 0 2

mented P-R intervals, hyperglobulinemia)                                                                                      .   When

present, pre-existing chronic valvular damage and old cardiac hypertrophy
have remained unchanged. But in some cases certain manifestations of acute
carditis have been promptly lessened or abolished, and within the limits of
our   short    follow-up      studies   (average:          a   few   months)             no         definite                  persisting
signs of new or increased old carditis have developed from the acute attacks
which were suppressed by the hormones.
   In a few reported cases in which there was frank or impending cardiac
decompensation, use of the hormones has caused troublesome but generally
transient retention of fluid. But in most patients with acute rheumatic fever
and acute carditis few if any major side effects have developed.
   Cortisone     and     ACTH,     although        they        suppress     symptoms,                       do         not        "cure"
rheumatic fever, nor is it yet certain that they shorten the inherent duration
of its acute phase. Hence they must be given until the natural duration of the
acute phase, generally six to twelve weeks, has run its course. Otherwise, as
pointed out by my colleagues, Drs. A. R. Barnes and H. L. Smith, some or
all of the acute manifestations will reappear and remain either until the hor-
mone is given again or until the acute phase has spent itself.
   Some evidence suggests that the proliferative as well as the exudative man-
ifestations of acute rheumatic carditis may be suppressed by these hormones.
If so, their proper use may prevent much pathologic change in the heart.
But prolonged observations will be required to determine whether or to
what extent these hormones will prevent the initial development or aggrava-
tion of rheumatic carditis.

                                                                                                                                      31,
Results in other conditions. T h e a c u t e a r t i c u l a r m a n i f e s t a t i o n s o f g o u t
38,65,69,80,91,101,102,111,112
                               and the articular      complications              of        disseminat-
                                  11,40,42,69,87,101,112                                                               20,23,42,58,112,

ed lupus erythematosus                                     , ulcerative colitis
                 69,77,102
psoriasis                                            42
                             and tuberculosis have been found to be-responsive to
these hormones in most, but not in all cases. Symptoms of osteo-arthritis
have been modified in some cases, but not in others.
   The hormonal effects on the non-articular features of these diseases have
been varied. Many features of disseminated lupus erythematosus have been
temporarily suppressed, others have not. Although remissions, not cures,
have been induced, use of the hormones has apparently been a life-saving
measure in certain acute crises of this disease. In ulcerative colitis, symptom-
atic relief of intestinal symptoms has been provided more often than objec-
tive improvement. In psoriasis, articular lesions have been more responsive


       C O R T I S O N E / A C T H                  I N         ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C      C O N D I T I O N S          3 2 7

than the lesions of skin. In tuberculosis, cortisone and ACTH appear to
                                                                                                                                     27,42,
control hyperergic tissue reactions, and may reduce certain symptoms
103
      . But the hormones exert no bactericidal or bacteriostatic effect, and be-
cause they inhibit formation of fibroblasts it has been suggested that they
                                                    27,34,42,63,90,103

may foster the spread of active tuberculous lesions                    . Therefore

they should be used with considerable caution in tuberculous infections, at
least for the present. But cortisone does not produce lysis of already existing
granulation tissue.
      Several types of allergic reactions have been suppressed during the use of
these hormones and sometimes for varying lengths of time thereafter: rag-
                          15,42                                             13,15,102                                102
weed hay fever                    , bronchial asthma                                    , status asthmaticus , infan-
tile atopic eczema, u r t i c a r i a , a n d c e r t a i n s k i n a n d o t h e r r e a c t i o n s d u e t o
                                                                   13
penicillin, gold, and other drugs .
      One of the more promising fields of usefulness for these hormones appears
to be the acute and subacute inflammatory diseases of the eye: uveitis, scleri-
tis, iridocyclitis, keratitis, chorioretinitis, sympathetic ophthalmia, and ver-
                             3 5 , 4 7 , 5 9 , 9 6 , 1 0 2
nal conjunctivitis                                            . In some cases cortisone in eye drops or oph-
thalmic ointment has been effective; in other cases subconjunctival or intra-
gluteal injections were employed.
  Less striking but still of considerable interest have been the results in some
                                              85                                           85                              69,102
cases of cranial arteritis , p e r i a r t e r i t i s n o d o s a ,                            dermatomyositis                     , ne-
             25,55,63                                  19,110                                                22,97
phrosis                 , sprue, burns                          , and certain blood dyscrasias                       , especial-
ly leukemia and acquired hemolytic anemia.
       The possible influence of these hormones on many other conditions is
being investigated, and optimistic preliminary reports concerning some of
                                      1 4 , 7 2 , 1 0 2
t h e m h a v e appeared                                  .    But it will take years to evaluate the results
critically. If one confines his attention to those diseases about which opinion
seems to be fairly unanimous after one or two years of experience, one finds
that about fifteen or twenty diseases can be modified markedly or suppressed
almost completely, at least temporarily. What makes this the more in-
teresting is that most of these responsive diseases have been heretofore
peculiarly resistant to control or even to temporary modification by any
previous remedy.


 Speculations on the Mode of Action.                                    Many of the numerous physiologic effects
 of cortisone and ACTH appear to be non-specific, meaning that if large
 enough doses are given long enough these effects will develop in anyone,
 normal or diseased. But the ability of these hormones to ameliorate markedly


328                                      1 9 5 0 P . S . H E N C H


almost the whole symptom complex of certain diseases appears to be group
specific; at least the outstanding clinical results occur in the rheumatic,
                                              39n
allergic, and collagen diseases .
   But how these hormones accomplish, for example, their antirheumatic
                                      3 9 n , 0 , 4 5
effect is still quite u n k n o w n                     . Because rheumatoid arthritis infrequent-
ly complicates Addison’s disease and because the daily dose required to sup-
press the responsive inflammation is considerably greater than that required
by addisonian patients, it appears that the hormones do not merely correct
some simple deficiency, such as one from an inadequate production of corti-
sone or ACTH. The administration of cortisone may correct a relative, not an
absolute, deficiency and satisfy an increased tissue requirement for the hor-
       45
m o n e . Thus current opinion is that the hormones act at the tissue, or cell,
level. But this tentative conclusion must be the subject of much further study.
   In providing relief, these hormones do not kill germs or appear to remove
the unknown etiologic irritants of the conditions which they ameliorate.
Thus they do not "cure" the diseases the symptoms of which they modify so
profoundly. But in an unknown manner they provide the susceptible tissues
with a shield-like buffer or protection against a wide variety of irritants.
   The hormones influence beneficially, not the irreversible pathologic anat-
omy or ashes of disease, but the reversible part of the responsive diseases,
their pathologic p h ysiology, that is, the reaction of tissues to the irritant.
   To use a figure of speech, these hormones appear not to extinguish the fire
nor to act like a carpenter to repair the fire’s damage. Instead they appear to
"dampen the fire" or to provide, as it were, an asbestos suit behind which
the patient, like some biblical Shadrach, Meshach, or Abednego, protects his
tissues from the fire. If this protection is removed prematurely before the fire
has spent itself, the patient and his tissues will react again to the burning. But
if the protection is not discarded until the natural duration of the fire is over,
the patient remains largely free of symptoms and apparently "well".


Search for Substitutes for Cortisone and ACTH. Miscellaneous Steroids. - Be-
cause of the cost, limited supplies and potential side effects of cortisone and
ACTH, some effective steroidal substitute has been intensively sought. So
far the search has been fruitless. About 50 steroids have been tested by us and
                                                                          14,18,30,61,74,76
others for antirheumatic and other properties                                                 . With the ex-
ception of 17-hydroxycorticosterone (Kendall’s compound F, substance M
of Reichstein) none has given significant results in the limited range of doses
which has thus far been explored. But a comparative study, by Polley and


  C O R T I S O N E / A C T H      I N   ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C   C O N D I T I O N S   3 2 9

Mason, of the chemical configurations of these ineffective steroids with those
of the potent compounds E and F, has revealed the structural requirements
which appear to give the steroid nucleus its antirheumatic properties and
which appear to be responsible for the physiologic activity of cortisone. They
are a ketone group at carbon-j, either a ketone or a hydroxyl group at
carbon-II, a ketone group at carbon-20, a hydroxyl group at carbon-17 and
at carbon-21, and a double bond between carbon atoms 4 and 5.
  Compound F (Kendall) - Certain data suggest that Kendall’s compound
F (17-hydroxycorticosterone:hydrocortisone) may be the ultimate product
                         66,73
of the adrenal cortex            . Although our supplies of compound F have been
very meagre, the antirheumatic activity of this compound appears to be
                                              43,45,76
comparable to that of cortisone                          .


Summary of Present Status.           Depending on the amount of their experience
with these hormones and also upon their own aggressiveness or conservatism,
American physicians, including clinical investigators, would express widely
differing opinions as to the present status of these hormones in general medi-
cine. Until recently, the hormones were used at the Mayo Clinic, not partic-
ularly as forms of treatment, but as tools for physiologic investigations. But
physicians cannot remain academic and aloof to the army of patients who
ask, "How soon can you treat me with these substances safely and within my
means?"
  Many investigators with one or two years of experience in the use of these
hormones believe that cortisone and ACTH can now be given limited prac-
tical application in the management of conditions which may require rel-
atively short-term usage for a few days or weeks, for example, acute gouty
arthritis, acute rheumatic fever, acute ocular inflammations, acute or seasonal
allergies, acute skin sensitivities, and acute crises of disseminated lupus
erythematosus.
  As for the application of cortisone and ACTH to the management of
responsive chronic diseases, the many investigations now being made are
revealing the scope and limits of their usefulness. Certain conservative, crit-
ical rheumatologists have already expressed their belief that the careful use
of these hormones as therapeutic agents for rheumatoid arthritis is justified
and appears properly to be impending.
  To permit the appropriate therapeutic and investigative use of these hor-
mones, the United States Food and Drug Administration has released them
for sale to all licensed American physicians.


330                                               1950 P.S.HENCH

Requirements for the Orderly Development of Cortisone and ACTH as
                                                  Therapeutic Agents


For the proper and orderly development of cortisone (or the cortisone-like
compound F) and ACTH as therapeutic agents, chemists must learn how to
make these materials in more or less unlimited quantities, and physiologists
and physicians must try to learn how they produce their beneficial effects, or
in lieu of such basic knowledge, physicians must learn how to use them em-
pirically but nevertheless intelligently and safely. As stated elsewhere, "In the
presence of functioning adrenal glands we must learn how to co-operate with
                                                                                                                   43
them rather than to try to dominate them or take over their functions" .


Problems of production.              In the competition for the attainment of their respec-
tive goals the biochemist and chemical manufacturer are somewhat ahead of
the physiologist and the clinical investigator. Despite enormous difficulties,
the production of these hormones, especially cortisone, has been greatly in-
creased.
   Cortisone.    -     Although           none             of    the   thirty-six   steps   required   to    convert
desoxycholic acid into cortisone has been by-passed, some of the steps have
been made less costly, less time-consuming, and productive of greater yields;
hence the cost has fallen from an estimated production cost of $1,000 a gram
in 1948 to the current (November, 1950) sales price of $35.00 per gram.
Despite certain news reports, no cortisone has yet been made from Stro-
                       12,104
phanthus p l a n t s            , soybeans, or Mexican yams. But the search for new
starting materials for the partial synthesis of cortisone, and for methods for
its total synthesis, continues and will doubtless be successful in time.
   ACTH. - The pituitary glands of animals (beef, horses) other than the pig
now yield significant amounts of potent adrenocorticotropic hormone (Ar-
mour’s ACTH; Wilson’s corticotropin). Potent ACTH is also being made
from the pituitaries of whales by Scandinavian scientist@.
   A   "long-acting"            preparation           of        ACTH,    prepared    by     Armour     &    Co.,    has
given satisfactory results in a few cases of rheumatoid, gouty and psoriatic
arthritis, rheumatic fever, and ulcerative colitis. Maximal duration of activ-
                                            112
ity was forty-eight hours .
                                     1 , 6 2 , 6 4 , 7 1
   Several investigators                                    have suggested that peptide fragments of
ACTH may retain physiologic activity, possess a much smaller molecular
weight than the parent product and provide the hope that eventual syn-
thesis of a potent ACTH peptide may be accomplished.


   C O R T I S O N E / A C T H   I N   ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C   C O N D I T I O N S    3 3 1

  Compound F (Kendall).- Until recently, compound F of Kendall (sub-
stance M of Reichstein) was obtained only by extraction from adrenal
glands. But now the biologic conversion or biosynthesis of compound F
                                                                          33,36,70
from substance S (Reichstein) is being accomplished                                  as also is the
                                                                                                109
synthetic production of compound F from a precursor of compound E .


Development of a rational (physiologic) method of administration.              As stated above,
the development of a rational or physiologic method for the administra-
tion of these hormones will not be fully accomplished until more has been
learned about the physiology of the pituitary and adrenal glands in the
diseases which respond to these hormones, and about the metabolism of
cortisone, hydrocortisone (compound F of Kendall) and ACTH, in health
and in disease.
  One of the prime requirements is the development ofsatisfactory biologic
or biochemical methods for estimating the amount of these substances in
bodily fluids and tissues. Thus we could learn how much of them are pro-
duced by the pituitary and adrenals of normal persons, or of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis or other diseases. The present chromatographic meth-
                                                                                      113
ods are useful, but simpler, more refined methods are desired .
 Much more must be learned about the function of the pituitary and adre-
nal glands in rheumatic and other patients as compared to normal persons.
The majority of investigative rheumatologists and endocrinologist are as-
suming that the pituitary and adrenal glands are functioning normally in
most rheumatoid patients, the conclusion being based chiefly on eosino-
                                                                                                101
philic responses to a single injection of exogenous ACTH (Thorn test) ,
and on studies of urinary steroids. But the fact that the adrenals of most
rheumatoids apparently secrete normal amounts of their eosinopenic-pro-
ducing hormone (cortisone?) under stimulation by exogenous ACTH does
not necessarily prove indisputably that the pituitary of the rheumatoid is
producing normal amounts of endogenous ACTH, or that the adrenals of
the rheumatoid are, without such added stimulation, producing normal
amounts of cortisone or cortisone-like material. And of course what are
normal and adequate amounts for a healthy person may not constitute ade-
quate amounts for the ill.
  Despite the fact that studies of the histologic structure of glandular tissues
do not always permit one to form precise opinions as to their physiologic
potency or normalcy, a more comprehensive study of the histology of the
pituitary and adrenal glands of rheumatoid patients (also of others who


332                                   1950    P.S.HENCH


respond   to   these   hormones),       and   "normal"   persons,   for   example,   persons
killed in accidents, and so forth, must be made at necropsy. Are the pituitary
and adrenal glands of rheumatoid normal histologically, or are there some
                                                                                          75
(primary or secondary) evidences of disease therein? A British investigator
has recently recorded his belief that there may be a characteristic histologic
abnormality in the pituitary of rheumatoid arthritics, an abnormality not
found in controls. Others have recently reported the presence, in rheumatoid
patients, of certain abnormalities in the metabolism of steroids which may
indicate a faulty secretion or an abnormal metabolism of the adrenocortical
                             21,88
hormones in this disease             . If true, the significance of these abnormalities
remains to be determined.
   From studies made with cortisone or ACTH labelled with radioactive iso-
topes much could be learned about the metabolism of these hormones.
ACTH tagged with radioiodine and injected into the heart of animals passes
at once into the adrenal cortex where the radioactivity remains for about
                                                   8 9
two hours in rapidly decreasing a m o u n t s . Studies with cortisone labelled
                                                                               16
with tritium, a radio-isotope of hydrogen, are also being made . By these
and other methods it may someday be possible to determine whether there
is, at the tissue level, a decreased utilization or an increased requirement for
cortisone.


Characteristics of substance X.        Until some of the above-mentioned investi-
gative methods have been developed we cannot test adequately the hypoth-
esis that the effective substance X of jaundice and that of pregnancy are
identical and that either or both are cortisone (or compound F). Cortisone
or compound F is presently the most likely candidate for substance X. The
characteristics of substance X are: (1) that it is antirheumatic and antiallergic,
that, in other words, it is group specific rather than disease specific; (2) that
it develops rapidly in jaundiced patients, more slowly in pregnant patients,
and appears to operate in these patients during a characteristic period of time;
and (3) that its clinical effects are accomplished rapidly and are more or less
complete but are transient. Cortisone appears to possess most of these
characteristics. But in the light of our newer knowledge we must study the
pituitary-adrenal relationships during the changing phases of (natural and
experimental) jaundice and of pregnancy in rheumatic and non-rheumatic
patients. Similar studies should also be made in rheumatoid patients receiving
gold salts. Thus we may learn how pregnancy and jaundice (and much less
commonly, gold salts) provide their benefits. We must test rigidly the valid-


   C O R T I S O N E / A C T H   I N   ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C    C O N D I T I O N S   3 3 3

ity of the interesting but unproved assumptions that in pregnancy the pro-
                                                              105
duction of cortisone may be markedly increased                      and that in hepatitis with
j a u n d i c e t h e n o r m a l ( ? ) p rocess of inactivation or destruction of cortisone,
perhaps by the liver, may be lessened with a resultant relative increase in
           45
c o r t i s o n e . (No evidence of increased adrenal activity, as revealed by studies
of urinary steroids, was found by Sprague, Mason, and Power among seven
men and nine women with jaundice due to obstruction, cirrhosis, or viral
hepatitis.)




Clinical investigators, while waiting for the collection of these missing data,
and for the development of these needed methods, can do much to insure
the reasonably intelligent and safe, even though empiric, use of these hor-
mones. Long-term studies of various plans of administration may show how
to provide the greatest relief with the least risk, and may even show how
to project the hormonal effects farther into the posthormonal period than
seems possible now. Clinical and metabolic studies of the effect of repeated
small doses of cortisone or hydrocortisone given orally may also constitute
another step in the direction of developing the most physiologic method of
administration.
   During the past year I have often been asked, "Do you think we shall be
able to use these or similarly effective substances with safety, or to reproduce
continuously the benefits of pregnancy or jaundice?" I believe that we shall.
The pregnant woman develops a strikingly altered and improved physio-
logic state which is generally antagonistic to the continuation of the symp-
toms of rheumatoid arthritis. She normally tolerates this altered, antirheu-
matic state for months without any disturbing evidences of hormonal im-
balance (unless her white striae are somewhat analogous to the red striae of
hypercortisonism). Indeed she often feels "better than I have for years". As
we learn of the agent and mechanism responsible for her antirheumatic state,
so we may learn to reproduce that basic mechanism for the physiologic
good of others.


                                          Conclusion


Cortisone and ACTH today represent unframed pictures. No boundaries can
yet be established to define either their full potentialities or their limitations.


334                              1950   P.S.HENCH


These hormones still belong to the physiologist and to the clinical investiga-
tor as much as, if not more than, to the practicing physician. But as Professor
Starling said many years ago, "The physiology of today is the medicine of
            95
tomorrow" .
  But whatever the immediate or future destiny of these hormones may be,
in the field of practical therapeutics they already have demonstrated clearly
the potential reversibility of many disease processes which have been thought
heretofore to be more or less relentlessly progressive. Thus they have given a
sound basis for much hope. In particular, they constitute powerful tools with
which we can investigate many problems related to the etiology and treat-
ment of a wide variety of diseases.




  1. E. B. Astwood, A. P. Cleroux, R. W. Payne, and M. S. Raben, Therapeutic
     studies on some newer corticotropbic (ACTH) preparations, Bull. New Engl. Med.
     Center, 12 (1950) 2-10.
  2. A. R. Barnes, Effects of cortisone and ACTH in 14 patients with acute rheumatic
     fever, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 25 (1950) 478-479.
  3. W. Bauer, J. E. Giansiracusa, and M. W. Ropes, The natural course of rheumatoid
     arthritis and the changes induced by ACTH, Trans. Assoc. Am. Physicians, 63
     (1950) 76-78.
  4. W. Bauer, E. W. Boland, R. H. Freyberg, W. P. Holbrook, and E. F. Rosenberg,
     Discussions Seventh International Congress on Rheumatic Diseases, New York, May
     30-June 3, 1949.
  5. E. W. Boland, The effects of cortisone and adrenocorticotropic hormone
     (ACTH) on certain rheumatic diseases, California Med., 72 (1950) 405-414.
  6. E. W. Boland and N. E. Headley, Effects of cortisone acetate on rheumatoid ar-
     thritis, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 141 (1949) 301-308.
  7. E. W. Boland and N. E. Headley, Management of rheumatoid arthritis with
     smaller (maintenance) doses of cortisone acetate, J. Am. Med. Assoc, 144 (1950)
     365-372.
  8. K. Brøchner-Mortensen, J. Georg, C. Hamburger, E. Snorrason, M. Sprechler,
     A. Videbaek, and O. T. K. With, Hormonbehandling af polyarthritis chronica,
     Ugeskrift Laeger, 112 (1949) 1255-1277.
  9. E. C. Brodie, E. B. Wallraff, A. L. Borden, W. P. Holbrook, C. A. L. Stephens Jr.,
     D. F. Hill L. J. Kent, and A. R. Kemmerer, Urinary excretion of certain amino
     acids during ACTH and cortisone treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, Proc. Soc.
     Exptl. Biol. Med., 75 (1950) 285-287.
 10. J. S. L. Browne, Corticosterone and "Cortin" in human urine, Josiah Macy, Jr.
     Foundation Conference on Bone and Wound Healing. Second Meeting, Josiah Macy, Jr.
      Foundation, New York, 1942, pp. 43-47.


 C O R T I S O N E / A C T H I N ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C C O N D I T I O N S   3 3 5

11. L. A. Brunsting, C. H. Slocumb, and J. W. Didcoct, Effects of cortisone on acute
    disseminated lupus erythematosus, Arch. Dermatol. and Syphilol., 63 (1951) 29-48.
12. R. K. Callow, Expedition to Nigeria. M. R. C. search for tropical plants, Brit.
    Med. J., 1 (1950) 1484-1485.
13. R. A. Carey, A. McG. Harvey, J. E. Howard, and P. F. Wagley, The effect of
    adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and cortisone on drug hypersensitivity
    reactions, Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 87 (1950) 354-386.
14. J. M. Carlisle, Cortisone (compound E): S ummary of its clinical uses, Brit. Med.
    .J.,   2 (1950) 590-595
15. H.     M. Carryer, G. A. Koelsche, L. E. Prickman, C. K. Maytum, C. F. Lake, and
    H.      L. Williams, Effect of cortisone on bronchial asthma and hay fever occurring
    in     subjects sensitive to ragweed pollen, J; Allergy, 21 (1950) 282-287.
16. Chemical and Engineering Reports 118th National Meeting of the ACS: Corti-
    sone Chemistry, Chem. Eng. News, 28 (1950) 3306.
17. W. S. C. Copeman, O. Savage, P. M. F. Bishop, E. C.Bodds, B. Gottlieb, J.
     H. H. Glyn, A. A. Henly, and A. E. Kellie, A study of cortisone and other
     steroids in rheumatoid arthritis, Brit. Med. J., 2 (1950) 849-855.
18. W. S. C. Copeman, J. J. R. Duthie, E. Fletcher, G. N. Myers, O. Savage, F. D.
    Hart, J. H. Kellgren, P. Lehman, G. D. Kersley, H. A. Burt, E. G. L. Bywaters,
    and S. J. Hart&all, Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with deoxycortone and
    ascorbic acid, Brit. Med. J., 1 (1950) 1006-1007.
19. P. O. Crassweller, A. W. Farmer, W. R. Franks, and A. D. McLachhn, Three
    cases of severe bum treated with cortisone, Brit. Med. J., 2 (1950) 977-981.
20. W. H. Dearing and P. W. Brown, Experiences with cortisone and ACTH in
    chronic ulcerative colitis, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 25 (1950) 486-488.
21. K. Dobriner, S. Lieberman, H. Wilson, M. Dunham, I. F. Sommerville, and C.
    P. Rhoads, Adrenal function and steroid excretion in disease; in J. R. Mote:
    Proceedings of the Second Clinical ACTH Conference, Philadelphia, The Blakiston
     Co., 1951, Vol. I, pp. 65-75.
22. J. J. R. Duthie, Clinical trials of ACTH; preliminary report, Edinburgh Med. J.,
    57 (1950) 341-364.
23. C. H. DuToit and W. Bauer, The effect of ACTH in ulcerative colitis; in J. R.
    Mote, Proceedings of the First Clinical ACTH Conference, Philadelphia, The Blakiston
    Co., 1950, pp. 459-468.
24. G. Edström, Undersökningar över vissa hormoneffekter vid kronisk artrit;
    (ACTH, hypofysinplantation, via adrenalinretning, DOCA, progestin, testoste-
    ron, Svenska Läkartidn., 46 (1949) 2697-2713.
25. E. B. Farnsworth, Metabolic changes associatedwith administrationof adrenocor-
    ticotropin in the nephrotic syndrom, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 74 (1950) 60-62.
26. A. P. Forbes, Effect of operations on the 17-ketosteroid excretion in man, Josiah
    Macy, Jr. Foundation Conference on Bone and Wound Healing, Third Meeting, New
     York, Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation, 1943, pp. 146-167.
27. S. Freeman, J. Fershing, C. C. Wang, and L. C. Smith, The effect of ACTH on
    patients with pulmonary tuberculosis; in J. R. Mote, Proceedings of the First Clinical
    ACTH Conference, Philadelphia, The Blakiston Co., 1950, pp. 508-521.


336                                 1950    P.S.HENCH


28. R. H. Freyberg, Effects of cortisone and ACTH in rheumatoid arthritis, Bull. N. Y.
    Acad. Med., 26 (1950) 206-211.
29. R. H. Freyberg, C. T. Traeger, C. H. Adams, T. Kusco, H. Wainerdi, and I.
    Bonomo, Effectiveness of cortisone administered orally, Science, 112 (1950) 429.
30. C. M. Guest, W. H. Kammerer, R. L. Cecil, and S. A. Berson, Epinephrine, preg-
      nenolone, and testosterone in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, J. Am. Med.
    Assoc., 143 (1950) 338-344.
31. A. B. Gutman and T. F. Yü, Effects of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) in
    Gout, Am. J. Med., 9 (1950) 24-30.
32. D. V. Habif, C. C. Hare, and G. H. Glaser, Perforated duodenal ulcer associated
    with pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) therapy, J. Am. Med. Assoc.,
    144 (1950) 996.
33. W. J. Haines, Recent Progress in Hormone Research, Vol. 7, Academic Press, New
    York 1952.
34. P. D’A. Hart and R. J. W. Rees, Enhancing effect of cortisone on tuberculosis in
    the mouse, Lancet, 2 (1950) 391-395.
35. A. M. Harvey, J. E. Howard, and A. A. Kattus, The effect of adrenocorticotropic
    hormone (ACTH) and cortisone on certain diseases of the eye in which hyper-
    sensitivity plays a role, Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 87 (1950) 461-481.
36. O. Hechter, R. P. Jacobsen, R. Jeanloz, H. Levy, C. W. Marshall, G. Pincus, and
      V. Schenker, The bio-oxygenation of steroids at C-II, Arch. Biochem., 25 (1950)
    457-460.
37. F. R. Heilman and E. C. Kendall, The influence of II-dehydro-17-hydroxycorti-
  costerone (compound E) on the growth of a malignant tumor in the mouse,
    Endocrinology, 34 (1944) 416-420.
38. L. Hellman, Production of acute gouty arthritis by adrenocorticotropin, Science,
    109(1949)280-281.
39. P. S. Hench, (a) Chronic infectious arthritis, Mayo Clinic Bull., 6 (1924) 1; (b)
    The protean manifestations of chronic infectious arthritis (with a note on treat-
    ment), Med. Clin. N. Am., 8 (1925) 1295-1306; (c) The systemic nature of
    chronic infectious arthritis, Atlantic Med. J., 28 (1925) 425-436; (d) Analgesia
      accompanying hepatitis and jaundice in cases of chronic arthritis, fibrositis, and
      sciatic pain, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 8 (1933) 430-436; (e) The analgesic
      effect ofhepatitis and jaundice in chronic arthritis, fibrositis, and sciatic pain, Ann.
      Internal Med., 7(1934) 1278-1294; (f) A clinic on some diseases-of joints. IV. The
      inactivation of chronic infectious arthritis and fibrositis by jaundice, Med. Clin.
      N. Am., 19 (1935) 573-583; (g) Effect of jaundice on chronic infectious arthritis
      and on primary fibrositis, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 109(1937) 1481-1484; (k) Effect of
      jaundice on chronic infectious (atrophic) arthritis and on primary fibrositis.
      Further observations. Attempts to reproduce the phenomenon, Arch. Internal
      Med., 61(1938) 451-480; 495-500; (i) The ameliorating effect of pregnancy on
      chronic atrophic (infectious, rheumatoid) arthritis, fibrositis, and intermittent
      hydrarthrosis, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 13 (1938) 161-167; (j) Effect of
      spontaneous jaundice on rheumatoid (atrophic) arthritis. Attempts to reproduce
      the phenomenon, Brit. Med. J., 2 (1938) 394-398; (k) The advantages of hepatic


 C O R T I S O N E / A C T H I N ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C C O N D I T I O N S   3 3 7

      injury and jaundice in certain conditions, notably the rheumatic diseases, Med.
      Clin. N. Am., 24(1949)1209-1237;(l) Personal communication to Dr. Augustus D.
      Gibson, Merck & C O ., Inc., Sept. 4, 1948; (m) The potential reversibility of
      rheumatoid arthritis, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 24 (1949) 167-178; Ann.
      Rheumatic Disease, 8 (1949) 90-96; (n) Cortisone and ACTH in clinical medicine,
      Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 25 (1950) 474-476; (o) The present status of
      cortisone and ACTH in general medicine, Proc. Roy. Soc Med.,43 (1950) 769-773 ;
      (p) (Chairman) Discussion, Ann. Rheumatic Diseases, 9 (1950) 397.
40.   P. S. Hench, E. C. Kendall, C. H. Slocumb, and H. F. Polley, The effect of a
      hormone of the adrenal cortex (17-hydroxy-II-dehydrocorticosterone: com-
      pound E) and of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone on rheumatoid arthritis.
      (Preliminary Report.) Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 24 (1949) 181-197; Ann.
      Rheumatic Diseases, 8 (1949) 97-104.
41.   P. S. Hench, E. C. Kendall, C. H. Slocumb, and H. F. Polley, The effect of a
      hormone of the adrenal cortex, cortisone (17-hydroxy-II-dehydrocorticosterone:
      compound E) and of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone on rheumatoid
      arthritis and acute rheumatic fever, Trans. Assoc. Am. Physicians, 62 (1949) 64-
       80.
42.   P. S. Hench, E. C. Kendall, C. H. Slocumb, and H. F. Polley, Effects of cortisone
      acetate and pituitary ACTH on rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatic fever, and certain
      other conditions, Arch. Internal Med., 85 (1950) 545-666.
43.   P. S. Hench, E. C. Kendall, C. H. Slocumb, and H. F. Polley, The antirheumatic
       effects of cortisone and pituitary ACTH, Trans. Studies Coll. Physicians Phila.,
    18 (1950) 95-172.
44. P. S. Hench, E. C. Kendall, C. H. Slocumb, and H. F. Polley, The effects of the
    adrenal cortical hormone (17-hydroxy-II-dehydrocorticosterone: cortisone) and
    of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) on rheumatoid arthritis and
    rheumatic fever, Proc. Seventh Intern. Congr. Rheumatic Diseases, New York, May
    30-June 3, 1949. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia. (In the press.)
45. P. S. Hench, C. H. Slocumb, H. F. Polley, and E. C. Kendall, Effect of cortisone
    and pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) on rheumatic diseases, J.
    Am. Med. Assoc., 144 (1950) 1327-1335.
46. P. S. Hench, C. H. Slocumb, A. R. Barnes, H. L. Smith, H. F. Polley, and E. C.
    Kendall, The effects of the adrenal cortical hormone. 17-hydroxy-II-dehydro-
    corticosterone (compound E) on the acute phase of rheumatic fevers. (Prelim.
    Rept.), Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 24 (1949) 277-297.
47. J. W. Henderson and R. W. Hollenhorst, Effects of cortisone on certain ophthal-
    mic diseases, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 25 (1950) 490-491.
48. H. Hennings, The whale hypophysis with special reference to its ACTH content
    (Prelim. Rept.), Acta Endocrinol., 5 (1950) 376-386.
49. P. F. A. Hoefer and G. H. Glaser, Effects of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hor-
    mone (ACTH) therapy. Electroencephalographic and neuropsychiatric changes
    in fifteen patients, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 143 (1950) 620-624.
 50. W. P. Holbrook, D. F. Hill, C. A. L. Stephens Jr., and L. J. Kent, Effects of
     ACTH and cortisone on rheumatoid arthritis, Arizona Med., 7 (1950) 43-44.


338                                1950   P.S.HENCH


 51. D. J. Ingle, Diabetogenic effect of somecortin-like compounds, Proc. Soc. Exptl.
     Biol. Med., 44 (1940) 176-177.
 52. E. Jonsson, Endokrinologi och reumatologi, Nord. Med., 44 (1950) 1891-1895.
 53. E. Jonsson, K. Berglund, E. Y. Htianson, N. G. Hävermark, and H. Laurell,
     Biochemical and clinical studies in rheumatoid arthritis during administration of
     adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). (Prelim. Rept.), Acta Endocrinol., 4
     (1950) 229-239.
 54. E. Jonsson, K. Berglund, N. G. Hävermark, G. Nyström, and F. Paulsen, Endo-
     krinologiska synpunkter p9 vissa reumatiska och andra mesenkymala sjukdoms-
     tills&nd, Svenska Läkartidn., 46 (1949) 1921-1931.
 55. N. M. Keith, M. H. Power, and G. W. Daugherty, The action of cortisone in
     nephritis with edema, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 25 (1950) 491-492.
 56. E. C. Kendall, Some observations on the hormone of the adrenal cortex designated
     compound E, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 24 (1949) 298-301.
 57. E. C. Kendall, Cortisone, Ann. Internal Med., 33 (1950) 787-796.
 58. J. B. Kirsner, W. L. Palmer, and A. P. Klotz, ACTH and cortisone in chronic
     ulcerative colitis: a comparison ofclinical effects, J. L.ab. Clin. Med., 36 (1950) 846.
 59. R. Koff, S. Rome, R. Kasper, R. R. Commons, R. Button, and P. Starr, Sub-
     conjunctival injection of cortisone in iritis, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 144 (1950) 1259-
     1260.
 60. W. C. Kuzell and R. W. Schaffarzick, Oral administration of cortisone acetate,
     Stanford Med. Bull., 8 (1950) 212-213.
 61. E. Lewin and E. Wassén Effect of combined injections of deoxycortone acetate
     and ascorbic acid on rheumatoid arthritis, Lancet, 2 (1949) 993.
 62. C. H. Li, Recent advances in anterior pituitary hormones (with special reference
      to adrenocorticotropic hormone ACTH), Ned. Tijdschr. Geneesk., 94 (1950) 1193-
      1196.
 63. J. A. Luetscher Jr., Q. B. Deming, J. Harvey, W. Lew, and L. J. Poo, Treatment
      of nepkosis with cortisone, J. Clin. Invest., 29 (1950) 1576-1587.
 64. R. Luft, B. Sjogren, and C. H. Li, Results of administration of adrenocortico-
      tropically active peptides (ACTH peptides) to a patient suffering from rheuma-
     toid arthritis, Acta Endocrinol., 3 (1949) 299-309.
 65. H. M. Margolis and P. S. Caplan, Treatment of acute gouty arthritis with pitui-
     tary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), J. Am. Med. Assoc., 142 (1950) 256
     258.
 66. H. L. Mason, Isolation of adrenal cortical hormones from urine: 17-hydroxycorti-
     costerone and 17-hydroxy-II-dehydrocorticosterone, J. Biol. Chem., 182 (1950)
      131-149; also printed in Pituitary-adrenal Function, American Association for the
      Advancement of Science. (A booklet.)
 67. H. L. Mason, W. M. Hoehn, and E. C. Kendall, Chemical studies of the supra-
     renal cortex. IV. Structures of compounds C, D, E, F, and G., J. Biol. Chem., 124
      (1938) 459474.
  68. B. F. Massell, J. E. Warren, G. P. Sturgis, B. Hall, and E. Craige, The clinical
      response of rheumatic fever and acute carditis to ACTH, New Engl. J. Med., 242
      (1950) 641-47; 692-698.


 C O R T I S O N E / A C T H I N ( N O N - ) R H E U M A T I C C O N D I T I O N S   339

69. C.   McEwen and J. J. Bunim, Effects of cortisone and ACTH on various types
    of   rheumatic diseases, Trans. Assoc. Am. Physicians, 63 (1950) 79-88.
70. D.   A. McGinty, G. N. Smith, M. L. Wilson, and C. S. Worrel, The biosynthesis
    of    17-hydroxycorticosterone from 11-desoxy-17-hydroxycorticosterone, Science,
    112 (1950) 506.
71. P. Morris and C. J. O. R. Morris, Isolation of a polypeptide with high adreno-
    corticotrophic activity, Lancet, 1(1950) 117-118.
72. J. R. Mote, The development of ACTH and the role of the adrenal gland in
    human disease, World Med. Assoc. Bull., 2 (1950) 71-86.
73. D. H. Nelson, H. Reich, and L. T. Samuels, Isolation of a steroid hormone from
    the adrenal-vein blood of dogs, Science, III (1950) 578-579.
74. G. Nyström, Attempts to reproduce the effects of ACTH or of compound E in
    rheumatoid arthritis by means of other hormones and steroids, Acta Endocrinol.,
    4 (1950) 240-244.
75. A. G. E. Pearse, The hypophysis in rheumatoid arthritis Lancet, I (1950) 954-
    955.
76. H. F. Polley and H. L. Mason, Rheumatoid arthritis. Effects of certain steroids
    other than cortisone and of some adrenal cortex extracts, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 143
    (1950) 1474-1481.
77. H. F. Polley, P. S. Hench, and L. A. Brunsting, Effects of cortisone and ACTH
    on psoriatic arthritis, Proc. Central Soc. Clin. Res., 23 (1950) 81-82; (Abstr.) J.
    Lab. Clin. Med., 36 (1950) 973-974.
78. C. Ragan, A. W. Grokoest, and R. H. Boots, Effect of adrenocorticotrophic
    hormone (ACTH) on rheumatoid arthritis, Am. J. Med., 7 (1949) 741-750.
79. T. Reichstein and C. W. Shoppee, The hormones of the adrenal cortex; in R. S.
    Harris and K. V. Thimann, Vitamins and Hormones; Advances in Research and
    Applications, Academic Press, Inc., New York, 1943, Vol. I, pp. 345-413.
80. W. D. Robinson, J. W. Corm, W. D. Block, and L. H. Louis, Role of the adrenal
    cortex in urate metabolism and in gout, Proc. Central Soc. Clin. Res., 21 (1948)
    23-24; J. Lab. Clin. Med., 33 (1948) I472-1473.
81. H. P. Rome and F. J. Braceland, Use of cortisone and ACTH in certain diseases:
    Psychiatric aspects, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 25 (1950) 495-497.
82. E. F. Rosenberg, Experiences with compound E (cortisone), other adrenal cortical
    steroids, and pituitary adrenocorticotrophic hormone. (Abstr.), Proc. Inst. Med.
    Chicago, 18 (1950) 95-96.
83. D. J. Sandweiss, H. C. Salzstein, S. R. Scheinberg, and A. Parks, Hormon studies
    in peptic ulcer: pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and cortisone,
    J. Am. Med. Assoc., 144 (1950) 1436-1442.
84. L. H. Sarett, A new method for the preparation of IT(a)-hydroxy-zo-ketopreg-
    nanes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 70 (1948) 1454-1458.
85. R. M. Shick, A. H. Baggenstoss, B. F. Fuller, and H. F. Polley, Effects of cortisone
    and ACTH on periarteritis nodosa and cranial arteritis, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo
    Clinic, 25 (1950) 492-494.
86. C. H. Slocumb: cited by P. S. Hench, in Ref. 39 (m).
87. L. J. Soffer, M. F. Levitt, and G. Baek, Use of cortisone and adrenocorticotropic


340                               1950   P.S.HENCH


      hormone in acute disseminated lupus erythematosus, Arch. Internal Med., 8 6
     (1950) 558-573.
 88. I. F. Sommerville, G. F. Marrian, J. J. R. Duthie, and R. J. G. Sinclair, Abnormality
     in steroid metabolism associated with rheumatoid arthritis, Lancet, 1(1950) 116-117.
 89. M. Sonenberg, A. S. Keston, and W. L. Money, Tracer studies with labelled
     preparations of anterior pituitary hormones: ACTH. (Abstr.), J. Clin. Endocrinol.,
      10 (1950) 809.
 90. D. M. Spain and N. Molomut, Effects of cortisone on the development of
     tuberculous lesions in guinea pigs and on their modification by streptomycin
     therapy, Am. Rev. Tuberc. Pulmonary Diseases, 62 (1950) 337-344.
 91. T. D. Spies and R. E. Stone, Relief of the symptoms of acute gout and rheuma-
     toid arthritis by means of pituitary adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH),
     Southern Med. J., 42 (1949) 720-722.
 92. T. D. Spies and R. E. Stone, Pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) as
     a tool of clinical and laboratory research, Lancet, 1 (1950) 11-14.
 93. R. G. Sprague, M. H. Power, H. L. Mason, and H. E. Cluxton, Metabolic effects
     of synthetic compound E (17-hydroxy-II-dehydrocorticosterone) in two patients
     with Addison’s disease and in one with coexisting Addison’s disease and diabetes
    mellitus. (Abstr.), J. Clin. Invest., 28 (1949) 812.
94. R. G. Sprague, M. H. Power, H. L. Mason, A. Albert, D. R. Mathieson, P. S.
    Hench, E. C. Kendall, C. H. Slocumb, and H. F. Polley, Observations on the
    physiologic effects of cortisone and ACTH in man, Arch. Internal Med., 85 (1950)
    199-258.
95. E. Starling, Banquet address, Aug. 4, 1926, Congress of Physiology, Stockholm;
    cited by H. Theorell, in Les Prix Nobel en 1947, Stockholm, P. A. Norstedt &
    Söner, 1949, p. 40.
96. E. H. Steffensen, J. A. Olson, R. R. Margulis, R. W. Smith, and E. L. Whitney,
    The experimental use ofcortisone in inflammatory eye disease, Am. J. Ophthalmol.,
     33 (1950) 1033-1040.
 97. J. M. Stickney, F. J. Heck, and C. H. Watkins, Cortisone and ACTH in the
     management of leukemia and lymphoblastoma, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic,
     25 (1950) 488-489.
 98. N. Svartz, The effect of ACTH on the agglutination with sensitized red sheep
     cells in rheumatoid arthritis, Acta Med. Scand., Suppl. 246 (1950) 240-242.
99. Symposium on Urinary Corticosteroids, Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation Conference on
    Metabolic Aspects of Convalescence Including Bone and Wound Healing, Tenth Meeting,
     New York, Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation, 1945, pp. 125-220.
100. J. Tepperman, F. L. Engel, and C. N. H. Long, A review of adrenal cortical
     hypertrophy, Endocrinology, 32 (1943) 373-402.
101. G. W. Thorn, T. B. Bayles, B. F. Massel, P. H. Forsham, S. R. Hill, Jr., S. Smith
     III, and J. E. Warren, Studies on the relation of pituitary-adrenal function to
     rheumatic disease, New Engl. J. Med., 241 (1949) 529-537.
102. G. W. Thorn, P. H. For&am, T. F. Frawley, S. R. Hill, Jr., M. Roche, D.
      Staehelin, and D. L. Wilson, The clinical usefulness of ACTH and cortisone, New
      Engl. J. Med., 242 (1950) 783-793; 824-834; 865-872.


       C O R T I S O N E / A C T H   I N   I N O N - I R H E U M A T I C   C O N D I T I O N S   3 4 1

 103. R. Tompsett, C. LeMaistre, C. Muschenheim, and W. McDermott, Effects of
      ACTH on tuberculosis in humans. (Abstr.), J. Clin. Invest., 29 (1950) 849-850.
 104. Upjohn-Penick, Expedition for botanical exploration: to Africa for cortisone
      precursors, Scope, 3 (1950) 4-9.
 105. E. H. Venning; Adrenal function in pregnancy, Endocrinology, 39 (1946) 203-220.
 106. E. H. Venning, M. M. Hoffman, and J. S. L. Browne, The extraction of cortin-
      like substances from human post-operative urine, Endocrinology, 35 (1944) 49-62.
 107. L. E. Ward, C. H. Slocumb, H. F. Polley, E. W. Lowman, and P. S. Hench,
      Clinical effects of cortisone administered orally to patients with rheumatoid ar-
      thritis, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 26 (1951) 361-370.
 108. P. Weil and J. S. L. Browne, The excretion of cortin after surgical operation,
      Science, 90 (1939) 445-446.
 109. N. L. Wendler, R. P. Graber, R. E. Jones, and M. Tishler, Synthesis of II-hy-
      droxylated cortical steroids; IT(a)-hydroxycorticosterone, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 7 2
      (1950) 5793-5794.
 110. M. J. Whitelaw, and T. W. Woodman, The treatment of severe burns with
      ACTH, J. Clin. Endocrinol., 10 (1950) 1171.
 111. W. Q. Wolfson, H. D. Hunt, C. Cohn, W. D. Robinson, and I. F. Duff, ACTH
      and colchicine in the clinical treatment of acute gouty arthritis. Physiological
      considerations and review of therapeutic results in fifty-one attacks, J. Michigan
      Med. Soc., 49 (1950) 1058-1064; 1083.
112.  W. Q. Wolfson, R. E. Thompson, W. D. Robinson, H. D. Hunt, C. Cohn, E.
      E. Hayes, R. C. Levy, S. L. Pearlman, B. B. Rubenstein, W. Wise, and I. Zitman.
      Physiologic and clinical studies with long-acting preparations ofpituitary adreno-
      corticotrophic hormone, Univ. Michigan Med. Bull., 16 (1950) 152-163.
 113. A. Zaffroni, R. B. Burton, and E. H. Keutmann, Adrenal cortical hormones :
      analysis by paper partition chromatography and occurrence in the urine of
         normal persons, Science, III (1950) 6-8.
