                              RAGNAR GRANIT

    The development of retinal neurophysiology
                     Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1967



For some twenty years my main experimentation has not been within the
field of retinal electrophysiology and my interests have shifted to problems of
motor control, chiefly muscular sense organs and quantitative properties of
firing motoneurones. For this reason my Lecture will be as retrospective as
the Award and deal with the re-birth of retinal studies that was inspired by
the increasing accessibility of electronic equipment from the mid-twenties
onwards. Before this era vision was chiefly studied by psychophysical meth-
ods. These had led to well-established correlations between perceptions of e.g.
colour, luminosity etc. and physically defined entities within the c.g.s. system
of units. But in 1926 Adrian and Zotterman1, using the afferent nerve of a
stretch receptor in a frog muscle, had shown that it was possible by amplifica-
tion to record the impulses in single nerve fibres and in 1927-1928 Adrian and
Rachel Matthews2,3 published their important experiments with the mass
discharge in the long optic nerve of the Conger eel. Evidently the electro-
physiological approach was the one now destined to pave the way for a deeper
understanding of how this, our noblest sense organ, had organized its inter-
pretation of the world of light, form and colour.
   Frithiof Holmgren4 (1831-1897) at Uppsala, who in 1865 discovered the
electrical response of the retina to light, the electroretinogram (ERG) of the
present day, had realized that many problems of vision could be analyzed by
what he called his "method of objectivating the impressions on the retina",
but amplification with the aid of the vacuum tube gave this general idea quite
a different dimension. It was - Lord Adrian said - as if we had got a new
very powerful microscope to work with.
  The basic idea of my own approach was formed during my study of Ramón
y Cajal’s (1894) classicaldescriptions of the retina as a "true nervous centre",
as clarified by his silver-stain preparations and likewise suggested by its em-
bryological development from the brain. It seemed to me likely that psycho-
physical data might with some profit to the field be translatable into neuro-
logical equivalents, and so, in 1928 I went to the laboratory of Sir Charles
Sherrington at Oxford in order to learn something about nervous centres. A


256                       1967 RAGNAR GRANIT

few years ago it gave me great pleasure to write an appraisal6 of this eminent
physiologist and the concepts he bequeathed to posterity. Sherrington and
Adrian shared the medical Nobel Prize in 1932.
   At the Johnson Foundation for Medical Physics of the University of Penn-
sylvania I made an attempt to put this general program into practice by a
psychophysical technique and to this end chose the fusion frequency of a
flickering light that is proportional to the logarithm of stimulus intensity
(Ferry-Porter law). This was done because I wanted an absolute measure of
whether an excitatory state rose or fell instead of the relative one by the cus-
tomary psychophysical technique comparing two half-fields. It was thus
assumed that at least to a first approximation the intensity of retinal excitation
would be measured by the fusion frequency. Very much later (1952) Chris:-
tina Enroth7 in a thesis from the Nobel Institute showed that the fusion fre-
quency of the impulses from single retinal ganglion cells was in fact propor-
tional to their impulse frequency. However, at the time (1929-1932), by use
of this hypothesis, it proved possible to demonstrate facilitation between small
flickering light spots separated by a weakly illuminated background 8,9 and to
show that the fusion frequency within limits was proportional to the area illu-
minated. These effects corresponded to the excitability changes measured by
Adrian and Matthews10 in similar experiments using the mass discharge from
the eel’s optic nerve as indicator. With adjacent fields at different levels of
brightness the fusion frequency rose in the brighter and fell in the darker
field 11, a fact interpreted as demonstrating a mechanism of contrast. "The
theoretical significance of the observation seems to be that the inhibitory sys-
tem is excited relatively more and more as the intensity of the excitatory pro-
cess in a group of neurones increases. Consequently the inhibitory effect pass-
ing from the more stimulated area to the adjacent less stimulated area will be
greater than the inhibitory effect passing in the opposite direction" (p. 671).
Today this sounds like a description of Hartline’s (ref.12 and this volume,
p. 269) lateral inhibition in the Limulus eye or of recurrent inhibition in the
motoneurones, as measured by Granit and Renkin13.
   By these findings I was convinced that psychophysics could be translated
into neurology but psychophysics was as strange a subject to neurologists as
was neurology to psychophysicists and so the implications of this work fell
between two chairs. Only the physiologists were understanding listeners.
   I next decided to take up the electroretinogram and thereafter to remain
within physiology. The complex ERG had to be split into components, a
piece of work begun at Oxford14, and the analysis established by various


                    RETINAL      NEUROPHYSIOLOGY                           257
means, since greatly improved upon, served as a starting point for much work
up to the present day (see summary by Brown’s). In a thesis from the Nobel
Institute co-operating with the Ophthalmological Clinic of the Caroline In-
stitute, Karpe16 made electroretinography a useful clinical method, nowadays
considerably developed and employed all over the world. Frithiof Holm-
gren 4, who always was very keen on applied physiology, would have been
pleased if the had lived to see this development.
   Although the ERG was a mass response from the whole retina it proved
possible with its aid to take a few definite steps forward on the road towards
a retinal neurophysiology. A slow cornea-positive component (PI) was
found not to cause any impulse activity in the optic nerve, another, faster
component of similar sign (PII) mimicked the mass dischargewith its rise at
onset (on-effect) and cessation (off-effect) of illumination. Very definitely it
could be shown17 that the ERG altered with light and dark adaptation in such
a manner that it was impossible to understand the processes involved in adap-
tation on a purely photochemical basis, the prevailing notion of the day. After
some further work I came to the conclusion that the light adapted eye makes
more use of inhibition, which was assumed to be relatively more important
for cone projections within the retina.
   However, to me at the time (in Helsingfors) the greatest problem of all was
how to prove inhibition to be present in the retina itself. Both the design of
this organ as well as the findings with the flicker method, mentioned above,
suggested that under some, as yet unknown, circumstances impulses in the
optic nerve might be stopped by light. The ERG suggested an approach to
this question. Since the discharge correlated with a cornea-positive electrical
deflexion, might not the opposite cornea-negative deflexion, obtained when a
flash was superimposed on the off-effect, indicate inhibition? This effect had
been studied by Granit and Riddell in great detail. By recording the mass
discharge in the optic nerve together with the ERG, this surmise was verified.
There was the postulated inhibition 18,19 . Very few, if any, later experiments
have given me such delight. With my background in the physiology of the
central nervous system, acquired in Sherrington’s laboratory, I now knew for
certain that the details of the visual image were elaborated by the interplay of
excitation and inhibition in the nervous centre of the retina itself. Hartline
(ref. 20,21 and this volume, p. 269), by his elegant method of splitting single
fibres in the optic nerve, soon found any amount of inhibition and so did we,
when, somewhat later (see below), our microelectrode studies of the retina
permitted isolation of single fibres. With this technique I later went on to


258                        1967 RAGNAR GRANIT

show that the <on> and <off> components of the discharge were mutually ex-
clusive when they were made to clash
                                       2 2 , 2 3
                                                 and held this to be a "belated vindi-
cation of the essential truth of Hering’s contention that there are two funda-
mental processes of opposite character in the retina" (ref. 24, p. 78).
   The following quotation from "Sensory Mechanisms of the Retina"25, written
in 1943, shows how the problem of form discrimination was formulated at
that time: "The accurate appreciation of contour, in particular, must be due
to minute fluctuations of the eyeballs resulting in on- and off-effects as well
as sudden inhibitions of the latter" (p. 168). The important role of the eye
movements 26,27 has since been demonstrated experimentally in several pa-
pers. Off-impulses do not require complete cessation of light. A diminution
of brightness suffices. Thus, because of she minute fluctuations of the eyebulb,
the contour between two different levels ofbrightness acquires a life of its own
created by the interplay of excitation and inhibition at <on> and <off>. No
more need be said in order to show why the experimental establishment of
retinal inhibition seemed so decisive a step towards a retinal neurophysiology
capable of interpreting visual events. It is well known that for several years
the leading theme of single-fibre work with the retina has been the effects of
the interplay of excitation and inhibition.
   So many things appeared tempting to study at the time that it was difficult
to choose. I next fell for the temptation to analyze the relation between the
amount of rhodopsin and the sensitivity of the dark-adapted eye. In his valu-
able thesis from my laboratory at Helsingfors Zewi28 had shown that the
total amount of rhodopsin could be extracted from a pair of frog eyes with an
average accuracy of 4% when left and right eyes of g animals were compared.
Our basic experiment 29 demonstrated that spectral lights between the wave-
lengths 4700 and 5850 Å, which were so weak that they could not bleach a
rhodopsin solution tested at 5000 Å, nevertheless reduced the electroretino-
graphically measured sensitivity of eyes exposed to them by as much as 74 to
56% depending upon the wavelength chosen. The non-exposed eye then
served as control. The recent work of Donner and Reuter30 suggests an ex-
planation: they have shown that metarhodopsin II, one of the intermediary
products of bleaching rhodopsin (see Wald’s Lecture, this volume, p. 292) is
likely to trigger a negative feedback depressing the sensitivity of the rods.
This effect is probably responsible for the unduly neglected findings of
Elenius 31 with short-lasting light adaptations of the rabbit’s eye.
   Another temptation was, of course, the mechanism of wavelength recep-
tion. This problem was then merely a branch of colour psychophysics and


                       RETINAL        NEUROPHYSIOLOGY                               259
Hecht , who had the enviable gift of always being plausible, had developed
       32



a trichromatic theory according to which there were, to be sure, three types
of cones, but overlapping very closely in spectral distribution of sensitivity, as
shown in Fig. 1. The element of plausibility came from his thorough mathe-
matical elaboration of the theory to explain a number of well known, precise
psychophysical observations on colour. To a neurological approach, however,
the idea of wavelength discrimination being based on the differences between
the narrow fringes of the three curves of Fig. 1, appeared to raise such formi-
dable demands on the internal machinery of the retina that it seemed more
reasonable to assume Hecht to be wrong. As a matter of fact, our earliest ex-
periments with the ERG elicited by Spectral lights 33 showed in unmistakable
terms that there had to be substances in the retina with-absorption spectra in
different bands of wavelength widely apart.




Fig.1. Spectral distribution of the primaries V, G and R, according to the hypothesis of
S. Hecht (Bulletin No. 4 of the Howe Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Harvard Universi -
                     ty Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1931).

At Helsingfors34 we then changed to microelectrodes: glass tubes with sil-
ver cores pulled out in a flame to fine tips, applied directly on to the retina of
frogs. In Stockholm, after 1940, these were replaced by platinum wires insu-
lated in molten glass, because the silver tips had a number of undesirable pro-
perties. It should not be overlooked that the first experiments on the frog ret-
ina were carried out under micro-illumination. The spectral lights were re-
flected internally from a silver-coated glass rod drawn out into a fine tip.


260                         1967 RAGNAR GRANIT

 When this light spot and the microelectrode were adjusted relative to one
 another in order to obtain a precise response, the distance between the two
 tips was often so great that only the optic nerve fibres themselves could be
 considered as sources of the spikes obtained. Although I have often pointed
 out this circumstance, our results are generally being presented as though they
 all referred to the giant ganglion cells 35, studied some years later in the cat
 retina.
     The main method was to illuminate the retina with spectral lights calibrated
 with respect to energy and listen to the threshold response of spikes heard in
 the loudspeaker. The spectral sensitivity is defined by the inverse value of the
 energy required for the threshold response and this figure was afterwards
 corrected for equal quantum intensity in every-wavelength. Optimal signal/
 noise ratio was established, partly by adjusting the microeleckodes, partly by
 working at the turning point of the characteristic curve of the amplifier.
     With this method isolation of single fibres need not necessarily be perfect.
 Choice of the threshold response as index implies in itself functional isolation
 of the wavelength to which the most sensitive response is obtained. The type
 of response used was photographed but the threshold was determined acousti-
 cally. When an eye is <mixed>, i.e. contains both rods and cones in large num-
 bers, it is necessary to maintain its state of light adaptation by special, regularly
 recurring controls. Another advantage of light adaptation is that threshold
 responses of even a small group of fibres then are very precise and sharply
  delimited. However, pure cone eyes (grass snake, tortoise) also were studied.
     These experiments, carried out on many species of animals, lasted about
  five years, the four last ones after my move to Stockholm. They showed that
  there were two main types of message to the higher centres: (i) either the
  spectral distribution of sensitivity was wide, comprising the whole visible
  spectrum, with a maximum around 5600 Å (Fig. 5) which shifted to about
  5000 Å after dark adaptation or else (ii) there were narrow bands, restricted
  to three main regions, as shown in the samples of Fig. 2. In the dominantly rod
  eye of rats an occasional narrow band after light adaptation was seen at 5000
  Å and ascribed to rhodopsin. This is not included in the figure. I called the
  broad bands <dominators> and the narrow bands (modulators). Especial care
  was devoted to proving that a single, well isolated spike could deliver the
  photopic 5600 Å dominator in light adaptation as well as the 5000 Å scotopic
dominator after dark adaptation. This is the electrophysiological version of
  the Purkinje shift from photopic to scotopic vision of which the dominator
  was held to be the carrier fibre.


                      RETINAL       NEUROPHYSIOLOGY                                 261




Fig. 2. Distribution of sensitivity of modulators from the eyes of rat (dots), guinea pig
(broken line), frog (line drawn in full) and snake (interrupted by circles). The narrow
    rhodopsin curve at 5000 Å left out from original figure (Nature, 151 (1943) 11).


 Since the same nerve fibre can deliver both rod and cone messages these
 experiments also showed that there is convergence of rods and cones towards
 the same final common path, as Cajal’s silver stains had shown anatomically.
 They proved one more point that seemed to me most important. Clearly,
 since a single fibre could carry both rod and cone messages in the form of a
 dominator band destined for the same upper station, the visual message would
have to be the same. Now, since luminosity is the sensory equivalent common
 to rods and cones-indeed, the rods are likely to record very little else - the
 brain must receive a special message of luminosity as distinct from colour
 specification. Wavelength discrimination was therefore held to be dependent
 on the narrow modulator bands. Similar bands were later beautifully isolated
by Donner in the pigeon’s eye with the aid of considerably improved micro-
              36



 electrodes.
   There was not at the time enough photochemical work to exclude the pos-
sibility that narrow spectral bands might represent absorption spectra of pho-
                                                                           25, 37
tochemical substances. I therefore limited my theoretical interpretation
to stating that wavelength discrimination was based on the modulator type of
response. Later on, my own work (summarized in Granit ) and work by
                                                              38



others (summarized in Granit39 and in Dartnall40) led to the view that the
narrowness of the modulator bands was a product of interaction between
overlapping broad-band absorption spectra whose form in man soon began
to emerge from the valuable ophthalmoscopic work of Rushton41 a n d
Weale 42. Modulation thus came to illustrate a principle common in the neural


262                          1967 RAGNAR GRANIT

organization of most afferent systems and signifying a crispening of the infor-
mation by interaction, probably largely inhibitory in nature.
   A great deal of experimental labour was invested in the measuring of domi-
nator curves in various eyes and proving their composite nature with respect
to elements sensitive to different wavelengths (see e.g. Donner and Granit43),
a theme ten years later developed by Donner and Rushton44,45. It is of some
interest to observe in retrospect how relatively easy it was to discover by our
methods special sensitivity to blue light in the eyes of several mammals com-
pared with the difficulties it later encountered in demonstrating a blue-ab-
sorbing substance in human eyes.
   The retina of the cat, to which my final work46 in this field was devoted,
has a considerable number of cones. It surprised me at first that, in order to
demonstrate specific sensitivity to several different regions of the spectrum
in the cat’s light-adapted eye, it was necessary to have recourse to selective
adaptation. The explanation is probably that the cat, compared with pigeon
and monkey, has relatively few optic nerve fibres. The idea of the adaptation
experiment was to bleach away a sizeable amount of rhodopsin by red, green
and blue lights. Since this is a homogeneous substance, the relative effects of
the bleaching lights, whatever their colour, could only be along proportional
ordinates as determined by the ordinates of the absorption spectrum of these
bleaching lights for rhodopsin. Remaining peaks of differential sensitivity in
different spectral regions would then have to be caused by cone substances.
On the basis of 4000 observations the three curves of Fig. 3 were obtained.




Fig. 3. Averages of individual modulators from cat eye after selective adaptation with
 blue, green or red filter. Outer contours indicate dispersion. ( J. Neurophysiol., 8 (1945)
                                           195).


                        RETINAL        NEUROPHYSIOLOGY                                263




Fig. 4. Extreme values obtained in the experiments summarized in Fig. 3. (J. Neurophysiol.,
                                      8 (1945) 195).
Fig. 4 shows the extreme values. Averaging these curves to add up to the
photopic dominator with maximum around 5600 Å, the theoretical curves of
Fig. 5 were drawn for the basically similar human eye (its periphery) which
do not differ very much from curves later obtained by various means (see
Wald, this volume, p.292).




Fig. 5. Synthesis of human photopic luminosity curve (identical with photopic domina-
tor) on the basis of three fundamental sensation curves B, G and R. Modulators indicated
                    in original left out. (J. Neurophysiol., 8 (1945) 195).


264                         1967 RAGNAR GRANIT

  These results were criticized on the grounds that the cat does not see colours,
as such an utterly irrelevant attack on retinal data, and since also proved to be
in error. With the highly developed training methods of the present day it has
not proved too difficult to make the cat respond to wavelength differences as
distinct from differences of luminosity (Mello and Peterson47; Sechzer and
Brown 48).
   In my Thomas Young Oration at the Royal Institution in London in 1945
I felt it safe to state: "The mechanism of colour reception is organized by the
peripheral visual apparatus, the number of colour-sensitive elements is rela-
tively limited, and these elements represent widely different regions of the
visible spectrum. Those were Young’s three fundamental assumptions. He
was right even in assuming three main types of colour-receiving apparatus.-
These are the three preferential regions within which modulators are found."
I also made some attempts to relate these findings to colour psycho-
p h y s i c s 2 5 , 3 7 , 4 6 , 4 9 but the somewhat monotonous work of recording spectral
sensitivities and the absence of photochemical data, gave me a distaste for the
whole field, and later on the microelectrode approach was taken over and
greatly improved by fresh minds. I finished the Thomas Young Oration with
the statement that I thought myself right but "further experience may never-
theless necessitate modifications. I can only hope that I shall not have to make
these experiences myself, but that somebody else will try his hand at the optic
nerve. I also feel just now that it would be interesting to see for a while what-
photochemistry and colour psychophysics could do for this field before any
further labour is invested in electrophysiological work" (ref. 37, pp. 462-
463).
   In the form of an extensive review completed in 1959, I paid a leave-taking
visit to the field in Volume II of The Eye (Granit 39) and found it occupied by a
large number of very competent workers. There was no need to return to it.




 1. E.D. Adrian and Y. Zotterman, J. Physiol. (London), 61 (1926) 465.
 2. E.D. Adrian and R. Matthews, J. Physiol. (London), 63 (1927) 378.
 3. E.D. Adrian and R. Matthews, J. Physiol. (London), 64 (1927) 279.
 4. F. Holmgren, Upsala Läkareförenings Förh., 1 (1865-66) 177.
 5. S. Ramón y Cajal, Die Retina der Wirbeltiere, Bergmann, Wiesbaden, 1894.
 6. R. Granit, Charles Scott Sherrington. An appraisal, Nelson, London, 1966.
 7. Ch. Enroth, Acta Physiol. Scand., 27 Suppl. (1952) 100.
 8. R. Granit, Am. J. Physiol, 94 (1930) 41.


                      RETINAL NEUROPHYSIOLOGY                                       265
  9. R. Granit and Ph. Harper, Am. J. Physiol., 95 (1930) 211.
 10. E.D. Adrian and R. Matthews, J. Physiol. (London), 65 (1928) 273.
 11. C.H. Graham and R. Granit, Am. ]. Physiol., 98 (1931) 664.
 12. H.K. Hartline, Federation Proc., 8 (1949) 69.
 13. R. Granit and B. Renkin, J. Physiol. (London), 158 (1961) 461.
 14. R. Granit, J. Physiol. (London), 77 (1933) 207.
 15. K.T. Brown, Japan. J. Ophthalmol., 10, Suppl. (1966) 130-140.
 16. G. Karpe, Acta Ophthalmol., Suppl. 24 (1945).
 17. R. Granit and L.A. Riddell, J. Physiol. (London), 81 (1934) I.
 18. R. Granit and P.O. Therman, J. Physiol. (London), 81 (1934) 47P.
 19. R. Granit and P.O. Therman, J. Physiol. (London), 83 (1935) 359.
 20. H.K. Hartline, Am. J. Physiol., 113 (1935) 59P.
 21. H.K. Hartline, Am. J. Physiol., 121 (1938) 400.
 22. R. Granit, Acta Physiol. Scand., 18 (1949) 281.
 23. R. Granit, Année Psychol., 50 (1951) 129.
 24. R. Granit, Receptors and Sensory Perception, Yale University Press, New Haven, 1955.
 25. R. Granit, Sensory Mechanism of the Retina, Oxford University Press, London, 1947.
 26. R.W. Ditchburn and B.L. Ginsborg, Nature, 170 (1952) 36.
 27. F. Ratliff, J. Exptl. Psychol., 43 (1952) 163.
 28. M. Zewi, Acta Soc. Sci., Fennicae, N. S., B 2(4) (1939).
 29. R. Granit, T. Holmberg and M. Zewi, J. Physiol. (London), 94 (1938) 430.
 30. K.O. Donner and T. Reuter, Vision Res., 7 (1967) 17.
 31. V. Elenius, Acta Physiol. Scand., 44, Suppl. (1958) 150.
 32. S. Hecht, The Retinal Processes Concerned with Visual Acuity and Color Vision, Harvard
      University Press, Cambridge, 1931.
 33. R. Granit and C.M. Wrede, J. Physiol. (London), 89 (1937) 239.
 34. R. Granit and G. Svaetichin, Upsala Läkareförenings Förh., 65 (1939) 161.
 35. W.A.H. Rushton, Nature, 164 (1949) 743.
36. K.O. Donner, J. Physiol. (London), 122 (1953) 524.
37. R. Granit, Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), 57 (1945) 447.
38. R. Granit, Ergeb. Physiol. Biol. Chem. Exptl. Pharmakol, 46 (1950) 31.
39. R. Granit, in H. Davson (Ed.), The Eye, Academic Press, New York, 1962, pp. 534-
     796.
40. H.J.A. Dartnall, in H. Davson (Ed.), The Eye, Academic Press, New York, 1962,
     pp. 323-533.
41. W.A.H. Rushton, Progr. Biophys. Biophys. Chem., 9 (1959) 239.
42. R.A. Weale, Optica Acta, 6 (1959) 158.
43. K.O. Donner and R. Granit, Acta Physiol. Scand., 17 (1949) 161.
44. K.O. Donner and W.A.H. Rushton, J. Physiol. (London), 149 (1959) 288.
45. K.O. Donner and W.A.H. Rushton, J. Physiol. (London), 149 (1959) 303.
46. R. Granit, J. Neurophysiol., 8 (1945) 195.
47. N.K. Mello and N.J. Peterson, J. Neurophysiol., 27 (1964) 323.
48. J.A. Sechzer and J.L. Brown, Science, 14 (1964) 427.
49. R. Granit, Nature, 151 (1943) 11.
