SCENTS AND SENSIBILITY: A MOLECULAR LOGIC
OF OLFACTORY PERCEPTION

Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2004
by
Richard Axel

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Columbia University, College of Physicians
and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.




INTRODUCTION
The image in the painting La Bonne Aventure is not a nose (Fig. 1). It is a
portrayal by the surrealist René Magritte of his own brain’s representation
of the external world. It is a vignette that reveals a tension between image and
reality, a tension that is a persistent source of creativity in art, brought to its
culmination by the surrealists. The problem of how the brain represents the
external world is not only a central theme in art but is at the very core of
philosophy, psychology, and neuroscience. We are interested in how the
chemosensory world is represented in the brain.
    All organisms have evolved a mechanism to recognize sensory information
in the environment and transmit this information to the brain where it then
must be processed to create an internal representation of the external world.
There are many ways for organisms to probe the external world. Some smell
it, others listen to it, many see it. Each species therefore lives in its own unique
sensory world of which other species may be partially or totally unaware. A
whole series of specific devices alien to human perception have evolved: bio-
sonar in bats, infrared detectors in snakes, electrosensitive organs in fish, and
a sensitivity to magnetic fields in birds. What an organism detects in its envir-
onment is only part of what is around it and that part differs in different or-
ganisms. The brain functions, then, not by recording an exact image of the
world, but by creating its own selective picture; a picture largely determined
by what is important for the survival and reproduction of the species.
    Sensory impressions, therefore, are apprehended through the lens of the
particular perceiving brain and the brain must therefore be endowed with an
a priori potential to recognize the sensory world (1). Our perceptions are not
direct recordings of the world around us, rather they are constructed intern-
ally according to innate rules. Colors, tones, tastes, smells are active con-
structs created by our brains out of sensory experience. They do not exist as
such outside of sensory experience (2). Biological reality, I argue, therefore


234


Figure 1. La Bonne Aventure. The painting La Bonne Aventure (Fortune Telling), by René
Magritte (1937) portrays a monumental nose. I have added the inscription “Ceci n’est pas
un nez” (This is not a nose) in Magritte’s script to emphasize the tension between image
and reality, a conflict inherent in much of his art as well as in the science of perception.




reflects the particular representation of the external world that a brain is able
to build and a brain builds with genes.
   If our genes are indeed the arbiters of what we perceive from the outside
world, then it follows that an understanding of the function of these genes
could provide insight into how the external world is represented in our brain.
But what can molecular biology really tell us about so elusive a brain function
as perception? Molecular biology was invented to solve fundamental problems
in genetics at a molecular level. With the demystification of the brain, with
the realization that the mind emerges from the brain and that the cells of the
brain often use the very same principles of organization and function as a
humble bacterium or a liver cell, molecular biology and genetics could now
interface with neuroscience to approach the previously tenuous relationship
between genes and behavior, cognition, memory, emotion, and perception.
   Why would a molecular neuroscientist interested in perception choose to
focus on the elusive sense of smell? In humans, smell is often viewed as an
aesthetic sense, as a sense capable of eliciting enduring thoughts and memories.
Smell however is the primal sense. It is the sense that affords most organisms
the ability to detect food, predators, and mates. Smell is the central sensory
modality by which most organisms communicate with their environment.
Second, humans are capable of recognizing hundreds of thousands of different


                                                                                       235


odors. For molecular neuroscientists studying the brain, the mechanism by
which an organism can interact with the vast universe of molecular structures
defined as odors provides a fascinating problem in molecular recognition
and perceptual discrimination. Finally, the problem of perception necessarily
involves an understanding of how sensory input is ultimately translated into
meaningful neural output: thoughts and behavior. In olfaction, the sensory
input is extremely well defined and consists of chemicals of precise molecular
structure. The character of the input in olfaction is far simpler than that of a
visual image, for example, which consists of contour, texture, color, movement
and form of confounding complexity. Representation of an olfactory image
is simpler and reduces to the problem of how precisely defined chemical
structures are transformed in brain space.
   As molecular neurobiologists, Linda Buck and I approached olfactory sensory
perception by dividing it into two problems: First, what mechanisms have
evolved to allow for the recognition of the vast array of molecular structures
we define as odorants? Clearly, there must be receptors in the sensory
neurons of the nose capable of associating with odor molecules. Do we have
a relatively small number of “promiscuous” receptors, each capable of inter-
acting with a large number of odorous molecules? Alternatively, olfactory
recognition may involve a very large number of “chaste” receptors each capable
of interacting with a limited set of odor molecules. The second problem is
conceptually more difficult: how does the olfactory sensory system discriminate
among the vast array of odorous molecules that are recognized by the nose?
Put simply, how does the brain know what the nose is smelling? This question
will ultimately require knowledge of how the different odors are represented
and encoded in the brain.

A LARGE FAMILY OF ODORANT RECEPTOR GENES
We approached the problem of odor recognition directly by isolating the genes
encoding the odorant receptors (3). The experimental design we employed
to isolate these genes was based on three assumptions: First, the odorant
receptors were likely to belong to the superfamily of receptors, the G-protein
coupled receptors (GPCRs), that transduce intracellular signals by coupling to
GTP binding proteins (4,5,6,7). Second, the large repertoire of structurally
distinct, odorous molecules suggests that the odorant receptors themselves
must exhibit significant diversity and are therefore likely to be encoded by a
multigene family. Third, the expression of the odorant receptors should be
restricted to the olfactory epithelium. Experimentally, we used the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) to amplify members of the GPCR gene superfamily
expressed in olfactory sensory neurons. We then asked whether any of the PCR
products were indeed members of a large multigene family. We observed that
restriction enzyme cleavage of a single PCR band generated a set of DNA
fragments whose molecular weight summed to a value significantly greater than
that of the original PCR product (3). In this manner, we identified a multigene
family that encodes a large number of GPCRs whose expression is restricted

236


to the olfactory sensory neurons. The receptors were subsequently shown to
interact with odors translating the energy of odor binding into alterations in
membrane potential (8,9,10,11).
   The completed sequence of both the murine and human genome ultimately
identified 1300 odorant receptors in the mouse (12,13) and 500 in humans
(14,15,16). If mice possess 20,000 genes, then as much as 5% of the genome,
one in 20 genes encodes the odorant receptors. A large family of odorant
receptors is observed not only in vertebrates but in the far simpler sensory
systems of invertebrates. A somewhat smaller but highly diverse family of
about 80 odorant receptor genes has been identified in the Drosophila genome
(17,18,19,50,67). The invertebrate, C. elegans, with only 302 neurons and 16 ol-
factory sensory neurons expresses about 1000 odorant receptor genes
(20,21). These experiments provide a solution to the first question; we recog-
nize the vast array of molecular structures defined as odorants by maintaining
in our genome a large number of genes encoding odorant receptors.
   The observation that over 1000 receptors are required to accommodate
the detection of odors suggests a conceptual distinction between olfaction
and other sensory systems. Color vision in humans, for example, allows the
discrimination of several hundred hues with only three different photore-
ceptors (22,23). These photoreceptors each have distinct but overlapping
absorption spectra. Discrimination of color is thought to result from comparative
processing of the information from these three classes of photoreceptors.
Whereas three photoreceptors can absorb light across the entire visible spec-
trum, our data suggest that a small number of odorant receptors cannot
recognize the full spectrum of distinct molecular structures perceived by the
mammalian nose. Rather, olfactory perception requires a large number of
receptors each capable of recognizing a small number of odorous ligands.
   The large number of odorant receptor genes when compared with receptor
numbers in other sensory systems, perhaps reflects the fact that in vision and
hearing the character of the sensory stimulus is continuously variable. Color
is distinguished by quantitative differences in a single parameter, the wave-
length of light. Similarly, one important parameter of hearing, the frequency
of sound, is continuously variable. The diversity of chemical structures of
odors do not exhibit continuous variation of a single parameter and there-
fore cannot be accommodated by a small number of receptors. Rather, the
full spectrum of distinct molecular structures perceived by the olfactory
system requires a large number of receptors, each capable of interacting with
a small number of specific odorous ligands.

A TOPOGRAPHIC MAP IN THE OLFACTORY BULB
We next turned to the question of olfactory discrimination: how does the
brain know what the nose is smelling? The identification of a large family of
receptor genes allowed us to pose this question in molecular terms. We could
now ask how the brain knows which of the numerous receptors have been
activated by a given odor. The elucidation of a mechanism by which the brain

                                                                             237


Figure 2. Convergence of Axons from Neurons Expressing a Given Receptor. Odorant
receptor loci were modified by homologous recombination in ES cells to generate strains
of mice in which cells expressing a given receptor also express a fusion of the microtubule
associated protein, tau, with -galactosidase. These whole mount photographs reveal
neurons expressing either the M12 (left) or P2 (right) receptors along with their axons as
they course through the cribriform plate to a single locus in the olfactory bulb. Neurons
expressing different receptors converge on different glomeruli. The genetic modifications
that assure the coordinate expression of receptor and tau-lacZ are shown beneath the
whole mount view. Reprinted from Cell, Vol 87, 1996, pp 675-686, Mombaerts et al., with
permission from Elsevier.




distinguishes the different combinations of receptors activated by different
odors would provide a logic of odor discrimination. This problem was further
simplified by the demonstration that an individual sensory neuron expresses
only one of the 1000 receptor genes (10,24). This observation emerged from
single neuron cDNA cloning experiments, and allowed us to translate the
problem of how the brain determines which receptor has been activated to a
far simpler problem: how does the brain knows which neuron has been acti-
vated by a given odor. As in other sensory systems, an invariant spatial pattern
of olfactory sensory projections could provide a topographic map of receptor
activation that defines the quality of a sensory stimulus.
   In other sensory systems, spatially segregated afferent input from peripheral
sensory neurons generates a topographic map that defines the location of a
sensory stimulus within the environment as well as the quality of the stimulus
itself. Olfactory sensory processing does not extract spatial features of the
odorant stimulus. Relieved of the requirement to map the position of an
olfactory stimulus in space, we asked whether the olfactory system might
employ spatial segregation of sensory input to encode a quality of an odorant.
Robert Vassar in my lab and Kerry Ressler in Linda Buck’s lab therefore
analyzed the spatial patterns of receptor expression in the olfactory epithe-
lium by in situ hybridization and observed that cells expressing a given
receptor are restricted to one of four broad but circumscribed zones (25,26).

238


Figure 3. A Topographic Map of Olfactory Sensory Axons in the Bulb. A whole mount
reveals neurons expressing two modified P2 alleles: P2-IRES-tau-lacZ (red) or P2-IRES-GFP
(green). These neurons send axons that co-converge on the same glomerulus in the olfac-
tory bulb. Neurons expressing other receptors converge on different glomerular loci that
are shown schematically. All nuclei are stained blue with TOTO-3. The relative positions of
the different glomeruli are maintained in different mice revealing an invariant topo-
graphic map in the olfactory bulb.




The overriding feature of this organization, however, is that within a zone
neurons expressing a given receptor are not topographically segregated, rather
they appear randomly dispersed. When they performed in situ hybridization
experiments to the bulb, the first relay station for olfactory sensory neurons
in the brain, they observed that topographic order was restored (27,28).
Neurons expressing a given receptor, although radomly distributed in the
epithelium, project to spatially invariant glomeruli in the olfactory bulb gen-
erating a topographic map.
   Peter Mombaerts, then a fellow in the lab, developed a genetic approach
to visualize axons from olfactory sensory neurons expressing a given odorant
receptor as they project to the brain (29). We modified receptor genes by
targeted mutagenesis in the germ line of mice. These genetically altered
receptor genes now encode a bicistronic mRNA that allows the translation of
receptor along with tau-lacZ, a fusion of the microtubule-associated protein
tau with -galactosidase. In these mice, olfactory neurons that transcribe a
given receptor also express tau-lacZ in their axons, permitting the direct
visualization of the pattern of projections in the brain (Fig. 2).
   We observe that neurons expressing a receptor project to only two topo-
graphically-fixed loci, or glomeruli, in the bulb creating mirror image maps
in each bulb. Neurons expressing different receptors project to different glo-
meruli. The position of the individual glomeruli is topographically defined

                                                                                      239


and is similar for all individuals in a species (Fig. 3). Individual odors could
activate a subset of receptors that would generate specific topographic pat-
terns of activity within the olfactory bulb such that the quality of an olfactory
stimulus could be encoded by spatial patterns of glomerular activity.
   The identification of an anatomic olfactory sensory map poses four questions.
The first, addresses the singularity of receptor gene choice. What mechanism
assures that a sensory neuron expresses only a single receptor and then
projects with precision to one of 1000 topographically fixed glomerular loci.
Second, does the anatomic map translate into a functional map such that
different odors elicit different patterns of activity? Third, can we relate specific
spatial patterns of glomerular activity to specific behaviors? Finally how is the
map read? How does the brain look down upon a spatial pattern of activity
and associate this pattern of with a particular odor?

RECEPTOR CHOICE AND THE TOPOGRAPHIC MAP
The topographic map in the olfactory system differs in character from the
orderly representation inherent in the retinotopic, tonotopic, or somatotopic
sensory maps. In these sensory systems, the peripheral receptor sheet is
represented in the central nervous system (CNS), such that neighbor relations
in the periphery are preserved in the CNS (reviewed in 30,31). In this manner,
peripheral receptor cells may acquire a distinct identity that is determined by
their spatial position in the receptor sheet. Spatial patterning in the periphery
can therefore endow individual neurons with positional information that
directs their orderly representation in the brain.
    The olfactory system, however, does not exhibit an orderly representation
of receptor cells in the periphery. Neurons expressing a given receptor are
randomly dispersed within a given zone and order is restored in the bulb
where neurons expressing a given receptor converge on discrete loci to create
a topographic map. Olfactory neurons differ from one another not by virtue of
their position in a receptor sheet, but rather by the nature of the receptor they
express. The tight linkage between the choice of an odorant receptor and the
site of axon convergence suggests a model in which the odorant receptor is
expressed on dendrites, where it recognizes odorants in the periphery, and
also on axons, where it governs target selection in the bulb. In this manner,
an olfactory neuron would be afforded a distinct identity that dictates the nature
of the odorant to which it responds as well as the glomerular target to which
its axon projects. If the odorant receptor also serves as a guidance molecule,
this leads to two experimental predictions. First, the receptor should be
expressed on axons as well as on dendrites and second, genetic modifications
in the receptor sequence might alter the topographic map.
    The first prediction was tested by Gilad Barnea who generated specific
antibodies against two odorant receptors and examined the sites of receptor
expression on sensory neurons (32). Antibodies were raised against extracellular
and cytoplasmic epitopes of the mouse odorant receptors, MOR28 and
MOR11-4. In the sensory epithelium, we observe intense staining in the den-

240


Figure 4. Odorant Receptor is Expressed on both Dendrites and Axons of Olfactory Sensory
Neurons. The mouse sensory epithelium (upper panel) or olfactory bulb (lower panel) was
stained with antibody to either an extracellular or cytoplasmic epitope of the MOR28
receptor. These experiments reveal the expression of odorant receptor in the cell body and
dendrites in the epithelium as well as on axon termini within a defined glomerulus in the
bulb. Antibody staining in the olfactory bulb coincides with the site of convergence of
MOR28 axons. Adapted with permission from 32. Reprinted from Science 304,1468, 2004,
with permission from Science.




dritic knobs, the site of odor binding. In the olfactory bulb, antibody stains
axon termini whose arbors are restricted to two glomeruli (Fig. 4). Antibody
staining of the bulb from mice bearing the MOR28-IRES-tau-lacZ allele reveals
that the glomeruli stained by antibody to MOR28 also receives the tau-lacZ
fibers. Thus the receptor is expressed on both dendrites and the axons of
sensory neurons.
   In a second series of experiments performed by a student Fan Wang, we
provided genetic evidence suggesting that the receptor on axons is indeed a
guidance molecule. We modified our gene targeting approach to ask whether
substitutions of the P2 receptor coding sequence alter the projections of
neurons that express this modified allele (33). We replaced the coding region
of the P2 gene with the coding regions of several other receptors, and
examined the consequences on the formation of the topographic map.
Substitution of the P2 coding region with that of the P3 gene, a linked
receptor gene homologous to P2 and expressed in the same epithelial zone,
results in the projection of axons to a glomerulus distinct from P2 that resides
immediately adjacent to the wild type P3 glomerulus. Other substitutions that
replace the P2 coding sequences with receptor sequences expressed either in
different zones or from different chromosomal loci also result in the conver-

                                                                                     241


gence of fibers to glomeruli distinct from P2. These observations, along with
recent experiments involving more extensive genetic modifications (34,35)
provide support for the suggestion that the olfactory receptor plays an
instructive role in axon targeting as one component of the guidance process.
   How may the odorant receptors participate in the guidance process? In
one model, the odorant receptor is expressed on the axon termini along with
other guidance receptors where it recognizes positional cues elaborated by
the bulb. Each of the 1000 distinct types of sensory neuron will therefore bear
a unique combination of guidance receptors that define a code dictating the
selection of a unique glomerular target. Such a model does not necessarily
imply that there are 1000 distinct cues, each spatially localized within the
bulb. Rather, a small number of graded cues may cause the differential acti-
vation of the different odorant receptors on axon termini. In this manner,
the different affinities of individual receptors for one or a small number of
cues, and perhaps different levels of receptor, might govern target selection.
Such a model is formally equivalent to models of retinotopy in which a gradient
of guidance receptor on retinal axons is matched by a positional gradient of
guidance cues in the tectum (reviewed in 31).

THE SINGULAR AND STABLE CHOICE OF RECEPTOR
If the odorant receptor defines the functional identity of a sensory neuron and
also determines the site of projection in the brain, then the expression of a
single receptor gene in a neuron is an essential feature in models of olfactory
perception. This immediately poses the question as to what mechanism has
evolved to assure the expression of a single receptor gene from the family of
1000 genes in the chromosome. One model for the control of olfactory
receptor (OR) expression invokes the existence of 1000 different sensory
neurons, each expressing a unique combination of regulatory factors that
governs the choice of a different OR gene. This deterministic model predicts
that all OR genes will contain different cis-regulatory sequences that are
recognized by unique sets of transcription factors. An alternative, stochastic
model of receptor gene selection suggests that all odorant receptor genes with-
in a zone contain the same cis-regulatory information and are controlled by
the same set of transcription factors. In this model a special mechanism must
exist to assure that only one receptor gene is chosen. Moreover, once a spe-
cific receptor is chosen for expression, this transcriptional choice must be
stable for the life of the cell because receptor switching after stable synapse
formation would seriously perturb odor discrimination.
    A series of transgene experiments performed by Ben Shykind in my own
laboratory, as well as in other labs, provide evidence for a mechanism of
receptor choice that is stochastic (36,37). We have generated mice in which
the endogenous P2 allele has been replaced with the P2-IRES-tau-lacZ allele.
We have also introduced a randomly integrated P2-IRES-GFP transgene into
the chromosome of this strain. In a deterministic model, we predict that a
unique combination of transcription factors would activate both the endoge-

242


Figure 5. A Feedback Model Assuring the Stable Expression of a Functional Receptor. (A)
The transcriptional machinery represented by a blue sphere expresses only one of 1000
odorant receptor genes (in this instance, R2). R2 encodes a functional receptor that elicits
a feedback signal that leads to the stabilization of receptor choice (symbolized by a red
sphere). (B) If the transcriptional machinery chooses the non-functional receptor, R1,
which is not competent to mediate feedback stabilization, switching occurs. The transcrip-
tional machine is then free to select a second receptor for expression that will ultimately
mediate feedback stabilization. This model provides a mechanism to assure that a neuron
expresses a functional odorant receptor.




nous and transgenic P2 alleles such that cells that express lacZ from the
endogenous P2-IRES-tau-lacZ allele should also express GFP from the P2
transgene. Examination of the sensory epithelium in these mice, however,
reveals a singularity of P2 expression. Cells that express the endogenous P2
allele never express the transgene. In a conceptually similar experiment, we
generated transgenic mice that harbor an integrated array of multiple P2
transgenes that include P2-IRES-tau-lacZ and P2-IRES-GFP linked at the same
chromosomal locus. In these strains, we also observe a singularity of transgene
expression. Neurons that express the P2-IRES-tau-lacZ transgene do not
express the linked P2-IRES-GFP gene. Taken together, these experiments
provide support for a model in which receptor choice is not deterministic,
rather it is stochastic.
   Once a single receptor gene is chosen for expression, this transcriptional
choice must be stable for the life of the cell because receptor switching after
stable synapse formation would seriously perturb odor discrimination. In recent
experiments, Ben Shykind in my lab along with the Reed and Sakano labs
devised genetic strategies that permit the analysis of the stability of receptor
choice (38,39,40). We have employed a lineage tracer to map the fate of sensory

                                                                                       243


neurons that express either an intact or a nonfunctional deletion of the
MOR28 gene. Mature neurons that express an intact MOR28 receptor, but
have not yet formed stable synapses in the brain, can switch receptor expression,
albeit at low frequency. Thus, we observe that switching is an inherent property
of wild type receptor gene choice. Neurons that choose to express a mutant
MOR28 receptor subsequently extinguish its expression and switch at high
frequencies to express alternate receptors such that a given neuron stably
transcribes only a single receptor gene. These observations suggest a mecha-
nism of OR gene choice in which a cell selects only one receptor allele but
can switch at low frequency. Expression of a functional receptor would then
elicit a signal that suppresses switching and stabilizes odorant receptor ex-
pression. Neurons that initially express a mutant receptor fail to receive this
signal and switch genes until a functional receptor is chosen (Fig. 5).
   The mouse genome contains 340 OR pseudogenes, whereas the human
genome contains 550 pseudogenes, several of which continue to be transcribed
(12,16). Expression of a pseudogene would result in the generation of sensory
neurons incapable of odor recognition. A mechanism that allows switching
provides a solution to the pseudogene problem such that if pseudogenes are
chosen, another transcriptional opportunity is provided assuring that each
neuron expresses a functional receptor. This model of serial monogamy assures
that neurons will express a single receptor throughout their life. This feed-
back model in which expression of a functional odorant receptor suppresses
switching to other OR genes is reminiscent of one mechanism of allelic
exclusion in T and B lymphocytes.

CLONING A MOUSE FROM AN OLFACTORY SENSORY NEURON
What mechanism assures that a single receptor gene is chosen stochastically
in a sensory neuron? One model invokes DNA recombination of odorant
receptor genes at a single active expression site in the chromosome. DNA
recombination provides Saccharomyces cerevisiae (41), trypanosomes (42) and
lymphocytes (43) with a mechanism to stochastically express one member of a
set of genes that mediate cellular interactions with the environment. One
attractive feature shared by gene rearrangements in trypanosomes and
lymphocytes is that gene choice is a random event, a feature of receptor gene
selection in olfactory sensory neurons. However, efforts to demonstrate a
recombination event involving OR genes have been seriously hampered by
the inability to obtain populations of neurons or clonal cell lines that express
the same receptor. Kristin Baldwin in my laboratory, in a collaboration with
Rudy Jaenisch, Kevin Eggan and Andy Chess at MIT, addressed this problem
by generating ES cell lines and cloned mice derived from the nuclei of olfac-
tory sensory neurons expressing the P2 receptor (Fig. 6)(44). The generation
of cloned mice from cells of the nose derives from an initial insight of Woody
Allen in his 1978 futuristic comedy, Sleeper. In this film, efforts are made to
resurrect a totalitarian leader by cloning from his only surviving body part,
his nose. Twenty-five years later, science successfully imitated art with the

244


Figure 6. Cloning a Mouse from Olfactory Sensory Neurons Expressing the P2 Odorant
Receptor. (a) A genetic strategy to label P2-expressing sensory neurons with GFP as well as
to mark olfactory sensory neurons by virtue of a unique deletion in DNA. (b) The olfactory
epithelium of a mouse with the genetic modifications described above. A single nucleus
expressing the P2 odorant receptor gene was picked and introduced into an enucleated
oocyte. The epithelium was stained with antibody to Cre recombinase (red) to mark sensory
neurons and GFP (green) to identify P2-expressing cells. (c) A green neuron expressing
P2-IRES-GFP was picked from dissociated olfactory epithelium of donor animals. (d) The
olfactory epithelium from a mouse cloned from a nucleus expressing the P2 receptor
shows the normal distribution of P2-expressing cells. Axons from these neurons converge
on a single glomerulus in the olfactory bulb (e). All nuclei are stained with TOTO-3 blue.
The observation that mice cloned from a nucleus expressing the P2 receptor gene do not
preferentially express this gene in the sensory epithelium suggests that DNA recombination
events do not accompany receptor gene choice. Adapted with permission from 44.
Reprinted from Nature 428, 44-49, 2004, Eggan et al., with permission from Nature.




generation of mice cloned from a single sensory neuron from the nose.
   We would predict that if DNA recombination accompanies receptor gene
choice then the olfactory epithelium from cloned mice derived from a sensory
neuron expressing the P2 gene should be clonal with respect to receptor
expression, such that all cells transcribe the rearranged P2 allele. Analysis
of the sequence and organization of the DNA surrounding the P2 allele ex-
pressed in cloned mice revealed no evidence for either gene conversion or
local transposition at the P2 locus. In addition, the pattern of receptor gene
expression in the sensory epithelium of cloned mice was normal. Multiple
odorant receptor genes are expressed without preference for the P2 allele
transcribed in the donor nucleus (Fig. 6). These data, along with similar
experiments by Peter Mombaerts (45), demonstrate that the mechanism
responsible for the choice of a single odorant receptor gene does not involve

                                                                                      245


irreversible changes in DNA. In a broader context, the generation of fertile
cloned mice that are anatomically and behaviorally indistinguishable from
wild type indicates that the genome of a postmitotic, terminally differentiated
olfactory neuron can re-enter the cell cycle and be reprogrammed to a state
of totipotency after nuclear transfer. The stochastic choice of a single OR gene
is therefore not accomplished by DNA recombination but rather by a rate
limiting transcriptional process, perhaps involving a single transcriptional
machine capable of stably accommodating only one OR gene.

OLFACTION IN THE FLY: A FUNCTIONAL MAP IN THE ANTENNAL LOBE
The identification of an anatomic map in the olfactory bulb immediately poses
the question as to whether this map provides a meaningful representation of
odor quality that is translated into appropriate behavioral output. Recently,
we have become interested in how the olfactory world is represented in the
brain of the fruit fly. Drosophila provides an attractive system to understand
the logic of olfactory perception. Fruit flies exhibit complex behaviors con-
trolled by an olfactory system that is anatomically and genetically simpler
than that of vertebrates. Genetic analysis of olfaction in Drosophila may therefore
provide a facile system to understand the mechanistic link between behavior
and the perception of odors. The recognition of odors in Drosophila is accom-
plished by sensory hairs distributed over the surface of the third antennal
segment and the maxillary palp. Olfactory neurons within sensory hairs send
projections to one of the multiple glomeruli within the antennal lobe of the
brain (46,47). Leslie Vosshall and Allan Wong showed that most sensory
neurons express only one of about 80 odorant receptor genes. Neurons
expressing the same receptor project with precision to one or rarely two spa-
tially invariant glomeruli in the antennal lobe, the anatomic equivalent of the
olfactory bulb of mammals (48,49,50)(Fig. 7).
   The anatomic organization in Drosophila is therefore remarkably similar to
that of the olfactory system of mammals, suggesting that the mechanism of
odor discrimination has been shared despite the 600 million years of evolution
separating insects from mammals. This conservation may reflect the mainten-
ance of an efficient solution to the complex problem of recognition and
discrimination of a vast repertoire of odors in the environment. In both flies
and mice, the convergence of like axons into discrete glomerular structures
provides a map of receptor activation in the first relay station for olfactory
information in the brain, such that the quality of an odorant may be reflected
by spatial patterns of activity, first in the antennal lobe or olfactory bulb and
ultimately in higher olfactory centers.
   An understanding of the logic of odor perception requires functional analysis
to identify odor-evoked patterns of activity in neural assemblies and ultimately
the relevance of these patterns to odor discrimination. We have performed
two-photon calcium imaging to examine the relationship between the anatomic
map and the functional map in the antennal lobe (51). Jing Wang and Allan
Wong in my lab developed an isolated Drosophila brain preparation that is

246


Figure 7. An Olfactory Sensory Map in the Fly Antennal Lobe. Neurons expressing the odorant
receptor, OR47b, also express the transgene, synaptobrevin GFP, revealing convergence on
a single spatially invariant glomerulus that is bilaterally symmetric in the antennal lobe.




amenable to two-photon imaging and is responsive to odor stimulation for up
to five hours. We expressed the calcium-sensitive fluorescent protein G-CaMP
in primary olfactory sensory neurons and projection neurons. G-CaMP consists
of a circularly permuted EGFP flanked at the N-terminus by the calcium-bind-
ing site of calmodulin and at the C-terminus by the M13 fragment of myosin
light chain kinase (52). In the presence of calcium, calmodulin interacts with
the M13 fragment eliciting a conformation change in EGFP. The resulting
elevations in fluorescent intensity reflect changes in the intracellular calcium
concentration, a presumed mirror of electrical activity. Moreover, the ability
to express G-CaMP in genetically defined populations of neurons allowed us
to determine with certainty the locus of neural activity. Odor-evoked changes
in fluorescence intensity within the antennal lobe are monitored by a laser-
scanning two-photon microscope (53).
   This imaging technique has allowed us to measure the responsivity of 23
glomeruli to 16 different odors (51). A number of interesting features of the
glomerular response to odors are revealed by these experiments. First, different
odors elicit different patterns of glomerular activation and these patterns are
conserved among different animals (Fig. 8). At odor concentrations likely to
be encountered in nature, the map is sparse and glomeruli are narrowly tuned.
   Second, the patterns of activity are insular, such that neighboring glomeruli
do not necessarily respond together to a given odor. Each glomerulus visualized
anatomically appears to be a functional unit. Third, the patterns of glomerular
activity are qualitatively similar upon imaging either sensory or projection
neurons. These observations suggest the faithful transmission of sensory input
to higher brain centers. Fourth, we have coupled genetic experiments with

                                                                                      247


Figure 8. Different Odors Elicit Different Patterns of Glomerular Activation that are
Conserved Among Different Organisms. Two different flies (upper and lower panels) bearing
the GH146-Gal4 and UAS-G-CaMP transgenes were exposed to three odors. Glomerular
responses reveal different patterns of activity for the different odors that are conserved in
different animals. The panels to the left show the pre-stimulation images that reveal glomerlar
structure and the panels to the right identify the specific glomeruli schematically.
Reprinted from Cell, Vol 112, 2003, pp 271-282, Wang et al., with permission from Elsevier.




imaging to demonstrate that the odor-evoked profile for a given glomerulus
directly reflects the responsivity of an individual odorant receptor. This finding
is consistent with prior molecular and anatomic studies that reveal that
neurons that express only a single receptor in like axons converge on a single
glomerulus. Thus these studies, along with other imaging approaches in insects
(54,55), demonstrate that the anatomic map is indeed functional and suggests
that each odor elicits a sparse pattern of glomerular activation that may confer
a signature for different odors in the brain. Imaging experiments in vertebrates
similarly reveal a functional representation of the anatomic map (56,57,58).


SPATIAL REPRESENTATIONS AND INNATE BEHAVIOR
All animals exhibit innate behaviors in response to specific sensory stimuli that
are likely to result from the activation of developmentally programmed circuits.
Allan Wong and Jing Wang in my lab, in collaboration with Greg Suh, David
Anderson and Seymour Benzer at Caltech, asked whether we can relate patterns
of glomerular activity elicited by an odor to a specific behavior (59). Some time
ago Benzer observed that Drosophila exhibits robust avoidance to odors released
by stressed flies. Gas chromatography and mass spectrometry identified one
component of this “Drosophila stress odorant (DSO)” as CO2. Exposure of flies
to CO2 alone also elicits an avoidance behavior at levels of CO2 as low as 0.1%
(Fig. 9).
   We therefore performed imaging experiments with the calcium-sensitive
fluorescent indicator G-CaMP and two-photon microscopy to ask whether we

248


Figure 9. CO2 Activates a Single Glomerulus and Elicits Avoidance Behavior. (A) Avoidance
of air from stressed flies (CS) as well as of increasing concentrations of CO2. Inhibition of
synaptic transmission in GR21A neurons that project to the V glomerulus using shits blocks
CO2 avoidance. Red and blue bars indicate avoidance behavior at the nonpermissive
(28°C) and permissive (21°C) temperatures, respectively. (B) Two-photon imaging in a
strain harboring GR21A-Gal4 and UAS G-cAMP reveals robust activation of the V glomerulus.




could discern a pattern of glomerular activity in response to DSO and CO2.
We first examined flies in which the G-CaMP indicator is driven in all neurons
by the pan-neural activator, Elav-Gal4. DSO activates only two glomeruli, DM2
and the V glomerulus, whereas CO2 activates only the V glomerulus.
Activation of the V glomerulus was detected at CO2 levels as low as 0.05% and
this glomerulus was not activated by any of 26 other odorants tested (Fig. 9).
   We demonstrated that axonal projections to V originate from sensory
neurons expressing the receptor, GR21A (50). We therefore performed
calcium imaging with flies in which the UAS G-CaMP reporter was driven by
a GR21A promoter Gal4 activator. CO2, as well as DSO activated GR21A sensory
termini in the V glomeruli. We next asked whether the GR21A sensory
neurons are necessary for the avoidance response to CO2. Inhibition of
synaptic transmission in the GR21A sensory neurons that innervate the V
glomerulus, using a temperature-sensitive shibire gene, shits (60), blocks the
avoidance response to CO2 (Fig. 9). Inhibition of synaptic release in the vast
majority of other olfactory sensory neurons or in projection neurons other
than those that innervate the V glomerulus, had no effect on this behavior.
   The identification of a population of olfactory sensory neurons innervating
a single glomerulus that mediates robust avoidance to a naturally occurring
odorant provides insight in the neural circuitry that underlies this innate
behavior. These observations suggest that a dedicated circuit that involves a
single population of olfactory sensory neurons mediates detection of CO2 in
Drosophila. The simplicity of this initial olfactory processing offers the possibility
of tracing the circuits that translate odor detection into an avoidance response.

                                                                                        249


HOW IS THE MAP READ?
Our experiments indicate that different odors elicit different patterns of
glomerular activity within the antennal lobe and moreover that defined patterns
of activity can be associated with specific behaviors. We can look at the pattern of
activity in the fly antennal lobe with a two-photon microscope and discern, with
a reasonable degree of accuracy what odorant the fly has encountered in nature.
Thus we can with our eyes and our brain determine what odors the fly has
encountered, but how does the fly brain read the sensory map?
    A topographic map in which different odors elicit different patterns of
activity in the antennal lobe suggests that these spatial patterns reflect a code
defining odor quality. However, the mere existence of a map, whether anatomic
or functional, does not prove that spatial information is the underlying para-
meter of an odor code. It has been suggested, for example, that the quality of
an odor is reflected in temporal dynamics of a distributed ensemble of pro-
jection neurons (61,62). In this model, a given odor might activate a small
number of glomeruli and a large ensemble of projection neurons (PNs) such
that different odors elicit different temporal patterns of activity in the same PN.
This temporal hypothesis in its simplest form postulates that the brain
exploits circuit dynamics to create spatiotemporal patterns of neuronal activa-
tion to achieve a larger coding space. Whatever the code, patterns of activity
in the antennal lobe must be translated by higher sensory centers to allow the
discrimination of complex olfactory information. If odor quality is encoded by
spatial patterns, we might expect that a representation of the glomerular map
is retained in the protocerebrum.
    We have begun to address the question of how the map in the antennal
lobe is represented in higher olfactory centers by examining the pattern of
projections of the neurons that connect the glomeruli to the protocerebrum.
Allan Wong and Jing Wang randomly labeled individual projection neurons
to visualize their processes that connect defined glomeruli with their targets
in the mushroom body and protocerebrum. We have used an enhancer trap
line in which Gal4 is expressed in a subpopulation of projection neurons
along with the FLP-out technique, to label single projection neurons with a
CD8-GFP reporter (63). A similar experimental approach has been used to
determine the lineage relationship of individual PNs and to examine their
pattern of axonal projections (64,65). We observe that most PNs send
dendrites to a single glomerulus. Projection neurons that receive input from
a given glomerulus extend axons that form a spatially invariant pattern in the
protocerebrum (Fig. 10). PNs from different glomeruli exhibit patterns of
axonal projections that are distinct, but often interdigitated (Fig. 11). Our
data reveal a striking invariance in the spatial patterns of axon arbors of PNs
that innervate a given glomerulus, a precision of connectivity that assures the
specificity of information transfer.
    The precision of projections of PNs reveals a spatial representation of
glomerular activity in higher brain centers but the character of the map differs
from that observed in the antennal lobe. Axon arbors in the protocerebrum are


250


Figure 10. Projection Neurons that Innervate to the Same Glomerulus have Similar Axonal
Projection Patterns. Individual projection neurons that connect to the VA1 LM glomeruli
are visualized in the protocerebrum in different flies. These images reveal a striking
constancy in the projection pattern among PNs that project to a given glomerulus. These
observations reveal an invariant topographic map in the protocerebrum that differs in
character from the map in the antennal lobe (with permission from 63). Reprinted from
Cell, Vol 109, 2002, pp 229-241, Wong et al., with permission from Elsevier.




diffuse and extensive, often extending the entire dimension of the brain
hemisphere (Fig. 10,11). This is in sharp contrast to the tight convergence of
primary sensory axons, whose arbors are restricted to a small 5–10 m spherical
glomerulus. As a consequence, the projections from different glomeruli,
although spatially distinct, often interdigitate. Thus, the point-to-point segre-
gation observed in the antennal lobe is degraded in the second order
projections to the protocerebrum. This affords an opportunity for the con-
vergence of inputs from multiple different glomeruli essential for higher
order processing. Third order neurons in the protocerebrum might synapse
on PNs from multiple distinct glomeruli, a necessary step in decoding spatial
patterns to allow the discrimination of odor and behavioral responses.


CONCLUDING REMARKS
These data suggest a model in which the convergence of information from
deconstructed patterns in the antennal lobe are reconstructed by “cardinal
cell assemblies” that sit higher up in a hierarchical perceptual system in the
protocerebrum. Olfactory processing will initially require that the structural


                                                                                  251


Figure 11. Axonal Patterns from Projection Neurons that Innervate to Different Glomeruli
are Distinct. Axonal projections from single PNs can be visualized as they branch in the
mushroom body and ultimately arborize in the protocerebrum. Projections neurons that
connect to different glomeruli exhibit different patterns of axonal projections. The axon
arbors in the protocerebrum are dispersed unlike the insular segregated arbors in the
glomerulus, affording the possibility for integration in higher olfactory centers (with
permission from 63). Reprinted from Cell, Vol 109, 2002, pp 229-241, Wong et al., with
permission from Elsevier.




elements of an odor activate an unique set of receptors that in turn result in
the activation of a unique set of glomeruli. The odorous stimuli must then be
reconstructed in higher sensory centers that determine which of the numerous
glomeruli have been activated. The identification of a spatially invariant sensory
map in the protocerebrum that is dispersive affords an opportunity for inte-
gration of multiple glomerular inputs by higher odor neurons.
   The elucidation of an olfactory map in both the olfactory bulb or antennal
lobe and in higher olfactory centers leaves us with a different order of problems.
Though we may look at these odor-evoked images with our brains and recognize
a spatial pattern as unique and can readily associate the pattern with a particular
stimulus, the brain does not have eyes. Who in the brain is looking at the
olfactory image? Who reads the map? How are spatially defined bits of electrical
information in the brain decoded to allow the perception of an olfactory image?
We are left with an old problem, the problem of the ghost in the machine.
   Finally, how do we explain the individuality of olfactory perception? The
innately configured representation of the sensory world, the olfactory sensory
maps that I have described, must be plastic. Our genes create only a substrate
upon which experience can shape how we perceive the external world. Surely

252


the smell of a madeleine does not elicit in all of us that “vast structure of
recollection” it evoked for Marcel Proust. For Proust, smell is the evocative
sense, the sense that brings forth memory and associations with a richness
not elicited by other sensory stimuli. Nowhere is this more apparent than in
the eloquent words recalling the madeleine incident from “Remembrance of
Things Past” (66).

“But when from a long distant past nothing subsists, after the people are dead,
after the things are broken and scattered, still alone, more fragile but with
more vitality, more unsubstantial, more persistent, more faithful, the smell
and taste of things remain, poised a long time, like souls ready to remind us,
waiting and hoping for their moment, amid the ruins of all the rest; and bear
unfaltering in the tiny and impalpable drop of their essence, the vast structure
of recollection.”

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This lecture encompasses the efforts in my laboratory over the past thirteen
years to provide further insight into the molecular logic of olfactory sensory
perception. I wish to thank the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the
National Institutes of Health, and the Mathers Foundation for their continued
gracious support of our research. Howard Hughes Medical Institute provided
an opportunity to interface molecular biology with neuroscience and has
consistently encouraged and supported the efforts of the laboratory in novel
directions. It is this work for which Linda Buck and I share the profound
honor and good fortune of having been awarded the Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine. This award was not made to me as a man but for my
work, a science that derives from the efforts of many brilliant students and
from the incisive teachings of my colleagues. I take equal pride in the science
that has been accomplished in the laboratory and in the scientists that have
trained with me and have contributed to our efforts. I therefore feel that I
accept this prize in trust as a representative of a culture of science in my la-
boratory and at Columbia University. I am deeply grateful for this culture.
Over the past thirty years, Columbia has provided an atmosphere that fosters
intellectual rigor and creativity and at the same time is imbued with a spirit of
warmth and collaboration.

REFERENCES
 1. Kant, I. [1781/1787] (1961) in: Critique of Pure Reason, N.K. Smith (transl),
    MacMillan, London.
 2. Kandel, E., Schwartz, J.H., and Jessell, T.M. (eds) (2000) Principles of Neural Science
    (4th ed.), McGraw Hill, New York.
 3. Buck, L. and Axel, R. (1991) A novel multigene family may encode odorant receptors:
    A molecular basis for odor recognition. Cell 65:175–187.
 4. Pace, U., Hanski, E. Salomon, Y., and Lancet, D. (1985) Odorant-sensitive adenylate
    cyclase may mediate olfactory reception. Nature 316:255–258.
 5. Sklar, P.B., Anholt, R.R.H., and Snyder, S.H. (1986) The odorant-sensitive adenylate


                                                                                      253


      cyclase of olfactory receptor cells: differential stimulation by distinct classes of
      odorants. J. Biol. Chem. 261:15536–15543.
 6.   Jones, D.T. and Reed, R.R. (1989) Golf, an olfactory neuron-specific G-protein involved
      in odorant signal transduction. Science 244:790–795.
 7.   Breer, H., Boekhoff, L., and Tarelius, E. (1990) Rapid kinetics of second messenger
      formation in olfactory transduction. Nature 345:65–68.
 8.   Zhao, H., Ivic, L., Otaki, J.M., Hashimoto, M., Mikoshiba, K., and Firestein, S. (1998)
      Functional expression of a mammalian odorant receptor. Science 279:237–242.
 9.   Krautwurst, D., Yau, K.-W., and Reed, R.R. (1998) Identification of ligands for olfactory
      receptors by functional expression of a receptor library. Cell 95:917–926.
10.   Malnic, B., Hirono, J., Sato, T., and Buck, L.B. (1999) Combinatorial receptor codes
      for odors. Cell 96:713–723.
11.   Touhara, K., Sengoku, S., Inaki, K., Tsuboi, A., Hirono, J., Sato, T., Sakano, H., and
      Haga, T. (1999) Functional identification and reconstitution of an odorant receptor in
      single olfactory neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96:4040–4045.
12.   Zhang, X. and Firestein, S. (2002) The olfactory receptor gene superfamily of the
      mouse. Nat. Neurosci. 5:124–133.
13.   Godfrey, P.A., Malnic, B., and Buck, L.B. (2004) The mouse olfactory receptor gene
      family. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101:2156–2161.
14.   Glusman, G., Yanai, I., Rubin, I, and Lancet, D. (2001) The complete human olfactory
      subgenome. Genome Res. 11:685–702.
15.   Zozulya, S., Echeverri, F., and Nguyen, T. (2001) The human olfactory receptor
      repertoire. Genome Biol. 2:0018.1–0018.12.
16.   Young, J.M. and Trask, B.J. (2002) The sense of smell: genomics of vertebrate odorant
      receptors. Hum. Mol. Genetic. 11:1153–1160.
17.   Clyne, P.J., Warr, C.G., Freeman, M.R., Lessing, D., Kim, J., and Carlson, J.R. (1999) A
      novel family of divergent seven-transmembrane proteins: candidate odorant receptors
      in Drosophila. Neuron 22:327–338.
18.   Gao, Q. and Chess, A. (1999) Identification of candidate Drosophila olfactory receptors
      from genomic DNA sequence. Genomics 60:31–39.
19.   Vosshall, B.L., Amrein, H., Morozov, P.S., Rzetsky, A., and Axel, R. (1999) A spatial map
      of olfactory receptor expression in the Drosophila antenna. Cell 96:725–736.
20.   Troemel, E.R., Chou, J.H., Dwyer, N.D., Colbert, H.A., and Bargmann, C.I. (1995)
      Divergent seven transmembrane receptors are candidate chemosensory receptors in
      C. elegans. Cell 83:207–218.
21.   Sengupta, P., Chou, J.H, and Bargmann, C.I. (1996) odr-10 encodes a seven
      transmembrane domain olfactory receptor required for responses to the odorant
      diacetyl. Cell 84:899–909.
22.   Wald, G., Brown, P.K., and Smith, P.H. (1955) Iodopsin. J. Gen. Physiol. 38:623–681.
23.   Nathans, J., Thomas, D., and Hogness, D.S. (1986) Molecular genetics of human color
      vision: the genes encoding blue, green, and red pigments. Science 232:193–202.
24.   Chess, A., Simon, I., Cedar, H., and Axel, R. (1994) Allelic inactivation regulates olfactory
      receptor gene expression. Cell 78:823–834.
25.   Ressler, K.J., Sullivan, S.L., and Buck, L.B. (1993) A zonal organization of odorant
      receptor gene expression in the olfactory epithelium. Cell 73:597–609.
26.   Vassar, R., Ngai, J., and Axel, R. (1993) Spatial segregation of odorant receptor
      expression in the mammalian olfactory epithelium. Cell 74:309–318.
27.   Ressler, K.J., Sullivan, S.L., and Buck, L.B. (1994) Information coding in the olfactory
      system: evidence for a stereotyped and highly organized epitope map in the olfactory
      bulb. Cell 79:1245–1255.
28.   Vassar, R., Chao, S.K., Sitcheran, R., Nunez, J.M., Vosshall, L.B., and Axel, R. (1994)
      Topographic organization of sensory projections to the olfactory bulb. Cell 79:981–991.
29.   Mombaerts, P., Wang, F., Dulac, C., Chao, S.K., Nemes, A., Mendelsohn, M.,
      Edmondson, J., and Axel, R. (1996) Visualizing an olfactory sensory map. Cell 87:675–686.
30.   Fritzsch, B. (2003) Development of inner ear afferent connections: forming primary

254


      neurons and connecting them to the developing sensory epithelia. Brain Res. Bulletin
      60:423–433.
31.   McLaughlin, T., Hindges, R., and O’Leary, D.M. (2003) Regulation of axial patterning
      of the retina and its topographic mapping in the brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiol.
      13:57–69.
32.   Barnea, G., O’Donnell, S., Mancia, F., Sun, X., Nemes, A., Mendelsohn, M., and Axel,
      R. (2004) Odorant receptors on axon termini in the brain. Science Brevia 304:1468.
33.   Wang, F., Nemes, A., Mendelsohn, M., and Axel, R. (1998) Odorant receptors govern
      the formation of a precise topographic map. Cell 93:47–60.
34.   Feinstein, P., Bozza, T., Rodriguez, I., Vassali, A., and Mombaerts, P. (2004) Axon guidance
      of mouse olfactory sensory neurons by odorant receptors and the b2 adrenergic
      receptor. Cell 117:833–846.
35.   Feinstein, P. and Mombaerts, P. (2004) A contextual model for axonal sorting into
      glomeruli in the mouse olfactory system. Cell 117:817–831.
36.   Serizawa, S., Ishii, T., Nakatani, H., Tsuboi, A., Nagawa, F., Asano, M., Sudo, K.,
      Sakagami, J., Sakano, H., Iijiri, T., et al. (2000) Mutually exclusive expression of odorant
      recepor transgenes. Nat. Neurosci. 3:687–693.
37.   Vassali, A., Rothman, A., Feinstein, P., Zapotocky, M., and Mombaerts, P. (2002)
      Minigenes impart odorant receptor-specific axon guidance in the olfactory bulb.
      Neuron 35:681–696.
38.   Serizawa, S. Miyamichi, K., Nakatani, H., Suzuki, M., Saito, M., Yoshihara, Y., and
      Sakano, H. (2003) Negative feedback regulation ensures the one receptor-one olfactory
      neuron rule in mouse. Science 302:2088–2094.
39.   Lewcock, J.L. and Reed, R.R. (2004) A feedback mechanism regulates monoallelic
      odorant receptor expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 10.
40.   Shykind, B., Rohani, C., O’Donnell, S., Nemes, A., Mendelsohn, M., Sun, Y., Axel, R.,
      and Barnea, G. (2004) Gene switching and the stability of odorant receptor gene
      choice. Cell 117:801–815.
41.   Hicks, J., Strathern, J.N., and Klar, A.J. (1979) Transposable mating type genes in
      Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 282:478–483.
42.   Pays, E.,Van Assel, S., Laurent, M., Darville, M., Vervoort, T., Van Meirvenne, N., and
      Steinart, M. (1983) Gene conversion as a mechanism for antigenic variation in
      trypanosomes. Cell 34:371–381.
43.   Brack, C., Hirama, M., Lenhard-Schuller, R., and Tonegawa, S. (1978) A complete
      immunoglobulin gene is created by somatic recombination. Cell 15:1–14.
44.   Eggan, K., Baldwin, K., Tackett, M., Osborne, J., Gogos, J., Chess, A., Axel, R., and
      Jaenisch, R. (2004) Mice cloned from olfactory sensory neurons. Nature 428:44–49.
45.   Li, J., Ishii, T., Feinstein, P., and Mombaerts, P. (2004) Odorant receptor gene choice is
      reset by nuclear transfer from mouse olfactory sensory neurons. Nature 428:393–399.
46.   Stocker, R.F. (1994) The organization of the chemosensory system in Drosophila
      melanogaster: a review. Cell Tissue Res. 275:3–26.
47.   Laissue, P.P., Reiter, C., Hiesinger, P.R., Halter, S., Fischbach, K.F., and Stocker, R.F.
      (1999). Three-dimensional reconstruction of the antennal lobe in Drosophila melanogaster.
      J. Comp Neurol. 405:543–552.
48.   Gao, Q., Yuan, B., and Chess, A. (2000) Convergent projections of Drosophila olfactory
      neurons to specific glomeruli in the antennal lobe. Nat. Neurosci. 3:780–785.
49.   Vosshall, L.B., Wong, A,M., and Axel, R. (2000) An olfactory sensory map in the fly
      brain. Cell 102:147–159.
50.   Scott, K., Brady, R., Jr., Cravchik, A. Morozov, P., Rzhetsky, A., Zuker, C., and Axel, R.
      (2001) A chemosensory gene family encoding candidate gustatory and olfactory
      receptors in Drosophila. Cell 104:661–673.
51.   Wang, J.W., Wong, A.M., Flores, J., Vosshall, L.B., and Axel, R. (2003) Two-photon
      calcium imaging reveals an odor-evoked map of activity in the fly brain. Cell 112:271–282.
52.   Nakai, J., Ohkura, M., and Imoto, K. (2001) A high signal-to-noise Ca2+ probe composed



                                                                                             255


    of a single green fluorescent protein. Nat. Biotechnol. 19:137–141.
53. Denk, W., Strickler, J,H., and Webb, W.W. (1990) Two photon laser scanning fluorescence
    microscopy. Science 248:73–76.
54. Joerges, J., Juttner, A., Galizia, C.G., and Menzel, R. (1997) Representations of odours
    and odour mixtures visualized in the honeybee brain. Nature 387:285–287.
55. Ng, M., Roorda, R.D., Lima, S.Q., Zemelman, B.V., Morcillo, P., and Miesenbock, G.
    (2002) Transmission of olfactory information between three populations of neurons in
    the antennal lobe of the fly. Neuron 36:463–474.
56. Rubin, B.D. and Katz, L.C. (1999) Optical imaging of odorant representations in the
    mammalian olfactory bulb. Neuron 23:499–511.
57. Uchida, N., Takahashi, Y.K., Tanifuji, M., and Mori, K. (2000) Odor maps in the
    mammalian olfactory bulb: domain organization and odorant structural features. Nat.
    Neurosci. 3:1035–1043.
58. Meister, M. and Bonhoeffer, T. (2001) Tuning and topography in an odor map on the
    rat olfactory bulb. J. Neurosci. 21:1351–1360.
59. Suh, S.B., Wong, A.M., Hergarden, A.C., Wang, J.W., Simon, A., Benzer, S., Axel, R.,
    and Anderson, D.J. (2004) A single population of olfactory neurons mediates an
    innate avoidance behavior in Drosophila. Nature 431:854–859.
60. Kitamoto, T. (2001) Conditional modification of behavior in Drosophila by targeted
    expression of a temperature-sensitive shibire allele in defined neurons. J. Neurobiol.
    47:81–92.
61. Laurent, G. (1999) A systems perspective on early olfactory coding. Science 286:723–728.
62. Wilson, R.I. and Laurent, G. (2004) Transformation of olfactory representations in the
    Drosophila antennal lobe. Science 303:366–370.
63. Wong, A.M., Wang, J.W., and Axel, R. (2002). Spatial representation of the glomerular
    map in the Drosophila protocerebrum. Cell 109:229–241.
64. Jefferis, G.S., Marin, E.C., Stocker, R.F., and Luo, L. (2001) Target neuron prespecifi-
    cation in the olfactory map of Drosophila. Nature 414:204–208.
65. Marin, E.C., Jefferis, G.S., Komiyama, T., Zhu, H., and Luo, L. (2002) Representation
    of the glomerular olfactory map in the Drosophila brain. Cell 109:243–255.
66. Proust, Marcel (1913) Vol. I. Swann’s Way in: Remembrance of Things Past, Random
    House, New York, pg. 50–51.
67. Dunipace, L., Meister, S., McNealy, C., and Amrein, H., (2001) Spatially restricted
    expression of candidate taste reseptors in the Drosophila qustatory system. Corr. Biol
    11: 822–835.




256
